CERTAIN SUCCESS

by

Norval A. Hawkins

Author of "The Selling Process"

THIRD EDITION

1920 DETROIT, MICHIGAN

Contents

CHAPTER                                        PAGE

      TO BEGIN WITH . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
      HOW TO STUDY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   I. THE UNIVERSAL NEED FOR SALES KNOWLEDGE. .  29
  II. THE MAN-STUFF YOU HAVE FOR SALE . . . . .  63
 III. SKILL IN SELLING YOUR BEST SELF . . . . . 108
  IV. PREPARING TO MAKE YOUR SUCCESS CERTAIN. . 137
   V. YOUR PROSPECTS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
  VI. GAINING YOUR CHANCE . . . . . . . . . . . 179
 VII. KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MEN. . . . . . . . . . 209
VIII. THE KNOCK AT THE DOOR OF OPPORTUNITY
        AND THE INVITATION TO COME IN . . . . . 239
  IX. GETTING YOURSELF WANTED . . . . . . . . . 270
   X. OBSTACLES IN YOUR WAY . . . . . . . . . . 298
  XI. THE GOAL OF SUCCESS . . . . . . . . . . . 332
 XII. THE CELEBRATION STAGE . . . . . . . . . . 368

To Begin With--

[Sidenote: Salesmanship Essential to Assure Success]

There are particular characteristics one can have, and particular things one can do, that will
make failure in life certain.

Why, then, should not the possession of particular opposite characteristics, and the doing
of particular opposite things, result as certainly in success, which is the antithesis of failure?

That is a logical, common-sense question. The purpose of this book and its companion volume,
"The Selling Process," is to answer it convincingly for you.

Success can be made certain; not, however, by the mere possession of particular characteristics,
nor by just doing particular things.

Your success in life can be assured; but only if you supplement your qualifications and make
everything you do most effective by using continually, whatever your vocation, the art of salesmanship.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Why Are Some Men Failures Who Deserve to Succeed?]

Life can hold nothing but failure for the ill-natured, unsociable, disgusting tramp who is
known to be ignorant, lazy, shiftless, a spendthrift, a liar, and an all-around crook. Such
a worthless man will make a complete failure of life because he is so dis-qualified to succeed.

On the other hand certain success ought to be achieved by the good-natured, intelligent, reliable
man who continually wins friends; the truthful man who has a fine reputation for thrift, honesty,
neatness, and love for his work. He seems entirely worthy of success. Yet for reasons that
baffle himself and his friends it sometimes happens that such a man is unsuccessful.

The defeat in life of one who appears so deserving of victory seems to prove that success cannot
be assured by the development of individual characteristics and by doing specific things. But
such a wholly negative conclusion would be wrong. When a worthy man fails, he loses out because
he lacks an essential positive factor of certain success--the ability to sell his capabilities.
By mastering the selling process this failure can turn himself into a success.

[Sidenote: Self-advertised Disqualifications Unrecognized Capabilities]

We are sure of the failure of the man who is utterly disqualified to succeed; not because he
has particular faults, but because they self-advertise and sell the idea of his disqualifications
for success. His characteristics and actions make on our minds an impression of his general
worthlessness. Defects are apt to attract attention, while perfection often passes unnoticed.

Millions of worthy men, otherwise qualified for success, have failed solely because their merits
were not appreciated and rewarded as they would have been if recognized. Capabilities, like
goods, are profitless until they are sold. Therefore the man who deserves to win out in life
can make his victory sure only by learning and practicing with skill the certain success methods
of the master salesman.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The Duty to Succeed]

Down through all the ages has come the duty to succeed. It was enjoined in the Parable of the
Talents. No one has the right to do less than his best. Then only can he claim full justification
for his existence. The Creator accepts no excuses for failure. Every personal quality, and
every opportunity to succeed that a man has, must be used, to entitle him to the rewards of
success. He owes not only to himself and to his fellows, but also to God, the obligation of
developing his utmost capability. If he does not pay dividends on the divine investment in
him, his dereliction is justly punished by failure in life. Sometimes he even forfeits the
right to live.

[Sidenote: Success Cannot be Copied]

Many ambitious people, who recognize their duty to succeed but do not know how to go about
it, make a common mistake in thinking. They believe the secret of certain success can be learned
from examples; that success can be copied. So men who have succeeded conspicuously are often
asked to state and explain their rules, for the benefit of other men who regard them as oracles.

[Sidenote: Other Men's Formulas]

Doubtless you have read much about Marshall Field, J. Pierpont Morgan, Charles M. Schwab, and
similar outstanding business men. You have studied their principles of success. You have tried
to practice their methods. But somehow the most careful following of their directions has not
made you a multi-millionaire, nor can you see riches as a prospect. Naturally you are both
disappointed and puzzled. Perhaps you have tested faithfully for years various formulas of
success extracted from the advice of successful men. Yet you have failed, or have achieved
only partial and unsatisfying success. You have been unable to solve the problem that you once
felt so sure could be worked out by the rules you mastered.

Maybe you have become discouraged and have given up, in disgust, your ambition for achievement.
Very likely you have said to yourself, "Success is so much a matter of luck and circumstances,
there's no way to make sure of it. I've done everything that Marshall Field, J. Pierpont Morgan,
and Charles M. Schwab have counseled; but I'm still plugging along on an ordinary salary. Rules
for certain success are bunk. Luck has to break right for a man."

[Sidenote: The Element of Luck]

Unquestionably good luck has brought success to some men who would have failed without its
aid. It is equally beyond doubt that bad luck has prevented other men from achieving their
ambitions. Of course such successes and failures do not fall within any rules. They are altogether
exceptional, and neither prove nor disprove general principles.

Eliminating the factor of luck, good or bad, the success of any normal, deserving man can be
made certain to the extent of his individual capacity. Some men have different or bigger capacities
than others; hence not all successes will be of the same kind, or alike in extent. But any
normal, deserving man can assure himself as great a success as he is fitted to achieve. It
is necessary, however, that he do more than develop his utmost capability. He must learn to
employ skillful salesmanship, in order to market his "goods of sale," or personal qualifications,
most profitably.

[Sidenote: Sales Skill Necessary]

Each of us has to make his own pattern of success. "The individual should develop his individuality,"
instead of attempting to imitate anybody else. It is even more necessary for him to use most
effectively all the natural powers he builds up.

A man can assure his success only if he learns how to utilize his personal qualifications so
as to create and control his opportunities to succeed. He should be able to bring himself to
good luck, and not expect anybody or any event to bring good luck to him.

One cannot make the most effective use of his capabilities, he cannot create and control his
chances to succeed, until he develops skill in salesmanship, which is necessary to market his
qualifications profitably. He must practice "selling himself" until the habit of using sales
skill in everything he does and says becomes second nature to him. Sales skill is the dynamic
factor of success. It transforms potential powers into actual accomplishments. It enables the
qualified man to turn his individual capabilities to best account.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Opportunity A Constant Companion]

Sometimes a man says, as an excuse for his failure, "I never had a chance." The truth is that
Opportunity is a constant companion to every man. Each of us has within himself limitless wealth.
All normal people are rich in ability. It is possible for anyone to become more prosperous.
He need only turn his possibilities into realities. When a man capable of accumulating riches
continues poor, he is like the shipwrecked discoverer of a bonanza gold mine on an uncharted
island. He cannot exchange his potential wealth for the things he desires; because he is unable
to market his raw gold.

Similarly you who have not yet succeeded are potentially rich. If you possess the generally
recognized fundamentals of success; such as characteristic honesty, intelligence, energy, etc.,
you are not handicapped for want of a market. Even though you now may seem to lack some of
the essential qualifications, you are capable of succeeding. Every necessary characteristic
of the successful man is latent in your nature and can be brought out by development. You have
not yet done your utmost with the best that is in you.

[Sidenote: Your Market Not Lacking]

First you should resolve to make yourself completely worthy to succeed. Meanwhile you should
be learning how to sell your "goods." On every hand there are markets in which qualities like
yours are being sold successfully by other men. Undoubtedly there will be a purchaser for the
best that is in you when you bring it out; provided you present your "goods of sale" in the
most skillful way. All about you are highly prosperous people with no more innate merits than
you have. Certainly the market for your particular abilities is within reach. Golden opportunities
of which you have not taken the fullest advantage surround you and touch your daily activities.
If you have not grasped your chance, it was because you did not know how to reach out with
all your capabilities. In other words, possessing the fundamental qualifications for success,
you have stood in the midst of the world's need for such capabilities as yours, but you have
not gone through the selling process.

You have failed thus far to achieve your ambition, simply because you have been an unsuccessful
salesman of yourself to the world.

Perhaps you never have thought of yourself as a salesman. You may not have realized the importance
to you of knowing and practicing the principles of skillful selling. Only one per cent of the
people in the United States call themselves salesmen or saleswomen. Yet in order to succeed,
each of us must sell his or her particular qualifications. Your knowledge and use of the selling
process are essential to assure your success in life.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Master Salesmen Made, Not Born]

The best commercial executives agree that the most effective selling representative of a house
is not the "natural born" salesman, but the salesman who is made highly efficient by training.
So every big, successful business conducts a course in salesmanship. Thorough tests have proved
that particular principles and methods of selling are sure to produce the highest average of
orders. Therefore these principles and methods are followed as standard practice in the sales
department.

That is, in order to assure the success of an individual salesman, he is required and aided
to develop particular qualifications and to do certain things that master executives have learned
will get the orders and hold the trade of buyers. The qualified professional salesman is drilled
thoroughly in tested principles and methods of selling. He is trained to use this standard
sales knowledge skillfully. As a result he works in the field with complete confidence.

Why should he doubt that he will succeed? He knows his own limitations and capabilities; knows
the true worth of his line; knows there is a market in his territory; knows how to sell in
the ways that have been proved most effective; and knows that practice of right salesmanship
will make him skillful in getting and holding business. Verily such "knowledge is power."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Certain Success With the Selling Process]

Your success in selling yourself can be made as certain as is a successful career to the first-class
professional salesman. This book and its companion volume will explain in detail salesmanship
ways to develop your best capabilities most effectively. You will be given the principles and
methods employed by the expert salesman in marketing any kind of right goods. You will also
be shown how to sell yourself by adapting his practices to your "goods of sale."

When you comprehend, and employ as second nature, the usages of the finest sales art, your
success in life, like that of the master professional salesman, will be certain.

[Sidenote: Ideas of Goods Not the Goods Themselves Are Sold]

If you have not called yourself a salesman, perhaps you doubt the value to you of skill in
selling. All you have to market is the best that is in yourself. Your ambition may be to succeed
as a doctor, or lawyer, or preacher, or clerk, or mechanic, or farmer, or banker. You do not
see how salesmanship could assure your success, however much it might help some one with commercial
ambitions.

If you think it would not be worth while for you to master the selling process, since you do
not expect to engage in the profession of selling, you misconceive the functions and work of
the salesman. You have thought he sells "goods;" and that as you do not deal in commodities,
you would have no practical use for the selling process he employs to assure his success. But
even the shoe salesman, or grocery salesman, or real estate salesman, or insurance salesman
does not really sell goods. He sells ideas about goods. Similarly you sell ideas about yourself
in order to succeed.

[Sidenote: When the Goods and the Ideas Are Different]

A sale is often completed in business without any inspection of the actual "goods" by the purchaser;
as when a quantity of standard sheet copper is specified, or when the salesman describes a
piece of machinery or shows a picture of it with a catalogue number. The "goods" are to be
delivered later. However, the selling process is finished; though only the mind's eye of the
buyer has seen what he anticipates getting on his order. The salesman has presented nothing
except certain ideas to the mental vision of the prospect. But these ideas have been sold so
realistically to the imagination of the purchaser that he gives his order for what he expects.

Suppose the goods delivered later do not correspond with the particular ideas about them that
have been sold. For example, the sheet copper furnished is not as specified in the contract,
or the machine shipped is not the same as the salesman pictured when he got the order for it.
Then there has been no sale of the different "goods." The intending purchaser bought particular
ideas. He will not accept the delivery of goods unlike the ideas sold to him.

[Sidenote: Know Your Prospect's Idea]

Another illustration. A real estate salesman describes a bungalow to a prospect for a home.
He shows plans and specifications, with accurate dimensions; there is no misrepresentation
of any detail. The salesman especially emphasizes, what is his own belief, that the bungalow
would make a "cozy" home. The prospect decides to buy the property. He says, "If it is as you
describe it, I'll take that place." The sale to his mind has been completed. All that remains
is delivery of a bungalow corresponding to the ideas sold. The delighted salesman escorts the
buyer to the "cozy home." But the empty rooms do not confirm the idea emphasized to the prospect.
The salesman cannot furnish them convincingly with his imaginative "cozy" word pictures. He
has made the mistake of omitting to learn the other man's conception of a cozy home before
selling the expectation of coziness. He is shocked when the sale is declared annulled with
the prospect's contradiction of his description, "There's nothing cozy about this place." The
intending buyer of a home feels there has been a misrepresentation; though the bungalow is
exactly like the plans and specifications shown to him. He was sold an idea that "the goods"
have not delivered; so he declares the sale off. A sale is a success only when true ideas are
sold, and afterward are delivered by the goods.

[Sidenote: Selling Ideas About Yourself]

If you "have the goods" and would succeed certainly in your chosen vocation, you must sell
to the world or to individual buyers true ideas about your particular qualifications for success--true
ideas regarding your best capabilities and the value of your services. Your "goods of sale"
may be your muscular power; your brain energy; your talents, skill, integrity, and knowledge
in this capacity or in that. Whatever qualities you possess, it is necessary that some one
be sold the idea of their full worth, or you cannot succeed. No matter how valuable your services
might be, they have only potential worth until another man, or some business, or the world
at large perceives desirable possibilities in you and buys the expectation that you will "deliver
the goods."

Probably you have said to yourself, "If I had the chance, I know I could deliver the goods."
We will grant that you are able to make delivery. However, before you will be given a chance
you must get across to the mind of some prospective buyer of muscular power, or brain energy,
or other capabilities such as you could supply, the true idea that you have "the goods" he
needs and that your qualifications would be a satisfactory purchase for him.

In other words, it is necessary that you use the selling process effectively, with thorough
scientific knowledge and a high degree of art, in order to make certain of gaining your opportunity
for success. You have no doubt that you can succeed if you get the chance. But you have not
realized, perhaps, that you can make yourself the master of your own destiny by first learning
and then practicing until it becomes second nature to you the sure, salesmanship way to gain
the opportunities you deserve. After you comprehend the sure process, you can soon develop
skill in actually selling to other men true ideas of the best that is in you.

[Sidenote: The Secret of Certain Success]

The secret of certain success in life for you, then, whatever your vocation or ambition, lies
in knowing HOW to sell true ideas of your best capability in the right market or field of service.
The chapters of the present book, supplemented by the contents of the companion volume, "The
Selling Process," should reveal to you clearly every principal detail of this secret.

[Sidenote: No 100% Salesmen]

Before you proceed further with the study of successful salesmanship as analyzed in these pages,
avoid a possible misconception of masterly selling. Even the most efficient salesman does not
get all the orders for which he tries. By his knowledge and skill his average of failures is
minimized; therefore everybody recognizes him as a great success.

So, however well you comprehend the selling process, and however skillfully you use it in your
career, you will not always accomplish the particular purpose to which you apply your salesmanship.
But you will markedly lessen the number and importance of your failures to do the things you
attempt. You will also increase to an extraordinary degree the quantity, quality, and profitable
results of your successful efforts. You will make a grand average so high that you will feel
you are a real success. Others, too, will so regard you.

[Sidenote: The Master Key]

Therefore, whatever your life ambition, study the selling process until you understand it thoroughly;
then perfect your skill by daily practice in selling your ideas, and ideas about yourself,
to other people. When you know HOW to sell true ideas of your best capability in your chosen
market or field of service, and have become expert in applying what you have learned, you can
use salesmanship continually in your everyday work. You should feel absolute assurance that
with its aid you can open the treasure house of your desires.

This universal master key that fits all locks now between you and success can be made by your
own hands and head. You have begun to shape it for your future use.

How to Study Certain Success with The Selling Process

[Sidenote: Suggestion To Salesmen]

The professional salesman or saleswoman who undertakes the thorough study of both this book
and its companion volume, might better read first "The Selling Process," the chapters of which
apply especially to his or her vocation.

If you are a "salesman," therefore, begin your study with the introduction to that book. When
you have read "The Selling Process" once, start "Certain Success" and master it. Then re-read
the other book in the light of the new ideas that will have been shed upon its contents by
the present text.

The practical value of "Certain Success" and "The Selling Process" to you as a salesman will
be multiplied a hundredfold if both are kept handy for continual reference. The marginal index
should enable you to find quickly any point regarding which you want to refresh your recollection.
This set of books was not written to collect dust on a library shelf. No salesman can get the
full worth out of the pages unless he uses "Certain Success" and "The Selling Process" as working
tools.

[Sidenote: If Your Vocation Is Not Selling]

If you are not engaged in selling as a vocation, and have not realized before that you must
be a good salesman or saleswoman in order to achieve your life ambition, commence mastering
the secret of certain success with the selling process by reading thoroughly the book now in
your hands. This preliminary study will increase your ability to read intelligently the more
technical contents of "The Selling Process." Do not skip or slight any portion of either book.
You cannot afford to miss a single bit of information regarding the sure way to succeed.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Purpose and Scope of the Two Books]

This is the first publication of "Certain Success," but five large editions of "The Selling
Process" were required in 1919 and 1920 to supply the demand from all over the world. The two
books, each complete in itself, now are issued together under the double title, CERTAIN SUCCESS
WITH THE SELLING PROCESS; though either "Certain Success" or "The Selling Process" may be ordered
alone.

My chief purpose in preparing this set has been to stimulate each reader's comprehension of
the value of skillful salesmanship to him. All of us who are ambitious to make the most of
the best that is in us need to be first-class salesmen, whether we market "goods" or our personal
capabilities. As has been emphasized repeatedly in this preface, every one who would succeed
in life must know HOW to sell his qualifications to the highest advantage. Poor salesmanship
is responsible for most of the failures of people who really deserve to succeed. It is almost
surely fatal to ambitious hopes in any trade, profession, or business.

CERTAIN SUCCESS WITH THE SELLING PROCESS covers in outline the whole subject of Salesmanship.
But the scope of this set does not afford room to give here a minutely detailed exposition
of the special processes of making sales in particular businesses. I have compiled for you,
rather, the general principles of effective selling that may be universally applied. "Certain
Success" and "The Selling Process" are handbooks of fundamental ideas which each reader, by
his individual thinking, should amplify and fit to his own work or ambition.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Real Study Required]

The fine art of successful salesmanship cannot be mastered in a few hours of casual reading.
You will not be able, immediately after glancing through these books, to unlock every long-desired
golden opportunity with absolute assurance. CERTAIN SUCCESS WITH THE SELLING PROCESS must be
studied out. You should keep them always at hand like your bank books, and draw on the contents
for your salesmanship needs from day to day.

You will get only a smattering of the secret of certain success if you just skim over the chapters,
and skip whatever requires you to think hard in order to comprehend it all. But if you dig
into the meaning of each sentence for the full idea, you will enrich yourself with constantly
increasing power and skill in selling. So you will surely become a real success.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Tested Working Tools]

The principles and methods of successful salesmanship summarized in these companion books,
though they will be new to most readers, are not mere personal theories. They all have been
demonstrated and tested in actual practice during my twelve years experience as Commercial
and General Sales Manager of the Ford Motor Company. Under my direction in the course of that
period Ford sales were multiplied one hundred thirty-two times--from 6,181 to 815,912 cars
a year. The fundamental principles and methods that I have tested and proved to be most successful
in selling automobiles and good will should work equally well in any profession, or business,
or trade; and for any normal, intelligent man or woman who uses them continually.

[Sidenote: Dollars and Cents Value]

Since the first publication of "The Selling Process" thousands of enthusiastic readers of the
book have voluntarily borne witness to its practical, dollars-and-cents value to them in their
daily work. Preachers, doctors, lawyers, bank officials, clerks, book-keepers, mechanics, laborers;
as well as business executives and sales managers and salesmen--men and women in scores of
widely different vocations--unite in testifying to their increased earning power and fuller
satisfaction in living and working. They credit these results to their study and continued
use of "The Selling Process." The value of that book will be at least doubled by the supplemental
reading of "Certain Success." Therefore the two are now published as a set of working tools
for any ambitious man or woman who is resolved to earn success.

NORVAL A. HAWKINS

Majestic Building, Detroit, Michigan.

CHAPTER I

The Universal Need For Sales Knowledge

[Sidenote: Analysis of Secret of Certain Success]

The Secret of Certain Success has four principal elements. It comprises:

(1) Knowing how to sell

(2) The true idea

(3) Of one's best capabilities

(4) In the right market or field of service.

Your success will be in direct proportion to your thorough knowledge and continual use of all
four parts of the whole secret. No matter how great your effort, an entire lack of one or more
of these principal elements of Certain Success will cause partial or utter failure in your
life ambition. You will be like a man who tries to open a safe with a four-combination lock,
though he knows only two or three of the numbers.

No one, however well fitted for success elsewhere, can succeed in the wrong field, or in rendering
services for which he is not qualified. Nor is complete success attainable by a man unless
he develops the best that is in him. Even if he brings to the right market his utmost ability,
he may fail miserably by making a false impression that he is unfitted for the opportunity
he wants. Or he may be overlooked because he does not make the true impression of his fitness.

Evidently, in order to gain a chance to succeed, anyone must first sell to the fullest advantage
the idea that he is the man for the opportunity already waiting or for the new opening he makes
for himself. Of course he cannot do this surely unless he knows how. Therefore sales knowledge
is universally needed to complement the three other principal elements of the complete secret
of certain success.

[Sidenote: Reasons for Failures]

When we try to explain the failure of any man who seems worthy to have succeeded, we nearly
always say, in substance, one of three things about his case:

"He is a square peg in a round hole;" by which we usually mean he is a right man in the wrong
place.

Or, "He is capable of filling a better position;" a more polite way of saying that a man has
outgrown his present job but has not developed ability to get a bigger one.

Oftenest, probably, we declare, "He isn't appreciated."

Very rarely is a worthy man's failure in life ascribed to the commonest cause--his personal
inefficiency in selling to the world comprehension of his especial qualifications for success.

[Sidenote: What Failures Realize]

If a man is a square peg in a round hole, he should realize that his particular qualities must
be fitted into the right field for them before he can succeed. A natural "organizer" cannot
achieve his ambitions if he works alone at a routine task.

No sensible man would aspire to fill a better position than he holds, unless he had developed
a capacity beyond the limitations of his present work. The shipping clerk who craves the higher
salary of a correspondent knows he cannot hope for the desired promotion if he has not learned
to write good business letters.

However deserving of advancement a man may be, he realizes he has but a slim chance to succeed
if his worth is unrecognized. So he wants appreciation from his chief. He knows that unless
his worth is perceived and truly valued, some one else, who may be less qualified, is apt to
be selected for the "Manager's" job he desires. Such "injustices" have poisoned countless disappointed
hopes with bitterest resentment.

The deserving man who fails because he is a misfit in his particular position, the worthy man
who is limited to a small career because the work he does lacks scope for the use of all his
ability; the third good man who has been kept down for the reason that his chief is blind to
his qualifications for promotion--all three of these failures understand pretty clearly the
reasons for their non-success.

[Sidenote: When Lack of Salesmanship Causes Failure]

It is very different in the case of the capable man who fails because he has been inefficient
in selling true impressions of his qualifications for success. A private secretary, for illustration,
might be thoroughly competent for managerial duties; but by his self-effacement in his present
job he might make the false impression that he was wanting in executive capacity. He would
be given a chance as manager if he were effective in creating a true impression of his administrative
ability. Such a capable man, if he has little or no scientific knowledge of the selling process
is apt also to lack comprehension of the value to him of knowing how to sell ideas. He does
not happen to call himself a salesman. Therefore he has never studied with personal interest
the fine art of selling. He does not realize that ignorance of salesmanship, and consequent
non-use of the selling process, almost always are responsible for the merely partial success
or the downright failure in life of the man who deserves to win, but who loses out.

[Sidenote: Who Is To Blame for Failure]

One may feel able to "deliver the goods," were he given the chance. He may know where his best
capability is greatly needed and would be highly appreciated if recognized. Yet the door of
opportunity may not open to his deserving hand, however hard he tries to win his way in. His
failure seems to him altogether unfair, the rankest injustice from Fortune.

If a man knows he is completely fitted to fill a higher position, he feels considerable self-confidence
when he first applies for it. But his real ability may not be recognized by his chief. The
ambitious man may be denied the coveted chance to take the step upward to the bigger opportunities
for which he rightly believes himself qualified. If his deserts and his utmost efforts do not
win the promotion he desires, he grows discouraged. He loses the taste of zest for his work.
His earlier optimism oozes away. After awhile his ambition slumps. Then he resigns himself
sullenly to the conviction that he is a failure but is not to blame.

[Sidenote: Dynamic Quality Lacking]

Leaving out of consideration most exceptional, unpreventable bad luck, the worthy man who fails
in life is to blame. He is not, as he thinks, a victim of circumstances or ill-fate. His failure
is due to his ignorance of the first of the four principal factors of the secret of certain
success. Potentially qualified to succeed, he does not have the absolutely necessary dynamic
element. He lacks an essential characteristic of the self-made successful man, a characteristic
which any one of intelligence can learn how to develop--a high degree of capability in gaining
his own opportunities to succeed.

He does not know how to sell true ideas about himself; though he may realize the importance
of making the best impression possible. So, however, he tries, he cannot get his deserved chances
to succeed. He could secure them easily if he comprehended the selling process of the master
salesman, and used it with skill. This process of masterly selling is the key to certain success
for the fully qualified man in any vocation.

[Sidenote: Making and Governing One's Own Good Luck]

A capable applicant will invariably be given a chance to succeed, if he takes the best that
is in him to a man who has need of such services as he could render, and then sells the true
idea of his ability. He has mastered all four principal elements of the complete secret of
certain success. Consequently he is able to create and to control his opportunities to succeed.
He makes and governs his own good luck.

Everywhere the most desirable positions in the business world are in need of men who can fill
them. Only the poorer jobs are crowded. But when Opportunity has to seek the man, the right
one is often overlooked. The golden chance is gained by another--less qualified and less worthy,
perhaps; but a better salesman of himself. The fully competent man, however, can assure his
success by becoming proficient in selling true ideas of his best capability in the right market
or field of service. The master salesman of himself makes his own chances to succeed, and therefore
runs no risk of being overlooked by Opportunity.

[Sidenote: Success Way Is Charted]

Master salesmen of ideas about "goods" use particular selling processes to get their ideas
across surely to the minds of prospective buyers. The professional salesman, therefore, has
plainly charted the way to certain success in any vocation, for the man who has developed the
best that is in him. If you are a candidate for a position, do not let a prospective employer
buy your services at his valuation, for he is certain to under-estimate you. Sell him true
ideas of your merits. Set a fair price on your worth, and get across to his mind the true idea
that you would be worth that much to him. Such skillful salesmanship used by an applicant for
a position can be depended on to make the best possible impression of his desirability; just
as the practiced art of the professional salesman enables him to present the qualities and
values of his goods in the most favorable light. The masterly selling process is not very difficult
to learn. Proficiency in its use can be gained gradually by any one who practices consciously
every day the actual sale of ideas in the artistic way.

[Sidenote: Knowledge of Salesmanship Develops Confidence]

As was stated in the Introduction to this book, it has been proved conclusively in business
that particular principles and methods of selling are certain to produce the highest average
of closed orders. In other words, success for the professional salesman is assured if he develops
certain qualifications, and if he does certain things; all within the capacity of any normal,
intelligent man. Scientific sales executives know positively, as the result of comparative
tests, that the salesman who develops these personal qualifications, and who does these things,
should get his quota of business and hold it. Hence, as has been said, specific training is
given in the sales schools of the most successful businesses, along the lines of best selling
practice.

[Sidenote: Practical Principles]

When the individual salesman who has been so trained commences work in his territory, he learns
in his experiences with buyers that the principles and methods he has been taught are actually
most effective. Assuming that he has developed his best capabilities pretty fully, and that
he has become fairly skillful in using what he knows about how to sell his line, he works with
continually growing confidence that he will succeed. Why should he doubt his complete selling
power? He knows there is a field for his goods in this territory. He knows clearly and vividly
what ideas he wants to get across to the minds of prospective buyers. He knows--most important
of all--just how to make convincing and attractive impressions of the desirability and true
value of what he presents for purchase. He comprehends the most effective ways to show prospects
both their need for his goods and that he has come, with a real purpose of service, to satisfy
that need.

You, the non-professional salesman of yourself, will sell your "goods of sale" with similar
complete confidence in your power to gain and to control your opportunities for success--if
you, too, use the right selling process.

This set of books explains and demonstrates in detail the principles and methods of the successful
salesman of ideas. The Introduction and twelve Chapters of the present series apply the selling
process especially to the sale of ideas about one's self, with particular relation to self-advancement
in the world. "The Selling Process," companion book to "Certain Success," shows the master
professional salesman at work, getting orders with assurance.

[Sidenote: Hard Study Necessary]

The fact that you have proceeded thus far in reading "Certain Success" proves you have an earnest
purpose to make the most of your present opportunity to learn how to succeed with certainty.
We will assume that you have developed your individual ability pretty fully, and that you know
where there is a field for such services as you are sure you could render if afforded the chance.
Surely, then, your ambition in life, whatever it may be, is a sufficient incentive to the most
thorough study of the principles and methods of successful salesmanship. Do not merely read
this set of books. MASTER "Certain Success" and "The Selling Process" to make yourself the
master of your own destiny.

Again and again, lest at any time while you study you might fall below 100% in absolute assurance,
you will read in these chapters the assertion that your success can be made certain. This statement
is not an exaggeration. It is necessary that you accept it literally throughout your reading
of this set of books. Do not take it "with a grain of salt." The taste of the declaration that
the selling process makes success sure will become familiar after these many repetitions. Realize
when you come upon the repeated idea as you proceed with your study that your continued reading
should frequently be reenforced by a steadily growing conviction that you are mastering the
sure way to succeed. You believe in yourself more than you did when you began to read this
book. This increasing faith should develop to complete confidence when you have dug into the
text of both "Certain Success" and "The Selling Process," and have dug out every idea in the
twenty-four chapters.

[Sidenote: Salesmanship Not a Science But an Art]

At the outset of your present study comprehend that salesmanship is not a science. Rather,
it is an art. Like every other art, however, it has a related science. Selling is a process.
Knowledge about the principles and methods that make the process most effective is the related
science. But such knowledge supplies only the best foundation for building success by the actual
practice of most effective salesmanship. The master salesman practices the scientific principles
and methods he has learned until the skillful use of his knowledge in every-day selling becomes
second nature to him. Thus, and thus only, is his art perfected.

You will gain knowledge from these books about how to sell with assurance the true idea of
your best capabilities--about how to sell any "goods of sale" unfailingly. But you can develop
the skill necessary to the actual achievement of certain success only if you continually use
what you learn about the selling process. You must perfect your selling art by the intelligent
employment of every word and tone and act of your life to attract other men to you, and to
impress on them convincingly true ideas of your particular ability.

[Sidenote: Be a Salesman Every Minute]

The master professional salesman is "always on the job" with his three means of self-expression,
to get across to prospects true ideas of the desirability and value of his goods. He is a salesman
every minute, and in everything he does or says. You can become as efficient as he, in selling
ideas about your "goods of sale," if your proficiency becomes as easy and natural as his. Such
ease is the sure result of sufficient right practice.

You have countless opportunities daily to make use of the selling process. In each expression
of yourself--in your every word, tone, and act--you convey some idea of your particular character
and ability. You should know how to make true, attractive impressions of your best self; and
how to avoid making untrue and unfavorable impressions by what you do and say. Then, when you
have learned the most effective way to sell ideas about yourself that you want other people
to have, it is necessary that you use the selling process consciously all the time until you
grow into the habit of using it unconsciously, as your second nature. Once you are accustomed
to acting the salesman continually, it will be no more difficult for you to be "always on the
job" selling right ideas of your qualifications for success, than it is for the professional
user of the selling process to be a salesman "every minute."

[Sidenote: Your "Goods of Sale"]

As already has been emphasized, "the goods of sale" in your case are your best capabilities.
You need first of all to know your true self, before you can sell true ideas about your qualifications
for success. Your true self is your best self. You are untrue to yourself, you balk your own
ambition to succeed, unless you develop to the utmost of your capacity your particular salable
qualities.

You do not need qualities you now wholly lack. You should not attempt to "salt" the gold mine
in yourself with the characteristics of other men who have succeeded by the development and
use of capabilities that were natural to them, but that would be unnatural to you. It is worse
than futile--it is foolish for you to imitate anybody else. Just be your best self. Make the
most of what you have that is salable. You require no more to assure your success.

[Sidenote: Selling the Truth About Your Best Self]

Every individual has distinct characteristics, and is capable of doing particular things, of
which he may be genuinely proud if he fully develops and uses his personal qualifications.
When all the truth about his best possible self is skillfully made known to others, chances
for success are certain to be opened to the ambitious man. If he lacks the salesmanship key,
the doors of opportunity may always remain closed, however well he deserves to be welcomed.

You possess "goods of sale" that have real quality, that are durable, that will render service
and afford pleasurable satisfaction to others. Your goods can be sold as surely as quality
phonographs, durable automobile tires, serviceable clothes, or pleasing books.

Maybe you can "deliver the goods" with smiles, or hearty tones, or ready acts of kindness.
Any one can easily be friendly. But have you developed all your ability to smile genuinely?
Have you cultivated the hearty tone of real kindness so that now it is unnatural for you ever
to speak in any other way? Do you perform friendly acts of consideration for others on every
occasion, as second nature?

If your honest answers to such questions must be negative, you are not a good salesman of your
best self all the time.

[Sidenote: Your Salable Qualities]

Your most salable quality may be dependability, rather than quick thinking. If this is the
case, concentrate your salesmanship on making impressions of the true idea of your reliability.
Your greatest success will be achieved in some field of service where dependableness is a primary
essential. You may be naturally unfitted to make a star reporter, but peculiarly qualified
to develop into the cashier of a bank.

Should you happen to be unattractive in features, your job is to transform your homeliness
into a likable quality--not to try to make yourself appear handsome. If you are wholly inexperienced,
that need not be a detriment to your success in the field you want to enter. When you have
mastered the selling process, your very greenness can be presented before the mind of a prospective
employer as the best of reasons for engaging you. You will be able to make yourself appear
desirable because you are green in that field, and therefore have no wrong ideas to "unlearn."

[Sidenote: Know All of Yourself]

You can greatly improve your chances to get the job for which you are best adapted, if you
use the reciprocal selling process employed by the professional salesman when he sells his
services to a house. He meets the head of the concern as his man-equal, and does not just offer
himself "for hire." Such a consciousness of your man-equality when you are face to face with
a prospective employer can result only from certain, analytical knowledge of your best self,
complemented by knowing how to sell the true idea of your particular desirability and worth.

Very likely you think you are seriously handicapped in many ways. Having made no detailed analysis
of yourself from a salesman's view-point, you do not appreciate fully the number and the market
value of the advantages you might have. Probably some of your best, most salable qualities
are latent or but partly developed.

[Sidenote: Chart Necessary]

List your particular "goods of sale." Put down on a chart, not only the qualities you have
now, but all the additional ones you feel capable of developing. Then you will realize vividly
that you possess many abilities, some undeveloped yet, which are always needed in the world.
You know that such qualities should be readily salable, to the mutual benefit of yourself and
of buyers. You are learning the selling process in order to make certain that you can sell
the best that is in you, as other men are selling themselves successfully.

Complete your chart by listing your various defects. Then study out ways to use even your particular
faults differently than you have been handling them; so that they will help you, instead of
being hindrances to your success. Think of some people you know, and of how they have turned
their physical "liabilities" into "assets" of popularity.

The very first sales knowledge you need is of exactly what you have to sell. You cannot see
all of yourself, your good and bad points--yourself as you are, and as you might be--unless
you make a detailed chart of your "goods of sale." One of the most important immediate effects
of such a self-analysis will be increased self-respect. Your handicaps will shrink, and the
peculiar advantages you have will grow before your eyes. You should feel new confidence in
your own ability.

[Sidenote: Man-Equality]

With this confidence will come a feeling that you are not the inferior of another man who has
achieved a larger measure of success than you have gained. When you start the sale of true
ideas of your best self to an employer-buyer of such services as you are capable of rendering,
you will have an innate consciousness of your man-equality with him. You should realize that
this sale of yourself, like all other true sales, is to be a transaction of reciprocal benefits,
and should be conducted on the basis of mutual respect.

It is your right to take pains that the prospective buyer of your services shall sell himself
to you as the boss you want to work with. Expect him to sell himself to you as a desirable
employer just as thoroughly and satisfyingly as you intend to sell yourself to him as a worthy
applicant for an opportunity in his business. When you have definite, sure knowledge of your
capability and service value, you certainly should not be willing to take "any old job."

There is no better way to make the impression of your desirability as an employee than to demonstrate
that you are choosing your employment intelligently. In explaining your choice, give specific
reasons for your selection of this particular opening. Show that you comprehend what is to
be done. Give some indication of your ability to do it efficiently and satisfactorily. Suggest
the worth of your services when you shall have proved your fitness.

[Sidenote: Require Employer to Sell You the Job]

The ordinary man who applies for a job in the ordinary way is accepted or turned down wholly
at the discretion of the employer. If you use the selling process skillfully, you will suggest
that you are out of the ordinary class. Of course, you should demonstrate in your salesmanship
that you are not over-rating your ability. The other man must be made to feel you have sound
reasons for your bearing of equality and self-confidence when you seek to make sure that in
his business you will have your best chance to succeed. By showing him that you are taking
intelligent precautions against making a mistake in your employment, you indicate conclusively
that you are not merely a "floater," but that you have a purpose "to stick and make good."

In the same measure that you require proof of a desirable personality in an employer, you should
make sure that the work is exactly what you expect. See that your prospective "new boss" sells
you the job at the same time you are selling him your services. If he perceives in you the
one man who best fits his needs, he will put forth every effort to buy your services. Every
employer will respect the man who states, with salesmanship, a sound reason for selecting and
seeking connection with a business house; since such a man gives promise of making the sort
of dependable, loyal worker that every business values and appreciates.

[Sidenote: Sell to Satisfy Real Needs]

The true salesman sells to satisfy a real need of the buyer. Therefore, when you have charted
your salable qualities, select the field of service in which such capability as you possess
is needed. That, you may be sure, is your right market--the field where you are certain to
succeed. Enter it, and no other field. Apply there for a place of opportunity to serve; with
the absolute confidence of a good salesman come to satisfy a want, and conscious of his individual
fitness "to deliver the goods."

You may not get just what you desire at the first attempt. The best professional salesman often
has to make repeated efforts to close orders. But in the end, if you "have the goods," that
are needed where you bring them, and you know how to sell true ideas of your best self (as
you will know after mastering the selling process) you will be sure of getting sufficient opportunities
to succeed. You will be as certain about getting enough chances as the first-class professional
salesman is certain of attaining his full quota of business despite some turn-downs. Success
is a matter of making a good batting average.

[Sidenote: Parts of Complete Process]

Remember as you read that you are studying a completed process. An unfinished sales effort
is not a sale at all. You will not be a certainly successful salesman until you perfect your
knowledge and skill in all the steps of salesmanship. You can learn only a single part of sales
efficiency at a time. The relative significance of each point, its full importance in the entire
selling process, will not be comprehended until you have read at least once all there is in
this set of books. When you re-study the successive chapters, the details you may at first
understand but vaguely in a disconnected way will be clear. You will comprehend them as various
elements of salesmanship which must be fitted together to complete the process of selling.

Thus far in the present chapter we have been considering principally the "goods of sale." We
have been looking at our subject from the material aspect. Now let us turn our attention to
the mental view of sales.

[Sidenote: Mental Nature of Selling Process]

In the effective selling process the skilled salesman is able to be the controlling party.
He makes the other man think as he thinks. As has been stated repeatedly, he sells ideas, not
goods. So the real nature of any sale is mental, not material. You must "deliver the goods"
to the mind of the man to whom you wish to sell your best capabilities. You should use the
same process as the professional salesman, who works to control the thoughts of his prospect
regarding the line of goods presented. Hence when you plan to make sure of getting a desired
position, it is necessary that you know exactly how to put true ideas about yourself into the
head of the person whom you have chosen as your prospective employer. Further, you need to
know precisely what psychological effects you can secure with certainty by using skillful salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Three Sales Mediums]

Ideas of your best capability may be sold through three mediums--advertising, correspondence,
and personal selling. Take advantage of all three, wherever and whenever possible, to gain
your chance for success. Use these mediums with real salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Advertising]

If you advertise for a position, think out in detail the impression of your true best self
that you wish to make on the minds of readers. Put your personality into the advertising medium
in such carefully selected language as will reach the needs of particular employers, and will
not appear to be just a broadside of words shot into the air without aim. Indicate clearly
that you are not seeking "any old job so long as the salary is good." Analyze and know just
what you suggest about yourself in print. Many a successful business man has sold himself through
the door of his initial big opportunity by real salesmanship in his advertisement of his capabilities.

[Sidenote: Correspondence]

Each letter you write should be regarded as "a sales letter." It makes an impression, true
or false, of you. Take the greatest pains to have that impression what you want it to be. Never
be slovenly or careless in writing to anyone on any subject. Put genuine salesmanship into
all your letters consciously; instead of conveying ideas unwittingly, without realizing what
the reader is likely to think of you and the things you write. You can scatter impressions
of your best self broadcast over the earth by using your ordinary correspondence as a medium
of salesmanship. So you can open both nearby and far distant opportunities for the future;
even while you still are training yourself to make the most of these chances you hope to gain.

Good sales letters are so rare that the ability to write them has erroneously been called "a
gift." It is not. Any one of educated intelligence can write his ideas; provided he has clear,
definite thought-images in his own mind. But cloudy thinking reflects only a blur on paper.

[Sidenote: Using Sales Letters]

A letter that plainly conveys true ideas is a sales letter; for it gets across to the mind
of the recipient a clear, definite mental impression of the writer's real personality and thoughts.

In all your correspondence, throughout the period of preparation for your chosen life career,
send out true ideas of your best capability. If you do, you doubtless will find the door of
your desired opportunity open by the time you are fully prepared to knock. Successful business
is always ready in advance to welcome "comers;" whenever and wherever they are sighted. Therefore
project your personality far and wide through your letters. Employ the medium of correspondence,
with salesmanship knowledge and skill, even when you write the most ordinary messages to your
acquaintances or to strangers. That is, think out certain ways to sell particular ideas about
yourself; then incorporate these bits of salesmanship in your letters.

A young man in his senior year at college selected a large corporation as his prospective employer.
He did not know any of the executives of the company, but he worked out a plan to get acquainted
through letters. He was especially desirous of entering the field of foreign trade, and had
made a fairly comprehensive study of the export business. He wrote to the president of the
corporation, gave a brief outline of articles and books he had read; then complimented the
great company by declaring that he realized the knowledge he had acquired was theoretical and
abstract, and that he wished to gain practical, concrete ideas by studying the methods of the
corporation. He enclosed with his letter ten cents in postage stamps, and requested that he
be sent any forms, instruction sheets, sales bulletins, etc., the president was willing to
let him have for study.

[Sidenote: Getting A Future Chance]

His letter was referred to the vice-president in charge of sales, who in turn passed it on
to a department manager with instructions to supply the matter requested. In the course of
a week the college student received a bulky package. Meanwhile a letter had been sent from
the department head which stated that the vice-president in charge of sales had referred to
him the request for forms, instruction sheets, etc., and that they would be forwarded under
separate cover.

The student took advantage of the three opportunities opened to conduct correspondence with
the executives of the corporation. He first wrote courteous, carefully worded "thank-you" letters
to the president, vice-president, and department head. These were all in his own hand, so that
his good penmanship might make an individual impression. After these letters were dispatched
the student mastered the material that had been sent to him. Then he wrote three supplemental
letters of appreciation, and made concise comments on some of the methods of the corporation,
with comparisons from his previous reading of books and articles on foreign trade. He stated
that he intended to make further investigation along these particular lines and that if he
learned anything he thought might be interesting to the company he would write what he found
out. In the course of a month he sent a letter which detailed his investigations. This he addressed
to the department head only. But he also penned brief letters to the president and vice-president,
in which he informed them that he had written in detail to the department head.

[Sidenote: Effect of Follow-up Letters]

The correspondence continued throughout the remainder of the student's senior year at college.
The letters from the business men soon evidenced more than formal courtesy. They grew personal
and indicated real interest. A month before his graduation the student was invited to call
at the company's office after Commencement. He went, made an excellent impression in interviews
with the vice-president in charge of sales and the department head, and though the ink on his
sheepskin was not yet dry, he gained his object. He was engaged by the corporation and began
training as a prospective representative of the company in foreign territory.

Thus through the correspondence medium of salesmanship a young man who had no advantage of
personal influence or acquaintance secured exactly the chance he wanted. Similar opportunities
are open to any one.

[Sidenote: Personal Selling]

Every moment of your life when you are in the presence of other people, you have chances to
sell true ideas about the best that is in you. You will not need to seek such opportunities
for personal salesmanship. Chances come to you continually to make good impressions on the
minds of the men and women you meet from day to day.

Be a skillful salesman of true ideas about yourself always, even in the most casual relations
you have with other people. Sell the best possible impressions of yourself to passers-by on
the street, to your fellow riders in cars, to clerks and customers of stores you visit, to
your home and business associates. Put selling skill, as second nature, into each word, tone,
and action of your social and business life.

Realize that in whatever you do or say, consciously or unconsciously, you are selling ideas
about your capability or your incapacity. You are making more or less definite impressions--you
are affecting your opportunities to succeed, and are forming good or bad habits--all the time.
Control the effects of your words, tones, and acts by saying and doing, consciously and intelligently,
only what will aid in selling true ideas of your best capabilities..

[Sidenote: Practical Psychology]

Of course you already know that each word and tone and act of your life makes some impression
on the people who hear or see you. But probably you have not realized fully that particular
ways of saying and doing things have distinct and different effects, each governed by an exact
law of psychology. You perhaps do not know now just what impression is made by a certain word,
or tone, or act. To be a master salesman of yourself you need to study the science of mind
sufficiently to acquire working knowledge of common mental actions and reactions. Familiarity
with at least the general principles of psychology is of the utmost importance in using the
selling process effectively.

Do not shy from study of the science of mind because it is an "ology" and therefore may seem
hard. You are a psychologist already. You know that certain things you do and say make agreeable
or unfavorable impressions on other people. In a general way you know why. It is necessary
only that you analyze specifically what you realize now rather indefinitely. If you do not
care to study a book on psychology, just use your own mind as your psychological laboratory
for continual self-analysis.

Answer for yourself such questions as, "Exactly what effect will this particular word, or tone,
or act have--and just why?" You can work out pretty well the practical knowledge of psychology
you must have in order to sell ideas about your capabilities most effectively. You simply need
to apply purposeful intelligence in everything you do and say; instead of making impressions
without comprehending that by each word and tone and act of daily living you are influencing,
favorably or adversely, your chances to succeed.

[Sidenote: Three Factors of Selling Process]

Think of yourself as one of the three factors of the selling process. The goods of sale are
your best capabilities, of course. The second factor is the prospective buyer, the man who
has need of such qualities or services as you could supply. The agent of sale, or third factor,
is yourself. If you will keep in mind always the conception of yourself as the uniting link
between your "goods of sale" and the prospective buyer, you can be a salesman of yourself every
minute. At any moment except when you are alone you may encounter and influence a possible
buyer of your best capabilities. You are continually within sight and hearing of people whose
impressions of you might affect your chances to succeed in life. Therefore always be alert
to grasp every sales opportunity within your reach.

[Sidenote: Twelve Steps]

It will be essential, also, that you have knowledge of the successive steps of the selling
process, as well as knowledge of your goods of sale and knowledge of practical mind science.
Otherwise you might omit inadvertently to use some round of the ladder to certain success,
and tumble to failure. These steps are so important to understand that the last nine chapters
of the companion book are devoted to them exclusively. It will suffice here just to state what
they are.

 1. Preparation For Selling;
 2. Prospecting;
 3. The Plan Of Approach;
 4. Securing An Audience;
 5. Sizing Up The Buyer;
 6. Gaining Attention;
 7. Awakening Interest;
 8. The Creation Of Desire;
 9. Handling Objections;
10. The Process Of Decision;
11. Obtaining Signature or Assent;
12. The Get-Away That Leads To Future Orders.

[Sidenote: Five Degrees of Effort]

Another element of necessary knowledge about the selling process is the classification of sales
according to the five degrees of effort required to close them.

1. A sale completed by response to the mere demand of the buyer.

Example--While a street car strike is on you are driving, an automobile down town. A man in
a hurry to catch a train stops you and says, "I'll give you two dollars to take me to the station."
You transport him in response to his call for your services.

[Sidenote: Distinguish Degrees of Effort]

2. A sale completed by the buyer's acceptance on presentation only.

Example--A man is walking along a country road in the summer time. He sees a sign in the door-yard
of a farmhouse; BERRY PICKERS WANTED. He presents himself as a candidate and the farmer at
once engages his services.

3. A sale completed immediately after a desire of the buyer has been created by a definite,
intentional effort of the salesman.

Example--A man out of work wants a job that will employ his physical strength. He encounters
three men who are struggling to load a very heavy box onto a truck. He takes off his coat and
proves his strength by the ease with which the box is lifted when he helps. He inquires which
of the three men is the truck boss; and asks for a job. He is hired because he has made the
boss want the aid of his strength in handling heavy loads.

4. A sale completed only after persuasion of the buyer.

Example--Assume that the truck boss in the next preceding illustration refuses at first to
hire the applicant who has demonstrated his strength. It is necessary then for the man out
of a job to talk his prospective boss into the idea that he needs a fourth man in his gang.

5. A sale completed only after a decision by the buyer as to the comparative benefits of purchasing
or of not buying.

Example--You and another candidate apply for the same position in an office. You appear to
be about equal in capability. The employer "weighs you in the balance" against the other applicant.
This is a sale requiring the fifth degree of effort. Manifestly you will need to use a very
high quality of skill to get into the mind of the prospective buyer of services the idea that
you are likely to be of more value as an employee than your competitor for the place. Then
you must skillfully prompt him to accept your application.

[Sidenote: Difficult Sales Most Worth Making]

When you appreciate exactly how sales differ in the degrees of effort necessary to close them,
you will realize the wisdom of preparing to sell your particular qualities and services with
full comprehension of all the difficulties commonly met by candidates for desirable positions.

Countless men have died failures because they used throughout their lives only the first or
second degrees of effort. Consequently all their attempts to get good jobs were futile. The
non-success of millions of other worthy men has been due to their use of no more than the third
or fourth degrees of selling effort.

[Sidenote: Sales of The Fifth Degree of Difficulty]

Sales of the fifth degree of difficulty sometimes demand knowledge and skillful use of the
entire selling process. They are the sales most worth making. The applicant for a new position
or for a promotion is certain to succeed in his purpose if he knows how to complete a sale
of the true idea of his best capabilities. In order to do this he must control the weighing
process of the buyer; and be skillful in prompting acceptance of his "goods of sale."

When you master and reduce to every-day practice the fundamental principles you can learn from
this set of books, you will be assured of making a successful average in handling sales of
the fifth degree of effort.

They are sales of the kind the professional salesman makes with complete confidence every day.
His methods, applied to the marketing of your goods of sale, will work such wonders for you
that you soon should build up self-confidence equal to the matter-of-fact assurance of the
master salesman of clothing, insurance, and other materials of sale. He knows when he begins
a season or starts on a trip that he will make a good batting average.

[Sidenote: Desired Results In Selling]

Comprehend, further, exactly what results are desired by the skilled salesman whose work is
based on scientific principles.

The immediate results desired are:

First, confidence;

Second, acceptance of the ideas brought by the salesman.

One who is unfamiliar with the scientific principles underlying the skillful practice of the
right selling process is unlikely to realize that the first sales effort should be concentrated
on winning the prospective buyer's confidence in the salesman and in the goods of sale. Failures
in selling are often due to the fault of the salesman who works primarily for but the second
of the immediate results to be desired; the acceptance of his proposition--the acceptance of
his personal capabilities and services, for instance. He neglects, as a preliminary to securing
acceptance, to gain the confidence of the other man. When you undertake to sell your particular
good qualities and your services to a prospective employer, do not make the mistake in salesmanship
of omitting the process of first winning his belief in you.

[Sidenote: Repeat Sales]

Besides the two immediate results desired by the skillful salesman, there is a permanent result
to be worked for--an enduring consequence desired from the present gains made. That permanent
result wanted is the opening of other opportunities for future sales.

Complete success in life is not assured when the original sale of one's best capabilities is
closed successfully. Gaining the initial desired chance does not make it certain that one will
succeed in his entire career. The first sale is faulty if it does not include a lead to future
opportunities "to deliver the goods."

The right selling process is continuous. Where one sale ends, another should be already started.
A great many failures of capable men can be ascribed to short-sighted concentration on immediate
chances. One who would make certain of the success of his whole life must ever look ahead to
the next possible opportunity for the sale of the true idea of his best capabilities, meanwhile
making the most of his present chance.

[Sidenote: Service Purpose In Selling]

In order to get the right viewpoint for further study of the selling process, you, the salesman
of yourself, need to comprehend clearly the fundamental purpose of all true salesmanship. It
should be the service of the buyer in satisfying his real needs.

Few salesmen know what sales service is, and how it should be rendered. Service is the very
soul of the certain success selling process. Service must be studied as a purpose until the
principles underlying the fullest satisfaction of the buyer's real needs are mastered, and
all false misconceptions of service are cleared away from the salesman's idea of his obligation
to the purchaser of his goods of sale.

[Sidenote: Sales Knowledge Universally Needed]

This brief summary of the principal essentials of sales knowledge has been outlined in order
to impress on you the practically universal need for a better understanding of the selling
process. Certainly you are convinced now that it will pay you to know HOW to sell. Then let
us look next at yourself in a different light--as a subject of study in sales-man-ship.

CHAPTER II

The Man-Stuff You Have For Sale

[Sidenote: The Man Sales-Man Ship]

Your knowledge of sales principles and methods, and your skill in selling ideas must be combined
with right sales-manhood if your complete success in sales-man-ship is to be made certain.
Particular man qualities are necessary to make you a master salesman in your chosen field.
"A good man obtaineth favor." So we will study now the elements of character required for the
most effective sales-man-ship, and how to develop them.

We shall not consider "Man" in the abstract, nor exceptional ideals of manhood. Our thought
of the sales man will be concentrated on qualities you have or can develop, that are necessary
to make you most efficient in selling ideas about yourself.

Some radical changes in your present character may be required. But you will need principally
to grow in order to attain the full stature of sales manhood that is necessary to gain complete
success. If your manliness is dwarfed now, you cannot succeed largely in selling true ideas
of your best and biggest capabilities, until you rid yourself of the character faults that
are stunting your growth as a sales man.

[Sidenote: The Little Man Out-of-Date]

Realize at the outset that the time has passed forever when the little man, with the narrowly
selfish outlook for "Number One," might succeed. The demand of the future will be, however,
not so much for BIG men as for big MEN. The world no longer looks up to Kaisers and Czars.
Success has ceased to be merely a towering figure. Hereafter the one sure way to succeed will
lead through the door of brotherly understanding of the other fellow, into the common heart
of mankind. Only salesmanship can open that door with certainty.

We are entering a new business era, where the old individualistic methods of attaining so-called
"success" will be worse than useless. Many of them even now are forbidden by law. All the practices
of the "profiteer" and his ilk are discountenanced by far-seeing people. Men of vision perceive
that the size of To-morrow's Success will be measured in direct proportion to its quality of
human service.

"SERVICE" is the motto of the highest salesmanship. Therefore, in shaping your plans to succeed,
start with the resolve to make yourself a truly big sales MAN. Do not copy the little, selfish
models of Yesterday. Study the signs of the times. To be out-of-date is equivalent to being
a failure.

[Sidenote: Pint and Bushel Men]

You will need to be big in ability, in imagination, in energy, in your ideals--but most of
all you must be big in MANHOOD. If you are little and selfish in your life purpose, you cannot
be certain of success in selling to a truly BIG man the idea that you are fully qualified for
his service. Before making any attempt to sell yourself into a desirable position, take pains
to develop as much man quality as characterizes your prospective employer. You cannot comprehend
him if you fall short of his standard of manhood. To-day the biggest buyers of brains and brawn
recognize their obligations of human brotherhood. If you are little and self-centered, how
can you reach into the mind and heart and soul of another man who is genuinely BIG? How can
you impel him to think as you wish?

The little man even doubts the existence of big manhood. He cannot comprehend such size. A
pint measure, however much it is stretched, is utterly unable to contain a bushel. But the
larger measure easily holds either a pint or a bushel. Similarly if you are big in manhood,
you can comprehend alike the little man and the big man. You will be able to deal successfully
with both.

[Sidenote: The Clothing Of Manhood]

It is not sufficient, however, that you grow to the full stature of your biggest man possibilities.
It is necessary also that you be clothed in the characteristics of manhood in order to be recognized
as a man. When you were only an infant, you were safety-pinned into a square of cloth once
doubled triangularly. You graduated to rompers at a year and a half or two. Then you put on
knee-pants, and afterward youth's long trousers. Now you wear the clothes of a full-grown man.
You would not think of dressing in knickerbockers, or rompers, or--something younger, to present
your qualities and services for sale. Yet your outer garb is much less important to the success
of your salesmanship than is your clothing of manhood.

[Sidenote: What is Your Man Power?]

If you hope to assure yourself of man's-size success in life, plan that wherever you are you
will make the instant impression that you are "every inch a man," not just an overgrown baby
or boy. Follow the example of Paul, that incomparably great salesman of the new ideas of Christianity.
He wrote in his powerful first sales letter to the Corinthian field, "When I became a man,
I put away childish things." Compel respect by your sound virility. Have a well-founded consciousness
that in manhood you are the equal of any other man, and you can make everybody you meet feel
you are a man all through.

What is your size as a sales man now?

Ask yourself this question, and answer it frankly. In order to make sure of selling yourself
into the opportunities you want, you must take your own measure and fit your manhood to the
selling process you have begun to learn. Beyond a doubt you are now a sales man of some size.
You are selling your physical or mental powers, your services of this kind or that, with a
degree of efficiency directly proportionate to your man-power.

[Sidenote: The ¼ m.p. Man]

If you are only a ¼ m.p. salesman at present, you lack three-fourths of the man capacity needed
to handle with certain success all the opportunities of full-size manhood. You were not limited
by Nature to ¼ m.p. size. You were born with full man capacity. You are like a gasoline motor
developing but a quarter of the power it was designed to produce--not because of any structural
fault in the engine, but simply for the reason that it does not function now as it was intended
to operate, and as it can be made to work in the future if it is overhauled and put in perfect
condition. The full power capacity originally built into the motor needs to be brought out.
Likewise your man-power plant requires to be made as efficient as possible, in order to assure
you of full man-capability for achieving success.

Maybe your chief fault is poor fuel, and what you most need is good "gas." You have not been
filling up your mind with the right ideas. Or, perhaps, your piston rings leak; and you lack
the high compression of determined persistence. Another fault might be in your carburetor--you
are not a good "mixer." Or your spark of enthusiasm may be weak. It is possible, too, that
your fine points are caked over by the carbon of accumulated bad habits. Maybe you have a cracked
cylinder--your health is partly broken down. The fault is in your timer, perhaps. You are not
"on the job" when you should be.

[Sidenote: Your Manhood Can Be Re-built]

No matter what ails your particular engine, it can be repaired or rebuilt into a full one-manpower
motor of efficiency. If you limp and pound along with but a quarter of your capability, it
is your own fault for not overhauling your power plant. Don't continue as a ¼ m.p. man and
blame anybody else, or curse your bad luck because you can't make speed and carry the load
necessary to succeed. Stop trying to go on crippled or clogged in manhood. Run yourself into
the repair shop right away and "get fixed."

You can make your manhood over.

There is full-man capability in you. You can get it all out and put it to work for your success.

You have the ability to re-make your character entirely, without changing your individual nature.

You must accomplish transformation into your best self before you can make the most of your
opportunities to sell your abilities and services. It will not suffice that you just are willing,
or desire, to become a first-class salesman of your particular "goods of sale." Merely acquiring
information or knowledge of the selling process is not enough to assure your success in life.
Even the most skillful practice of all the sales principles and methods you learn will be insufficient
to guarantee your success--if you do not develop your full man capacity for sales-man-ship.

[Sidenote: Essentials of the Master Sales Man]

The result of the necessary changes and growth in your manhood will be an enlarged conception
of all men--your greater capacity to understand and to handle any one else successfully.

It is entirely possible for you to develop and cultivate every essential quality of the master
sales-man, and still to be just yourself.

[Sidenote: Good Appearance]

The high grade professional salesman makes the best appearance of which he is capable. Surely
you can do that, too. You can train yourself to grace and ease in your bearing. However unsatisfactory
your features may be, you certainly are capable of looking pleasant, and therefore of being
attractive. It is possible for you to have well-kept hands and hair; to wear suitable, clean
clothes; to be neat.

[Sidenote: Physical Capacity]

First-class salesmanship requires, too, a high degree of physical capacity for the most effective
performance of the selling process. You need health, virility, energy, liveliness, and endurance,
in order to sell effectively the idea that you are physically able to fill the job you want
most. Physical incapacity is a handicap in almost any vocation. It can be remedied. It must
be remedied as fully as possible in your case. You may not be very robust naturally, but you
can make the most of the constitution you have, with certain success as the incentive for your
fullest possible physical development. Few of us are as well as we might be.

[Sidenote: Mental Equipment]

Whatever your physical shortcomings, there can be no doubt that you are capable of developing
all the essential mental equipment of the successful salesman. You only need to comprehend
a few elemental laws of mind science; and then to train yourself to the utmost of your particular
ability--in perceptive power, alertness, accuracy, punctuality, memory, imagination, concentration,
adaptability to circumstances, stability, self-control, determination, tact, diplomacy, and
good judgment.

Does this seem like a long list of difficult accomplishments? Examine the items, and realize
how easy it is to develop these mental qualities of masterly salesmanship.

Perception is simply looking at things with your mind as well as with your eyes.

Alertness is no more than mental sharp ears.

Accuracy results from taking pains to be right.

Punctuality is a habit of mind that anyone can develop.

Memory is acquired by practice in remembering things.

You use some imagination every day--use all your imaginative power.

Likewise you occasionally concentrate your thoughts. More exercise in concentration will develop
this mental characteristic.

You adapt yourself to circumstances when necessary, or when you choose. You can train yourself
so that you will be prepared to meet anything that may happen.

You have a degree of stability of character, otherwise you never would accomplish anything.
Increase your steadfastness by sticking to more purposes.

Similarly determination, self-control, tact, diplomacy, and good judgment are merely the natural
results of continual practice to develop these mental qualities.

[Sidenote: Emotional Qualities]

The principal emotional or heart qualities required in masterly selling are ambition, hopefulness,
optimism, enthusiasm, cheerfulness, self-confidence, courage, persistence, patience, earnestness,
sympathy, frankness, expressiveness, humor, loyalty, and love of others. Think of these one
by one, and realize how many of them you already possess to a considerable degree.

You may not be optimistic; perhaps you lack self-confidence, or maybe you are wanting in courage.
But with the possible exception of these three "heart" qualities of the master salesman, you
are not deficient now in the emotional essentials of successful salesmanship. You need only
a higher degree of each.

Develop all your capability in the other qualities, and you will find you have become an optimist.
Your self-confidence, too, will grow as fast as you increase your ability. When you are full
of optimism and self-confidence, you will not find it difficult to create courage within yourself.
Then you will have the complete emotional equipment of a master salesman. The exact way to
develop courage with certainty is explained in the second chapter of "The Selling Process,"
with especial reference to the professional salesman, who must meet his prospects courageously
in all circumstances if he would succeed.

[Sidenote: Ethical Essentials]

Nor is it hard for you to qualify yourself ethically for mastery of the selling process. Surely
your intentions are right. You mean to be honest and truthful. You can be of good moral character.
You expect to be reliable. It should be easy for you to love your chosen work.

[Sidenote: Spiritual Capacity]

There remains, finally, the essential of spiritual capacity for selling. It comprises idealism,
vision, faith, desire to serve, ability to understand other men. Perhaps you are deficient
in some of these spiritual qualities now. But with idealism all about you in the spirit of
the world cannot you, too, lift your eyes to higher purposes than the satisfaction of merely
selfish desires? Are you not able to look broadly, instead of narrowly at life? You know you
must have faith--that you cannot make sure of success if you doubt. Your mission as a true
salesman of yourself should be to serve your prospects by satisfying their real needs for the
abilities you have. Love of others results from serving them with what you can supply that
they lack.

In no respect, then, from personal good appearance to spiritual capacity, need you be other
than your best possible self to qualify for certain success with the selling process.

[Sidenote: Change and Growth Necessary]

Reference has been made repeatedly in these pages to the necessity for change and growth in
your man character before you can become a master salesman of your full capability for success.
Of course you cannot change your nature into a different nature; any more than one form of
life can be transformed into an entirely distinct form of life. It is impossible to develop
a carrot into a calla, or to make a dog of a pig. But the elements of any particular form of
life may be altered, most radically.

[Sidenote: Develop Use, Activity and Quality Of Elements]

So you can develop: (1) the use; (2) the degree of activity; (3) the quality, of any element
in your present salesman equipment.

For example, it is generally recognized that suitable clothes help to create a good impression.
Therefore you should use to the highest degree of activity and of quality what you know about
the effect of dress in helping to create a good impression. But, to particularize, do you (use
your knowledge) polish your shoes, even if it is no more than flicking off the dust with your
handkerchief, every chance (highest degree of activity) you get when they need it? And when
you polish your shoes in the morning preparatory to starting your day's work, do you just give
them "a lick and a promise," or do you "make 'em shine?" (Highest degree of quality.)

[Sidenote: Animal Training]

The "stupid" pig can be taught to do as phenomenal tricks as the "intelligent" dog. It is possible
to train a pig so that he will appear to be able to discriminate among colors, to tell time,
even to perform simple operations in arithmetic. At the circus or vaudeville we sit in wonder
while the "educated" stupid pig, alertly afraid of the trainer's whip, performs stunts of seeming
intelligence. Under the stimulus of fear he acts like a quick-thinking dog. In truth he has
been changed by training, from the pig characteristic of utter stupidity to the dog characteristic
of rudimentary intelligence. But in nature and form he remains just a pig. If you should see
him among other pigs in a pen, you never would mistake the "educated" pig for a fat puppy.

In the trained pig the use of his pig mind is developed to an unusual degree of activity and
of quality to save himself from punishment and to gain the tidbits that reward his performance
of tricks. The purpose of the trainer is accomplished by changing and developing the mind functioning
of the pig. No trainer would attempt to change the nature of a pig--to develop a pig into an
elephant, a different creature. Only characteristics can be changed or developed.

[Sidenote: Plant Development]

Luther Burbank has accomplished with plants even more extraordinary changes and developments
in characteristics than have been achieved by the most expert trainers of animals. He could
not make a carrot into a calla; but he did take the dwarf natural calla plant and develop it
into a splendid lily that bears flowers measuring a foot across the petal. He also multiplied
the characteristic colors of the natural calla and has evolved great blossoms of a score of
shades, from pure white to jet black.

The noted plant wizard developed, too, the naturally small, hard, dry, sour prune and transformed
it into a juicy, sweet fruit that is bigger and more delicious than our common plum.

He also succeeded in altering radically an element of the natural walnut, which had a characteristic
covering skin of bitter tannin over the meat inside the nut shell. For countless centuries
walnut trees had been in the habit of covering the meat of their nuts with this tannin skin.
Luther Burbank trained selected walnut trees to give up this fixed bad habit, and to produce
nuts the meats of which were not enveloped in bitter coverings.

[Sidenote: Man Making]

Since expert trainers have been able to accomplish such marvelous changes and developments
in the characteristics of lower animals and plants--not changes in the form of life, but alterations
so nearly miraculous that they seem almost to be changes in nature--is there the least doubt
that you, a man, excelling every other animal, and every plant in consciousness and intelligence,
are capable of the most radical, elemental changes in your present self?

Cannot you, then, certainly develop and use to a much higher degree of activity and quality
the MAN characteristics you now possess? Of course you can! You need but to learn the science
of yourself--to get full knowledge of what you are and of what you might be--by studying the
big, best qualities in you. After that you will need to make the most of what you learn about
your true self. Intensive self-study will reveal to you all the possibilities of your enlarged
and bettered personality. When you know you have developed your biggest, best manhood, you
certainly will feel increased power to sell your "goods."

Of all living creatures, Man is the most adaptable, is capable of the greatest development,
and responsive in the highest degree to desires from within and to influences from outside
himself. Only a stupidly ignorant man would hold to the belief that the elements of his character
cannot be radically changed and developed. At present you may be handicapped with what you
have considered "natural disqualifications" for success. Then study yourself thoroughly, one
detail at a time. Follow this self-analysis by intelligent practice in the active use of your
best qualities, and determine to change your "disqualifications" into salable characteristics
that will help you to succeed.

[Sidenote: No Normal Man Lacks Qualifications For Success]

Certainly a slouch can straighten up, wash his dirty hands and face, dress neatly, and suggest
proper regard for his appearance. The physical weakling is able to build considerable strength
into himself. Dullards, unless their brains are stunted, may develop surprising intellectual
keenness. Careless men can train themselves to painstaking accuracy. Individuals who are habitually
late may become models of punctuality. The man of flighty thoughts can concentrate. It is possible
to control a quick, bad temper. Tact, diplomacy, and good judgment can be learned and used
efficiently by the countless thousands of people who now are tactless, undiplomatic, and characterized
by poor judgment.

So it is with the principal emotional, ethical, and spiritual qualities of the master salesman.
You have them all, elementally. Certainly you can develop any selected element to higher activity
and use it to help you sell true ideas of your best capabilities.

Maybe you have fought long and vainly for self-confidence, for courage, for will power. Perhaps
you have realized for years that you are slow in perception, and have struggled to make yourself
take mental snap-shots of details and conditions. You have wished and willed and worked to
be agreeable and courteous; yet perhaps you lose friends by your characteristic disagreeableness
and lack of courtesy. If, in spite of all you so far have done to improve yourself, you have
been unable to get rid of your faults and defects, you are apt to question the statement that
you certainly can develop such qualities as you most desire.

[Sidenote: Decision Will Power Hard Work Insufficient]

No doubt you have decided, probably you have willed, very likely you have made a persistent
struggle to change your characteristics. You honestly have tried hard to grow, and to increase
your man capacity. Consequently your failure may have left you rather hopeless about ever succeeding
as you once expected to succeed. Perhaps you have given up your case as "too tough a job."
We will assume that you are not so young as you wish you were, and that you have committed
to memory the fatalistic, hoary lie, "You can't teach an old dog new tricks." But recall the
fixed habit of bitterness the walnut had for centuries, the color and size of the natural calla,
the sour taste of the little wild prune, which the plant wizard changed most radically without
using any "wizardry" at all. He just applied scientific knowledge in his training of walnut
trees and callas and prunes and other forms of vegetable life. Have you tried his method of
development? Do you know exactly what he did?

If Luther Burbank had merely desired and willed that the walnut should give up its old bad
habit, he never could have accomplished the job of development. He might have insisted persistently
for a life-time that the little, sour, dry prune should become more luscious and larger than
the plum; but it would have remained the same in size and other characteristics as it always
had been, despite his continued determination. Desire, will, and persistence were but preliminary
steps toward the complete accomplishment of his purpose with the prune.

[Sidenote: Luther Burbank's Method]

Burbank worked out in his mind and by actual experiments distinctive methods of development--development
and changes along particular, definite lines. He selected for the prune he wanted to produce,
(an imagined, ideal prune) certain desirable qualities of the plum--the best plum characteristics.
He studied what produced these particular qualities in plums. Then with his exact, scientific
knowledge of the similarity in nature of the plum and the prune, and his equally definite knowledge
of the differences in their characteristics, supplemented by his knowledge of exactly what
produced the difference in the two fruits, he started his experiments with natural prune trees.

He led specimens through a pre-determined scientific process of training. He succeeded in getting
his experimental prune trees to develop discriminatively, almost as if they had the power of
choice, particular plum qualities in preference to others. But the result was not a transformation
of the prune trees into plum trees. The fruit of the tree he evolved was just a perfected prune.
He simply developed all the capability the prune had originally to be like a plum in deliciousness.

[Sidenote: Natural Growth Without Struggle]

Note just here one very important feature of the Burbank method of plant development and change.
It did not involve any struggle or hard work on the part of his trees. He merely provided natural,
but scientifically selected conditions and food; knowing that his prunes then would grow naturally
in the particular ways he wanted them to develop, and in no other ways at variance with his plan.

Perhaps the primary fault in your ineffective effort to develop yourself into the man you want
to be, is that it has been a struggle. Natural growth always is easy. Growth involves a struggle
only when one or more of the means of natural growth are lacking. Luther Burbank wished his
prune trees to develop certain selected qualities of the plum. Therefore he provided his wild
prunes with the same means he had used effectively with plums to increase their lusciousness.
He knew these means should have a similar effect on prunes. When he had provided the natural
means of discriminative development, he left the rest to the natural growth of his prune trees.
They began to develop the selected plum qualities easily, and generation after generation became
more and more like plums.

[Sidenote: Two Bases Of Growth Mind and Body]

Now let us consider briefly: first, the bases of natural, easy growth of selected man qualities;
second, the processes that take place in the development of desired man qualities, some of
which may not have seemed to exist previous to the evolutionary training; third, the training
methods that should be employed to make these processes most effective and to produce the particular
results wanted and no others.

There are two bases of development in every one--the inner and the outer man. The real himself
is the inner man, which psychologists call the "Ego." But there is something else in the make-up
of every man, his body. Each of us recognizes his body--not as himself, not as his ego--but
as belonging to the real, or inner himself. A man thinks and says, "my body" just as he considers
and refers to anything else that is his.

The discrimination between the two parts of "You" must be understood at the very start of your
self-development. All your plans for the growth of the characteristics you need to assure your
success should be based on comprehension of your duality. The two "You's" in yourself not only
are distinctly different, but they are also very intimately related in all their functions.
Neither your "ego" nor your body is independent of the other part of your duality. So, of course,
both must co-operate fully in every process of your self-development; and your training methods
should be planned for the bettered growth of your inner and outer man as a team.

[Sidenote: Team-work Processes]

You understand now that your growth should be on a dual basis; that you have two different
men to develop, not just one; and that they must be handled discriminatively, but together.

Next it is necessary that you know in exactly what ways the activities of the mind man, or
ego, are related to the activities of his body, or the physical man. Otherwise you cannot comprehend
the team-work processes by which any desired qualities of manhood can be developed from their
rudiments. Perhaps the reason you have not yet succeeded fully is that you have been a "one-horse"
man and have not trained your dual self to be an effective mind-and-body team pulling together.
It takes both mind and body to bring to market successfully all the "best capability" of a man.

[Sidenote: Training Methods]

Evidently, as a pre-requisite to self-development, one should have knowledge of the particular
processes that result surely in natural, easy, rapid growth. Otherwise he would be more than
likely to employ a wrong or only partly right method of training. So as a student of yourself
you need to start with comprehension of your two bases of development, mind and body. It is
necessary next that you acquire scientific knowledge of the distinct but related processes
of developing your two selves severally to work together as a team. Then you must learn the
particular methods of coöperative mental and physical training that are most effective in accomplishing
the man growth you desire.

[Sidenote: Neither Mind Nor Body A Unit]

Not only have you two selves, but neither "You" is a single unit. Your mind, as well as your
body, is made up of distinctly different but very intimately related and associated parts.
Your "mind" cannot be developed as a whole. Its parts must be severally bettered and strengthened
in coordination, just as the physical man is developed by training his various muscles.

You know you have distinct sets of muscles which all together make up your composite body.
Perhaps, however, you have not realized before that your mind is not a unit, but is made up
of innumerable distinct "mind centers," each of which functions as independently of the others
as your set of eye muscles operates independently of the set of muscles governing the movements
of one of your fingers. And possibly you do not know that each mind center has a distinct brain
center, which functions for that particular part alone of your whole mind. Each associated
mind-and-brain center also has direct, distinct nerve connections with only one set of muscles.

In fact, you are "a many-minded, many-bodied" man--a collection of mental and physical parts,
a composite man rather than a man unit. These several parts are in large measure practically
independent of one another. One set of body parts "belongs to" only its particular associated
set of mind parts, or mind center.

[Sidenote: Independent Mind and Body Centers]

If you were constituted otherwise, your life would be very precarious; for the injury or destruction
of even a minor part of your body would be fatal to the whole unit. As it is, you can lose
a finger without affecting your eye-sight in the least. So you might suffer a localized brain
injury that would completely paralyze a finger, without impairing your sight at all. Either
the mind center that governs a finger, or the set of muscles in that finger can be affected
without necessarily reacting upon any other mind center or any other set of muscles.

[Sidenote: Interrelation Of the Ego And Physical Man]

But if the mind center that governs a certain set of muscles is affected, that set of muscles
also is directly affected and at once. Likewise if anything happens to a particular set of
muscles, the reaction is instantly transmitted to its associated mind center through the "direct
wire" nerves and brain center which particularly serve that part of the mind.

Great scientists have studied mental and physical phenomena in inter-relation and have learned
certain facts. For example, it is known that "the mind" not only affects the general functions
of "the body," but also the rate of bodily activity and the chemistry of body tissues. Long-continued
hard thinking actually does "wear a man out." It consumes blood and brain tissue. It "slows
him up." It may impair his digestion and appetite. We all know these things, but the scientists
know just why we feel physically tired after using only our minds.

They have learned also that every activity of the mind has a direct effect on the brain substance.
That is, each mind operation through the brain changes its physical structure in some degree.
Mental effort or relaxation increases or decreases the amount of blood in the brain. When you
have been using your mind very hard, your head "feels heavy," and it is unusually heavy then
on account of the extra amount of blood weight. Even the temperature of the brain, particularly
of that portion of the brain which is especially functioning at a given moment, is changed
with every mental effort.

[Sidenote: Slow Muscles Slow Mind]

There is abundant scientific proof that the quality and quantity of muscle, brain, and nerve
(physical) activity in a particular individual are accompanied by corresponding qualities and
quantities of mental activity. That is, when a person's muscle action, nerve response, and
brain action are sluggish, his mind also develops a characteristic of slow action. And vice versa.

We say of a certain acquaintance that he has an alert mind. But his "ego," or mental self,
could not act quickly and alertly if his brain, the physical instrument of his mind, did not
receive and transmit impressions swiftly to his mentality. The brain does not think. It is
as purely physical as any other part of the body. It just handles, or transmits in and out,
to and from the mind, the various impressions sent in by different sense muscles, and the mental
reflexes or impulses sent out by the innumerable mind centers. Your mind works through your
brain. Of course, therefore, the quality and quantity of mental work you are capable of doing
are limited by the degree of handling-or-transmitting efficiency characteristic of your particular
brain structure.

[Sidenote: Value of Practical Psychology]

Any interference with the brain quality or quantity of an individual naturally interferes with
his normal mental functioning. If a particular part of a man's brain is injured, the associated
mind center is harmed likewise and his mental quality is affected in proportion. Should a certain
portion of his brain be cut out, the total quantity of his mental powers would be correspondingly
reduced. We all know these things about the brain and the mind. But only a few scientists are
familiar with many details of the inter-relation of mind and brain and muscles, which should
be known to all people who want to make the most of themselves. The salesman of himself needs
to understand his "goods" thoroughly; so as we study the selling process that completes the
secret of certain success, we dig into practical psychology a little way now in order to stimulate
in you a desire for further exploration of that gold mine of opportunities.

[Sidenote: Physical Manifestations of Ideas]

The mind depends on the brain, in coordination with the nerves and muscles, to express thoughts.
That is how your inner or "ego" sales-man gets his ideas out of your physical salesman, and
shows them to the minds of prospective buyers. You can make another person conscious of your
thoughts only by some perceptible physical manifestation of the idea you wish to convey to
him. Evidently, then, in order to succeed in developing your big sales manhood and in making
effective impressions of it on others, you must learn both how to think the ideas of big manhood
into your own mind most effectively and how to show them outwardly with masterly skill. The
first process is man development; the second is sales-man-ship, or manhood self-expression
for the purpose of controlling the ideas of other men.

[Sidenote: Selling A Thought]

There is but one way to indicate or express what is going on in your mind. Your thoughts can
be physically shown only by muscular action of some kind. Brain and nerve action are hidden,
but muscle action can be perceived. If your muscular action expresses exactly the idea you
desire and will and use it to manifest, your mind is able to get its thought across to another
mind--to sell the idea.

Conversely, if your muscle action--your outer, perceptible self--expresses something different
from your thought intention, your mind has failed to make the true impression of your idea.
It may be that an impression directly contradictory to your thought has been made by your muscles
working at cross purposes. So the truth in your mind won't get across to the other man's mind--not
because your idea was untrue, but because it has not been physically interpreted by your muscles
as you intended. For example, you might stand so much in awe of a man you greatly admire that
you would avoid speaking to him, and in consequence would appear to him indifferent or cold.
Your physical appearance would belie your intentions.

Perhaps, if you have failed in life or have only partially succeeded, despite the qualifications
you possess for complete success, your muscles may be principally to blame. The parts of your
idea-selling equipment that can be perceived in action probably have not "delivered the goods"
of sale correctly.

[Sidenote: How Knowledge is Accumulated]

Not only is your mind absolutely dependent on the muscular system of your body for any true
expression of the real you inside; it likewise must depend on the activity of your various
sets of muscles to get all the incoming sense impressions that make up whatever knowledge you have.

Have you realized how your present fund of information was accumulated? Everything you know
came into your conscious mind originally through impressions first made on your various "sense"
muscles, and then transmitted by nerve telegraph to directly connected brain centers, which
in turn passed on to their associated mind centers these original impressions of new ideas.
Many repetitions of similar sense impressions were needed to register permanently in your mind
your first conceptions of different colors, scents, etc. Thus you learned to think. The process
was started--not by your mind--but by your various "sense" muscles. These received from your
environment impressions of heat, cold, softness, hardness, etc., and passed them in to associated
brain-mind centers, which thus commenced to collect knowledge about the world which you entered
with a mind absolutely empty of ideas.

If a child might be born with a good brain, but with his general muscular system completely
paralyzed, he could learn nothing at all regarding the world. He would have no conscious mind.
No sense impression of smell, light, taste, sound, or feeling could be received by the brain
of such a child; for no original perceptions of any kind could be taken in. He would be like
a complete telegraph system with every branch office closed. No intelligence would be transmitted;
since no message could be even filed for sending. Because of the paralysis of the sensory muscles,
the child's conscious mind would remain blank.

[Sidenote: Each Mind-Center Must Be Developed Specifically]

Recall now that you have a multiplex, not a single brain. That is, your so-called "brain" is
made up of innumerable, distinct "brain centers" which function quite independently of one
another. No particular unit requires help from any of the others in order to do its especial
work with full efficiency. Each center attends only to its specific business in your life.
It rests, or relaxes from activity, when it has nothing to do; or when the particular muscles
it governs are not in use. And, of course, when a certain brain center rests or is inactive,
its associated mind center also rests or is inactive.

As already has been stated, the mind of a man is built up, through the brain instrument, by
the sense impressions transmitted to his consciousness. In other words, all he knows with his
mind first came into his mental capacity from outside impressions of things and ideas. The
fewer the impressions that come into the mind through the brain, the less does a man know.
And only the impressions that come into a particular mind center develop that center. (For
example, the development of keenest eyesight by many optical impressions would not affect at
all a man's ability to discriminate among the tones of music, would not give him "a good ear.")

[Sidenote: Weak or Undeveloped Centers]

It is evident, therefore, that if a particular brain center temporarily or permanently is deprived
of right and sufficient exercise in transmitting sense impressions, its coordinated mind center
will be stunted in its growth or starved for lack of mental food. This is why a man is awkward
in using his native tongue when he returns to the country of his birth after a long residence
among people of a different nation where that language was not spoken. But a little exercise
of his brain in transmitting again the sound of his native tongue will quickly stimulate his
mind with the renewed supply of this particular mental food to which it formerly was accustomed.
In a few weeks he will use the old language naturally; whereas another man, who never had spoken
it, would require years to build up such full knowledge from a start of complete ignorance
of the language.

Evidently, too, a weak, undeveloped brain center would be incapable of receiving strong mental
impulses from its coordinated mind center, and of transmitting them in full strength to the
particular muscles governed by that mind center. This is why, if a man's brain center of courage
is undeveloped, even the most courageous thoughts will not make his body act bravely. His legs
may run away against his will to fight. The physical instrument of his mind (his brain), and
also certain associated sets of muscles, must be sufficiently exercised in the action of courage
to build up within him the physical structure of fearlessness that will be instantly responsive
to a mental attitude of bravery.

[Sidenote: Right Exercise for Development]

If for any reason the brain instrument is weak or undeveloped, it can handle only weakly either
in-coming messages to the ego from the senses, or out-going impulses from the mind to the muscles.
So, because of this undeveloped brain instrument, the full capability of neither the inner
nor the outer man can be built up and put to use. Obviously, therefore, if one is ambitious
to succeed, he needs to know and to practice the coordinated mind-brain-muscle exercises that
will increase the quantity and better the quality of his man capacity. Since he is a "many-minded,
many-bodied" man, general physical and mental exercise will not develop the particular qualities
required to assure his success. Each and every mind-brain-muscle set must be built up individually
by specific exercises which strengthen that particular unit of the multiplex man. Then, of
course, all his units should be taught to work together to make his success certain with his
all-around capability fully developed and coordinated.

[Sidenote: The Discriminative-Restrictive Method]

Luther Burbank worked out "discriminative-restrictive" methods of growth that may be applied
as successfully to men as to plants. He could not have built up the ability of a prune tree
to produce delicious fruit if he had not fed into the tree structure, or instrument of production,
a sufficient quantity and high quality of the particular plant foods of deliciousness. He restricted
his experimental prune trees to the development of specific delicious qualities, by giving
them no food except that discriminatively selected for his purpose. That is, he made them develop
in one way and in one way only, when he was making a particular test.

Similarly, as has been stated before, you can develop the specific man qualities you need to
succeed. You must feed to a particular mind center, through the related brain center, selected
sense impressions. These can come only from the coordinated set of muscles governed by that
mind-brain center. Then you should exercise the specific brain center and set of muscles in
the production of mental reflexes, or the mind fruit. Acts of courage, for example, are the
fruit of brave thoughts.

[Sidenote: Brain Development]

A particular brain center, of course, will be strengthened both by the food of sense impressions
it is given, and by the exercise of handling messages to and from the mind. The brain, or physical
instrument of the mind, is like an intermediary or go-between of the ego and the body. It is
of the utmost importance that it should do its work efficiently. Otherwise the full capability
of neither the outer nor the inner man can be utilized.

If Brown passes something to Jones, who passes it along to Smith; then Smith passes it back
to Jones to be re-passed to Brown--Jones, the middle agent of transmission or handling instrument,
whom we are comparing to the brain, might be so awkward, slow, and inefficient as a go-between
that the possible ability of Brown and Smith in passing would be nullified or greatly hampered.
But if the inefficiency of Jones is blamable to his inexperience, it evidently can be changed
to efficiency by sufficient right exercise in passing. The more of that sort of work he does,
in either direction, the better passer will Jones become.

His exercise, however, must be in passing things, if passing capability is to be developed.
He would not become a better and quicker passer by any amount of exercise in taking things
apart, or in inspecting things--wholly dissimilar functions.

[Sidenote: Training in Passing]

Moreover, Jones would not become an expert passer of glassware as a result of practice in passing
bricks, for the two kinds of things are not handled alike. Indeed, the man accustomed to passing
bricks might be more likely to break glassware than another man who previously had no particular
skill in passing anything. The expert brick-passer would be apt to forget sometimes that he
was passing glass. His muscles might treat the fragile ware with the rough habit acquired in
passing bricks.

Plainly, discriminative-restrictive methods of training are required to perfect capability
in any particular kind of physical passing; however much skill in general passing may have
been developed. If Jones should become expert in passing pails of liquid, he would nevertheless
need to train himself anew in order to pass frozen liquid efficiently in the form of cakes
of ice. And, to particularize still more, it would be necessary for him to learn how to pass
different liquids. Water and thick molasses in pails should not be handled alike.

Similarly the various brain centers, as passers of different sense impressions and mental reflexes
in and out, require, each of them--like Jones--the specific exercises that will develop their
several particular abilities. The individual brain unit (as of courage, memory, judgment, etc.)
is strengthened only by handling the in and out business of its coordinated muscles and mind
center. Also, while a particular set of muscles and coordinate mind center are strengthening
their brain center by the exercise they give it, they are both being developed by the same
exercise of passing along sense impressions and thoughts to each other through the brain--like
Smith and Brown.

[Sidenote: The Process Of Growth]

Returning to the comparison of Burbank's methods with man development, we perceive again how
the principle of discriminative-selective training is applied to accomplish the growth of certain
characteristics needed to assure a man's success. The plant wizard in his initial tests gave
to his undeveloped prune trees particular food and conditions and treatment selected for the
purpose of imparting specific qualities of deliciousness. A prune somewhat improved in deliciousness
was the first result. Then from the product of that improved prune he started another cycle
of development. He fed the selected food of deliciousness to the improved prune tree, and a
fruit more delicious resulted. His work was simply plant breeding by the discriminative-restrictive
method. Brain breeding is a similar process of particularized, cumulative development.

[Sidenote: Begin With Specific Training of The Outer Man]

All the foregoing rather complicated explanation of "psychological processes" has seemed necessary
to make a clear impression of the right training methods for building within you any quality
you need to assure your success. You must begin by training your outer man.

You can develop a particular mind-brain center (such as the center of courage) only by the
discriminative-restrictive training of those portions of your body which are directly related
in activity and responsiveness to that mind-brain unit of the multiplex YOU. Training of any
other set of muscles will not develop the particular mind-brain center you want to build up,
and would be a wrong procedure.

You should begin with specific training of particular sets of sensory muscles because, as we
have seen, that is the natural order of the process of growth. It is how you began to learn
everything you know. You can increase and improve your present limited, conscious knowledge
most effectively by taking into your mind from your trained particular senses more and better
impressions than you ever have taken in before.

[Sidenote: Developing Persistence]

Suppose your success has been hindered by your lack of persistence. You need to develop that
quality in particular. Let us see how the discriminative-restrictive principle should be applied
specifically to assure you of building persistence within yourself.

First it is necessary that you discriminate between this one quality and all others; especially
between it and the quality of determination. Very different training methods are required to
develop persistence and determination respectively. When you are just "determined" to do a
thing, your jaw muscles, your arm and back muscles, perhaps all your commonly known muscles,
will be hardened as long as you remain determined, but no longer. They will relax when the
occasion for determination has passed. The habit of instantly tensing your muscles temporarily
whenever you need to be determined will very greatly strengthen and improve the efficiency
of your brain-mind center of determination. But that temporary hardening of your muscles will
only slightly affect the development in you of characteristic persistence.

[Sidenote: Developing Determination]

Hence the training of your muscles for building the habit of determination within you should
be concentrated on exercise in changing swiftly from comparative laxity to muscular tension.
That is, in order to accustom your mind to hardening with determined thoughts whenever determination
is needed, you should train your muscles to harden in coordination, and thus to support your
mental determination by the complementary physical suggestion of the same quality.

You do not need to use determination all the time; so it will be sufficient if your muscles
are taught to be quickly responsive to determination of mind on any occasion. (You know it
helps you to carry out a resolution if you stiffen your body at the moment you make up your
mind to do a thing, but continued stiffness of the body in determination would be a strain
likely to weaken your power of action unless backed by a tremendous, stored-up reserve strength
of muscles.) Begin your practice for the development of determination, then, by training your
muscles to tauten the instant you think determinedly. Your brain-mind center of determination
will also be strengthened by the exercise that builds up the supporting habit of muscle action
in coordination. Millions of men have failed in life because their determined thoughts were
not reenforced by stiffened backbones.

[Sidenote: Discrimination Between Determination and Persistence]

Now let us discriminate between muscle training to develop the characteristic of persistence
and the training already described for the building of determination. In order to strengthen
your persistence, you must transmit through the distinct brain center of persistence to the
corresponding mind center, the impression of muscles permanently developed in firmness, not
just capable of temporary hardening on occasion.

The characteristically persistent man has gradually developed his lax-muscled, sagging, baby
chin into a jaw that is habitually firm, whether or not he happens to be determined to do anything
at a given moment. His muscles do not sag utterly, even when he is asleep. He probably wakes
up in the morning with his teeth clenched. So, whenever his coordinated brain-mind center perceives
that the quality of persistence is required, and starts to apply it, the mental impulse to
persist is backed by a permanent firm muscle structure that can stand up as long as the mind
needs the physical support.

[Sidenote: A Slump in Determination]

In contrast, the man who is only characteristically determined, but who lacks persistence in
his determination, has developed just the habit of hardening his muscles for the time he is
determined on doing a particular thing. That does not exercise his muscles sufficiently to
make them firm all the time, whether under tension or not. Consequently his determination is
likely to slump if his resolution is subjected to a long strain. He does not possess muscular
structure sufficiently strong to support persistence in his determination.

Habitual lack of firmness in the jaw muscles, as you know, results in a sagging chin; which
detrimentally affects the brain-mind center of persistence. A man whose jaw habitually hangs
loose may be capable of great determination for a while, but he is not persistent in character.
He might clench his teeth, stiffen his body, and plunge into the surf to rescue a drowning
person; but his first resolution to effect the rescue would be weakened by the cold water and
by fear. He lacks the quality of the bulldog that will die rather than loose its teeth from
another dog's throat.

[Sidenote: Muscles Express and Impress Ideas]

The coordinated muscles express the mental attitude, as we have perceived; and equally they
impress the mind with their attitude. If you have a sagging chin, you are incapable of the
mental bulldog grip of persistence. So tighten up your jaw muscles, and never let them hang
utterly loose, if you are resolved to develop the characteristic of "stick-to-it-iveness."
Begin with muscle training, for your muscles must be utilized to start the process of building
up your brain-mind center of persistence.

[Sidenote: Developing Perception]

When you train the particular sense muscles that transmit external impressions to a particular
brain-mind unit (the same muscles that reflexively express the ideas of that one part of your
multiplex ego) you may be absolutely sure of developing a particular related characteristic.
For example, if you want to sharpen your perceptive faculties so that you will see with the
eyes of your mind much more than the ordinary man perceives, exercise your physical eyes in
taking snap-shots that you can see clearly in detail with your imagination when you look away
from an object after a glance at it. Try glancing at the furnishings of your room, then shut
your eyes and construct a mental picture. When this is definitely clear to you, open your eyes.
The reality will be very different from your imagined picture. But sharpen your perceptive
faculties, develop a "camera eye;" then the reality will be exactly impressed on your mind.
Witnesses in court often contradict one another, in all honesty, simply because their ability
to perceive actualities is not highly developed. In consequence, they get false mental impressions
of happenings or things they severally have seen.

[Sidenote: Three Processes Of Mental Development]

There are but three processes of mental development:

The first process comprises getting information from a sense to its associated brain center,
which then makes the mind center conscious that particular information has been transmitted to it.

The second process is organizing the information in the mind center, with relation to other
information previously brought to the mind.

In the third process the mind center directs its co-related brain center to send out certain
impulses of action to the corresponding muscular structure.

Let us analyze an illustration of these three processes of mental development. Suppose first
you hear something that concerns a particular prospect for your "goods of sale." Second, you
comprehend the significance to you of what you have heard. Third, your mind directs your muscles
to make a particular use of what you have comprehended. The original mental impression has
been fully developed because you employed all three processes. If you had not completed the
cycle of development, you would have given your mind only partial exercise with what you heard.

In order to become a master salesman, you must take in many impressions, perceive their significance
to you and how you can make use of them, then act on your comprehension of what you have learned.
There are countless failures in the world who might have been successes if they had not stopped
their possible mental development at the first or second stages.

A man might know an encyclopedia of facts, but be a failure.

He might comprehend how to use his knowledge, and still be a failure.

Success comes only to the man who acts most effectively on what he knows.

[Sidenote: Right Practice Of the Three Processes]

In order to secure quick and effective results, the practice of the three necessary processes
of development should be:

First, definitely conscious. You need to know just what quality you want to develop in yourself.

Second, discriminative. You must learn the differences between what you want, and what you
don't want to develop in particular.

Third, restrictive. It is necessary that in your training to develop a certain quality, you
concentrate your practice on the respects in which this particular quality differs from other
qualities.

Most of us are pretty definitely conscious of what we want. We know just the qualities we would
like to have. But very few people employ most effectively the discriminative-restrictive methods
of training in their processes of development.

[Sidenote: Importance of Differentiation]

It is impossible to develop a particular quality fully if you only recognize its likenesses
to other qualities. Real mental development is accomplished only as a result of the recognition
of differences. After studying twins for a year, you still might be unable to tell them apart
if you were impressed solely with their remarkable similarity to each other. Another man, with
a mind discriminatively and restrictively trained to recognize differences, would learn in
five minutes to distinguish the individualities of the twins.

Almost phenomenal development can be attained by use of the discriminative-restrictive training
method. The minutest distinctions can be perceived if one concentrates his practice for mental
growth on the recognition of differences only. Individuals who have lost one or more senses
become extraordinarily adept in detecting contrasts with their other senses. A normal man,
possessed of all his senses, is capable of even greater development of his powers of differentiation.

You know how remarkably a blind man learns to "see" with his fingers and ears. But need you
lose the sense of sight before you can comprehend the lesson of his example to you? You realize
that you appear to lack many essential qualities of success. Know now that these are all merely
dormant in you. They can be awakened and developed to an extraordinary degree if you train
yourself consciously in the discriminative-restrictive use of all your sense tools. You would
do it if you were blind. It certainly should be much easier to accomplish the desired transformation
with your eyes open to aid your other senses.

[Sidenote: Whatever You Lack Now You Can Develop]

The significance of all this is that you need not be permanently handicapped in your sales-man-ship
by any present lack of particular qualifications for success. It makes no difference what you
happen to be short of now. By properly coordinating your brain-mind-muscle sets or centers,
and by using all three in the processes of your development, you can make yourself over almost
miraculously. Will power, courage, exact and wise judgment, persistence, patience, rapid thinking,
constructive imagination--any and all qualities you want CAN be developed in you, even though
they now seem not to exist.

Your development is limited only by the practically limitless number of unawakened cells in
your brain. Most of your potential mind centers are asleep yet. You can wake up the slumberers
with your various sense muscles, and vigorously exercise them into activity for your success.
You have been handicapped because you have been carrying so many "dead-heads" that ought to
be working or paying their way.

Remember that growth of any brain-mind center can be begun and continued only by the exercise
of the coordinated set of sense muscles in transmitting impressions from outside yourself and
in expressing your thoughts.

[Sidenote: Your Limitless Brain Capacity]

The number of cells in the human brain has been estimated at from six hundred millions to two
billions. The greatest genius who ever lived doubtless had scores of millions of brain cells
that remained more or less idle, if not sound asleep, all his life. Nature has furnished you
with a plentiful surplus of grey matter in your head. Do not be afraid that you will exhaust
or tire out your brains by your self-development. Put into your work all the brains you can
waken with your various senses. And keep the alarm clocks wound up.

[Sidenote: Growth Can Be Assured And Success Made Certain]

Can you become a big sales MAN? Of course! You have all the necessary tools to make yourself
over in any way you will--your muscles, nerves, brain, and mind. Use them cooperatively, as
they were meant to be used, in their respective sets--not as if you were a mental-physical
unit. To develop your sales manhood you need only to apply real thinking in the processes of
your daily life. Study out the reasons and effects of all your acts and expressions. Your experimental
psychological laboratory should be yourself, undergoing at your hands the transformation from
what you are to what it is possible for you to become. Begin making your man-stuff over. Each
successive step will be easier to take. Your growth, when you employ the right processes and
methods, is certain. Therefore your success in making yourself a big sales man can be assured.

CHAPTER III

Skill In Selling Your Best Self

[Sidenote: Practice Of the Art]

If you have developed real capability and first-class manhood, you have "the goods" that are
always salable. But you realize now that the mere possession of these basic qualifications
for success will not insure you against failure in life. You cannot be certain of succeeding
unless you know how to sell true ideas of your best self in the right market or field of service,
and until you develop sales skill by continual correct practice.

We will assume that you have had little or no selling experience. You are conscious that you
entirely lack sales art. Therefore, though in other ways you feel qualified to succeed in life,
you may be dubious about your future. Perhaps you realize that skill in selling true ideas
of your best capabilities is all you need to make your success certain. But you question, "Can
I be sure of becoming a skillful salesman of myself?" You have no doubt of your ability to
learn the selling process, but very likely you do not believe you ever could practice it with
the art of a master salesman. Consequently you are not yet convinced of the certainty of your
success.

[Sidenote: Success Proportionate To Sales Skill]

Of course success cannot be absolutely assured in advance unless every element of the secret
we have analyzed can be mastered. Hence it is necessary that you now be shown certain ways
to sell ideas--ways that cannot fail, that are adaptable to the sale of any right "goods,"
and that you surely can master. You need to feel absolutely confident that if you follow specific
principles and use particular methods, you can impress on any other man true ideas of your
best capabilities. When you become skillful in making good impressions, you certainly will
be able to sell yourself into such chances to succeed as fit your individual qualifications.

Your success with the best that is in you can be made directly proportionate to your skill
as a salesman of "your goods." Mastery of the art of selling will enable you to cut down to
the minimum the possibilities of failure in whatever you undertake. Remember that success does
not demand perfection. There never was a 100% salesman. To be a success, you need only make
a good batting average in your opportunities to sell. It is not necessary to hit 1000 to be
a champion batsman in the game of life. Ty Cobb led his league a dozen years with an average
under .400.

[Sidenote: Technique And Tools]

The foundation of sales art is knowledge of selling technique. So the first step in the process
of developing your skill as a salesman of yourself is the study of the right tools for making
impressions of "true ideas of your best capabilities." You must know, also, the scientific
rules that govern the most effective use of these right tools. Technique, however, is only
the basic element of salesmanship. On the foundation of your sales knowledge it is necessary
to build sales skill that will completely cover up your technique. Your perfected sales art
should seem, and really be second nature to you.

Your salesmanship probably will be crude until you overcome the awkwardness of handling unfamiliar
tools, or familiar tools in ways that are new to you. But "practice makes perfect." The use
of the right technique in selling true ideas about your best self will soon become natural.

[Sidenote: Making Success Easy]

The skillful sale of ideas is accomplished without waste of time or energy in the selling process.
The unskillful, would-be salesman not only fritters away his own time and effort, he also wastes
the patience and power of the man to whom he wants to sell his "goods." The sales artist, however,
gets his ideas into the mind of a prospect quickly, with the least possible wear and tear on
either party to the sale. No one appreciates a fine salesman so thoroughly as the best buyer.
Skill in selling true ideas about your particular qualifications will not only assure your
success, but will make it easy for you to succeed.

[Sidenote: Docking Your Sales-man-ship]

The skillful salesman is the captain of his own sales-man-ship. But in order to make certain
of landing his cargo of right impressions he takes aboard the pilot Science to begin with,
and then concentrates on four factors of the art of selling ideas:

First, discovering and traversing the best channel into the prospect's mind;

Second, locating the particular point of interest upon which the salesman's cargo can be most
effectively unloaded;

Third, maneuvering alongside this center of the buyer's interest;

Fourth, securely tying to the interest pier so that the shipload of ideas may be fully discharged.

The primary aim of the skillful salesman when making port is to get safely to the right landing
place as soon as possible and with the least danger of failure in his ultimate purpose of completing
the sale. At this initial stage of the selling process, however, he concentrates his thoughts
on the skillful docking of his sales-man-ship. The nature of the cargo a sailor ship captain
brings to port has little or nothing to do with the art of reaching and tying up to the pier.
Similarly, whatever his "goods of sale," the skillful salesman uses the same principles and
methods to dock his salesman-shipload of ideas most effectively in the harbor of the prospect's
mind. So the art you are studying is standardized. When you master it, you can apply it successfully
to the sale of your best self or any other "goods of sale."

[Sidenote: Reasoning And Argument Are Wrong]

Before considering the methods of selling that are most effective, it will be well to get rid
of a mistaken idea that is all too common. A great many people regard reasoning power, or the
force of pure logic, as an important selling tool. There are so-called salesmen who attempt
to "argue" prospects into buying. Unthinking sales executives sometimes instruct their representatives
to employ certain "selling arguments." But the methods and language of the debater have no
place in the repertory of a truly artistic salesman or sales manager.

One debater never convinces the other. At best he only can defeat his antagonist. In a skillfully
finished sale, however, there should be neither victor nor vanquished. The selling process
is not a battle of minds. There is no room in it for any spirit of antagonism on the part of
the salesman. So in your self-training to sell true ideas of your best capabilities, do not
emphasize especially the value of logic and reasoning. If you use them at all in selling yourself,
disguise their character most skillfully. Never suggest that you are debating or arguing your
qualifications with prospective buyers of your mental or physical capacity for service. You
cannot browbeat your way into opportunities to succeed.

Most employers buy the expected services of men and women in order to satisfy their own desires
for particular capabilities. Few will buy against their wishes. In order to sell your qualifications
with certain success, you first must make the other man genuinely want what you offer. Almost
always mind vision and heart hunger must be stimulated to produce desire. Therefore the most
skillful salesman of himself does not use the words, tones, and actions of argument. In preference
to cold reason and logic he employs the arts of mental suggestion and emotional persuasion.

[Sidenote: The Force of Suggestion]

Suggestion is especially effective in producing desire; because an idea that is merely suggested,
and not stated, is unlikely to provoke antagonism or resistance. A suggestion is given ready
access to the mind of the other man. Usually it gets in without his realizing that a strange
thought has entered his head from outside. When he becomes conscious of the presence in his
mind of an idea that has been only suggested to him, he is apt to treat it as one of his own
family of ideas and not as an intruder. Naturally he is little inclined to oppose a desire
that he thinks is prompted by his own thoughts. However, he would be disposed to resist the
same wish if he realized it had been injected into his consciousness.

All of us know the great force of suggestion; but there are very few people who so use words,
tones, and movements as to make the most of their power of suggesting ideas in preference to
stating them. Probably no tool of salesmanship will be of more help in assuring your success
than fully developed ability in suggestion, which is the skillful process of getting your ideas
into the minds of others unawares.

[Sidenote: Words Are Doubted]

The words we use are intended to convey pretty definite meanings to listeners. If we are entirely
honest in our words, we expect whatever we say to be taken at its face value as the truth.
Yet each of us knows that his own mind seldom accepts without question the statements of other
men, however well informed and honest they are reputed to be. You and I mentally reserve the
right to believe or to doubt the written or spoken words of someone else; because they always
enter our minds consciously. We know that the words we hear or read come from outside ourselves.

The skillful salesman proceeds on the assumption that his words will be stopped at the door
of the prospect's mind and examined with more or less suspicion of their sincerity and truth.
Therefore the selling artist employs words principally for one purpose--to communicate to the
other man information about such facts as cannot be introduced to his consciousness otherwise.
Some facts can be told only in words. But a master of the selling process uses as few words
as possible to convey his meaning. He depends on his suggestive tones more than on what he
says. He reenforces his speech with accompanying movements and muscular expressions, to get
into the mind of the other man by suggestive action the true ideas behind the words used.

Similarly when you bring your full capability to the market of your choice, you should not
rely upon a mere declaration of your qualifications; and upon word proof, written or spoken,
that you are the man for the job. Your words are unlikely to be taken at their face value.
Any claims you have a right to make will be discounted heavily if you say very much about your
own ability. You run the risk of being judged a braggart and egotist when you talk up your
good points; though you may be telling no more than the plain truth.

[Sidenote: Tones and Acts Are Believed]

However, if your tones of sincerity and self-confidence denote really big manhood; and if your
every act and expression indicate to a prospective employer that you are entirely capable of
filling the job for which you apply, he probably will consider himself very shrewd in sizing
you up. Really you have suggested to him every idea he has about you, but he will think he
has found in you the very qualifications he desires in an employee. You can do more to sell
yourself by the way you walk into a man's office than you could accomplish by bringing him
the finest letters of introduction or by "giving him the smoothest line of talk about yourself."
He is able to read the principal characteristics of the real You in your poise and movements
and in the manner of your speech. He will believe absolutely any characteristic he himself
finds in you. What you say to him may have little real influence on his judgment of you. But
be sure that he will note how you speak; and will make up his mind about you from your tones
and actions, rather than from your words. He will think the ideas you suggest to him are his
own original discoveries.

[Sidenote: Suggestion By Tones And Acts]

Evidently, before you attempt to achieve success, it is very important that you study the art
of suggestion by tones and actions. When you know the principles, you should practice this
art until you make yourself a master of skillful suggestion.

You need to know precisely the effects of tone variations, the exact significance of the various
tones you can use. It is necessary also for you to comprehend not only that "Every little movement
has a meaning all its own," but just what that meaning is. When you are equipped with thorough
knowledge of how to suggest particular ideas through tones and motions, you should practice
using the principles and methods of suggestive expression you have learned, until it becomes
second nature always to speak and act with selling art. Then you will be a skillful salesman,
sure of your power to sell true ideas of your best capability wherever you are. Your success
will have been made certain through your sales art built on the foundation of your sales knowledge
by your fully developed sales manhood.

[Sidenote: Discriminative Selective Method]

Your increased selling skill will result naturally, just as we have seen that you will grow
naturally in sales manhood, if you employ the discriminative-selective method when training
your human nature in the art of suggesting your best self. You need first to recognize the
exact differences of significance among the various tones and movements at your command. Then
your self-training in suggestive expression should be concentrated on the particular ways of
speaking and acting that will best demonstrate your qualifications for success. Of course it
is equally important to eliminate all tones and movements that might suggest unfavorable ideas
about you. To make sure of your success, be certain that everything you do and say tells "the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth" about your capabilities. It is necessary
to make sure no word, tone, or movement carries the least suggestion that might possibly leave
a false impression of the real You.

Let us make a brief analysis now of words, tones, and acts--the three means of suggestive expression
which are the natural equipment of every man for conveying his ideas to the minds of others.
You cannot employ the discriminative-restrictive method to develop your selling skill unless
you know very definitely just what your different tools of expression are, and the almost infinite
variety of uses to which they can be put.

[Sidenote: Four Rules About Words]

For the reasons already explained, words are of much less value than tones and movements in
suggesting ideas the other man will admit to his mind unawares. But the sales efficiency of
words can be very much increased if they are chosen with intelligent discrimination, and if
the choice is restricted to words that have four qualifications.

First, they should be common words.

Second, short words are more forceful than long words.

Third, words of definite meanings are preferable to mere generalizations.

Fourth, words that make vivid impressions are most effective in suggesting ideas.

[Sidenote: Common Words]

When you employ words to sell true ideas of your best capability, choose words that everybody
understands. Do not "air your knowledge" in uncommon language. Unless you are seeking a position
as a philologist in a college, restrict yourself to every-day common speech when selling your
personal qualifications. An important element in the skillful sale of ideas is making them
as easy as possible for the other man to comprehend. If you use unfamiliar words, it sometimes
will be hard for him to understand what you mean. The truly artistic salesman avoids introducing
any unnecessary element of difficulty into the selling process. So you should discriminate
against all unusual expressions and restrict yourself to the common words that are easy for
any man to comprehend.

[Sidenote: Short Words]

A long word or phrase may convey your idea clearly, but force is lost in the drawn-out process.
Remember that your words will meet the intuitive resistance of the other man's mind before
they are admitted to his full belief. You cannot afford to sacrifice the driving-in power of
the short word. Therefore, when your opinion is asked, it will be better salesmanship to say,
"I think" so and so than "It is my impression--"

[Sidenote: Definite Words]

The definite word conveys a particular meaning to the mind of the other man, not merely a vague
or general idea. Never say, when you apply for a position, "I can do anything." That tells
the prospective employer simply nothing about your ability. Particularize.

[Sidenote: Vivid Words]

It is of the utmost importance to make vivid impressions with your speech. You should employ
words skillfully to produce in the mind of the other man distinct and lifelike mental images.
He may not credit the words themselves, taken literally and alone. But he will believe in the
pictures the words paint in his mind; because he will think he himself is the mental artist.
He will not be suspicious of his own work. If you apply for a situation in a bank, and the
cashier seeks to learn whether or not you are safely conservative in your views, you can suggest
in vivid words that you have the qualification he requires. You will make the desired impression
if you say to him, "I always carry an umbrella when it looks like rain."

[Sidenote: Tone Meanings]

Our analysis of the three means of self-expression turns now to tones. Rightly selected words
are tremendously augmented in selling power when they are rightly spoken. Most men employ but
a small part of their complete tonal equipment, and are ignorant of the full sales value of
the portion they use. The master salesman, however, practices the gamut of his natural tones,
and utilizes each to produce particular effects. Thus he supplements his mere statements with
suggestive shades of meaning. The way he says a thing has more effect than the words themselves.

Conversely tone faults may have a disastrous effect on one's chances to succeed. For illustration,
ideas of mind, of feeling, and of power can be correctly expressed by the discriminative use
of particular pitches of tone. But a wrong pitch, though the words employed might be identical,
would convey a directly opposite and false impression.

[Sidenote: Mental Pitch]

Suppose you are appealing only to the mind of your prospective employer--as when you quote
figures to him--you should restrict your tone temporarily to the mental pitch. You are just
conveying facts now. Therefore the "matter-of-fact" tone best suits the ideas expressed. Since
it fits what you are saying, the way you speak impresses the other man with the suggestion
that your tone and words are consistent. Therefore his mind has no inclination to resist the
mental pitch on this occasion. He admits your figures to his conscious belief more readily
than he would credit them if spoken in an emotive or power tone. Such tone pitches would strike
him as out of place in a mere statement of fact.

[Sidenote: Tone Faults]

If your prospective employer asks how old you are, and how many years of experience you have
had, and you reply in a tone vibrant with emotion or in a deep tone of sternness, the wrong
pitch certainly will make a bad impression on him. By employing an inconsistent pitch when
stating facts, you might "queer" your chances for the position you most desire. The tone fault
in your salesmanship would lie about your real character. The man addressed would think you
were foolish to use such a pitch in merely imparting a bit of information to his mind. He would
expect you to employ for that purpose simply a head tone, not a chest tone nor an abdominal
tone. The head tone, when used to convey matters of fact, aids in convincing the mind of the
other man because it is the pitch that fits bare facts--the tone of pure mentality.

[Sidenote: When Mental Tone Should Be Used]

This mental, or head tone, is most effective in gaining attention, in conveying information,
in arousing the perceptive faculties of another mind. Restrict its use to these purposes only.
The mental tone is not pleasing to the ear. It is pitched high. It suggests arguments and disputes.
It is the provocative tone of quarrels. So it should be employed most carefully, with every
precaution against giving offense by its insistence.

Avoid its use for long at a time. Its very monotony is apt to irritate. The high pitch suggests
a mental challenge to the mind of the other man, and hence arouses his mental tendency to opposition.
The unskillful over-use of head tones may ruin a salesman's best opportunity to gain a coveted
object.

There are times, however, when it is necessary that you should insist--briefly. If you do so
artistically, and do not persist in the high, mental, rasping tone; but change to the lower,
emotive, chest tone very soon after your insistence on the other man's attention, you will
not hurt your chances. It is the continued use of the head tone that is to be avoided.

[Sidenote: Emotive Pitch]

The emotive (chest or heart) pitch dissipates opposition as naturally as the mind tone provokes
a quarrel. Even a hot argument can be ended without any lasting ill-feeling if the disputants
conclude with hearty expressions of good will for one another. The same words spoken in head
tones would increase the antagonism by suggesting sarcasm or insincerity. The resonant chest
tone suggests that it comes from the speaker's heart. The hearer's heart makes his mind believe
the heart message conveyed by the emotional pitch of the other man's voice.

Therefore if you want your ideas to penetrate a man's heart, don't aim your tone high at his
head. Lower it to the pitch of true friendliness, of comradeship, of human brotherhood. Aim
at his breast with your breast tone. Do not fawn or plead, however, when selling ideas of yourself.
You can persuade best by suggesting that you have brought all your manhood to render the other
man a real service. This suggestion will induce a feeling of respect for you, which will certainly
be followed by willingness of the prospect to let you show him you are able "to deliver the goods."

[Sidenote: Danger of Over-using Head Tone]

Some people suggest by the over-use of head tones that they depend altogether on what they
know to achieve success. They make the impression that they expect their high degree of mentality
to open chances for them to succeed. "They know they know" their business; so when they secure
opportunities to demonstrate their capabilities, they emphasize too much what they know. They
are apt to use the mental tone continually. Perhaps the prospective employer needs a man of
exactly such knowledge as is possessed by the candidate he is interviewing. But if when presenting
his qualifications the applicant rasps the ears of his hearer for a long time with high-pitched
head tones, the listener intuitively becomes prejudiced. He is impressed with the suggestion
that the speaker is a "know-it-all" fellow. The employer is likely to turn down his application
because of the unskilled tone pitch in which it is made.

[Sidenote: Sing-Song Parrot Talk]

When a man has talked glibly and fast about superior qualifications he knows he possesses,
it dazes him if his exceptional capabilities fail to win him the job for which he is particularly
fitted. He cannot comprehend why another applicant who plainly is not so well qualified should
be chosen. But his voice has suggested to the employer that everything he said was just "parrot
talk." Thousands of bright "parrots" remain failures all their lives for no other reason than
their utter inability to get inside the hearts of other men. The ordinary canvasser who trudges
from house to house with his "sing-song" patter has grown into the bad habit of using head
tones almost exclusively. As a natural reflex of the unpleasant impression he makes with his
voice, it is a common experience to have a door slammed in his face.

[Sidenote: Getting Around Mental Barrier]

The master salesman comprehends that the mentality of a prospect is a barrier to his emotional
expression. That is, the mind is an alert sentinel on guard to protect the heart from its own
impulses to unthinking action. So the skillful salesman when making his "approach" goes around
the mind side of the prospect to the emotional side, where there is no hostile guard. He knows
that "the hearts of all men are akin," and that "the hardest heart has soft spots." He realizes
it is bad salesmanship to challenge the sentinel mind of the prospect in a mental tone. So
the salesman artist makes his tone resonant with chest vibrations that stimulate the direct
response of the other man's heart. He works at first to draw out fellow feeling, not to drive
his ideas into the head of the prospect.

[Sidenote: Talking Like a Brother]

The mere presentation of thoughts, or mental pictures of goods, is not enough to induce a prospect
to buy. The master salesman comprehends that he has to deal with the dual personality of the
individual he plans to sell. Therefore from the very beginning of his interview he works to
open the mind of the other man by first establishing a unity of human feeling between his own
heart and the heart of his prospect. He uses the emotive tone. He "talks like a brother." Of
course he is careful not to exaggerate this show of fellow feeling. He uses a "hearty" tone
without appearing in the least degree hypocritical. When their hearts are in accord, the other
man is prepared to agree mentally with the salesman.

[Sidenote: Power Pitch]

The third pitch of your voice as a salesman is the power tone. It can be used skillfully to
suggest that you have the force required to succeed. It is the pitch that comes from deep down
and that calls into play the powerful abdominal muscles. It is not necessarily a loud tone,
however. Often it is low, with a suggestion of immense reserve strength behind it. With the
power pitch you can command in a simple request which, spoken in a higher tone, might be refused
because it would lack the suggestion of force. In order to succeed, you sometimes must employ
power. When a situation requires a demonstration of your strong personality, augment the force
of your words and acts by using the tone pitch that suggests the power of the big muscles of
your waist.

[Sidenote: When to Use Power Tone]

Employ the emotive tone to convey ideas of your truthfulness and honor. Show your courtesy
and kindness with the heart pitch; use it to manifest your real desire to be of service to
your prospect. But suggest your solidity and capacity for good judgment by employing the pitch
of power. With its aid you can convince your prospect of the enduring quality of your best
characteristics; you can deny disparagement or doubt of your ability; you will be able to brush
aside unfounded objections; you can compel respect.

[Sidenote: Tone Units]

The discriminative use of various units of tone is as helpful in making suggestive impressions
as is the employment of character pitches. The one-tone voice does not augment the force of
words. "Yes" said with but one tonal unit is not nearly so powerful as "Y-es" in two tones,
the second pitched low. A two-tone "Y-es" with the second unit high-pitched suggests the very
opposite of plain "Yes." It implies "No," or a question instead of an affirmation. Sometimes
it is advisable to suggest "No" when the word itself if spoken bluntly would give offense.
You can convey the idea of skepticism or denial by using two tone units skillfully pitched
in saying "Y-es."

While you ordinarily can double the effectiveness of your tone by using two units, and you
may treble the effect if you employ three (as in the exclamation A-ha-a!), if you attempted
to use more than three units of tone in any ordinary circumstances you would be likely to appear
odd or fantastic, if not foolish. So be careful not to over-do the employment of multiple tone
units to stress your meaning.

[Sidenote: Placing Tones]

There is selling value, too, in the placing of tones in your mouth. A tone placed far forward
indicates lack of thought and instability. It is the tone we associate with "lip judgments."
On the contrary, hidden thoughts, unwillingness to tell all you know, are suggested by tones
placed far back in your mouth. The middle-of-the-mouth tone makes the impression that the voice
is properly balanced, and suggests the associated idea of mind balance. Avoid the extremes
in placing your tones, if you would make certain of the most effective use of your voice in
selling ideas. Convince and persuade by employing the secure, trustworthy tone of the "happy
medium."

[Sidenote: Bad Habits]

Undoubtedly you have little bad habits that tell lies about you--habits in the use of words,
habits of tone, and especially habits of action. When you fully understand the significance
of what you say, and of how you say it, and of the things you do--the effects produced on other
men--you will start changing your bad characteristics into good factors that will certainly
help you to succeed. So study yourself most carefully, in order to learn what your habits are,
and their meanings.

[Sidenote: Significance Of Movements]

Ordinarily a man is conscious of his words and tones, but he often does things unconsciously.
Probably you realize only vaguely or not at all just what your various actions suggest to people
who observe you. Therefore it is of the greatest importance that you study the significance
of discriminated movements, gestures, and facial expressions as aids or hindrances to the making
of true impressions of your best capabilities. You should restrict yourself to acts that make
the best impressions.

Movements, and their results, may be analyzed under three heads: Poise, Pose, and Action.

[Sidenote: Poise]

It is a phenomenon of psychology that the balancing of the body suggests mental balance. Conversely,
if the body is out of balance, there is the suggestion that the mind is no better poised. That
is, if a man cannot keep his balance physically, we have an intuition that he is mentally off
his equilibrium. Correct poise of course involves correct body support, and suggests a rightly
supported mind. Hence you can make the impression, merely by the way you stand and walk, that
you are a person of well-poised judgment. You may hurt your chances very much if it seems necessary
for you to prop your body with your legs. The man who stands with his feet wide apart is out
of balance, and is easily tipped over. The impression made by the incorrect poise is that such
a man must be unable to stand by himself like normal men. The law of the association of ideas
then immediately suggests that his thoughts are similarly unable to stand unless propped.

Incorrect poise of the body has another bad effect in the sale of ideas. It makes the impression
of abnormality. Being unusual, it distracts attention from the salesman and his capabilities,
and turns it to his lack of balance. You realize that in order to sell your ideas effectively
you need the concentrated attention of your prospect. It will help you to succeed in life if
you perfect yourself in the skillful poising of your body and its members so that you will
be able to appear perfectly balanced in any normal position.

If you teeter from side to side, or rock back and forth on your heels when you are talking
to a man whom you want to impress with your stability of character, you will undermine everything
you say by what you do. Of course you should not stand stiffly. Your leg posts are designed
to serve as a flexible pedestal for your body. Your ability to shift your weight from one foot
to the other easily without losing your balance suggests associated capability of your mind
to keep your judgment in balance. If you have a correctly poised mind, it can balance your body.

[Sidenote: Pose]

The poses of your body, too, are suggestive of ideas about your mental make-up. The quiet pose
aids in making impressions of the qualities of solidity of purpose, of calmness, of confidence,
etc. The active pose is suggestive of enthusiasm, force, hustling, and the like. Your pose
should be suited to the vocation you have chosen. In a bank, for instance, the quiet pose of
assured efficiency perfectly suits the atmosphere of safety and security. In a factory, on
the other hand, you are likely to make a better impression with a much more active pose that
matches the energy and speed of manufacturing operations.

You should not, however, take any pose as a pretense. Whatever poses you employ to augment
the things you say should be used as means for the better communication of truth, not to falsify
in any degree. And you will need to be extremely careful lest you over-do a particular pose
and suggest affectation. Doubtless you have characteristic poses. Analyze yourself. Determine
what your habits of pose mean to other people. Then make such changes in your characteristic
poses as will signify only the best traits you have.

[Sidenote: Action]

Next we will make a brief study of actions from four viewpoints.

First, the lines of action;

Second, the directions of action;

Third, the planes of action;

Fourth, the tension or the laxity of action.

[Sidenote: Lines of Action]

All movements are in straight, single curved, or multiple curved lines of action. Each of these
classes of movements creates a particular impression when it is perceived--an impression very
different from that produced by movements of either of the other classes. It will help you
greatly in your ambition to succeed if you understand the exact significance of your every
action along the various lines, and if you employ intelligently the right movements to suggest
the particular ideas you wish to convey.

The straight gesture always indicates an appeal to mentality. Use it to aim ideas at the other
man's mind.

The single curve, or wave movement, invariably denotes feeling. Employ it to reach into the
breast of the other man and influence his heart.

The gesture of double curves signifies power. It should be employed to dominate both the mind
and actions of the prospect--to make him think and do the things you will.

[Sidenote: Directions Of Actions]

The different directions of actions also suggest various ideas. Your selling purpose is to
get ideas over from your mind to the mind of the other man. It is especially important that
the direction of your gestures should conform to your sales intention. Every movement you make
to aid your purpose should suggest your mental action toward the prospect, or away from yourself.
It should signify that you are taking something out of your mind and offering it to his. Of
course you don't break into his head with your idea and force him to receive it. You just bring
it to the front porch of his mind. Then, if you have been skillful in your salesmanship, he
will open the door of interest after you ring the bell of attention, and will permit your idea
to enter his thoughts. But he is unlikely to admit it unless by some indication from you to
him he knows what is expected of him.

If you gesture toward yourself when expressing your thoughts, you do not suggest to the other
man that he take in your ideas. Instead you concentrate his attention on your selfishness and
your individual opinion. The characteristic gestures of the typical old peddler are displeasing
because they are made in the wrong direction. He holds his arms close to his body and gesticulates
toward himself. He makes the impression that he does not have your interest at heart in the
least, but only his own.

[Sidenote: Affirmation And Denial]

An up-and-down movement suggests something standing. It has the associated significance of
vitality or life. Conversely, a side-to-side gesture suggests similarity to things lying down,
lack of vitality, or the death of ideas. By holding yourself erect you make a very different
impression of your energy than would be made were you to lean to one side. You can affirm a
statement by an up-and-down movement of your hand or by a nod of your head. You deny suggestively
with a horizontal gesture or by shaking your head from side to side.

[Sidenote: Levels of Action]

The significance of action on different planes or levels is seldom appreciated. The level of
eye action is of especial importance in suggesting particular ideas.

When you look another person in the eye, you convey to him the idea of direct mental energy.
You suggest the straight action of your mind in team-work with his. Your eye action on the
same level indicates to him that you are thinking on the practical plane.

[Sidenote: Lifting Prospect's Thoughts]

But if your eyes repeatedly focus above the level of the other man's eyes, you make the impression
that you are an idealist rather than a practical person. What you say will not seem to him
to apply directly to his case. He will not feel the personal, or man-to-man contact of your
thoughts. Sometimes, however, it is important to lift your eyes when talking to a prospect,
in order to suggest that he lift his thoughts from the level of mere selfishness. By your suggestive
eye action on the upper plane you may stimulate in him a higher vision of possibilities or
an insight into the future, if he seems inclined to take a strictly practical view of his present
needs only.

When you look below the eye level of the other man, you indicate (1) modesty, if the movement
is directly down; (2) shame, if the movement is a little to one side and downward; (3) disgust,
if your eyes look far down and far to the side.

[Sidenote: Tensity and Laxness]

The tensity or laxness of your muscles when you are in the presence of a prospect will suggest
to him very diverse ideas. Both tensity and laxity of muscles can be used to good effect in
selling. Your muscles should appear somewhat tense when you are presenting ideas, in order
to make the impression that your mind is fully active. Conversely, by normal relaxation of
your muscles when you are listening, you suggest the receptivity of your mind and your entire
readiness to take in ideas from outside. When you show your muscles are relaxed, you also indicate
that you are perfectly at ease and unafraid of objections or criticism. If you were to sit
tense under criticism, you would suggest that you felt the necessity of fighting back. But
you disarm disparagement of your capabilities when you appear entirely at ease while you listen.

[Sidenote: Introduction To Study of Sales Art]

The brief outline in this chapter of fundamental principles of selling skill, and of the methods
by which ideas may be conveyed through artistic suggestion, is just an introduction to your
study and comprehension of the successive steps of salesmanship practice which are to be analyzed
in the remaining chapters of this book. The limitations of our present space have made it impossible
to do more than summarize here the chief factors of art in selling ideas. You will need to
master the remainder of the book in order to amplify and to apply most effectively in practice
the general principles and methods that have been outlined.

Surely you now are convinced that skill in selling is not a vague mystery, not a natural gift,
not something impossible for you to attain. Every element of sales art can be analyzed in detail.
You are learning exactly how to sell the true ideas of your best capability. Practice of what
you learn will perfect your salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Success Certain]

There is absolutely no doubt that you can master the right principles and methods. By continual
practice you surely can become skillful in their daily use. When you make yourself adept in
the art, you certainly will be able to sell your particular qualifications successfully.

CHAPTER IV

Preparing to Make Your Success Certain

[Sidenote: Be Ready When Your Chance Comes]

Thousands of men have failed in life because they were not ready when their best chances for
success came. Some of these golden opportunities slipped away unrecognized. Others, though
perceived, could not be grasped. The men to whom they were presented had not prepared to hold
and use such chances whenever they might arrive.

If you would make your success a certainty, you must get all ready for it in advance. Then
you will not be taken unawares when you find your big chance. If you are thoroughly prepared,
you will sight it quickly, realize its full value, and seize it with complete confidence in
your ability to make the most of it.

Before you seek it, be sure of your entire readiness for the opportunity you especially want.
You can much better afford to wait a little while for certain success than to rush, unready,
into the field of your choice, risking the likelihood of failure that could be guarded against
by intelligent preparation to succeed.

[Sidenote: Do Not Start Unprepared]

A young man was offered a position of fine opportunity with a great banking house. His ambition
was to build his career in that particular organization. But when the duties of the proffered
situation were explained to him, he declined to undertake them at once; though he risked the
chance that he might not get another such opportunity for employment by the financial institution
of his choice.

"I am sorry," he said to the cashier, "but I do not know enough about accounting to fill that
job now. It will take six months of hard work evenings to train myself to fit your needs. Please
give me other employment in the bank meanwhile, so I'll be able to study the job at close range
while getting ready for it."

This was excellent salesmanship. The candidate suggested in his words, tones, and actions that
he recognized a real opportunity, that he comprehended all it involved, that he was willing
to prepare himself adequately, and that he felt certain of his ability to fill the place after
completing the necessary preparation.

The bank, however, was in immediate need of his services in the position offered to him. So
the cashier, who had been very well impressed by the young man's attitude, told him to take
the place, and offered to supply him with an accountant aide for six months.

[Sidenote: Keeping the Opportunity Open]

"I would rather not," the applicant persisted in declining. "I mean to keep on climbing toward
the top in this bank, once I get started; and I don't want to begin as a cripple. I couldn't
give thorough satisfaction now, even with an assistant on the accounting. It is not good business
for me to start by making a poor impression. I'd prefer that you do not think of me as a man
for whom excuses need to be made. I wish to commence my work in that job, when I am ready,
with your complete confidence that I can handle it--not as a weak sister." He smiled winningly.

The failure of so skillful a salesman of ideas was simply impossible. There is no getting away
from such a high quality of salesmanship. The cashier bought the present and prospective services
of the young man who had demonstrated at the outset his comprehension of the first importance
of preparation. The opportunity was kept open six months for the applicant in training, while
he fitted himself for his future job. This successful salesman of true ideas of his best capabilities
is now a vice-president of the great financial institution.

"But," you say, "suppose the cashier had been unable to wait, would not the young man's over-emphasis
of his attitude on preparation have prevented him from succeeding in his ambition?"

No! A single turn-down cannot cause the failure of a successful salesman. If that cashier had
not appreciated the worth of the candidate, an officer of some other bank certainly would have
had a clearer vision of his value. The applicant might have been balked temporarily in his
ambition. The best salesman occasionally has to try and try again. But a successful career
for that young man was assured in advance. From the very start he was "certain to get there."

On the other hand, if he had risked making a disappointing impression in his new job, he might
have taken the first step toward failure. Suppose he had begun the work for which he was unprepared,
and then had made serious mistakes due to his unfitness. His record would have been blemished.
His ability might have been questioned. He prevented such possibilities by making sure his
preparation was adequate before he accepted his big chance.

[Sidenote: Preparation Should Be Two-fold]

Your preparation for certain success must be two-fold. You need to prepare yourself in ability
first to perceive; then to appreciate the full value of what you see. Golden opportunities
are all about you. If you do not recognize them, or if you perceive but slight value in the
signs of rich chances to succeed, you will fail because of your unreadiness.

Many a farmer in Oklahoma cursed his "bad luck" after he sold a farm on which a gusher was
later discovered. But the oil had been there all the time. The "luckless" farmer simply did
not perceive the indications of wealth under his plodding feet; or, if he saw signs of oil,
he did not realize that they denoted the possibility of millions.

[Sidenote: Developing Perception]

Perception can be broadened almost immeasurably. The physical eye, if normal and thoroughly
trained, is fitted to be "all seeing." So can your mind be made capable of widest vision over
all the fields of possible opportunity. Some are within your present mental view, others you
can see only after going farther or climbing higher in knowledge. The biggest possibilities
of success cannot be comprehended in their entirety by narrowed mental sight.

The first essential of preparation to succeed is that you open your eyes fully, and look all
around you for the opportunities within range of your vision. There are so many close at hand
that your search would better begin right where you are. Even if eventually you seek far for
the best chance to succeed, do so with thorough knowledge of what is near by. Before you leave
your present environment, have an intelligent conviction that you are capable of a bigger or
different success than is to be found within your immediate reach.

Also see and comprehend the especial difficulties you will find close at hand. It does not
always pay to remain in "the old home town." Often a young man needs to go to a community of
strangers to gain appreciation of his ability. It is likely to be hard for him to win success
among people who knew him as a boy and who still regard him as immature. He may find it much
easier to succeed in a neighboring town.

It is possible to make the greatest success turn aside from beaten paths, leave the accustomed
haunts of the successful, and go to a place where no such success ever before has been established.
The Mayo brothers compelled their success as world renowned surgeons to come to them at the
little city of Rochester, Minnesota. Elbert Hubbard brought fame to East Aurora, New York,
by founding there his school of philosophy and the Roycrofters.

[Sidenote: Over-specialized Preparation]

Almost as common as the mistake of first looking far afield for success opportunities, is the
error of over-particularizing one's original preparation. If you think now that you want to
be a lawyer, you should prepare yourself especially by studying law, of course. But you should
not exclude preparation for other vocations. Judge Gary was thoroughly prepared for legal practice.
Doubtless when he began his studies of law he expected to continue in his chosen profession.
But he did not neglect to prepare himself in general business capability. So when his biggest
chance came, he was ready to step out of his law practice and into a manufacturing industry.
There he fitted himself for the position of chief executive in the immense United States Steel
Corporation.

The ability of a master salesman is not limited to getting orders for just one line of goods,
or to selling only to certain buyers. He has all-around sales knowledge and skill. Though he
naturally sells to better advantage in some fields than in others, he can attain a high degree
of efficiency in selling anything meritorious, because of his broad and diversified preparation.

[Sidenote: Varied and Adaptable Preparation]

Your preparation for all the possibilities of success you may be able to reach hereafter should
be similarly varied and adaptable; though you will be wise to specialize, in addition, by making
more detailed preparation for the vocation of your choice. At twenty the average man cannot
know for what he is best fitted. He may not be sure even at thirty. The start toward eventual
success has often been delayed until middle life. To cite my own case, I prepared myself especially
for the career of a certified public accountant, but found my greatest success in the profession
of selling. I was able to grasp my biggest opportunity in the sales field because, though I
had been devoting my time and energies chiefly to accountancy, I had studied and practiced
salesmanship for years in order to market my own services most effectively.

While preparing yourself for success, keep your mental eyes wide open. Perceive any and all
chances about you, however much you specialize in your preparation for a selected career.

[Sidenote: Preparation In Salesmanship]

Comprehend that preparation in salesmanship is necessary, whatever vocation you choose. Mastery
of the selling process is absolutely essential if you would assure your success in any field
of ambition. Not only must you perceive opportunities to succeed, but you also must know how
to sell yourself into the chances you see. No matter how much particularized knowledge you
may acquire in preparation for a selected career, your success will not be assured until you
are able to sell your capabilities to the best advantage. You can neither perceive all your
possible selling opportunities, nor make the most of them when seen, unless you learn the selling
process and develop skill in the actual sale of the best that is in you.

Broad, varied knowledge is required as the foundation for certain success. It cannot be built
on a narrow or limited base. Evidently, however, exactly the same amount of knowledge possessed
by two men would not make them equally successful. As already has been emphasized, success
is not assured by the mere possession of knowledge, but by the effective ways in which elements
of knowledge are fitted to opportunities.

[Sidenote: Abstract And Applied Knowledge]

Your abstract knowledge may be valueless. In order to succeed certainly you must connect the
things you have learned with particular people in particular fields of activity. When you have
developed the power of relating your individual ability to every imaginable use, your mental
eyes will be opened to many opportunities for success that you otherwise might never perceive.
Such an association of what you know and can do with the various ways your capabilities might
be utilized will tremendously augment your self-confidence. When you realize in how many ways
it is possible to use your especial talents, you will not be likely to doubt your own worth.
You will offer your qualifications for sale with complete faith in their value to prospective
buyers.

[Sidenote: Insurance Against Undervaluation]

Thorough preparation in comprehension of values is the salesman's best protection against a
personal inclination, or an outside temptation, to cut prices. If your preparation for your
chosen career has been limited to gaining knowledge, and you have not studied its true worth
to every imaginable prospective buyer, you will be apt often to offer your services for far
less than their full value. Conversely sometimes you will be likely to think your services
are worth more than they really are. You may fail to close sales because your price is too
high. A pre-requisite of good salesmanship is the right price. If your preparation for selling
your services has been thorough, you will realize the exact worth of your knowledge and skill.
You will neither suggest inferior value by quoting a cut price on your capabilities, nor demand
so much as to indicate the characteristics of displeasing egotism or greed. If you know what
you are truly worth, you will make the right price on your real value. Then your self-confidence
in your worth will lend you power to convince the other man that your services would be a good
"buy" for him.

[Sidenote: Seeing Into Opportunities]

If you can imagine all the various uses to which your ability might be put, you will appreciate
the full value of every opportunity you perceive. Not only will you see the chances for success
that are all about you, but you will see into them. When your mind catches sight of success
chances, they will look familiar to you because of their similarity to opportunities you previously
had thought about and connected with your own qualifications. If you are prepared to perceive
and to appreciate fully each indication of a success opportunity that comes within the range
of your mental vision, you will promptly begin working a chance "for all it is worth," as if
it were a newly discovered gold mine.

[Sidenote: Service Purpose In Preparation]

Possibly what you have read has unduly impressed you with the idea that the salesman's motive
in his preparation is selfish. So perhaps it is well to pause here for the reminder that your
primary salesmanship purpose should be true service. You are preparing yourself thoroughly
in knowledge of your full sales value, as a measure of success insurance and self-protection.
It is not true sales service to give a buyer value greatly in excess of the price quoted. It
is right for you to make sure in advance about your full worth. However, the obligation to
render service is the principal element of right salesmanship, and should come before the objective
of a good price. Prepare then primarily to serve your prospect. Demonstrate your true service
purpose, and he will give secondary consideration to the cost of engaging your qualifications
for his business.

[Sidenote: Pleasing Character]

You can serve best if you please in rendering service. Therefore prepare your self, your knowledge,
and all your methods so that from the moment you make your first impression on a prospective
employer, you will please him. Do not prepare for the interview with the purpose of pleasing
yourself. What you like may be distasteful to the man you want to impress.

Since you cannot tell in advance when or where you may encounter a prospective buyer of your
services, you will not be safeguarding every possible chance to succeed unless you wear your
"company manners" all the time. You always should dress carefully, act with painstaking courtesy,
and conduct yourself as if you might meet a rich relation at any moment. You certainly can
expect more wealth from "making yourself solid" with Opportunity than you ever are likely to
be willed by a millionaire uncle. It will pay you much better to please Opportunity in general
than to ingratiate yourself with any person in particular.

[Sidenote: Please Everybody Everywhere Always]

"Company manners" that are just "put on" temporarily may be left off on the very occasion when
you would want to appear at your best if you only knew that "The Golden Chance" was to be met.
Therefore prepare to be characteristically pleasing to everybody, everywhere, and all the time.
Then, no matter where or when or in what guise you come upon Opportunity, you will be sure
to please with your genuineness.

Innumerable great successes have begun with the making of a pleasing impression on some one
whose presence and notice were unknown. You realize that your success is practically impossible
if you displease. Preparation to please is of first importance in getting ready to succeed.
Your success in the field of your especial ambition will be assured if you win your first chance
there by making an initial pleasing impression and then keep right on pleasing.

Cultivate grace in your movements--for grace is pleasing to everyone. Carry your body naturally,
especially your head; with such a bearing that total strangers will feel pleasure when they
look at you. Be a person who pleases at sight. It is not difficult. No matter what sort of
face you have, if it expresses habitually your pleasure in living, it will look pleasant. A
look of pleasure is pleasing to others. You like to see some one else enjoying himself thoroughly.
Everybody feels the same way. Our own faces brighten when we come upon radiant happiness anywhere.

[Sidenote: Details That Please]

Please others with your smile. It should not be just an affected smirk, but a smile of genuine
friendliness for all the world. Please by wearing inconspicuous clothes that are faultless
in taste, fit, and cleanliness; and of a quality suited to your vocation. Show also that you
take good care of what you wear, for that makes a pleasing impression. You can please in your
dress without arraying yourself in expensive clothes. Indeed, an over-dressed man is more displeasing
to Opportunity than is one poorly dressed. There can be no excuse for foppishness, but a shabby
neat appearance may be due to a good reason. Please with the suggestion in your manner that
you are getting along well. Do not pretend false prosperity, of course; but indicate that you
feel successful. Any one finds it unpleasant to be in the company of a failure. If you would
succeed hereafter, avoid making the impression that you have not already succeeded. "Success
breeds success."

[Sidenote: Courtesy And Politeness]

Be courteous invariably. Learn and observe the rules of politeness. Please by acting the gentleman
always. Practice courtesy and politeness in your own home to perfect yourself in these pleasing
characteristics. Then you will show them everywhere. Remember that the rest of the world is
made up of "somebody else's folks." Courtesy and politeness are not natural attributes. In
order to make yourself a master salesman you need to develop them to an unusually high degree.
You may intend to be courteous and polite always, but only the development of the fixed habit
will fully support your intention.

You cannot be polite, however courteous you mean to be, unless you take pains to prepare yourself
with knowledge of the usages of polite people. In order to be polite, it is necessary that
you do not only the courteous thing, but the correct thing. Your courtesy might displease if
it were unsuited to the circumstances. It would not be polite, for example, to invite an orthodox
Jew to dinner and then to serve him with a pork tenderloin. Your intention to be a courteous
host would not lessen your offense against good manners. Your guest would be incensed by your
impoliteness, not pleased by your courteous intention.

[Sidenote: Virility Pleases]

No quality you have is more generally pleasing than virility--your man stuff. Therefore on
all occasions show yourself "every inch a man." Moreover, act like a he-man. Never appear "sissyfied"
in even the slightest degree. Swing your legs from the hips when you walk; don't mince along.
The stride of a he-man is strong and free. If yours lacks the qualities of virility, change
your habit of walking.

When you make gestures, move your whole arm. A wrist movement suggests effeminacy. It is important,
too, that you train your voice to ring with manliness. Even a squeaky, weak tone can be made
to suggest man stuff if the words are spoken crisply, and the sentences are cleanly cut. Do
things with the ease that indicates a man's strength, not with evident effort. Perhaps you
have not realized that by cultivating grace in your movements you can make impressions of your
man power. Grace means the least possible expenditure of energy in efficient action. A man
can accomplish things with ease and grace that a child or a woman would make hard work of and
do awkwardly.

[Sidenote: Pleasing Tones]

A pleasing tone helps to assure one's success. You may think your voice is a heavy handicap.
Perhaps it is high pitched and squeaky; or, on the other hand, a "growly" bass suggestive of
ill-nature. Again it may be faltering or hoarse. Such faults are not serious to a master salesman.
If your vocal equipment is physically normal, your voice can be made pleasing. In order to
make your tones agreeable, learn to vibrate them naturally through your nose. A mouth tone
is displeasing. The so-called "nasal twang" that sounds so unpleasant is a mouth tone prevented
from free vibration through the nose. Humming, as you know, both indicates pleasure and is
a pleasant sound. It is produced with the mouth closed, by a vibration of the bone structure
of the face and of the nasal cavities. Certainly, even if you have a disagreeable voice, you
can make your tones hum, and thereby render them more pleasing. Adenoids that could be removed--even
failure to keep the nose clean--may prevent a man from succeeding. Whatever hinders the free
vibration of tones makes displeasing impressions of the speaker. When a man has a bad cold
in his head that blocks the nasal passages, his voice rasps the ears of a hearer.

[Sidenote: Avoid Giving Displeasure]

Not only please by doing things that give pleasure; also avoid doing displeasing things. For
example, when you say or suggest anything to another person you want to influence, remember
to be a salesman of your ideas. Do not make the impression that you are teaching. No adult
human being really enjoys being taught. Any grown person likes to be treated as an equal, and
to have new thoughts conveyed to him without that suggestion of superior intelligence which
is characteristic of many teachers when dealing with pupils. Perhaps you have heard Burton
Holmes lecture. His enunciation is a delight in its perfection, but he talks "according to
the dictionary" so naturally that his correctness does not sound a bit affected. You feel at
home with him. His diction is attractive to you. Another speaker practicing the same exactness
of pronunciation, but less artistic in selling his ideas with words, might displease you by
his scholarly accents.

[Sidenote: Tact]

Sometimes it is tactful to speak incorrectly, as a courtesy to the other man. If in the course
of your interview with a prospective employer he should mispronounce a word, you would be undiplomatic
to emphasize the correct pronunciation in speaking that word yourself. It is not dishonest,
but truly polite to reply "My ad'dress is"--instead of pronouncing the word correctly. Do not
suggest by over-emphasis of right speech that you wish to pose as one who is conscious of his
superiority, however well you may realize that you are on a higher plane of intellectuality.
We all like a genuinely great man who does not hold himself aloof.

[Sidenote: Prepare For All Kinds Of Men]

Prepare to meet not only strong men, but weak men; cautious men; very proud men; greedy men.
Be ready for reckless men, humble men, men who live to serve others. Be aware in advance of
the differences in their buying motives. They will not all have the same reasons for giving
or for refusing you a chance. Hence be prepared to adapt your salesmanship to the characteristics
of the various kinds of men you are likely to meet. Though you never should pander to an unworthy
motive, study different types of character and learn how to fit your ability to the peculiar
or distinctive traits of possible buyers of such services as you have for sale. Perhaps an
easy-going employer will appreciate your "pep" as much as would a hustler, but he won't like
it if you seem to prod him with your energy. On the other hand, the employer who is a hustler
himself might be keenly pleased should you keep him on the jump to stay even with you.

[Sidenote: Success Insurance]

Be thorough in preparing to sell your capabilities; so that your success may be insured. You
ride on a first-class railroad with confidence, feeling that every precaution for your safety
has been taken. You are at ease when you begin your trip; for you know that track, train, and
men in charge all are dependable. Because of the complete readiness of the railroad for your
journey, you count on arriving safely at your destination. You have no fears that you may be
wrecked en route.

Similarly you should make the most thorough preparation before starting out as a salesman of
the best that is in you. You have to grade your own roadbed, and must yourself lay the rails
over which your ideas in trains of thought will be carried to the minds of other men. You are
fireman, engineer, brakeman, and conductor of this Twentieth Century Limited. Your destiny
as a salesman of yourself is in the hands of no one else. Before you travel any farther, take
all practicable measures to assure your safe arrival, without delay, at the station of Success.

[Sidenote: Start Confidently]

When you are thoroughly prepared to sell true ideas of your best capabilities, you should start
with confidence that you will reach the end of the line safely and on time. Don't attempt to
"get there" before making adequate preparation for success. Remember that a railroad does not
commence operating through trains until the track is finished.

If you are prepared now for the actual start in salesmanship--if you are packed up and ready
to leave for your field of opportunity--ALL ABOARD!

CHAPTER V

Your Prospects

[Sidenote: Meaning of "Prospects"]

If you were to be asked, "What are your prospects for success?" you probably would answer by
stating the things you expect or hope may happen. We commonly say that a certain man isn't
rich, but he has "prospects;" because he has a wealthy aunt who is very fond of him, or he
is employed by a business that is growing fast, or he owns property which seems sure to increase
in value, or some other good fortune is likely to befall him. The literal meaning of "prospect"
is "looking forward." So most of us have come to think of our prospects as just possible occurrences
in the future, to the happening of which we may look ahead with considerable hopefulness.

"Prospects," in salesmanship has a very different meaning. The master salesman does not regard
himself as merely a "prospectee," but as a prospector. He thinks of "prospecting" as the gold
miner uses the word to describe his activities when he searches for valuable mineral deposits.
"Prospects" do not just "happen" in the selling process of achieving success. They do not result
from circumstances merely, but must be accumulated by the activity of the salesman.

[Sidenote: Making Good Luck]

"Your Prospects," as the subject of this chapter, does not mean your fondest hopes, or confident
expectations. We are studying the ways to assure your success. If your prospects depended on
mere happenings, they would be highly uncertain; because what you hope and expect may occur,
may never take place in fact. The master salesman does not depend on such prospects. He makes
his own luck to a very large extent by skillful prospecting; as the trained prospector for
gold tremendously increases his chances of discovering a rich lode by thoroughly and intelligently
investigating a mining region. We are to consider now the prospects you are capable of controlling,
the opportunities you can bring within reach by your own exploration of possible fields of success.

We will study particular things you can do, and exactly how to do them, to increase the number
and quality of your chances to succeed. A trained prospector for gold has more chances to strike
it rich than a greenhorn because he knows the indications of valuable minerals, and is skilled
in the use of that knowledge. So your opportunities for success will certainly be increased
if you know how to search for, to discern, and to make the right use of your prospects.

[Sidenote: Prospecting Not Gambling]

Do not think, because we have compared prospecting in mining and in selling, that the success
of the salesman prospector, your success, must be largely a "gamble" anyway, as is the case
with the explorer for gold. However experienced and skillful in prospecting the miner may be,
he is very uncertain of discovering a bonanza. He cannot be absolutely sure there is gold in
the region he explores, in paying quantities and practicable for mining. Though he has every
reason to feel confident of the richness of a particular field, he may nevertheless be so unfortunate
as not to discover the gold lode or profitable placer deposit. He is helpless to control the
existence of the indications of success. They are predetermined by nature. By no effort of
his own is he able to increase or decrease the fixed quantity and quality of the golden chances
about him. He can only increase his likelihood of discovering gold. Even the most intelligent,
skillful prospecting will not make a miner's success certain.

You, the salesman prospector for opportunities to succeed, are not so limited. There are particular
things you can do, and particular ways of doing them, that will assure your finding chances
to make sales of the best that is in you. If you learn the scientific principles of prospecting
for opportunities, if you make yourself highly skillful in looking for and digging into the
success chances that surround you always, there will be nothing uncertain about your prospects
to succeed. You will know surely that you have prospects, just what and where they are, and
their full worth to you.

Of course, prospecting is only part of the selling process; so your knowledge and skill as
a prospector will not suffice to guarantee your complete success. However, at this preliminary
stage you can be certain that your search for rich chances to succeed will not be a barren quest.

The present chapter will help you to make sure of gaining for yourself such opportunities as
lead to complete success in the field of your choice. We will observe and understand how the
skillful salesman prospects for the purpose of increasing his sales efficiency. We will study
the principles and methods of prospecting he uses successfully; for his practices, applied
to your job of selling yourself, will certainly improve your chances to succeed. We will see
also how your very best prospects can be created by masterly salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Hard Work Necessary]

At the outset comprehend that no other step in the selling process involves so much hard work
as you will need to do in order to find all your possible chances of success and to make the
most of them. It is necessary that you look intelligently, most earnestly, and constantly.
You must expect to spend a great deal of time and energy in your quest for prospects. So it
is essential to your success as a prospector that the investigation of your field of opportunity
be carefully planned in order to make the most effective use of the time you spend prospecting.
It is vitally important, too, that you develop sufficient physical stamina to do a tremendous
amount of hard work. The gold miner has little chance to discover the bonanza he seeks if he
searches only a few days or weeks, or if he lacks the strength and endurance required for making
a thorough exploration of the mineral region. Similarly it may take a master salesman months
of unremitting toil to prospect a sale that he then is able to close in an hour or two.

[Sidenote: The Food of Salesmanship]

Prospecting supplies the food of salesmanship. The salesman thrives if his prospecting is sufficient
and good. He grows thin and weak to the point of failure if it is bad, or inadequate in quantity.
Every salesman should realize that prospecting furnishes the nourishment for salesmanship,
but some so-called salesmen do practically nothing to ensure themselves an abundant food supply.
They merely absorb the tips that come their way. Like sponges they sop up the limited quantity
of selling chances they happen to get. That is not the way to feed one's ambition with opportunities.

Comprehend that you must seek actively for your best prospects. You should not stop searching
until you find what you are looking for. Myriads of men have failed because they did not make
an earnest, hard effort to discover chances to succeed, or because they did not persist in
the exploration of their fields of opportunity. You know that other men no more capable than
you are succeeding all about you. Certainly, then, your chance exists. Seek it in your own
thoughts and in the circumstances of your every-day living. Put a great deal of time and toil
into your search. You cannot afford to loaf on this preliminary job.

[Sidenote: Prospect Continually Act Quickly]

Every moment you are awake should be used in prospecting; unless it is required for some other
part of the process of assuring your success. There is no keener pleasure than the eager, continual
search of a miner for gold and of a master salesman for possible big buyers. It is necessary
that you feel their thrilling zest for discovery; that you develop their unflagging energy;
that you be fired by their ardor for the quest. In order to be a highly successful prospector
you will need especially a quality they have in common--"pep."

How eagerly the miner prospector drinks in every bit of news he hears about a new strike! How
alertly the master salesman listens to casual gossip that holds a clue which may lead to a
sale! But the miner and the salesman prospectors would not benefit in any degree by what they
learn through their perception of prospects if they did not then act intelligently upon the
clues secured. Not only should you keep your eyes and ears open for indications of opportunities
to succeed, but you should be ready in advance to take instant advantage of any you may discover.
What a fool a miner would be if, after finding rich prospects of gold, he were to lose his
chance to someone else because he did not know how to file a mining claim! Could there be a
greater failure in salesmanship than learning about a big contract to be let, and being unprepared
to bid on it? Before doing any outside prospecting, be sure you know what you have in you.
Make certain of your ability to take full advantage of your chances to succeed when you come
upon them.

[Sidenote: Little Doors To Big Success]

Prospects that seem at first glance to be hardly worth following may lead to other prospects.
Merely because your ambitions are big, do not neglect a chance to make a little success. Investigate
completely every minor prospect you find. Until you look into it thoroughly, you cannot be
sure of all that a clue holds. The indication of an opportunity that seems of slight importance
may possibly lead straight to the bonanza lode.

An elevator boy in an office building made up his mind to rise permanently in the world; to
get out of the vocation in which he was just going up and down all the time without arriving
anywhere in particular. He prospected the tenants of the building, learned all he could about
them, and determined who were the biggest men. He studied the directory, asked questions, and
finally selected the one big business man to whom he was resolved to sell his capabilities.

[Sidenote: Persistent Effort After Prospecting]

This man was known to be unapproachable. So, instead of attempting to interview him, the elevator
boy prospected to discover his characteristics. He found out exactly what qualities were most
likely to please his intended employer. Then he cultivated the tone, manner, and habits of
action that he felt certain would impress the difficult prospect most favorably. It took the
resolute elevator boy nearly a year of continual, skillful work to make the big business man
notice him and distinguish him from the other elevator boys. Six months more were required
to develop the big man's attention into thorough interest. But at the end of a year and a half
of faithful prospecting, the ambitious youth gained his selected, self-created opportunity
to succeed. There was no stopping him after he got his start. In less than a decade he had
sold his qualifications so successfully to a group of powerful financiers that he, too, had
become a multi-millionaire.

This illustration of persistent effort to gain a desired chance should help to keep you from
becoming discouraged about your prospects for success. Bear in mind the old, familiar motto,
"If at first you don't succeed, try, try again." Stick to your prospecting when you know you
are on the right lead. It has been estimated that the busy bee inserts its proboscis into flowers
3,600,000 times to obtain a single pound of honey. But the bee is the only insect, remember,
that lives on honey.

[Sidenote: No Poor Territory For Success]

The poor salesman is apt to complain that his territory is poor. The good salesman makes any
territory good. So in prospecting your field of immediate opportunities, make the best, not
the worst, of your present circumstances. The star base-ball player does not refuse to play
on the small-town team because it isn't good enough for him. The great Ty Cobb first made them
"sit up and take notice" in a bush league. Undoubtedly he felt then that he was fit for better
company, but he put in his best licks and played big-city ball on the small-town team. That
was excellent prospecting for the chance he wanted with the best clubs. From the very beginning
of his career, Ty Cobb has used masterly salesmanship to get across to the world true ideas
of his best capabilities in his chosen field.

To-day there is no poor territory for success. Telegraph and telephone and wireless methods
of communication, electric light and power, railroads and inter-urban car service, farm tractors,
passenger automobiles, motor trucks, and the airplane have so revolutionized the inter-relations
of men that all the former great distances of different locations and view-points have been
shortened almost to nothingness. The whole world lives now in a single community of interest.
The great war has taught us that each individual is close to everyone else. In your prospecting
for success you are not limited by any narrow boundary of opportunities. Wherever you are,
newspapers and magazines bring to your door chances for big success. If you search for prospects
in everything you read you should be able to reach out all over the earth with your capability.
An ambitious man I never had heard of before wrote to me at one time from South Africa to secure
a selected territory for the sale of automobiles in a western city of the United States. From
a distance of nearly half the circumference of the earth he got his chance to succeed.

[Sidenote: The Fields of Opportunity Are Broad]

A clerk in a Los Angeles real estate office received a letter from an acquaintance in Chicago
who had spent his summer vacation in Michigan. The Chicago man wrote that the farmers of the
Traverse Bay region were made rich by a bumper crop of potatoes just harvested. The Californian
saw a chance for success in this bit of information. He worked out his idea and talked it over
with his employers. He sold them on it. They sent him East loaded with facts about "the glorious
West" and brim-full of Los Angeles peptimism. Aided by cold weather in Michigan that winter,
the western real estate man eventually sold California irrigated ranches to a score of Michigan
farmers who suddenly had made sufficient money to retire from potato raising, and who were
old enough to be strongly attracted by the idea of owning and cultivating land in a more genial
climate. Thus a sentence in a letter led straight to the success of the clerk who perceived
his prospects and knew how to make the most of them.

[Sidenote: Know Local Conditions]

While distances have been bridged by modern swift means of communication and transportation,
every locality has opportunities for success that are peculiar to it alone. Conversely every
locality is handicapped in certain ways. Therefore in your prospecting for success study the
conditions in your especial field. As a salesman of yourself, you should know your "territory,"
its advantages and disadvantages in particular respects. Men are doing business in your town.
There is no better way to gain a prospect to succeed with a house in your home community than
to demonstrate to the head of the concern that you comprehend just what he is "up against"
on the one hand, and on the other what "edge" he has on businesses in the same line located
elsewhere. You could make no worse mistake, you could injure your own prospects no more, than
by showing ignorance of local conditions, or inappreciation of the circumstances in which your
prospect's business is being conducted.

[Sidenote: Turn to Account What You Learn]

Not only should you know as many facts as possible regarding opportunities in your chosen field;
it is even more important that, by the use of your imagination you relate these facts to practical
ways of turning them to account for your benefit. In order to derive the maximum of benefit
from your prospecting, you must make the best use of every item of knowledge you gain. Sometimes
the mere possession of particular knowledge will increase your chances to succeed. But almost
invariably you can multiply the value of what you learn if you prospect in your own mind for
ideas about putting the facts to the most profitable use.

Do not forget that the primary object of true salesmanship is service to the other fellow.
Therefore prospect your own thoughts with the purpose of making what you know especially valuable
to some one else, your intended employer for instance. In every step of the selling process
you should think first of how you can serve your prospect with something that he lacks and needs.

[Sidenote: Prospect Needs]

Surprisingly few young men who go into business prospect their fields of opportunity to learn
what is most wanted there. The great majority take up special professions or enter selected
industries just because they wish to do chosen things. The master salesman, however, adapts
himself to the circumstances and requirements of his customers, even at the sacrifice of his
personal inclinations. He could not succeed if he sold only what he wanted to sell, or if he
confined his salesmanship efforts to a limited number of buyers because he liked them and disliked
others. In order to assure your success, you must learn to like to do what is most needed to
be done, and learn to like to serve whoever lacks what you can supply. Therefore prospect your
fields of opportunity to learn what capabilities are principally needed. If you would make
your success as easy as possible, look about you first to determine the demand for such services
as you are able to render.

[Sidenote: Sometimes Go The Round-About Way]

Perhaps your prospecting will indicate that it is advisable for you to go a round-about way
to your goal of ambition; because the direct route is beset with great difficulties. A young
doctor wished to specialize in bacteriology. He realized that it would take the savings of
a great many years of general medical practice to equip a complete laboratory of his own. Accordingly
he discontinued the practice of his profession; though he went on with his studies. He engaged
in business for five years. Thus in a comparatively short time he earned the money he needed
to enable him to devote the rest of his life to bacteriological research.

[Sidenote: Racial Characteristics]

Different territories or fields of opportunity have various characters, like different people.
It is important to study especially the racial types you are likely to encounter. Many a man
has attained success by accumulating discriminative knowledge regarding the national peculiarities
of the Latin peoples, Slavs, Teutons, Anglo-Saxons, Magyars, etc.

The Italian has strong likes and dislikes in colors and patterns of goods. To be a good salesman
in dealing with him, you should know his preferences and prejudices. If you learn what colors
and patterns are most favored in the "Little Italy" of your city, you may be able to employ
this bit of knowledge to help you very much in influencing your fellow-residents of Italian
descent.

You are aware of the effect produced on the majority of Irishmen by the color green. But take
care to learn whether the Irishmen whose political help you would like to win are from the
South or the North of the Emerald Isle. They may be Orangemen, and you might "queer" your prospects
by going among them wearing a green necktie.

Learn your facts with discrimination; then use them restrictively in the circumstances where
they will be most effective in promoting your success.

[Sidenote: Temporary Conditions]

Prospect to learn not only permanent conditions in your field of opportunity, but also any
temporary conditions that might affect your chances to succeed. Mental and emotional "waves"
sweep over the country and over local communities at times. Billy Sunday's revivals in various
great cities brought success opportunities to particular businesses, but had injurious effects
on others. You should take such factors into account when studying your prospects.

The manufacturers of that successful innovation, the "Service Flag," took advantage of the
sudden demand for such an emblem. When war came, they saw into the future and perceived a new
lack. But the need for Service Flags was temporary. Before the war ended they were displayed
everywhere. To-day none are seen.

Now there has come into existence The American Legion, which seems certain to be a great political
and social power in the United States for generations, as was the G.A.R. after the civil war.
Any man who hopes for political success in the course of the next thirty or forty years must
prospect the thoughts and feelings of the veterans of 1917-18.

[Sidenote: Analyze Individuals]

You will have specific as well as general prospects. Hence it is essential that you supplement
your study of conditions with the analysis of individuals. Study men with the greatest care,
especially the one man or group of men upon whom you want to impress ideas of your capabilities.
Learn all you can regarding the personal characteristics of the individual to whom you hope
to sell your services or "goods." Your knowledge of his traits and peculiarities, your familiarity
with his life purposes and hobbies, may assure you a chance to succeed with him that otherwise
you could not get. A friend of mine is the president of a big ice company, but he is not so
much interested in cooling people's food as in warming their hearts with his genuine brotherhood
for all men. There isn't much prospect for anybody to sell him "a cold business proposition,"
even though he is a dealer in ice.

[Sidenote: Hobbies]

Do not, however, make a "hobby of hobbies." Only the big hobbies of your man are worth especial
study. Never harp on any of his little idiosyncracies. He may be sensitive about being eccentric.
It is bad salesmanship to pretend an interest in another person's whims. You cannot use his
hobbies to help your prospects unless you share his feelings to a considerable degree. My friend
who believes and practices the doctrine that all men are brothers would be sure to detect quickly
a false humanitarian bent on a selfish purpose to exploit his hobby.

As already has been emphasized, the object of the good salesman when prospecting is to discover
the lacks of men who might benefit from the things he has to sell. If you are looking for your
prospects with that service purpose, you have taken a long preparatory step in the process
of selling your qualifications. Find the employer who needs your best ability, and your success
will be assured the moment you get into his mind the true idea that you are the man he has
been looking for.

[Sidenote: Prospect Lacks]

Undoubtedly you know men to whom success has come because they made other men realize they
fitted into particular needs. A young acquaintance of mine foresaw that a manufacturer would
want an assistant within a year or two; though the executive himself was unaware that he was
developing such a need. My acquaintance got a minor job under him in order to make a good impression
in advance. Long before the head of the business realized that he was breaking in a confidential
assistant, the young man had qualified for the position he had perceived in prospect.

Your chosen employer may not know of the lack that you have prospected in his business. He
may not have the least idea that he wants you. Prospecting his needs is part of your job as
a salesman of yourself.

An expert accountant sold himself into a fine position as the auditor of a great corporation
by anticipating that the Company would need to have its system of book-keeping revolutionized
in order to prepare for the Federal income tax. He prospected what was coming to that business;
then sold the president comprehension that he lacked an expert accountant he was going to need
badly before long.

One of my own experiences as an accountant illustrates the value of specific prospecting. When
I was studying accountancy, I bought every authoritative publication on the subject. For one
set of forty books I had to send to London. Each volume related to the peculiar accounts, terms,
etc. of one business. There was a book on brewery accounting, another on commission house accounting,
and so on through the list of forty businesses. To each volume I afterward owed at least one
client. For instance, I got a commission to make a cost survey for a tobacco company, largely
because I was able to convince the president that I knew a good deal about the tobacco business.
I talked intelligently to him regarding the processes of his industry.

[Sidenote: Reasons Behind Habits]

When you prospect an individual's personal qualities, traits, or hobbies, do not stop after
learning the facts. Study out the reasons behind habits and opinions. It may help you only
a little to know that your intended employer is a Republican or a Democrat; that he is conservative
or radical in his social opinions. But your chances of success in dealing with him will be
greatly increased if you know exactly why he belongs to one or the other political party, and
the reason he is a "stand-patter" or a "progressive." Use knowledge of why's and wherefore's
with the skill of a salesman bent on securing an order from a prospective buyer. But be sure
you get the fundamental facts, for often "appearances are deceiving."

[Sidenote: Your Personal Responsibility]

When you look for prospects in your selected field of service-opportunities recognize your
personal responsibility for the successful development of the chances you find. Before you
begin prospecting, realize that what you make of your opportunities is solely up to you. Assume
all the responsibility for your own success; then you will have no excuse to blame any one
else if you fail. Should things not go as you wish, say "It's my own fault," and feel that
way. The true salesman never apologizes to himself. So if you have not found your prospects,
or if you have not made the best use of the chances you have discovered, kick at the man who
is responsible. Don't get sore on the world at large.

[Sidenote: Follow-ups]

Perhaps what has been said thus far has over-emphasized the process of prospecting for the
first chance to succeed. Maybe it suggests to you that if one can get an opening, the hardest
part of the effort to assure success will have been accomplished. But a successful career in
salesmanship is not built on single orders closed. The master salesman keeps on selling the
same buyer and develops him into a steady customer. He continues all the while to prospect
the needs of that buyer, just as thoroughly as if he were planning his first approach.

Your initial success should be completed by after-service. In order to continue progressing
toward your goal, you must "deliver the goods" right along. You cannot keep your success growing
unless you prospect unremittingly for more and better opportunities to render service. Give
satisfaction in larger amount and improved quality from month to month, and year after year.
If you would continue to succeed, look ahead always for more prospects and seek in each of
them new chances to broaden your usefulness.

[Sidenote: The Art of Prospecting]

If you prospect skillfully (with art), your chances to find what you seek will be remarkably
increased. So look for your prospects cheerily. Be frank and expressive in your quest. Show
your sympathetic side, and thus appeal to the kinder tendencies of other people. The best way
to avoid the world's coldness is by warming everybody you meet with your own cordiality. Be
courteous. Especially cultivate the art of talking with people instead of at them. Use tact
and judgment in dealing with your prospects.

Thousands of men are shut away from the open minds and hearts of others by doors of concealment
and reserve. You need to open such doors. You can do it only by frankness on your own part,
which will induce people to feel like telling you their secrets. Frank expression of your opinion,
provided it has a sound foundation, will often draw out the hidden opinions of others and reveal
to you prospects that you might never discover unaided. Do not, however, be dogmatic or arbitrary
in saying what you think. Speak your beliefs casually. Then you will not discourage those honest
differences of opinion that enlighten one's own ideas.

Rid your face of sharpness if you would be a good prospector for your best chances to succeed.
Avoid "the cutting edge" in your voice and manner when you make inquiries about opportunities
you seek. You are likely to be most effective in prospecting if you cultivate an easy attitude
of friendliness. The master salesman does not set his jaw when prospecting. He uses curved,
instead of straight line gestures to supplement his words. He suggests a "ball-bearing" disposition,
not "corners."

[Sidenote: Sympathetic Attitude]

Be a good mixer when looking for your prospects. Learn the art of companionship. The first
essential is fellow feeling. Therefore do not go about with a chip on your shoulder, but with
your face a-smile and your palms open to offer and to receive hand-clasps. Sympathize with
the ambitions of other men, with their hopes and dreams. Remember that each part of every work
of man, however substantial and enduring it now may be, was once no more than a figment of
the imagination of some one's mind. So do not be altogether "practical" when prospecting. It
is a mistake to neglect to prospect visions.

[Sidenote: Have a Leader]

When the master salesman prospects, he uses very effectively a "leader" idea. You know how
aggressive stores advertise leaders that draw trade in other things. Your prospecting of your
various capabilities should enable you to decide which of your qualifications will make the
most effective leader in the case of a certain employer. Do not expect him to perceive all
your merits immediately. Concentrate his attention and interest on one or two elements of your
fitness to fill his especial needs. Prospect to make sure which of your possible leaders would
be most likely to influence him in your favor. Then use these selected elements of your character
very prominently to open the door of your initial chance. Countless successes have been founded
on well chosen leaders.

A little bake shop in Chicago competes successfully to-day with a great chain-store company
that has an immense establishment directly across the street. The shop sells as its leaders
home-made English tarts that no chain-store could supply. These draw buyers for groceries and
other goods the chain-store sells much cheaper, but which the purchasers of tarts order with
their pastry rather than cross the street and divide their marketing.

[Sidenote: Summary]

Now let us summarize "Your Prospects." They are not far away nor far ahead in time. They are
in your own hands right now. You cannot fail in life if you recognize and use most effectively
all the opportunities available to you at present. You suffer from no lack of chances to succeed.
You only need to open your physical eyes and the eyes of your mind to see fine prospects every
day. Then if you imaginatively relate your abilities to what you perceive, and plan how you
can fit yourself into a chosen place of real service, you will have begun the selling process
successfully. At the outset of your career it is possible for you to reduce difficult obstacles
to temporary set-backs that you can get around or overcome.

[Sidenote: Success A Matter Of Fractions]

There is only a narrow margin of difference between success and failure. Success is a matter
of fractions and decimals, not of big units. A few thousand American soldiers and marines turned
the tide of German victory at Chateau Thierry. "It is the last straw that breaks the camel's back."

If you begin the selling process by the finest prospecting, and keep on with equal effectiveness
throughout all the following steps of salesmanship, you will gain so many more chances than
you otherwise could get that your success in the end will be assured. The master salesman works
with certainty that he will secure his quota of orders. He knows in advance that he will succeed;
because he knows sure ways to sell.

Good prospecting is just a natural process, intelligently comprehended. It is neither mysterious
nor hard. It is one of the preliminary, understandable ways to make success not only sure,
but easy to attain.

CHAPTER VI

Gaining Your Chance

[Sidenote: Getting Inside The Door]

We will assume that you have qualified yourself to succeed; that you have developed your best
capabilities in knowledge, in manhood, and in sales skill; that you have completed the general
preparation necessary to assure your success in marketing your particular qualifications; and
that you also have learned how to find and to make the most of your prospects. After these
preliminaries you are ready to take the next step in the selling process, and to begin putting
your capabilities, and what you have learned from preparation and prospecting, to specific
use in actual selling.

In order to succeed, you must not only be qualified for some particular service work, but you
also need chances to demonstrate your capabilities and preparedness for effective service.
If you stand all your life in complete readiness for success but outside the door of opportunity,
you will be a failure despite your exceptional qualifications and preparations for handling
chances to succeed. It is necessary that you get inside the door. We will study now the sure
ways and means of entrance.

[Sidenote: The Salesman's Advantage Over the Buyer]

One great advantage the skillful salesman has over even the best buyer is that he can plan
completely what he will do and how he will do it to accomplish his selling purpose. The prospect
is unable to anticipate who will call upon him next; so it is impossible for him to avoid being
taken unawares by each salesman. He can make only general and hasty preparations at the moment
to deal with the particular individual who comes intent on securing his order.

The good salesman, however, works out in advance the most effective ways and means to present
his proposition. Each move in the process of selling his ideas to a prospect is carefully studied
and practiced beforehand. The effects of different words and tones and acts are exactly weighed.
When the thoroughly prepared salesman calls on a possible buyer, he has in mind a flexible
program of procedure with which he is perfectly familiar and which he can adapt skillfully
to various conditions that his imagination has enabled him to anticipate. Hence the master
salesman usually is able to control the situation, no matter how shrewd the prospect may be;
because the salesman's chance to plan assures him a great advantage over the unprepared or
incompletely prepared other party to the sale.

[Sidenote: Dominate The Interview with Confidence]

If you would likewise "dominate" the man to whom you want to sell your capabilities, prepare
"plans of approach" to his interest before calling on him; in order to make sure of presenting
your qualifications most strongly. He can oppose your salesmanship with but comparatively weak
resistance; because he has had no such opportunity as you to get all ready for this interview.
The skillful salesman is confident that he can control the selling process he begins. When
you seek a selected chance for the success you desire, you should feel similar assurance of
ability to sell your services. You will possess this feeling if you prepare your "plan of approach"
as the master salesman gets ready for his interview with a prospective buyer.

[Sidenote: The Two Entrances]

You have to make two distinct "entrances" in order to gain your desired chance to succeed.
You need to get yourself into the presence of the employer you have selected. Then it is essential
that you get the true idea of your capabilities and preparedness into his mind. Your "approach"
to his attention and interest, therefore, involves a double process. It is important that you
plan intelligently the most skillful ways and means of making the two entrances; through the
physical and the mental closed doors that now shut you out from the opportunities you have
prospected and desire to gain.

No master salesman would call on an important prospect before planning in his own mind how
to take the successive steps of the interview expected. Nor would a master salesman neglect
to think out in advance several specific methods of getting past any physical barriers he might
encounter between the outer door of the general office and the inner sanctum of the man he
must meet face to face in order to close a sale.

[Sidenote: Ordinary Way Of Getting Job]

But when the unskilled salesman of his own capabilities seeks a situation, he usually neglects
to make careful, detailed plans to reach his prospect in the most effective way. He does not
prepare to create the particular impressions that would be most apt to assure him the attention
and interest of the employer upon whom he calls. Nearly always when a man out of a job answers
an advertisement or follows up a clue to a possible opening for his services, he thinks the
most important thing is to "get there first." The only advantage he hopes to gain over other
applicants is a position at the head of the line.

Have you ever stopped to analyze the mental attitude of an employer toward the half dozen,
dozen, or score of men who answer his advertisement for the services of one man? He thinks,
"Here are a lot of fellows out of jobs. Probably most of them are no good, or they wouldn't
be out of jobs. They are competing for this place. Each sees there are plenty of others who
will be glad to have it. Therefore it is likely that I can get a man without paying him much
to start with, and he probably won't be very independent for a while after I hire him. I'll
take my pick of the lot, and keep the names and addresses of two or three others in case he
doesn't make good."

[Sidenote: Shearing The Sheep]

Then the employer calls in the applicants as if they were so many sheep to be sheared by sharp
cross-examination. Practically every candidate enters the private office with a considerable
degree of sheepishness in his feelings, whether he tries to appear at ease or not. The employer
first eyes him in keen appraisal. He then proceeds briskly to clip off facts about him. The
man sitting behind the desk absolutely dominates the situation. He finishes his questioning,
and disposes of the applicant as he pleases.

What chance to gain the desired opportunity for service does each candidate have in such an
uncontrolled process of getting a job? He has one-sixth, or one-twelfth, or one-twentieth of
a chance for success; according to whether there are six or a dozen or a score of applicants.
Also, practically without exception, men who come seeking a position and find that it has been
filled make no further efforts to secure the opportunity for which they have applied; though
the successful candidate may not make good and the position may soon be vacant again. Your
own experience and observation have made familiar to you this common way of looking for jobs.
You know that in such cases the employer has all the advantage. Certainly the applicants who
try to gain a chance to work by this method use no salesmanship at all.

[Sidenote: The Salesman's Method]

How would a "salesman" candidate for such a situation proceed? First, he would avoid the mistake
of presenting himself as merely one of a crowd of competing applicants. He would make his particular
personality stand out. Before calling, he would do some prospecting to discover just what capabilities
were needed to fill the position advertised. Then he would plan different ways of tackling
the prospective employer. When all ready, but not before, he would go to the address.

If he should find a crowd there, he would not merge with it. He would avoid stating his business
immediately in the outer office, rather than identify himself with the other candidates waiting.
He would have a plan to get an interview later, after the dispersal of the crowd. If he should
be told then that the position had been filled, he would go right ahead with his selling program
regardless of the rebuff. He would proceed to sell the boss the idea that he was an especially
well fitted man for the job. He would assume that no one else could give such satisfaction.

Nevertheless the employer might feel that he had no place open for the latest candidate. In
this event the applicant would demonstrate with salesmanship that he was the sort of person
it is worth while for any business man to keep track of. Such a real "salesman" of his own
capabilities, if put off for the time being, would be reasonably sure to get his desired chance
the next time that employer might require such services as he could supply.

[Sidenote: A Salesman Cost Clerk]

A young acquaintance of mine wanted to secure a chance in the office of a prominent manufacturing
corporation, under a certain executive whom he regarded as the most capable business man in
the city. The company had advertised for a minor clerk in the cost department, which was managed
by the particular executive. My acquaintance called, and found seven other applicants waiting
in the general office. He did not join them, but sent in his card to the busy head of the cost
department with the penciled request, "May I see you for twenty seconds in order to make a
personal inquiry?" He was promptly admitted to the private office, and then stated his purpose
in calling. He was careful to be extremely brief.

"My name is James A. Ward. I believe, Mr. Blank, I am the man you want for the clerkship in
your cost section. In order to save your time, may I have permission to make some inquiries
of the chief clerk in that department, to learn just what qualifications are required and what
the work is? Then when you talk with me, it will be unnecessary for you to explain details."

[Sidenote: Securing A Stand-in]

Taken unawares, the executive was not prepared to refuse the courteous request. Moreover, he
was impressed with the distinctive attitude of the young man. He instructed that the candidate
be taken to the cost department. There my acquaintance made an excellent impression on the
cost accountant and several clerks. Thus in advance of any other applicant he secured a "stand-in"
with a number of persons who might influence the judgment of their chief in selecting a new
man. When he had learned the nature of the work to be done, Ward did not make the mistake of
thrusting himself again into the sanctum. Instead, he wrote a note to the executive on whom
he had called first.

     "Dear Mr. Blank:

     I know now exactly what the job in the cost department is, and that
     I can fill it. But I should like to think over the best ways to
     give you complete satisfaction, before talking with you about it.
     Please telephone to me at Main 4683 when it will be convenient for
     you to see me.

               Respectfully,

                           James A. Ward."

The young man sent his note into the private office and left at once. There now were nine applicants
on the anxious seat in the reception room. Ward did not wish to be asked to wait his turn.
He felt sure the executive would inquire of the costs manager about him, and he got away from
the office quickly so that there would be an opportunity for his chosen prospective employer
to receive the full effect of the good impression made in the cost department.

[Sidenote: Giving Opportunity A Chance to Catch Up]

My acquaintance was not at all worried lest some other candidate be chosen in his absence.
The measures of salesmanship he had taken made it practically certain that the executive would
not employ any one else before talking to him. Ward went to his room and waited for the telephone
call he was sure would come. While he sat expecting it, he used the time to think out the best
ways to approach the big man with whom he wanted to work.

The salesman candidate was summoned in about an hour. None of the applicants ahead of him had
come prepared with any definite plans. Therefore my acquaintance, who knew in advance just
what the conditions were and who had decided exactly how he would present his particular capabilities,
found it easy to secure the chance he desired. He is earning a salary of four thousand dollars
a year now, and is on his way up to a five-or-six-figure job. He will get there, "as sure as
shooting." A salesman like that cannot be kept down.

[Sidenote: Turning Failure Into Success]

I asked Ward one day what he would have done if the telephone call he expected had not come.
He replied that he would have gone to see the executive next morning anyhow, and that he had
planned carefully how he would approach him.

"I'd have sent in a note that I was ready to report some ideas I had worked out regarding his
cost-keeping as a result of the thinking I had done since learning his system. He wouldn't
have refused to see me, even if he had hired some one else meanwhile. Then I'd have told him
the very things that got me the job. They would have assured me a chance in his office, whether
he had a place for me right then or not," Ward asserted positively. "If that plan of mine hadn't
succeeded," he amended, "I'd have known he wasn't the kind of man I wanted to work for, after
all. But it turned out exactly as I knew it would," my friend ended with a grin.

Can you imagine a man of such sales ability failing to get a chance almost anywhere? Yet Ward
did only what any one, with a little forethought, might have done in the circumstances. Analyze
the selling process he used, and you will perceive that there was nothing marvelous about it--it
was all perfectly natural. Is there any good reason why you cannot employ similar methods to
gain the chance you want?

[Sidenote: Service Purpose is Essence of Salesmanship]

Let us dig into what Ward did, and find the "essence" of his salesmanship in the ways and means
he employed to assure his two "entrances," to the presence and into the mind of the executive.
He was successful principally because he made the impression that he had come with a purpose
of rendering real service to the other man. His plan of approach assured him the opportunity
he wanted because it was designed to serve the head of the department in his need for particular
capabilities. Very rarely will any one refuse a needed service. So, coming with a purpose of
service, Ward made certain in advance that he would be welcomed to his opportunity. The essence
of a successful plan of approach to the mind of any prospect is a carefully thought-out idea
of how to supply him with exactly what he lacks.

Just as the service purpose well planned is the key to the door of a man's mind; so is it the
"Open Sesame" to his presence. Plan how to bring to the attention of a prospect your real service
motive in coming to him, and how at the same time you can indicate to him your capabilities;
then you will be as sure as was my ingenious acquaintance that no office door will long remain
closed to you. You only need to use the processes of the master salesman to gain any chance
you want. You will succeed almost always in your immediate object; and if you are unsuccessful
in your first or second sales attempt you will be absolutely certain to get some other good
opportunity very soon.

[Sidenote: Make a "Vacancy" For Yourself]

It is not necessary to wait until the employer for whom you have chosen to work advertises
a job. You should plan ways and means of gaining an entrance into his business organization,
regardless of any "vacancy" he may have in mind. Plan exactly how you can serve him. Prospect
for a need that he may not realize himself. Afterward work out a particular method of showing
him clearly what he lacks, and that you are the man to fill the vacancy you yourself have discovered
and revealed to him.

An elderly man who was down on his luck and who, on account of his grey hair, had been unable
to get various kinds of work he had sought, devised a novel plan of approach that gained him
a coveted chance in a big department store. He came to the main office and reached the sales
manager without difficulty by appearing to be just a customer of the store. Then he whisked
from under his coat a pasteboard sign on which he had printed, PORTER WANTED--TO KEEP SIDEWALK
CLEAN.

"I'm after that job, sir," he explained his presence.

The sales manager waved the old man away.

"You're in the wrong place," he said curtly. "Employment office is on the top floor."

"I made the sign myself," the applicant declared, standing his ground. "The employment manager--you--no
one in this store has realized, I think, how filthy your sidewalk is. If you will come down
with me and look at it, I'm sure you will want to have it cleaned and will instruct that I
be given the chance. It is hurting your sales, as it is now. Kept clean, as I would keep it,
it would be a fine advertisement of the store's policies, and would help sales."

The old man's plan of entrance gained him his initial opportunity. He swept the sidewalk only
two weeks. Then the sales manager made a place for him behind a counter, where he is serving
customers with satisfaction to-day.

[Sidenote: Distinguishing Characteristic Of Masterly Salesmanship]

You will recall that in a previous chapter the ability to discriminate was stated as the distinguishing
characteristic of masterly salesmanship. The ability to perceive differences, and skill in
emphasizing them, will assure success in selling either ideas or goods.

The discriminative-restrictive study of anything is certain to give one a much clearer and
more definite understanding of it than could be secured by a study of its likeness to something
else. If, when describing two people, you compare their points of resemblance, you do not paint
a clear picture of either. But if you restrict your comments to the differences in their features,
you will portray a pretty definite mental image of each.

[Sidenote: "Different" Ways Win]

You have been given several examples of ways and means to gain an entrance into the presence
and into the mind of an employer. You will note that each applicant restricted his plans of
approach to methods that were entirely different from those ordinarily used in getting a job.
The purpose of the salesman in every case was to bring out the difference between him and competing
candidates for the situation. The selling processes described were successful because discriminative-restrictive
principles of skill were employed to bring to the attention and interest of the prospect the
service capabilities of the one applicant, in distinction from all others.

When you plan to gain the chance you most want, you can assure yourself of success if you will
work out in your own mind how to do something effective that is different from the methods
commonly used in attempts to gain opportunities, and that will impress your real service purpose
in applying for your chance.

First think out clearly what the other man needs. Distinguish exactly in your thoughts between
what is lacking in his organization, and what he already has. Then when planning to gain an
entrance to the presence and the mind of your prospect, restrict your thoughts to ways and
means of indicating and suggesting that you know precisely what service is wanted. Prepare
to show him that you don't have merely a vague, indefinite idea of a job like other jobs. Plan
to indicate that you are not just about the same as ordinary men who apply for positions. Be
ready to make the first impression that you are a particular man with individual ideas and
distinctive capability. If you can prove that, you will be certain to gain your chance through
good salesmanship of the true idea of your qualifications.

[Sidenote: Plan Approach To Fit the Particular Man]

When planning his approach, the master salesman combines his earlier work of preparation and
his prospecting. He re-organizes in his mind all the information he previously has gained for
his own benefit. Now he reviews his knowledge from the standpoint of the prospect. He plans
to use what he has learned in the ways that seem to him most likely to fit the mentality, impulses,
feelings, conditions, and real needs of the man he wants to influence to accept his proposition.

Having thus planned to fit his knowledge to an individual prospect, the skillful salesman arranges
constructively in his own mind particular, definite points of contact with the mind of this
one other man. He plans restrictively. That is, he works out only the approach ideas that are
likely to fit the characteristics of the certain man on whom he intends to call. He also discards
ways and means that are not especially adapted to this prospect.

[Sidenote: Different Effects on Different People]

Of course the master salesman purposes to make the best possible impression always; but he
recognizes that words, tones, and actions which would create a favorable impression on one
prospect might make an opposite impression on another. For instance, a jolly manner and expression
help in gaining an entrance to the friendly consideration of a good-natured man, but would
be likely to affect a cynical dyspeptic disagreeably.

The intelligence and skill used by the master professional salesman of goods in planning ways
and means to gain his sales chances, can be used in the same way just as effectively by you
when planning your approach to the presence and mind of any one related to your opportunities
for success. Before you apply for the job you want, or before you present your qualifications
for promotion or an increased salary, make in advance a discriminative selection of ideas that
will be likely to prove most effective in accomplishing your purpose with your employer prospect.
Then, when you interview him, restrict your presentation of your case to these discriminatively
selected strong points of your particular capability.

[Sidenote: Contrast Selfish and Service Purposes]

You should suggest contrasts between yourself and ordinary job seekers or employees. When you
present your qualifications for a promotion or for a raise, you will be sure of succeeding
if you are able to get across to your employer's mind the true idea that your services in the
future may be different and deserving of more reward than the services for which you have previously
been paid.

When an employee asks for more money because other men are being paid higher wages in the same
office, or because he has prospects of better pay elsewhere, or even because of increased costs
of living, he makes an unfavorable impression on the man from whom he requests a raise. His
purpose in presenting his claims is evidently selfish. He appears to be looking out only for
Number One, and the employer naturally looks out for his Number One when responding. By using
methods that suggest a wholly selfish purpose, the applicant decreases his chances of gaining
what he desires. Yet most employees ask for raises in just this way.

[Sidenote: The Quid Pro Quo]

Contrast the impression made when an employee approaches the boss with a carefully planned
demonstration of his capability for increased service, as the basis of a proposal that he be
promoted or given a higher salary. He comes into "the old man's" office with an attitude that
produces a favorable impression. When he explains exactly what he is doing, or can do if permitted,
that is deserving of more reward than he has been receiving, he presents the idea of a "quid
pro quo" to his "prospect," just as the salesman of goods presents the idea of value in fair
exchange for price.

If the service now being rendered by the employee, or the new service he wishes permission
to render, is really worth more money to the employer, the applicant for a raise is practically
certain to get it, provided he has chosen a fair boss. And, of course, a good salesman of himself
does not go to work in the first place until he has prospected the squareness and fair-mindedness
of the employer.

[Sidenote: The Saleswoman Secretary]

A young woman was employed in a secretarial capacity shortly before the world war began. In
the course of the next two years her salary was voluntarily doubled by her employer. But her
necessary expenses increased in proportion; so she was able to save no more money (in purchasing
power) than it would have been possible for her to put in the bank if there had been no increase
either in her earnings or in the cost of living. That is, if the war had not happened, and
she had continued at work for two years without any raise at all, she would have been practically
as well off at the end of that time as she actually found herself with her doubled pay.

As the months of her employment passed, she had made herself progressively much more valuable
to her employer. She was rendering him now a very large amount of high-grade service. But in
effect she was being paid no more money than when she was engaged. The young woman knew her
employer intended to be fair with her. Undoubtedly he felt he had treated her well by voluntarily
doubling her salary in two years. If she had gone to him and had asked for more pay in the
manner of the ordinary applicant for a raise; if she had stated her request without skillfully
showing the difference between actual conditions and his misconception of the facts; she likely
would have made an unfavorable impression. But she was a good saleswoman of her ideas. She
made a discriminative-restrictive plan of approach to gain her object, and used first-class
selling skill to get into her employer's mind a true conception of her worth to him.

[Sidenote: Opening the Boss's Eyes]

She compiled from her budget the exact amount of increased living costs. The comparative figures
of two years showed that her necessary expenses were approximately double what they had been
before the war. Then she used the percentage ratio to demonstrate in neat typewriting that
approximately all of her salary increases had gone to some one else, and had not remained in
her hands. On another sheet she typed a summary of the most important business responsibilities
she carried for her employer at present, but which she had not been qualified nor trusted to
bear when she was first engaged. The secretary brought the two exhibits to the desk of the
business man, laid them before him with brief explanations of what they represented, and concluded
with a simple personal statement which she worded most carefully.

[Sidenote: The Approach That Commands Respect]

"Mr. Blank, I know you mean to be perfectly square with me. So I want you to realize what has
been the actual purchasing power of the salary I have received, and what I have done with it.
This percentage slip shows that my additional pay was all used for additional expenses. I have
been unable to increase my savings. I really have been paid only for the same kind of services
I was able to render when you employed me. Now I know how to do all these additional things."
She pointed to the list typed on the second sheet of paper. "In effect, I haven't been paid
anything for them, you see. I am sure you have not appreciated the difference between the increased
service I have rendered, and the buying power of the raises you have meant to give me but which
have all gone to some one else. Please study these lists. I believe you will feel that I am
earning a larger salary and really am worth more to you than two years ago."

Her "different" approach gained the secretary not only an immediate increase of fifty per cent
in her salary; but five hundred dollars back pay that her fair-minded employer was convinced
she should have received.

Such an approach commands the respect of the prospect. It is the approach of an equal, not
of an inferior. So greatly does it reduce the chances of failure that the salesman is practically
certain to succeed in his purpose.

[Sidenote: Initiative Is Yours]

Recognize that the initiative in gaining your chance should be in your own hands. Do not wait
for any opportunity to come to you. "Go to it." Go prepared to control the situation you have
planned to create, but be ready also to meet unexpected possibilities. The object of the master
salesman in his preparation is not only to make the selling process easy, but also to meet
any difficulties he can foresee that may arise to block him. He is ready to take full advantage
of favorable conditions he has planned to meet, and is equally ready for turn-downs. If you
use the discriminative-restrictive method to gain admission to the presence and into the mind
of your prospect, it is altogether unlikely that you will be denied the chance you seek. Nevertheless
go loaded for refusals. Be ready with the quick come-back to every turn-down you can imagine.

A clerk in a real estate office wanted an opportunity to prove that he was capable of selling.
Times were very hard, and the firm had flatly announced that it would not promote anybody or
grant any raises. But this clerk, who had made up his mind to secure a salesman's job, carefully
prepared a plan of approach before he went to the president's office. His ostensible purpose
was to get a raise; so he had worked out an ingenious reply to every objection he could imagine
his employer might make to paying him more money. But he really wanted a different job, not
just a larger salary.

[Sidenote: Come-backs To Turn Downs]

He tackled the "old man" at a selected time when he knew the president would not be busy. One
after another, in quick succession, he came back at every reason given for turning him down
on his application for additional pay. Finally the cornered employer stated frankly that the
clerk was entitled to a raise, but as frankly said it could not be granted because of general
business conditions. The applicant, having gained his immediate object by proving his worth,
then switched to the second part of his plan of approach.

"I didn't expect more money for my clerical work, but haven't I proved to you by the way I
handle turn-downs that I possess the qualifications of a salesman? It would be just as hard
for a prospect to say 'No' to me as it has been for you. I don't want a raise. I want a chance
at selling real estate. Give me a drawing account equal to my present salary, and I'll earn
it in commissions. I'm going to make it hard for anybody to get away from me after I tackle
him to buy a lot or a house."

Of course the clerk got his chance.

[Sidenote: Touch Tender Spots]

Another important detail of good salesmanship in planning to approach opportunities to succeed,
is touching the tender spots of the subordinates in the office of the big man you want to reach.
Also plan to touch tender spots in him. You can do it with a courteous bow, or with the tone
of respect. Employ the personal appeal--that is, make contact between your personality and
the personality of the other party you desire to influence. There is no better way than by
manifesting your real friendliness. One who comes as a friend is able to feel and to appear
at ease. The bearing of perfect ease makes the excellent impression of true equality in manhood,
and helps very greatly in gaining for one a chance to succeed.

[Sidenote: Strength and Resourcefulness]

Sometimes self-respect will require you to use very forceful methods to secure the opportunity
you desire. A snippy clerk may refuse you admittance to the private office. The big man himself
may send out word that he will not receive you, or perhaps he will attempt to dismiss you brusquely
after you are granted an audience. So be prepared to manifest your strength, as well as your
resourcefulness, should such force of personality be needed in any imaginable situation. If
you have planned exactly how you will show your strength, you will make the impression when
you manifest it actually that you are strong in fact, and not just a bluffer. Often you can
prove your strength by looking another person fearlessly in the eye.

[Sidenote: Four Essentials of Good Approach]

It is evident from what has already been outlined that to make a successful approach one needs
particular qualifications. There are four essentials: First, mental alertness in perceiving;
Second, good memory for retaining the impressions received; Third, constructive imagination
in planning the approach; Fourth, friendly courage in securing an audience and in making the
actual approach to the mind of the other man.

All your senses must be wide awake if you are to perceive every point of difference that can
be used effectively to sell your particular ideas in contrast with ordinary ideas.

It is necessary not only that you see distinctions clearly, but that you be able to remember
them instantly, when you need to use them in selling your ideas.

You cannot make any certainly successful plan to deal with a future possible chance unless
you cultivate your power of imagination by working out in advance every conceivable situation
that may be anticipated.

And all your other capabilities in gaining your chance will be of no avail if your purpose
meets resistance; unless you are equipped beforehand with friendly courage, the kind of real
bravery that is likable.

[Sidenote: Genius]

It is highly important to your success that you be able to make the impression that you are
a person of genius. Genius, analyzed, is no more than the exceptional application of natural
ability to doing work. Application demands complete attention. Attention leads to discrimination.
Discrimination concentrates, of course, upon the recognition of differences. And differentiation
depends principally upon sense training in alertness. Unless a sense is very keen, it cannot
make distinctions sharply. So we get back to the primary necessity of developing all your senses
and of keeping them wide awake to perceive and act upon chances for success.

[Sidenote: Memory]

Your discriminative power of perception will be well-nigh valueless to you, however, if you
are unable to recall whenever needed, all the points of difference possible to utilize in your
salesmanship. Therefore you should train your memory. We will not enlarge just now upon this
factor of the process of making success certain; because in previous chapters and also in the
companion book, "The Selling Process," the right methods of developing a good memory are indicated.

[Sidenote: Constructive Imagination]

The value of constructive imagination, not only in planning your entrance to the physical presence
and into the mind of the prospect, but all through your salesmanship, cannot be over emphasized.
If you are to gain your chance with another man, you must be able to see imaginary future situations,
through his eyes. In advance of your interview it is necessary that you imagine yourself in
his place when a caller like yourself is received.

Some so-called "realists" condemn imagination. They say it is apt to make men visionary and
unable to recognize and meet successfully the every-day problems of life. But the big men of
finance, industry, and politics have become pre-eminent because of the fertility and productiveness
of their imaginations. What the "hard-headed" man condemns is not imagination, but inability
to use it constructively. He deprecates imagination not carried into action. Constructive imagination,
however, has always been man's greatest aid in making progress.

[Sidenote: Four Ways to Re-construct Ideas]

In order to develop your constructive imagination most effectively you must follow certain
laws with regard to the re-adjustment of parts, qualities, or attributes of things you know.
You can re-construct an idea; (1) by merely enlarging an old mental image; or (2) by diminishing
the size of the previous image; or (3) by separating a composite image into its parts; or (4)
by imaging each part as a whole.

Let us illustrate how these laws of constructive imagination might be applied effectively in
planning the approach to a prospective employer.

[Sidenote: Using Constructive Imagination]

He perhaps has an idea that the possibilities of the job you want are limited. You should plan
to enlarge the picture of your possible service and to show that you could do more things than
he is likely to expect of you.

So you can diminish his idea of the salary you want, by planning to show him that in proportion
to the enlarged service you purpose to render, the pay you ask is not really big.

In order to make him appreciate better just what your contemplated job means, you can separate
it into the different functions you will perform. The mere fact that the job has a great many
parts will be effective in impressing him with the idea that it is worth more pay.

Then you can take each part or function of your job and show it as a whole opportunity. For
instance, if you are a correspondent, you might demonstrate just how letters of different length
could be spaced on the stationery to develop a uniformly artistic impression that would help
to get more business by mail.

All your imaginative powers can be made to work together to accomplish the one certain result
you desire. "Constructive imagination is always characterized by a definite purpose, which
never is lost sight of until the image is complete."

[Sidenote: Friendly Courage]

Thousands of men have failed, after getting right up to the door of opportunity, because they
had to turn away in order to screw up their courage. No one can hope to succeed if he lacks
the quality of bravery necessary to gain chances.

True bravery is not cockiness or swaggering. It is simply a kindly self-confidence that makes
no impression of a threat to others, and gives no suggestion that the man who has it feels
there is the slightest reason for being afraid of anybody else.

[Sidenote: No One To Fear]

Really, if you have planned just how to approach each prospect with a true service purpose,
there is no one in the world you need to fear. Lack of courage is usually due to lack of preparation
for what might be anticipated. Sometimes a man is fearful of another because of his own consciousness
that he has come to that other man principally for the purpose of taking something away from
him. This consciousness causes a guilty feeling, which undermines courage. If through imaginative
planning you know in advance about what to expect, and if you feel your intentions toward your
prospect are absolutely square, you will not be afraid to seek your chance anywhere. Your courage
will not ooze.

[Sidenote: "Right is Might"]

True courage is based on a permanent consciousness of right feeling and thinking, coupled with
the sense of power that is expressed in the maxim, "Right is might." Such courage can be developed
by the discriminative-restrictive process with absolute certainty, as is explained in the companion
book, "The Selling Process."

[Sidenote: Big Mental Outlook]

Our study of plans of approach would be incomplete without emphasizing the prime necessity
for a big mental outlook. To assure your success in gaining the chances you want it is necessary
that you vision imaginary situations of the future and fit into them the facts you know now
or may be able to learn.

However, you cannot develop maximum skill in gaining your chances if you are unable to learn
anything except through personal experience. Personal experience is valuable, no doubt. But
you must develop the ability to think out the significance of other men's experiences, and
must be capable of applying what you learn to your own imaginary use.

The big view-point, the ability to learn from observation as well as from experience, will
develop in you broad and varied conceptions of other men. It will make you tolerant of characteristics
that differ widely from your own. You will respect the view-point of the other fellow, and
will recognize that he may be perfectly fair in his attitude and opinions, however widely he
may differ from your ideas. Your big mental outlook should make you feel friendly toward him
as your prospect, and you can make the approach of courage that is friendly.

[Sidenote: The Sentry And the Password]

Perhaps you will meet opposition to your entrance when you come to gain your chance. It is
likely that some sentry in the outer office of your prospect, or the sentry of his own mind
when you reach his presence, may halt you at the portal of opportunity with the challenge,
"Who goes there?"

Your answer should be spoken confidently, "A friend."

The test will then be made by the sentry, "Advance, friend, and give the countersign."

The secret pass-word to Opportunity is, "Service."

Prove you know the countersign, speak it with courage, and you will find yourself no longer
an object of suspicion, no longer regarded as a possible enemy.

You have nothing to fear if you plan to approach your prospect as a true friend who has come
with a carefully thought out, intelligent offer of service that he lacks.

CHAPTER VII

Knowledge of Other Men

[Sidenote: Unlocking The Other Man's Heart And Mind]

We have seen how you can make certain of gaining your introductory chance. Now we are to consider
the first step in the most effective use of this opportunity to begin building your own success.

Let us say that you have chosen a particular man as the sort of employer with whom you want
to work. Your prospecting has convinced you that in his business you have found the right market
for your present services and a promising field for the future big success you are ambitious
to achieve. Therefore you wish to sell him a true idea of your best capabilities. We will assume
that you have passed the threshold of his private office, but your object in calling upon him
has not yet entered his thoughts and feelings.

Before you state the ideas and service intention you have brought, make certain of the best
possible reception from him. You need to take every practicable precaution against being rebuffed.
You want to assure yourself of a welcome. Having gained this chance to start the sale of your
capabilities, it is of vital importance not to take the next step in the selling process blindly,
lest you stumble. Hence you should size up the other man before you announce your purpose in
calling. What you may learn from reading his character correctly will help you to gain admittance
into his mind for your ideas. It should assure a welcome from his heart for your sincere desire
to serve him.

[Sidenote: Skeleton Key Unavailing]

Golden opportunities to succeed in a particular business cannot be unlocked with a skeleton
key of knowledge about human nature. Knowledge of all men supplies merely the shaft and general
shape of the key blank, which must then be notched and filed to fit the characteristics of
the individual whose mind and heart you wish to open for the admission of your ideas and feelings.
Unless you can get into that one mind and that one heart with your service purpose, you will
be shut out from the opportunity you want. It is important that you know the traits of men
in general, of course. Such knowledge, however, should be supplemented by a specific and true
conception of the particular man through whom you hope to reach your chance to succeed.

Do not confuse in your present thoughts the process of prospecting the characteristics of a
man before meeting him, with the later process of sizing him up at the time of the interview.
It is highly important to accumulate in advance as much knowledge as possible of your prospect's
individual traits. But what you learned about your chosen future employer before you gained
the chance to present your ideas to him in his office should be used merely as a guide in sizing
him up on the spot.

[Sidenote: Stop, Look, Listen]

Take nothing for granted now. Through your personal, specific observation either confirm or
disprove every item of information that has come to you from other people previous to meeting
this man face to face. Your informants may or may not have had correct conceptions of his characteristics.
It would be unwise, even unsafe, for you to rely implicitly on their judgment of him. You need
to be certain you know him as he really is; so that you can present your purpose with the confidence
a skilled salesman feels when he is sure he understands the principal traits of the prospect
he is addressing. In reaching this man you have gained your first chance. You cannot afford
to risk losing it by haste. Do not advance farther in the selling process until you have made
certain of the ground you are to tread. It is very bad salesmanship to begin introducing ideas
and feelings to a mind and heart that are unknown to you except from hearsay.

"But," you say, "I'm not a mind reader. And I can't look into another man's heart."

True. Yet you should be able to read the signs of his thoughts; which he manifests in his words,
tones, and acts. And you need not see into his heart to know what it contains; since fundamentally
all men are much alike at heart. Just look clearly into your own heart at its best. You will
find there the basic emotions and feelings that civilized men have in common everywhere.

[Sidenote: Character Analysis by Types Not Reliable]

Character analysis by "types" is unreliable. I believe as little in phrenology as in palm-reading.
I have directed thousands of men in business. Personal experience has proved to me that the
permanent structure of a particular human body is not an invariably true index to the characteristics
of the inner, or ego man who owns that body.

He has had no control over the color of his hair or eyes. He cannot reshape the bones of his
face, nor alter the bumps on his head. To believe that such permanent structural details of
the "natural" outer man determine or denote the peculiar aptitudes of the inner man is to credit
the exploded doctrine of fore-ordination.

Therefore, when you have gained the chance to present your capabilities for sale to a chosen
prospect with whom you believe you will have the best opportunities to succeed, and when you
are swiftly shaping your presentation plans to fit his personality, don't size up merely the
factors of his make-up with which he was born. You will be apt to mistake his true character
if you have come to his office with the delusion that the blonde type of man is fundamentally
different in nature from the brunette type. Get out of your head any misconception that a man
is foredoomed to practically certain failure in a particular career because he has a big nose,
sloping brow, and receding chin; and that another man with a snub nose, bulging forehead, and
protruding jaw is destined almost surely to succeed if he selects a certain vocation. No "mind
man" with a normal, healthy body is limited in his possibilities of success by being born with
red, or black, or tow hair; or because the bones of his head happen to be shaped in a particular
way. The ego is the master, not the slave, of the body.

[Sidenote: True Signs of Character]

The true signs of character are to be read only in the words, tones, and movements of a man--and
in his muscle structure as he has developed it or has left it undeveloped. We already have
seen in a previous chapter how a mind center and its co-ordinated set of muscles develop each
other. So the positive characteristics of the inner man are revealed clearly by the muscle
structure built up by his habits of thinking and feeling and action. On the other hand, his
deficiency in certain mental and emotional development is indicated negatively by his lack
of the muscle structure that naturally would be co-ordinate with such development.

The relation of muscular development to mental development, as explained in an earlier chapter,
suggests the one sure way to judge a man's habits of thinking. Observe discriminatingly his
various muscle structures, and his muscle activities in detail. The development of certain
sets of muscles proves a co-ordinate development of the mind centers most directly connected
with these muscle structures. Similarly the mental action of a man is indicated by his physical
manifestations with his muscles in movements.

Hence if you learn to read the mental significance of particular muscle structures and of particular
muscle actions, you will be able to size up both the habits of thought (individual characteristics)
of a man, and what he happens to be thinking at the time you come to present your services
or ideas for sale.

[Sidenote: Recapitulation]

Before going on with our study of the subject of this chapter, let us summarize the preceding
pages to make sure that we know thoroughly the somewhat difficult but very important ground
we have gone over thus far.

You chose a certain man as your prospective employer because you believe that if you succeed
in associating yourself with him you will have the best opportunities to achieve your ambition.
You are now standing in his presence. You need to size up his true character quickly in order
that you may be sure of presenting your capabilities in the particular way that is likely to
be most effective with him. You wish to impress this one man with right ideas of your qualities
and their value. You want him to perceive that he lacks and requires just such services as
you purpose to offer for sale. You realize it is unsafe for you to jump at conclusions about
his characteristics. You pause briefly to size him up before presenting your proposition, rather
than to proceed blindly in ignorance of his habits of thought, and with no clue to what he
happens to be thinking at the time you call. You must know all it is possible to find out on
the spot regarding him.

[Sidenote: What Has He Done with His Birthright?]

You cannot be certain of his characteristics if you judge him solely by what Nature forced
on him. But you can be absolutely sure if you size him up by observing what he has done with
his birthright, and if you are then able to interpret correctly what you perceive. Your prospect
has had nothing to do with the shape and size of his head. His fair or dark complexion is inherited.
He is utterly unable to control the color of his hair or eyes. His muscle structure, however,
is a development that he has accomplished himself. If he has a firm jaw, the jaw muscles, not
the jaw bone, signify the characteristics of a firm mentality. Judge the physical man he has
made by his habits of living under the government of his mind. Disregard such physical details
of his appearance as he cannot help. The made man is the true image of the ego. It is this
ego of your prospective employer you need to know, for your chance to succeed in your purpose
with him depends on the inner man you must convince and persuade. Therefore restrict your size-up
to the discriminative observation of the muscle signs of his mind habits and mind actions.

[Sidenote: Recall Burbank Method]

Recall now, or re-read the second chapter of this book. There you studied the principles of
restrictive-discriminative growth--the Burbank method of developing selected qualities of manhood.
That chapter related to your cultivation of particular characteristics within yourself. The
same principles will guide you with equal certainty in acquiring knowledge of other men.

Every mental characteristic of your prospect about which you need to know has physical indications
that can be perceived, and translated into certain knowledge of details of his character. You
have studied the co-relation of your mind and body in mutual development. You may be sure that
similar processes of development have produced like effects in the case of the man you have
come to see. You know exactly how to grow particular qualities within yourself, by using your
muscles to develop corresponding mind centers and vice versa. You can read another man's mind
by observing his muscle structure and muscle action, and by then interpreting the mental significance
of what you perceive.

[Sidenote: Men are Alike At Heart, But Differ in Mind]

To repeat and emphasize again what already has been said about knowing the heart of another
man--you need but look into your own breast to find there the finest basic characteristics
of the human heart in general. As Kipling wrote, "The Colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady are sisters
under their skins." All men are fundamentally alike at the bottoms of their hearts, however
much they may differ in the individual traits they have grafted upon their common root of human
nature.

So when you are sizing up your prospect, you should comprehend that the most effective way
to get to his heart is through such an appeal as would reach the heart of every man. Know your
own heart surely, then, in order to be certain of knowing his. All human hearts respond similarly
to manifestations of courage, nobility, love, faith, honor, and the like. We laugh and cry
at the same humor and pathos. Our feelings are closely akin. We differ from one another only
in our minds. Our individual, acquired habits of thought affect but the degrees of our several
heart responses to the gamut of fundamental emotional appeals.

[Sidenote: Exhaustive Prolonged Analysis Unnecessary]

Knowledge of another man, then, involves first, comprehension that he is like every other man
in his emotions, and unlike all other men in the way he thinks. To a trained observer his habits
of thought are clearly indicated by his muscle structure and muscle action. Exhaustive prolonged
analysis is unnecessary. You can learn to read quickly the mental significance of the comparatively
small number of details of muscle structure and action that constitute a fairly complete index
to his character. Then you will be able to judge with certainty practically all the traits
of which you need to be sure in order to make the most effective presentation of your services
for sale to this particular man.

[Sidenote: Value of Size-up]

The value of such a dependable size-up can scarcely be over-estimated. It is not easy to gain
the initial chance to present your capabilities to the one man with whom you have chosen to
be associated. But it would be tremendously harder to win a second opportunity to sell your
services after failing the first time. By sizing him up aright while you are presenting your
qualifications for his consideration, you will be able to avoid making unfavorable impressions.
You can also adapt your salesmanship to creating the best possible impression of your capabilities
and their fitness to his *especial needs*.

[Sidenote: The Gruff Reception]

Sometimes a man seeking to gain the big chance that he believes would open the door to success
fails to secure his opportunity because he is disconcerted by a gruff reception that he misconstrues
as personal to him. He wrongly interprets natural self-defense as a sign of habitual crabbedness.

A big man often thinks he is "hunted" by people who want to make him the prey of their own
purposes. The employer you have chosen as the means of reaching the goal of your ambition may
feel suspicious of your object in approaching him. He is likely to assume an attitude of extreme
reserve, or even of icy indifference. Possibly his manner will be curt and sharp. Size up such
a reception as just his way of protecting himself against impositions. His treatment of you
is merely a superficial manifestation of the instinct for self-preservation. It indicates nothing
more than that he is wary of any one who calls on him with an unknown purpose.

His object in being cold or brusque is to get rid of people who might annoy him or waste his
time. He would not assume his repelling pose if he knew you had come with a purpose of true
service, after full preparation of yourself and your selling plans to interest him. Though
he does not realize it yet, you will neither pester him nor fritter away his precious minutes.

[Sidenote: Melting Ice And Smoothing Roughness]

Therefore if your size-up convinces you that the cold, brusque manner is only assumed, you
need not deal with it as if it were characteristic. It indicates no more than the habit of
wariness. You should proceed confidently with your selling process, undeterred by the bearing
of your prospect. Do not attempt to mollify his assumed harshness. It will take but a few moments
for you to sell him the idea that you have brought him something he really needs. When he first
glimpses your service purpose, his icy pose will begin to melt and his rough tones will be
smoothed.

A great public-utility corporation with thousands of branch offices throughout the United States
had as its purchasing agent for many years an old gorgon. He was "a holy terror" to new salesmen,
but became a staunch customer when once his confidence was deservedly gained. And every employee
in the office of this tartar loved him for his true kindness of heart.

[Sidenote: Don't Flinch Or Retreat]

You may have occasion to call on such an eccentric big man. If you are rebuffed fiercely, don't
let it "get your goat." He can have no possible reason for disliking you personally, especially
before he comprehends your purpose in coming to him. So disregard his ferocious pose. Though
he may treat you as an unwelcome intruder, proceed calmly to the statement of your business.
You know that your intention to render him a true service justifies you in taking his time.
Therefore his assumed fierce manner should be powerless to disconcert you.

Do not retreat from a chosen prospective employer; do not even flinch from him, however ill-tempered
and repellant he may appear. You cannot possibly lose so much by standing your ground as you
would forfeit by running away from this chance to demonstrate your salesmanship. Countless
thousands of men have failed because at the first sign of antagonism they surrendered even
more than they might have lost if they had been utterly beaten after the hardest kind of a
fight for victory. They gave up without a struggle, not only all their chances for success,
but their self-respect as well.

Suppose the man you have selected as your future employer does snap at you viciously when you
call on him; his ferocity signifies no more than that you must approach and handle him carefully.
Your prospecting and your size-up should have convinced you that he is not in fact the crab
he tries to appear. Real, thorough cranks are so rare they can be considered as non-existent.
It is safe to conclude that any man who acts as if he were sore all the way through all the
time is just acting. Ignore the irrascibility of the "Everett Trues" you meet. Superficial,
assumed indications will not help you to comprehend the inner man you want to influence. Restrict
your size-up to the signs of that inner man. While the old gorgon you face is brow-beating
you, he may be planning in the back of his head an act of gentle kindness to some one. If he
is habitually kind, there will be physical indications of that characteristic; in his tones
and acts if not in his words. Look for these signs beneath his harsh manner, which is merely
a disguise he has put on. "Everett True" behaves like a domineering tyrant, but he really is
characterized by an acute sensitiveness to what is right and just.

[Sidenote: Judge By Unconscious Appearance And Actions]

When sizing up a man, depend principally upon details of his appearance and actions. Translate
whatever you see or hear into definite discriminative judgments regarding him. His muscle structure
and movements indicate certain traits. Of course you should also observe and size up the significance
of the words and tones he uses. But a man employs his speech with the conscious intention of
making impressions. Therefore it is not safe to rely on a size-up based on what he says. Your
prospect may be using his words and tones to hide, rather than to reveal, his inner self.

However, if you know how to separate and classify details of muscle structure and action, you
can depend safely on specific conclusions based on these indications. The muscle structure
of a man is the result of his habits of living, or of his predominant characteristics. He builds
it up unconsciously and is unable to disguise it. It can be interpreted as certain proof that
he has particular traits. Most of his movements, too, are made without his realizing exactly
what they denote of his character and present thoughts. He just "acts natural." Therefore if
you read indications of the inner man by analytically observing his physique and actions, you
will gain reliable information about him. He will not know that he is revealing his traits
and what he is thinking.

[Sidenote: Your Opinions About People]

From your earliest childhood to this moment you have been forming first-hand opinions of other
people by observing and interpreting their words, tones, and movements. Sizing up men is not
a new process to you. But in order to be a certainly successful salesman of yourself you should
observe more intelligently and discriminatively hereafter. Instead of making up your mind about
people without knowing just how or why you arrive at your judgments, classify your intuitions
scientifically. Know the reasons for your opinions. You can be sure about the conclusions you
reach as a result of your specific, exact observation of details. The study and analysis of
words, tones, and acts, coupled with a little painstaking practice, will make you an expert
judge of other men.

[Sidenote: Study Character Unobserved]

Do not seem to make an effort to observe the person you are sizing up, for that would impress
him disagreeably. Without indicating that you are watching him, mentally note and interpret
his muscle structure, his manner of speaking, his gestures, the rate of his physical activity,
the way his actions respond to his ideas, the type and tensity of his movements. Each item
you analyze and translate should indicate to you clearly some fact about the inner man.

Of course you will not be able to read your prospect thoroughly in the first few moments after
you meet him. It is possible to make only a partial size-up then. No one would reveal all his
characteristics in such a brief time. But each indication you perceive and interpret correctly
will aid you to attribute to him certain other, related traits. For instance, if the actions
of a man indicate the characteristic of evasion, you may judge safely that he lacks courage,
the highest sense of honor, some of the elements of perfect squareness and trustworthiness.
If he has a habit of under-estimating or "knocking," and manifests this characteristic in something
he says or does, you may feel certain he is not an idealist. He is likely to be pretty "practical"
in his views, and cannot be won by appeals to rosy visions.

[Sidenote: Elements of Character are Consistent]

Analysis of a man's true character usually shows that its elements are thoroughly consistent.
A human being is not a bundle of contradictions, but an aggregation of likenesses. Every man
differs from every other man; yet, generally speaking, one element of his character is not
apt to differ radically from another detail of himself. There are exceptions, but in most cases
the seeming contradictions in an individual are only apparent opposites. Supposed inconsistencies
cause surprise because the true fundamental traits of the person observed are not discerned.
The outer man often seems to contradict himself. But nearly always the inner man is consistent
in his various characteristics. This is the reason why your size-up should be restricted to
discriminative observation of indications of the ego.

[Sidenote: Application of Theory]

Perhaps you have been thinking, "The theory seems to be all right, but exactly how is it applied?"
So we shall turn our attention next to specific details of sizing up the characteristics of
the inner man. We shall see just how his thoughts and feelings may be discerned at a particular
time.

We assumed previously that you have called upon the man to whom you want to sell your services.
You believe the way to your success lies through association with him. Your faculties of observation
should be trained to size up at a glance whatever traits are suggested by his bearing, his
clothes, his manner, his actions, his surroundings. Whether he is standing or sitting, it is
possible for you to perceive and interpret his pose and poise. You can learn much from his
walk if he steps forward to greet you. His handshake may tell volumes about his true character.
The different ways that men clasp palms are especially significant of their individual traits.
You should have a scientific knowledge of handshakes.

[Sidenote: Traits Suggested By Nods]

Should your prospect merely nod on your entrance, note discriminatively the movement he makes.
There are many kinds of nods. The quick, sharp tipping of the head indicates unhesitating,
clean-cut decisions. Such judgments on the spur of the moment are not always right, but they
are apt to be pretty conclusive. Irregular, jerky nods are signs of irritability, of rash or
very impulsive decisions, and often of unreasoning prejudice. The nod made directly forward
signifies frankness, dignity, and straight thinking. The tilting of the head a little to one
side suggests a habit of indirectness and a tendency to "stall."

[Sidenote: Learn to Analyze Smiles]

How much of a man's character is illumined by his smile! Ability to analyze smiles correctly
will enable you to size up the dissembled traits of character behind the false smile. Such
analytical ability will also show you how to turn to your best advantage the smile of true
friendliness.

It is possible to judge from the physical aspect, from the facial expressions, from the movements,
and from the voice of a man whether he is nervous or phlegmatic, active or passive, healthy
or lacking in vigor and strength. A skillful size-up will determine that he is either eccentric
or well balanced mentally, that he is thrifty or extravagant, that he is disposed to take comprehensive
views or is inclined to give undue attention to trifles and details. He will indicate to a
keen observer real intellect or mere intelligence. His emotions also may be read. He reveals
himself as generous or selfish; as an optimist or as a skeptic. He shows that he is responsive
to heart appeals or is hard hearted, moral or immoral, artistic or lacking in appreciation
of art, cultured or boorish.

[Sidenote: Discriminative Restrictive Process]

To know the significance of your prospect's different words, tones, and movements--the only
means he has for the expression of his ideas and feelings, just apply to his case whatever
you have learned in studying yourself. Adapt your previous discriminative knowledge to the
prospect you are sizing up. Restrict your conclusions about him to the significance of details
you observe in his appearance, actions, and speech.

After considerable practice in sizing up you will become familiar with the indications of many
different traits. But in most cases it will be sufficient if you can observe swiftly and interpret
in a flash only a few of the commonest character signs. We will touch briefly upon some of these.

[Sidenote: Facial Muscles]

Tense jaw muscles, whether large or small, denote the characteristic of persistence. But loose,
flabby cheek muscles do not necessarily prove the habit of over-eating, or of sensuality. They
may mean that the man who has them does not habitually allow his feelings to show in his face.
When the muscles of facial expression are flabby they prove only that they are slightly used.
Therefore when you encounter a man with loose cheeks read his characteristics from other muscle-structure
signs, and from his actions. Do not misjudge the heavy face as a sign of grossness.

[Sidenote: Courage And Bluff]

If a man holds his head up easily, and moves it in this upright position without stiffness
or effort, you may be sure his back neck and shoulder muscles are strongly developed. Such
strong development suggests that he is courageous, for these muscles are directly co-ordinated
with the mind center of bravery. Therefore the head and shoulders easily held back and up;
not a high chest, signify courage. The bulging chest often indicates no more than pouter-pigeon
bluff temporarily put on.

[Sidenote: Indications Of Intellect And Power]

A man's high chest, however, is a sign that his predominant characteristics are intellectual;
because his chest has been developed by the student's habit of upper-lung breathing. The nerves
running from the upper part of the lungs are directly connected with the brain centers of intellect.
On the contrary the nerves that lead from the lower portions of the lungs center first in the
plexus through which are manifested the vital emotions and the emotions of sex. Hence the man
who breathes deeply by habit indicates a great deal of vitality and has marked "he-man" traits.
He is not of the intellectual type so markedly as he is a man of power. The man who breathes
only from the upper part of his lungs is not a man of power, but may have a fine intellect.

[Sidenote: Significance Of Postures]

The postures of the body are significant of characteristics. If your prospect stands with his
feet wide apart and his arms folded conspicuously across his high-held chest, he probably has
a habit of bluffing. His widely spread feet indicate that he has to prop himself in that physical
posture; so it is unnatural to him. Similarly he has had to prop himself in his mental posture.
Push your ideas hard and he will lose his mental balance; just as he would lose his physical
balance if you were to jolt him. He is obliged to prop himself. He is bluffing. You can make
him quit. The folded arms and expanded chest of the bluffer mean no more than the high-arched
back of a cat. Stroke "Tom" soothingly, and he stops bristling. Stroke the human bluffer tactfully
with persuasion, and he will not act pugnacious for long.

[Sidenote: The Balanced Body]

But if, when making a statement, your prospect stands or walks about easily with his feet close
together; if he balances his body without difficulty or artificial postures--it is certain
that he has a good deal of determination in his make-up. You cannot influence him to change
his mind by making emotional appeals to him. In order to secure the favorable decision of such
a man, you will need to use the most conclusive, solid evidence of your capabilities.

[Sidenote: Wavering Minds]

Suppose your prospect shifts his feet continually and rather jerkily. While you are talking
with him, he frequently changes his weight from one foot to the other. He is suggesting that
he has little confidence in his own judgment, that he is not sure of his own thoughts. Take
the lead strongly with such a man. Do his thinking for him. It is up to you to bring his vacillating
mind to definite conclusions, following your lead. First make it clear to him that your proposal
is really to his interest. Then proceed with a manner of absolute assurance, as if you did
not question his doing what you wish. With your skillful salesmanship you can stop his wavering
and induce him to act as you indicate.

[Sidenote: Quick Thinkers]

The rate of one's muscular activity is directly associated with the rate of one's mental activity.
The man who moves slowly by habit is also a plodder in his thoughts. On the contrary, quick
actions indicate quick thinking; which, however, may be mistaken. Only the quick motion that
is under perfect control suggests an unerring conclusion reached swiftly. The man who snatches
up a pencil with sure fingers, and without fumbling it begins to write at once, demonstrates
that he has an electrically fast mind perfectly harnessed to his purpose. When another man
reaches swiftly for a pencil but misses his sure grasp at the first attempt; or when the dash
of his hand to the paper is followed by a momentary delay for adjustment of the pencil in his
fingers or by hesitation before he begins to write, he denotes mere impulsiveness.

[Sidenote: Self-Control]

Sometimes a quick thinker will purposely develop the habit of making very deliberate motions.
This trait is the result of his determined repression of a recognized inclination to act on
impulse. He has accomplished perfect self-control in order to guard against the danger of making
up his mind too quickly on his first thoughts. But his slowed-down movements will be so precise
and certain as to indicate his characteristic of self-control and that his mind has moved in
advance of his acts.

If you have occasion to size up such a man, you should perceive that the movements of his muscles
do not correspond with the rate of his mental activity, as a superficial observer might mistakenly
conclude. If your prospect sits or stands immobile; or if his actions give no indication of
what he is thinking, watch his eyes and his facial muscles of expression. Eyes that fairly
dart from one object to another, expressions that flash on and off the face; prove swift mental
activity, no matter how quietly the body may be held. For instance, a strong, quick thinker
may have his muscles under such perfect control that he will pick up a pencil very deliberately
because he has trained himself to repress his impulses. But when he has finished using the
pencil, he will drop it cleanly and not let it slip slowly from his fingers. His self-training
in precaution applies only to what he does before acting on a purpose. The moment he is done
writing, he also is done with the pencil. His hand does not linger with it over the paper.
Unconsciously his characteristic quickness manifests itself in his inclination to get rid at
once of the tool he has finished using.

[Sidenote: Tightened Thoughts]

Any indication of muscular tensity suggests a tightening of the mind on thoughts. It is often
a sign of mental resistance or of persistency. If, when talking to a man you observe that his
muscles seem taut, avoid forcing the idea you want him to accept, for his mind is opposing
it strongly just then. Perhaps he has a persistent thought of his own, at variance with yours.
Either give him a chance to express his idea in words, so you can dispose of it, or switch
him away from it by changing the trend of the conversation. When you perceive that his muscles
are normally relaxed, you may safely return to the postponed point. You will encounter lessened
mental resistance. Very likely he will then have no impulse to persist in the thought he previously
had fixed in his mind.

[Sidenote: What a Man's Walk Shows]

Note how your prospect walks forward to meet you, or how he moves about his office. If his
stride is long and free and easy, it proves that the back muscles of his thighs are strong.
Those muscles function in direct co-ordination with the mental action of willing. Therefore
when a man walks easily with a long, free stride he indicates that he has a strong will. He
may be sized up confidently as a fighter for his rights, as a man with a great deal of resolution
once he makes up his mind.

[Sidenote: Determine Mental Speed]

It is very important when sizing up a man to determine the degree of his mental speed. If you
have brought your best capabilities for sale to a prospective employer, you need to know whether
or not he is getting clearly all the ideas you present. It is necessary for you to make sure
on the one hand that you are not presenting ideas too fast for his mind to comprehend each
point fully. On the other hand, you wish to avoid harping on details after he understands them.
It will aid you very much in your salesmanship if you know just how quickly the mind of your
prospect acts. There is no better way to find out than by noting the speed of his muscle response
to test ideas. Since the rate of muscle activity is directly indicative of the rate of mental
activity, you can often learn from observing the movements of your prospect how quickly his
mind takes in points you state or suggest.

You might test him by asking that he write a name or set down some figures you give him. If
without hesitation he reaches for a pencil, you may be sure his mind responds quickly to your
ideas. But should there be a moment or two of delay before he picks up the pencil, his slower
physical response to your request is to be read as an indication that his mind does not grasp
ideas at once.

[Sidenote: Keep Mental Pace]

After making your size-up of the degree of his mental speed, you can govern your presentation
by what you have learned. If you are dealing with a mind that acts slowly, give your prospect
plenty of time to get each idea you want to impress upon him. But proceed briskly from point
to point with the man whose mind grasps ideas instantly. You would make a poor impression on
him were you to go at a lagging pace.

It is not necessary, however, to make special or artificial tests to learn how quickly your
ideas are being grasped. Observe the facial expressions of your prospect, which will indicate
how soon your thought is appreciated after it is presented. Should you say something with a
touch of humor, the time it takes him to smile or twinkle his eyes will measure the speed of
his mind in catching ideas.

[Sidenote: Head and Eye Movements]

The movements of the head and of the eyes, according to which are predominant in the case of
an individual, tell much of his character. The villain on the stage habitually looks out of
the corners of his eyes. So does the mischievous ingenue. But the hero turns his whole head
when he looks about. And the look of innocence in the eyes of the heroine is straightforward;
her head is pointed directly in line with her gaze. Apply the principle in your salesmanship.
When you observe a man who turns his head freely and easily for a square look at a person who
comes into his presence, size him up as one who is not afraid to face either facts or people.
If you note that another prospect glances obliquely at persons or objects, or that he habitually
turns his eyes to one side or the other while keeping his head still, judge him to lack the
characteristic of frankness. He is likely to be evasive and shifty in his dealings. Perhaps
the sign you have perceived indicates no more than that your prospect is "stalling." It is
evidence, nevertheless, that his mind is not meeting your ideas squarely. You will need to
compel his attention to come back to your point, time and again perhaps.

[Sidenote: Strength Of Mind]

The full-arm movement denotes strength, and bigness of conceptions. A mere wrist gesture suggests
littleness, flippancy, weak traits. Similarly if a man walks from his hips, he suggests the
characteristic of strong personal opinion. If he walks principally from the knees, or over-uses
his ankles and minces along, he indicates that his mind is not certain and that he holds his
opinions weakly.

A straight gesture denotes pure mentality. A single-curved movement indicates some emotion,
rather than only a thought. Action in a double curve suggests power behind the expression.

[Sidenote: Honor and Straightforwardness]

A gesture outward from the chest and on the same level denotes the qualities of honor and straightforwardness.
If your prospect makes such a motion in response to some idea you present, he is thinking on
the same man-level as yourself--he is treating you as his equal.

A characteristic movement of the arm above the shoulders signifies vivid imagination, or impracticability.
It may be read as an indication of lightness of character or of a tendency to go off on a tangent.
Conversely, gestures outward from the lower part of the body denote power, or an inclination
to depreciate values.

[Sidenote: Selfishness]

If a man gestures toward himself, he indicates limited conceptions, or selfishness, with a
tendency to materialize everything. Movements in any direction away from the trunk of the body
and on its level denote assertiveness, sincerity, creative ability, or willingness to cooperate
in thought.

[Sidenote: Affirmation And Denial]

Vertical movements suggest the life of ideas, and symbolize affirmation. Horizontal gestures
accompany the denial of ideas and the death of interest. The diagonal upward curve indicates
idealism. A similar curve downward is a sign that an idea presented to the imagination is concretely
realized.

[Sidenote: Frankness and Dodging]

The person who gestures directly in front of himself proves he is willing to meet you face
to face regarding the idea presented. But when a man gestures slightly to one side or the other,
he is not dodging. His movement denotes only that he is thinking seriously. However, if you
present ideas to a man who gestures far to the right or left, you may feel certain that he
is not giving his thoughts in harmony with yours, but probably is trying to get your ideas
out of his mind.

[Sidenote: Study Tones]

While we have emphasized that "muscular indications" are of principal importance in making
a certain size-up, the tones and words of the prospect should not be altogether neglected.
Often a man will unintentionally reveal in his tones the very things he means his words to
conceal. You would not depend on the words of a person if they were contradicted by his acts
and tones.

Mental, emotive, and power characteristics are signified by various tone pitches. The degree
of a man's determination and his persistence in thought are denoted by the number of tone units
he habitually employs when speaking. The genuineness of a statement is suggested or disproved
by the tone intervals in the statement. "Yes" spoken in one unit without inflection means unqualified
assent. "Y-es" in two tones may mean doubtful assent, or false agreement, or even a contradiction.
The middle-of-the-mouth tone proves a well balanced mind, in contrast with the unreliable mind
that is denoted by the lip tone, and the secretive mind which is suggested by the tone that
comes from far back in the mouth.

In a five minute conversation an alert observer who has studied a few of the elemental principles
of tone analysis can size up a great many of the most pronounced characteristics of a prospect.

[Sidenote: Don't Offend By Scrutiny]

It is better to make no size-up at all than to strain in observing the other man and make him
aware of your close scrutiny. Such an inartistic size-up impresses a prospect disagreeably.
He feels that you are prying into his personal characteristics. Therefore teach yourself to
observe without seeming to look closely at the object of your size-up. Learn to observe unobserved;
especially to perceive details without looking sharply. Your eyes and ears can take in specific
points about your prospect without making their keen activity apparent.

[Sidenote: Two Parts of Sizing-up Process]

When you have learned how to see and hear many details clearly at the same time, unsuspected
by your prospect, you will be a master of the first essential of skillful character reading.
The second necessary element of proficiency in sizing up men is the relation or association
of each detail observed, with the particular characteristic it denotes. To begin with, perceive
points about your prospect. Then ask yourself about each, "What does this mean?"

[Sidenote: Practice Makes Perfect]

Of course you will not become an expert judge of other men at once. But get the habit of seeing
and hearing specific indications of characteristics wherever you go. You will soon find that
your mind has been opened to new, clear ideas of people.

It is possible for anyone to become a mind reader. It is necessary only to note and think out
the meaning of character signs and thoughts. Trained specific observation will read and interpret
these signs. When you become skillful in sizing up other men, this art will help you very much
in gaining the best possible receptions everywhere you go. Also, if you are able to read your
prospect's thoughts and character, you can avoid antagonizing his ideas.

[Sidenote: Remove Unnecessary Difficulties]

Gain knowledge of other men in order to make it easy to sell them true ideas of your best capabilities.
It is not hard to succeed if you take the unnecessary difficulties out of the process of gaining
your chances.

CHAPTER VIII

The Knock At The Door Of Opportunity and The Invitation To Come In

[Sidenote: Selling is Not a Mechanical Process]

The process of selling ideas comprises several steps, part or all of which the salesman may
need to take in order to close a particular sale successfully. In our study we are considering
step after step in regular order, but the actual selling process cannot be reduced to such
exactitude and routine. Before we begin our analysis of this "presentation" step, it should
be clearly understood that success in selling ideas is not achieved by going through a machine-like
process. We follow a regular sequence in these chapters, but it is unlikely that you will ever
complete a sale of your services by taking the various steps of the selling process in the
precise order of our study.

[Sidenote: Be a Fully Equipped Salesman]

You may need to use them all in order to succeed in a specific instance. Again, without taking
many of the steps here analyzed, you might be able to gain the success opportunity you most
desire. The object of this book is to fit you for any and every condition you are likely to
meet in your efforts to gain opportunities for your ambition. It is improbable that in order
to get your desired chance and to make the most of it you will have to use all you learn of
the secret of certain success. You cannot afford, however, to run an avoidable risk of being
at a loss regarding what to do at any stage of the process of selling to a selected prospect
true ideas of your best capability. You need to know the most effective ways to deal with situations
that may never happen, but which, on the contrary, might be encountered. You cannot start confidently
on your quest for success unless you are fully equipped.

[Sidenote: Reducing the Odds Against You]

If you believed it would be necessary for you to do everything contained in this book in order
to gain the opportunities you desire, you likely would feel very skeptical about succeeding.
You might think, "A single little slip and I'd lose out. It's a thousand to one against me."
The fact is that the odds on the side of failure are very heavy in the case of an ordinary
man. If you can reduce them only a little in your own case, you will get a start towards success
because of the slight lessening of your handicap.

[Sidenote: Value of Knowing a Single Step]

I recall a man who mastered but three principles of prospecting needs. With this limited knowledge
of salesmanship he was able to induce a great financier to open the door of opportunity and
take him into a field of rich chances to earn a fortune. Another friend of mine got his start
solely from knowledge of a manufacturer's principal hobby. What he knew about the "single tax"
enabled him to plan a sure approach to the mind of the factory owner. A young lawyer in Chicago
seized upon a chance for fame and wealth in his first meeting with a poor, seemingly unsuccessful
inventor. In each of these instances a single step of the selling process, taken correctly,
carried the salesman through the door of opportunity and brought him within reach of the beginnings
of success.

[Sidenote: Get Ready for Imaginable Happenings]

You may not need to knock at that door, nor wait for an invitation to come in. In your case,
perhaps, the door stands open, with a "Welcome" mat just outside. Yet if you do need to knock
with your ideas for admittance to another man's mind, and if it ever becomes necessary for
you to win a welcome, this chapter will prove valuable reading. You will be helped to gain
your desired chance, and the danger of your failure will be minimized, if you know how to knock
and exactly what to do to assure your welcome.

Even the master salesman can never be absolutely certain of the reception he will have from
any prospect. Therefore he "goes loaded" for all imaginable contingencies. You, the salesman
of yourself, should be likewise prepared with knowledge of how each and every step in the selling
process may be taken most effectively. Whatever emergency arises, you must be ready to take
the fullest advantage of a favorable turn, and equally ready to reduce as much as possible
any disadvantage you encounter.

[Sidenote: Knocking and Getting In]

Of course it will avail you nothing if you succeed only in reaching the particular man through
whom you have planned to gain success. And after you meet him it will do you no material good
to size him up correctly; if you are then unable to hold his attention to your presentation
of ideas. Your preliminary skillful salesmanship would all be wasted. Evidently, in order that
you may continue the process of gaining your chance, it is necessary that you should know how
to knock on the door of his mind in such an agreeable but compelling way that he will be forced
to let his attention come out pleasantly to you and your purpose. Hence right knocking at the
door of opportunity immediately follows the size-up as an essential part of the process of
making success certain.

It is necessary next for you to know how to prevent a turn-down on the front porch of your
prospect's mind, and how to insure the admission of your ideas to his thoughts. You can compel
your prospect to open the door of his attention, but in order to get inside his mind and secure
his interest in your purpose, you must win his willing invitation for your ideas to enter his
thoughts and make themselves at home there.

[Sidenote: Certain Success Methods]

We have seen how you can make certain of gaining your chance to reach the door of opportunity.
You can size up surely your prospect's dominant characteristics and what he is thinking. Likewise
you can guarantee to yourself, first the attention, and second the interest of the man you
have come to see. It is necessary only that you use the methods of the master salesman to compel
the opening of the door and to induce the extension of welcome to your ideas.

[Sidenote: Our Old Acquaintance Again]

Here again we meet our old acquaintance, the discriminative-restrictive method. You must discriminate
between the process of knocking at the door of opportunity and the process of securing the
invitation to come in. Then, in practicing these related but different steps of the selling
process, it is necessary that when you knock you restrict yourself to the use of the methods
that are most effective in gaining attention. Similarly you should restrict yourself to using
the very different methods of securing interest, when you work to get an invitation for your
ideas to come inside the other man's mind and make themselves at home there.

[Sidenote: Process of Compelling Attention]

Psychologists define "Attention" as "that act of the mind which holds to a given object perceived
by one or more senses, to the exclusion of all other objects that might be perceived at that
time by the same or other senses." A knock at a door attracts attention because it temporarily
diverts the previous attentiveness of the mind to other things, and concentrates it on a new
object of attention. The sense of hearing is struck. Whether or not the mind is willing to
hear, it cannot help perceiving the sudden new sound. Its attention is forced. The instant
the knock is heard, the mind is compelled to drop or suspend what it has been thinking about;
though this exclusive new attention to the knock may last but a fraction of a second.

Our senses function under the control of the sub-conscious mind. It is futile for us to will
that we won't hear, or see, or taste, etc. We have to take in sense impressions, whether we
want to do so or not. Therefore, if you employ restrictively the sense-hitting method, you
can force the man upon whom you call to give his attention to you or to the presentation of
your ideas.

[Sidenote: Inducing Interest]

It is necessary to discriminate, however, between the use of the avenues to reach the mind
center of attention, and the use of very different ways into the mind center of interest. If
you start wrong, there is very little chance that you will arrive at the right destination.
The center of interest is wholly under the control of the conscious mind. Your prospect can
refuse to be interested, if he chooses, despite your determination to interest him. His interest
must be induced. Any attempt to compel it is apt to have a fatal result. Nearly always such
an effort to force interest develops antagonism, instead.

But there are methods of inducing interest that are just as sure to succeed as are the sense-hitting
methods by which attention may be compelled. This double step in the process of selling the
true idea of your best capabilities in the right market can be taken with absolute certainty
of success if you know and practice the principles in accordance with which the master salesman
sells his ideas of goods to prospects. We are to study these principles now, as applied to
the sale of your qualifications for success in the field you have selected.

[Sidenote: Exclusive Agreeable Attention]

When you enter the office of your prospect--your chosen future employer, for example--he will
be giving his attention to something. No one, while he is awake, can be wholly non-attentive.
Your function, at this stage of the selling process, is to compel him to stop paying attention
to something or somebody else, and to give you and your ideas his exclusive attention.

[Sidenote: Avoid Making Unfavorable Impressions]

Of course good salesmanship makes it advisable also to avoid creating a disagreeable impression
while forcing yourself and your ideas upon the attention of your prospect. The conscious mind
governs a man's likes and dislikes. So if you knock compellingly at the door of that mind to
gain attention, you may arouse very unfavorable attention. For illustration, a boisterous greeting
of your prospect, or a very noisy entrance into his office, would doubtless compel his attention
by the direct hammering on his senses. But the attraction of his attention to you would affect
the operations of both his conscious and sub-conscious minds, and his conscious mind would
be disagreeably impressed. His compelled attention, therefore, might result in your being thrown
out.

[Sidenote: Gaining Both Attention And Interest]

However, you can knock at the sense doors of the sub-conscious mind with such unobjectionable
sense-hitting methods that while agreeable attention will be compelled thereby, you can also
be sure that a favorable impression on the conscious mind of the prospect will be induced.
For illustration, if your prospect is evidently busy at his desk when you are admitted to his
office, you might compel his attention by entering very quietly and by standing in silence
without interrupting him until he has had an opportunity to finish what he is doing. His sound
sense would be struck, paradoxically, by your exceptional quietness. His sense of equilibrium
would also be affected by your perfect poise while waiting. Your whole attitude would impress
him so favorably that his especial interest in you would be induced. His greeting would be
pleasant.

Suppose your prospect looks up from his work when you enter his presence, and you approach
close to his desk; if you are immaculate in dress and body, you will appeal agreeably to his
olfactory sense. The law of the association of ideas will then begin to work in your favor.
Your prospect will get subconsciously a conscious impression of your clean character.

You might wear a fresh flower in your buttonhole and so strike several of his senses pleasantly.
But unless the flower is inconspicuous and in good taste it would make an unfavorable impression.

[Sidenote: Good Impressions]

Let us assume now that when you enter the office of your prospect, he is disgruntled about
something. You can take some of the heat out of his ill temper by your appearance of cool self-confidence
and good nature.

There are many more such favorable sense impressions which you could make by simply standing
in manly erectness while waiting to receive the exclusive attention of your prospect. You might
employ all the sense-hitting features of bearing and manner referred to above. The effect of
the sum of these would be the forced agreeable attention of your prospect. He simply could
not help noticing the various items that would strike his different senses; nor could he help
being agreeably impressed; though he might not give you any indication of the effect you had
compelled.

[Sidenote: Continual Attention Necessary]

It is highly important that you should be able first to gain the favorable attention of your
prospect, and second to hold it until his interest is aroused. It may also be necessary for
you to regain his attention if it is temporarily lost and diverted to some other object. The
master salesman realizes it is essential to have the attention of his prospect continually
centered upon the ideas presented, throughout the selling process. Only a poor salesman of
ideas would go right on talking, even though it might be clearly evident that he did not have
the exclusive attention of the man addressed.

[Sidenote: Regaining Attention]

When you proffer your capabilities for purchase by a prospective employer, do not make the
mistake of continuing to present your best selling points if you have any doubt that his attention
is exclusively yours. Stop your selling process if his attention wanders or is diverted. Use
the sense-hitting method to compel it to come back to you and your ideas. If some one should
enter his office while you are talking to him, or if his telephone should ring, stop short
in your presentation. (Your sudden silence, in itself, will be attention compelling.) Do not
go on with your sales presentation until the interruption is over. Then use some sense-hitting
method of making sure that his attention is again concentrated on you and your ideas.

[Sidenote: Sense Hitting]

An acquaintance of mine who had especially fitted himself for business correspondence, typed
striking paragraphs taken from form letters he had devised and pasted the slips of paper on
stiff filing cards. He carried with him to his interview with the president of a large corporation
about thirty-five or forty of these cards. His prospecting had indicated that in the course
of the half hour he had planned to take up with a presentation of his capabilities this executive
would be interrupted often by telephone calls and the entrance of subordinates. The salesman's
size-up also revealed that his prospect's attention was likely to wander to the things on his
desk. From time to time when the correspondent was presenting his ideas the president reached
out his hand and picked up a paper. Evidently he was inclined to give but flighty attention
to his caller.

[Sidenote: Striking More Than One Sense]

The salesman, however, had "come loaded" for exactly this situation. He had worked out his
selling plan in detail. As he developed idea after idea, he used a device for regaining attention
by hitting at the prospect's senses of sight and hearing. Just as soon as the president's hand
wandered to a paper, the salesman ruffled the cards he held, quickly selected one, and clicked
it down on the desk top before his prospect. He had to do this perhaps a dozen times before
he felt confident he had clinched the interest of the executive. If the salesman had used words
merely, what, he said in presenting his ideas to the prospect might have gone in one ear and
out the other. But his action of ruffling the cards struck the president's senses of sight
and hearing compellingly; as did the clicking of the card on the desk top when it was presented
for reading. Repeatedly the return of the prospect's wandering attention was forced subconsciously;
yet no disagreeable impression was made on his conscious mind. In the course of half an hour
the correspondent succeeded in selling his services at a very satisfactory salary.

[Sidenote: "Come Loaded"]

If you similarly "come loaded" for sense-hitting, you will be able to get your prospect's attention
originally, and to regain it whenever it is temporarily lost. In advance of your call on the
man to whom you want to sell your services, think out things you can do that will strike one
or more of his senses forcibly, without making disagreeable impressions. You can take with
you to the interview specimens of your work, or testimonials; and hold them in your hand where
they will attract notice. Or you might plan to use attention-compelling gestures.

[Sidenote: Tone Variations]

Changes of tone will make the other man "perk up his ears" if his attention wanders; so plan
to introduce variety into your manner of speaking. Don't just open the spigot of your mind
and let your ideas run out in a monotone. Variety of voice is pleasing, as well as attention-compelling.

I know a salesman who is in the habit of using a spotlessly clean big handkerchief to help
him keep the prospect's mind concentrated on the proposition being presented. Whenever the
other man's attention is diverted, this salesman whisks his handkerchief from his pocket and
touches his lips with it. The flash of white hits the sight-sense of the prospect and brings
back his wandering attention to the salesman.

[Sidenote: Sense Hitting Should Help The Sale]

But such devices are superficial. The best sense-hitting means of compelling attention, directly
relates some sense effect to the salesman's purpose.

The correspondent who ruffled his cards and clicked them down on the prospect's desk would
not have been so successful if on each card he had not pasted a specimen of his work as an
efficient letter writer. If he had brought a pack of blank cards, for example, the repeated
use of his device for getting attention might have irritated the other man. To analyze the
illustration further; if the correspondent had brought the specimens of his work on letter
paper, not pasted on stiff cards, they would have been much less effective. He could not have
ruffled them, and would have been unable to make the clicking sound he used to hit the other
man's ears.

[Sidenote: Suggesting Capability]

Suppose you apply for a situation as a bookkeeper or an accountant. One of the best sense-hitting
devices you could use to compel attention to your ability would be a collection of complicated
tabulations in your handwriting, made neatly without a correction or an erasure. Such an exhibit
of painstaking workmanship, if complemented by a neat, attractive personal appearance, would
force the employer to notice you and the proofs of your qualifications. You certainly would
make a most favorable impression. Your prospect would imagine his books and records as you
would keep them. When presenting the evidences of your capability as an accountant, you could
suggest other qualities than those mentioned--such as the proper pride of a good workman, serious
earnestness, dignity, keen intelligence, etc. Such suggestions made with the aid of sense-hitting
devices would help you to complete the sale of your services.

[Sidenote: Make Your Qualities Stand Out]

Perhaps you wish particularly to impress your qualities of alertness, energy, love of work,
and physical stamina. Then sit or stand easily erect when you call on your prospect. If you
should slump or loll in your chair, you would suggest that you lacked the very characteristics
on which you are depending to get the job.

Make your best qualities stand out noticeably in your bearing. Should you apply for a position
of great trust, requiring the exercise of the finest discretion, be sure to look the other
man frankly in the face and let him see into your eyes. Also modulate your tones to the pitch
of discretion and confidence. Your manner, your expressions, your voice will all draw attention
to your fitness for the chance you want.

[Sidenote: Original Methods]

Such illustrations as have been given above should be understood as merely suggestive of ways
to use the sense-hitting method of compelling attention. Do not copy the suggestions offered.
Think out for your individual use a collection of sense-hitting devices of your own. Then you
will be able to select various ways to gain and to re-gain attention when you are in the presence
of a prospect. No matter what may be your ability and ambition, there are features of your
character and your service capacity that you can utilize to make direct sense appeals. Find
out for yourself what they are, and plan how to use them most effectively. If you cannot gain
attention to your qualifications, or if you are unable to recall wandering attention, you may
lose the chance you have succeeded in getting. Insure yourself against the possibility of such
a disaster; so that your previous good salesmanship in securing an interview will not all go
for naught.

[Sidenote: Out-of-the-Ordinary Things]

If you do something out of the ordinary, the force of your sense-hitting will be much greater
than if you employ only common devices for gaining attention. It is better to do something
that compels attention to your recommendations than to say "I want to call your attention to
these letters."

[Sidenote: Danger of Distracting Attention]

However, there is always the danger that in gaining attention by unusual means you may attract
too much attention to the device you use, and so distract notice from the proposition you are
presenting for sale. Therefore be sure that whatever extraordinary thing you do to compel attention
contributes directly to your main purpose and does not lead your prospect off on a side track
of thought.

A business house once got out an advertising novelty and had samples distributed by the salesmen
as gifts to their principal customers. The novelty was an ingenious mechanical device. It attracted
so much attention to itself that when a salesman put it on the desk of a prospect before beginning
his sales talk, the attention of the other man was drawn from what the salesman was saying
and was given to the novelty. The prospect would pick up and examine the advertising device
while the salesman was presenting ideas regarding his standard line of goods. As a result,
many of the best points of the sales talks were unnoticed. The advertising novelty was a detriment.
The sales volume fell off while it was being distributed. The slump was traced directly to
the mistake of having the salesmen pass out the attention-compelling device which was not related
to the staples of the house line.

[Sidenote: The Remedy]

The distribution was made by mail thereafter, in advance of the salesman's call. It was effective
then as an introduction for the traveler; because by the time he came to see the prospect,
the novelty of the advertising device had worn off. It was no longer an attention-distracter.

[Sidenote: Three Ways To Compel Attention]

Remember that the attention of your prospect is always given to something. If another object
of attention is more compelling than your means of forcing his notice, your attempt will fail.
Therefore be sure that your attention-getting device has at least one of three points of superiority.

(1) It can be stronger than the other appeal to the same sense. If your prospect's attention
to what you are saying wanders because a phonograph starts to play in the next room, you can
recall it to your presentation by slapping your hands together to emphasize a point, or you
can change your tone suddenly. His sense of hearing will be struck compellingly by your device.

(2) Your appeal for attention can be made to more senses than are being reached by the distraction.
The phonograph music hits only the ears of your prospect. Besides slapping your hands together
or changing your tone, you can supplement such appeals to his tone sense by an appeal to his
sense of sight. You can make a gesture, or display a letter for him to read just at that moment.

(3) Your appeal can hit the senses of your prospect more insistently than the other. If the
phonograph music proves very attractive to him, you will need to keep hammering at him with
forceful changes of voice, with gestures, by touching him, or by doing something else to make
his attention to the music "let go."

[Sidenote: Summary]

To summarize the most effective method of gaining attention--hit each sense to which you appeal
as strongly as you can, without making a disagreeable impression, strike as many senses as
possible, and keep on using your sense-hitting device as long as necessary to get or to recover
exclusive favorable attention.

Many a man has gained success because he first gained attention. He stood out from the crowd,
or was able to make his qualities noticeable. When one is fully qualified for success, he may
need only to attract attention to his capabilities; then he is likely to be given the chance
he wants.

[Sidenote: "I'm Not Interested"]

Often, however, the salesman is discomfited after he gains attention. The prospect halts the
selling process by declaring, "I'm not interested." Suppose you are able to compel your prospective
employer to notice you favorably, but he balks there and shows no inclination to buy your services.
He has listened attentively to all you have said. He has concentrated his mind upon you, and
has not wandered in thought to other subjects. Yet you perceive that he is inclined to put
you off or to turn you down. Evidently, in order to prevent such a contretemps, you need to
resort now to a different selling step, which you have not taken previously.

It is necessary that you have at your command a way to induce interest. This interest-inducing
means must be as sure in its effects as the sense-hitting method of compelling attention. Otherwise
you could not be certain of success with the selling process. If the effectiveness of every
step cannot be assured in advance, you will not rely confidently on salesmanship to achieve
your ambition.

[Sidenote: Discriminate Between Attention And Interest]

Probably you have never worked out in your mind exactly the reasons why you are interested
in particular things and in certain people. Let us make an analysis. Your attention might be
attracted so strongly to a vicious criminal that for the time being you could think of no one
else. Yet his fate might be a matter of such indifference to you that you would have absolutely
no interest in the man. But suppose you should see in his face, or in an expression of his
eyes, something that haunted your memory appealingly. It would induce you to read the newspaper
accounts of his trial. You would feel a little sorry for him, on learning that he had been
sentenced to a long term in prison. Very likely you would say to yourself, "I suppose he is
a mighty tough character, but I believe there is something in him that isn't altogether bad."
Your intuition would tell you he possessed undefined traits that you like. In your own liking
for these characteristics that you vaguely discerned in him when you saw him, is the key to
the interest he induced.

[Sidenote: What and Whom We Like]

What do we like? Whom do we like?

Things that are like our own ideas. People who are like the ideas we have about likable people.
Interest is all a matter of recognizing points of likeness.

In order to draw your prospect beyond the attention stage of the selling process, and to induce
his interest in your "goods," you must impress on him suggestions of the similarity of your
ideas to ideas already in his own mind. He will like your ideas in proportion to their resemblance
to his own way of thinking on the same subjects. So you should express yourself as nearly as
possible in his terms, and attract his interest by making him feel that your mind and his are
much alike.

[Sidenote: Non-Interest]

One day I was sitting in the private office of a very wealthy philanthropist. A salesman presented
a letter of introduction to the millionaire, who in turn introduced me to his caller. The newcomer
thereupon proceeded to present most attractively a business proposal. He offered my friend
an excellent opportunity to make a good deal of money by joining an underwriting syndicate.
The millionaire at once declared he was not interested. "I have all the money I want," he said,
and bowed the salesman out. The ideas that had been presented to him were altogether different
from his own financial motives.

[Sidenote: Interest]

That same afternoon another promoter called upon my friend with a project for investment in
a house-building corporation. This second salesman evidently had prospected the philanthropist
and had planned just how to interest him. He did not stress the profits to be made from investment
in the stock of his corporation, but referred to them in a minor key. He emphasized the need
of the city for more homes, and cited instances of distress due to the housing shortage.

My friend was thoroughly interested. He took home the salesman's prospectus for further study.
Since he was a good business man, he satisfied himself that the investment would be profitable.
But he subscribed for fifty thousand dollars worth of securities principally because they represented
a project like his own ideas of the way money should be put to work for human happiness.

[Sidenote: Know Prospect's Likes and Dislikes]

When you call on the man you have selected as your future employer, go equipped with all the
prospecting knowledge regarding him that you have been able to get. Be sure you know his strongest
likes and dislikes. Size him up on the spot, for the purpose of supplementing what you have
previously learned about him. Hit his attention with sense-appeals related to his peculiarities.
Then, in order to make sure of his interest, present some idea that is of the kind he especially
likes. He will open his mind and welcome your idea at once.

[Sidenote: The Man of Quick Decisions]

Suppose he has a reputation for brusqueness and quick decisions, and is impatient about any
waste of time. You probably would help your cause by looking him straight in the eye and saying
bluntly something like this:

"I want to work for you because you are my kind of a man. Ask me any questions you want, now.
You won't have to call me on the carpet for information about my work after you hire me. Pay
me two hundred dollars a month, and I won't be back in this office to get a raise until you
send for me."

I know a young man who secured a good job from an "old crab" in just that way, within three
minutes after they first met.

Two men sought the position of office manager of an automobile company. The owners of the business
were thorough mechanics who had designed their own car, but who were comparatively unfamiliar
with office operations. They were not at home outside their factory.

[Sidenote: Mistake of Speaking Different Language]

The first candidate for the vacant position brought the finest recommendations of his qualifications
for office management. The other applicant had had much less experience, and was not nearly
so well qualified. But the first man was a poor salesman of his capabilities. He failed to
recognize, when he explained his ideas to the partners, that he was talking to a pair of mechanics.
They did not understand the language he used. His presentation of his qualifications as an
office manager would have impressed an employer accustomed to sitting at a desk. But the partners
were intuitively prejudiced against the capable candidate who was so very unlike themselves
in all respects.

[Sidenote: Speaking the Same Language]

The other applicant was shrewd. He used salesmanship in presenting his lesser qualifications
for the position. He talked in terms borrowed from the language of shop practice. He compared
the plans he suggested for the office supplies stock room, with the "tool crib" in the factory.
He explained his idea of office organization by using as a model a chart of the plant departments.
He compared office expenses with factory overhead.

The owners of the business understood very little about the subjects he discussed, but he used
words and expressions that were familiar to them. So his ideas, as he presented them, impressed
the partners as like their own way of looking at things. The better salesman, who knew how
to interest his prospects, got the five-figure job; though he was a less capable office executive
than the disappointed applicant.

[Sidenote: Fitting Ideas To Prospect's Mind]

Do not try to sell another man particular ideas because you like them. You are not the buyer.
Sell him ideas that he likes. Fit the ideas you bring him to the characteristics of his mind.

If you judge him to be a quick thinker, do not hesitate in indecision a moment longer than
is necessary for you to make up your mind confidently. On the other hand, should he be a deliberate
thinker, be careful not to make an impression that you are rash or impulsive in your decisions.

[Sidenote: Clothes and Interest]

If he is inclined to be finical about his dress, or over-particular regarding orderliness,
he will be interested if your garb is punctiliously correct and if you suggest to him the habits
of precision. I read a little while ago the story of a young man who lost the chance to become
the confidential assistant of a noted financier. The young man missed his opportunity because
he made the mistake of wearing a soft collar when he called for the final interview with the
financier.

[Sidenote: Avoid False Pretense of Interest]

Do not, of course, put on false pretenses, to make your prospect like you and your ideas. Remember
that you must live up to a first good impression. So appear nothing, say nothing, do nothing
that is untrue to your best self. But without any dishonesty you can indicate that your way
of thinking has points of similarity to the slant of the other man's mind. If he is a Republican,
while you are a Democrat, and the subject of politics comes up, do not pretend to be an elephant
worshiper. Admit your party allegiance casually, and remark that you are not hide-bound in
your political faith, but open-minded. Maybe he will employ you with the hope of converting
you to Republicanism.

[Sidenote: Few Direct Opposites]

There are few ideas regarding which honest men are diametrically opposed on principle. You
can suggest to your prospective employer the idea that you are in accord with his way of thinking;
though you may differ widely in many respects. You need not emphasize the degree of your likeness
in mind. Certainly it would be very poor policy to stress your differences of opinion.

[Sidenote: Like Breeds Like]

Any likeness of your suggestions to the ideas of the other man will impress him agreeably.
He will be pleased to find the points of resemblance, and they will help to gloss over a possible
prejudice in his mind against you. The association of your similar ideas on a subject will
suggest to him imaginative pictures of your association with him in his business. "Like breeds
like." He will place you mentally in a situation where the likable qualities he has found in
you might be employed to his satisfaction.

[Sidenote: Inside the Door]

Then you will be safely inside the door of his interest. Without realizing it, your prospect
would like to bring about the condition he has imagined. He is beginning to want you in his
employ; though as yet he has no deep-seated desire for your services. Objections to you may
spring up in his mind, but you certainly have been successful throughout the processes of getting
his response to your knock, and of securing for your ideas his invitation to come into his
thoughts for a better acquaintance with your purpose.

[Sidenote: Unwelcome Guests]

After admitting your ideas to his mind, he may wish he had not welcomed them. He may find objectionable
things in you or in your proposal. Sometimes a man responds to a knock on his door, and becomes
sufficiently interested in the caller to invite him to enter the house; but regrets afterward
that he extended the welcome. This change of heart and mind is usually due to something done
by the visitor after his admittance. However, we are not considering just now any step of the
selling process beyond winning a welcome. In later chapters we will study how to make the most
effective use of hospitality and the things to avoid that might impress the host as abuses
of the privileges of a guest.

[Sidenote: Furniture of The Mind]

Ideas have been called "the furniture of the mind." We have already seen that they are the
developments of repeated sense impressions. A particular mind center is partly or wholly furnished
with ideas in proportion to the man's use of his sense avenues to bring in ideas from outside
himself. The doors of the mind swing inward most readily when the new mental furniture brought
along a sense avenue matches the ideas already in the mind center. Doubtless the young man
who lost the interest of a great financier by wearing a soft collar would have been able to
hold it if he had dressed according to his prospect's ideas.

[Sidenote: One Likable Thing Helps]

If there is one thing about you that another man dislikes, it disproportionately tinges his
entire attitude of mind toward you. On the other hand, if you have one especially likable feature,
it tends to lessen the disagreeable impression of things about you that the other man does
not like.

So, when you come to a prospect as a salesman of your best self and have gained his attention,
avoid making disagreeable suggestions to his mind, and have at your command a number of sense
appeals you are sure he will like. You certainly will secure his interest if you follow this
selling process.

To win his interest you need not induce your prospect to like you all through or in every respect.
If he likes but one thing about you at first, he will be interested enough to give you the
chance to develop more interest. The interest that produces the fruit of acceptance is often
a growth from only one seed sown by the salesman of ideas.

[Sidenote: Avoid Over-Emphasis]

At this stage of the selling process it is not wise to plunge ahead fast. Do not go to the
extreme on any subject that you find is interesting to your prospect. His interest may be mild,
and he might be prejudiced if you seem to display excessive concern about something that he
considers of minor importance. I recall the experience of a man who was complimented on keeping
an appointment to the minute. He over-emphasized the virtue of punctuality and irritated his
prospect, who was not always on time himself. The job went to another applicant.

[Sidenote: Moderate Attitude]

Be moderate in your attitude when you work to secure the beginning of interest, lest you raise
an obstacle in your path. Until you are sure you have won a considerable degree of interest,
you cannot lead strongly in any direction without running the risk of losing some of the advantages
you have gained. Therefore at the interest stage proceed warily. "Watch your step."

[Sidenote: Hobbies]

Be especially careful not to gush over a hobby of your prospect, in which his interest may
not be so great as you suppose. Hobbies are dangerous. Don't harp on one. It requires consummate
art to show enthusiasm about another man's hobby without arousing his suspicions regarding
your sincerity.

[Sidenote: Art of Knocking and Winning a Welcome]

Throughout the various steps of the selling process, salesmanship is an art. The art of knocking
at the door of opportunity and of winning the invitation to come in lies in making favorable
out-of-the-ordinary impressions in unusual ways. The salesman himself, his methods of presenting
his services for sale, and his qualifications--all should stand out distinctly, and make impressions
of his individuality. He should not seem like a common applicant for a position, but should
suggest to the prospective employer that he is a man of uncommon characteristics and especial
capability.

[Sidenote: The Process And Effects]

That is the way to make a good impression. Such an impression of an extraordinary personality
first affords pleasure, then excites a degree of admiration, and next arouses a certain amount
of curiosity that is nearly akin to interest. If you please your prospect in your initial impression
on him, he will like you and begin to feel personal concern about your application.

[Sidenote: Analyze, Discriminate, Restrict]

In order to qualify yourself for taking this step of the selling process effectively hereafter,
analyze the impressions you make now. Discriminatively select the good and bad details. Then
restrict your future practice in perfecting the art of inducing interest, to the development
and use of your pleasing qualities only.

[Sidenote: The Interesting Opening]

Most men begin an interview with a prospective employer indefinitely or in merely general terms.
Naturally they confront a wall of non-interest. You have come, remember, on a mission of service.
Please at once by presenting the idea that you know a particular service which is lacking and
which you can supply. Break the ice of strangeness between you and your prospect by an appeal
first to his human side through a smile of genuine friendliness and by looking straight into
his eyes so that he can see into your heart.

Then in a business-like way get right down to business without hesitation. Show enthusiasm,
which is contagious if not overdone. Base your enthusiasm on real optimism. Indicate temperamental
youthfulness in vigor and courage. Say something original--something strong, maybe a little
startling; but it must be self-evidently true. By all means avoid anything that suggests parrot
talk or indefinite thought. Do not expect the other man to listen with interest to a statement
proceeding from premise to conclusion.

[Sidenote: Headlines]

Use headlines prominently and often to summarize the body of your proposal. Headlines attract
your attention and induce your interest in particular newspaper items. Employ headline statements
for the same purpose in selling the idea of your capabilities; just as surely you will get
attention and interest.

A noted sales manager who had been earning a large salary made up his mind that satisfying
success for him was to be gained only through a business in which he would be partly an owner
instead of just an employee. He called together a group of financiers and introduced his purpose
by saying to them, "Gentlemen, I have an idea in which I have so much confidence that I will
resign my $75,000 a year job to develop it. I want to explain it to you and to have your co-operation
in financing a project I have worked out." His headline statement secured instant interest,
of course.

There is something about yourself or your capabilities that you can put into headlines. In
forcible, vivid language you can strike some senses of your prospects. Think of headline statements
about your services. Write them out in advance. You may be certain they will produce the same
psychological effect as headlines in the newspapers.

[Sidenote: Sense Doors Always Open]

Use the sense avenues to introduce agreeable suggestions into your prospect's mind centers
of attention and interest. Then you will be employing the unusual methods of a master salesman,
who devises ways of using every possible sense appeal.

The sense doors are always open. They are held open by the subconscious mind. If you understand
your way through them there will be no doubt about the effectiveness of your knock at the door
of opportunity, or about getting an invitation for your ideas to enter the mind of the other man.

CHAPTER IX

Getting Yourself Wanted

[Sidenote: Show a Need For Your Services]

A great many salesmen mistakenly believe that if they can interest a prospect thoroughly in
their goods, he is almost sure to buy. When this stage is reached, they think they only need
to keep his interest growing to close the sale. If, instead, it drags on interminably, they
are utterly at a loss regarding what more they should do to secure the order.

Do not fall into a similar error when selling true ideas of your best capabilities. Not only
is it necessary that you induce your prospective employer's interest in your personal qualifications,
but you need to make him realize there is a present lack in his business which you can fill
to his satisfaction. You must get yourself wanted.

You might make an excellent first impression on the man you have chosen as your future chief.
He might listen attentively to your presentation of ideas, and question you so interestedly
that you would expect him to say at any moment, "All right. The job is yours." Then, instead
of engaging your services, he might remark, "I'll keep your name on file." Or he might say,
"I know a man who probably could use you. I'll give you a note to him." You would win a cordial
farewell handshake from your prospect, but not an acceptance of your proposal to work with
him. You would leave without the job. Your failure would be due to your inability to get yourself
sufficiently wanted.

[Sidenote: See Yourself Through Your Prospect's Eyes]

Now imagine yourself in the place of this employer. See your application through his eyes.
Unless you can look at yourself from the prospect's viewpoint, you may not comprehend your
deficiency in salesmanship.

The employer upon whom you called said to himself while you were trying to sell your services,
"Here is a very attractive man. He presents an interesting proposition. But I have no real
need for such an employee; therefore it would be poor business for me to engage him, much as
I should like to do so. I am sorry that at present I have no place for him in my organization.
He's a man I'd like to keep track of, so I'll file his name and address for possible future
reference. Meanwhile I'll give him a note to my friend Smith. I hate to turn him down cold;
he's such a fine man."

Evidently the employer did not feel a lack in his own business. You failed to make him realize
any need for your services.

[Sidenote: Proving A Need]

Contrast with this illustration the case of an efficiency engineer who secured his chance to
overhaul a factory by demonstrating to a manufacturer that he needed a new order-checking system.
The engineer "beat" the old system and brought to the manufacturer's office a lot of goods
he had secured that could not be checked. His salesmanship compelled attention, induced thorough
interest, and proved there was a hole that should be filled. When the lack was shown convincingly,
the manufacturer wanted it satisfied. The sale of the engineer's services was quickly closed.

[Sidenote: Getting Yourself Wanted Is Only One Step Ahead]

Do not jump to the conclusion that you are sure of the job you desire, just as soon as you
get yourself wanted. You are not yet at the end of the selling process. The prospect has only
been conducted successfully another step forward toward your goal. The moment after he realizes
the lack in his business, he is apt to question most critically your qualifications for filling it.

[Sidenote: Analysis Naturally Follows Desire]

As soon as a man begins to feel a real tug of desire for anything, he examines it with new,
increased interest to make sure there isn't something the matter with it. The suit of clothes
that only induces his interest in a shop window is passed by after a look. However, if he says
to himself, "That's the kind of suit I want," he goes in and examines the workmanship and the
cloth, in search of faults. The salesman may need to overcome certain objections of his prospect
before the order can be secured.

But we have not reached the objections stage of the uncompleted sale. That is the subject of
the next chapter. Let us retrace our steps to study the essence of the art of getting yourself
wanted.

[Sidenote: Two-part Process of Getting Yourself Wanted]

There are two parts to the process. First, you must show the prospect what he lacks; that in
his business there is an unoccupied opportunity for such services as you believe you are capable
of rendering to his benefit and satisfaction. Second, you need to picture yourself filling
the place and giving the service; to show him imaginatively your qualifications at work in
his business.

[Sidenote: Sincerity Of Service Purpose]

Of course it is primarily necessary that you believe in your own capability, and in the value
to the other man of the qualities you have brought to him for sale. Unless you have this feeling
yourself, you will not be likely to draw out his reciprocating desire for your services. You
are not dealing now with his mind. Desire proceeds from the heart. It is emotional, not mental.
The least suspicion of your insincerity would check your prospect's feeling that he wants you
as an employee. You must feel that you have come with a purpose of genuine service, and you
must draw out his similar feeling.

[Sidenote: Desire Comes Out of the Heart]

When you knocked at the door of your prospect's mind, and when you sought to induce his welcome
for your ideas, your object was to get him to take your thoughts into his head. The line of
action is reversed at the desire stage of the selling process. Until now you have been the
moving party. You have been getting yourself and your ideas into his consciousness. But while
attention and interest are receptive processes, the emotion of genuine desire starts with an
outward moving impulse from the prospect. It isn't enough that he open his heart and let you
enter, as he has admitted your ideas to his mind. If he really wants you, his feeling of desire
will come out after you.

[Sidenote: Service Value is Appreciated]

You have revealed to your prospect a lack in his business, and have pictured yourself filling
it to his satisfaction. You have done him a double service. It is human nature to appreciate
such a genuine service, and to want more like it. The first service is accepted with appreciation,
but when the square man wants more he makes a move to get it, and expects to pay for it. As
soon as you have shown the lack and your ability to fill it, and have pictured yourself "on
the job," it will be natural for your prospect to want you there in fact.

The colored porter who washed the windows and scrubbed floors in the general offices of a manufacturing
corporation was ambitious to rise in the social scale and to earn a larger salary. One evening
he went to the private office of the president, and presented for sale an idea of his capability
for a different job.

[Sidenote: Official Welcomer Wanted]

"Boss," he began, "You-all ain't got nobody dere to de front doah to make folks feel welcome-like
when dey comes in heah. Down in Virginny my ol' gran-pap useter weah a dress suit ever' day
an' jist Stan' in de front hall of his ol' massa's house, a-waitin' to bow an' smile to comp'ny
whad'd come in. If you'll jist rent me one o' dem dar suits, Boss, I could stan' out in the
front office an' make folks feel we wuz glad to see 'um, lak' mah gran'pap did. When ennybody
comes heah now, dey ain't nobody pays much 'tention to 'um. You'd orter git somebody on dat
job, Boss; an' I reckon I'm jist 'bout cut out foh it, suh."

The colored man compelled attention by presenting himself at the door of the sanctum. He induced
interest in his proposal. Then, in addition, he pointed out a lack and that he could fill it.
Immediately the president visioned the old darkey as an official welcomer, and wanted him.
He reached right out for the service offered. The sale was closed at once, and the colored
man shone in his new glories within a week.

[Sidenote: Conflict of Heart and Mind]

Often a man desires with his heart things that his mind does not approve. Therefore when you
work to get yourself wanted, appeal to the heart of your prospect, rather than to his mind.
Then if his mind raises objections to his desire for your services, your mind at a later stage
of the selling process will overcome or get around his mental opposition. When the time for
that step arrives, his heart will already have been won as your ally, and will help you dispose
of the objections his mind has raised.

[Sidenote: Get Yourself Liked]

As a preliminary to getting yourself wanted, get yourself liked. Make such an impression, do
and say such things, as will draw out of the heart of your prospect a friendly feeling for
you. You know of people who have been boosted to notable successes because influential men
took personal interest in their advancement.

I recall an office boy who was always ready to perform little extra services. He held his employer's
overcoat one day, and the boss rather absent-mindedly handed him a tip. The boy shook his head
and declined the dime.

"I didn't do that for a tip. You always treat me fine, and I just like to show you I appreciate
it."

The boy's heart had spoken, and the employer's heart responded at once with an especial liking
for the lad. The seed of personal interest having been planted in the heart of the president,
his liking grew. The boy was advanced to better and better positions. He made good on his merits,
but he was helped very much because his employer wanted him to succeed.

[Sidenote: The Common Heart of Man]

Reference has previously been made to the fundamental likeness of all men at heart and to their
differences in mind. Send out with your voice an appeal to only the minds of your audience--read
a table of statistics, for example--and it will affect all your hearers differently, depending
on the mental characteristics of each individual. But tell a story of great courage, of self-sacrifice,
of love--the same fundamental effect will be produced on all the hearts in the audience; though,
of course, the various individuals will respond with different degrees of emotional intensity.

As has been said before, in order to look into the heart of another man you need but see clearly
into your own. There you will find all the emotions of human nature, no matter how you may
differ from other men in mentality. Hence if you would prompt the heart of another man to want
your services, just do the things he would need to do to win your liking for him. Imagine the
cases reversed, and be guided in your selling process by what you see.

[Sidenote: Popular Men]

To look at this step from another angle--if you would be likable, you must find other men likable.
If you like people only within a limited range, you will similarly narrow your own likableness.
If, however, you genuinely like all men--like them for their faults and frailties as well as
for their merits--you will appeal to the intuitive heart of any other man. You will draw out
his liking for you because the magnetic power of your own heart will not be restricted to pulling
your way the friendly feelings of only a few people. Instead, you will be a "popular" man,
a man who is generally well liked.

You meet certain men whom you like at sight. You desire further acquaintance, or friendship
with them. But these men have not prepared themselves to suit you in particular. Most other
people who meet them have the same feeling toward them that you experience. The men you like
at sight, and who make friends wherever they go have developed in themselves feelings of friendliness
for all men. As like breeds like, liking draws liking.

[Sidenote: Artificial Methods Never Deceive The Heart]

If you try to develop particular traits, only because you believe they will attract other men
to you, you will not make your nature likable. Such artificial methods of making yourself attractive
never deceive heart intuitions. You will not become popular by proceeding selfishly. But if
you develop within yourself a heartfelt interest in your fellow men, if you are full of genuine
desire to serve them with your friendship, you will attract the liking of nearly all the people
you meet. They will want to know you better and to be your friends.

[Sidenote: No Insulation Against Human Magnetism]

There is "no sich critter" as a natural grouch. A man who has that reputation is repressing
his natural emotions--that is all. He does not express his true feelings. He attempts to deny
that he has them. But they are inside him, and you can pull them toward you if you bring your
likableness to bear upon his heart. He will feel the tug, and will be drawn to you by your
magnetic power. There is no insulation that can prevent the pull of human magnetism. So treat
the crab with a feeling of real liking for the human nature inside, and don't be discouraged
by his shell. Be more than ordinarily likable when you have to deal with a surly prospect.
Exert all the magnetism you have. He will feel drawn to you. You will get yourself wanted.

J. Pierpont Morgan, Senior, was noted for being unapproachable. But it is said that he took
a great liking to a certain newsboy who never acted afraid of him and who treated him as an
ordinary mortal. This gamin always had a cheery word for everybody. That he made no exception
in Mr. Morgan's case won the heart of the austere financier, who helped the boy to get an education
and to start in business.

[Sidenote: Do Not Over-sell Likability]

The emphasis placed on the importance of likableness as the principal factor in getting yourself
wanted may have made you forget the primary necessity of showing your prospect a real lack
in his business, and that you are capable of filling it. It is possible to attract an employer's
liking for you, whether he has a place for you or not. But his liking will do you no good unless
you can also make him see he has a need for you.

Success is not to be won by getting in where you are not wanted, however likable you may be.
You must sell the idea of your service value as well as the ideas that your services would
be liked. You cannot over-develop the quality of likableness, but you can over-sell it, to
the detriment of your own best interest.

[Sidenote: A Winning Personality Sometimes Fails]

One of the most conspicuous failures I know is a man who has "a winning personality." Times
without number his genuine agreeableness has won him fine chances to succeed, but in the positions
he has held he has never studied the needs of his employers for other qualities than likability.
Consequently he has fallen down on all his big chances. Today he is just a popular door man
for a big department store. His intelligence and his physical ability are so evident that he
is an object of pity and wonder as he smiles and bows to customers of the store. Undoubtedly
if he had studied the different opportunities he has had, and had fitted himself into all the
requirements of a particular situation, his winning personality would have helped him higher
and higher toward the mountain peaks of success instead of leaving him on an ant hill.

[Sidenote: Three Impressions Necessary]

Of course the mind of your prospective employer acts in co-ordination with his heart when you
attract him so much that he really wants the service you proffer. He imagines you rendering
that service. He thinks what "might be" if you were associated with his business. He paints
mental pictures that please him, and he wishes his vision to come true. But when he begins
to imagine you rendering service, the picture of your agreeable personality will not be pleasant
to him if he sees that he doesn't really need you. In order to get yourself wanted it is necessary
that you show him the lack, and that you can fill it, and that you would be likable when filling
it. If you make these three impressions on the mind and heart of your prospect, your success
in your purpose will be assured. You will not fail to get yourself wanted.

[Sidenote: Desire is Turning Point Of the Sale]

In salesmanship "desire is the determinant of the sale." By this is meant that when the salesman
sufficiently stimulates a real desire in his prospect, he has climbed the highest grade of
difficulty. If he is skillful, the selling process from then on should be comparatively easy
sledding. You realize that if you can get yourself wanted by an employer, the matter of landing
a job in his business should not be hard. We therefore are considering now the turning point
in the process of selling the true idea of your best capabilities in the right field. After
you get yourself wanted, the odds are no longer against you, but grow increasingly in your
favor. If, having succeeded in getting yourself wanted, you then fail in your ultimate purpose,
you should blame no one but yourself.

[Sidenote: The Use of Tactful Suggestion]

A very skillful use of tact and diplomacy is necessary to success in pointing out to a prospect
something that he lacks, and your capability for filling that lack. A man is apt to resent
your "picking flaws" in his business. He is likely to regard you as an egotist if you assert
that he needs you. You will not get yourself wanted if you make the impression that you are
a critical fault-finder with "the big-head." Rather, you should pattern after the example of
the professional salesman of goods. In the processes of persuasion and creating desire he employs
the arts of suggestion in preference to making direct statements. He is a tactful diplomat.
Learn from his methods, as explained in "The Selling Process."

You have come to a chosen employer, with a real service purpose; but be careful not to offend
in your presentation. Do not bring him your idea for improving his business as if it were a
great discovery you have made. He won't like it if you open his eyes to his lacks in that fashion.
You might better suggest that while you have perceived what he needs, you have no doubt he
either has seen it already or would have perceived it if his time and attention had not been
engrossed by other things. You will be liked if you so present a picture of the lack and of
yourself satisfying it.

[Sidenote: Rubbing the Prospect the Wrong Way]

You are apt to get yourself cordially disliked if you rub your prospect's pride in his business
the wrong way.

An accountant sought an opportunity to become the auditor for a manufacturing corporation.
He had gained considerable "inside knowledge" of the company's lax business methods. But when
talking to the president he exaggerated the relative importance of these defects. In his eagerness
to impress the executive with the need for an auditor, he over-drew the danger from leaks in
the company's accounting system. The president was exasperated. His pride was stung. What had
been said reflected on his capability as an executive. So he turned savagely on the accountant.

"If we're so rotten as all that," he snarled, "how could we make money and pay dividends? No
doubt you are right in your criticisms of our methods. But if I had a man like you around here,
continually finding fault and picking everybody and everything to pieces, the whole business
would be demoralized. The ideas you have brought to me are worth a thousand dollars, and I'll
give you my check for that, but no crepe hanger can work for me."

[Sidenote: Avoid Teaching]

When you present your capabilities for sale, don't suggest that you think your prospect's business
will go to the "demnition bow-wows" if your services are not engaged. Understate the lack and
your fitness to fill it. You may be sure the employer will appreciate fully the value of the
new ideas you bring, and the worth of your services.

[Sidenote: Pope's Rule]

None of us really like "teachers." Do not suggest that you are a "know it all." Much less make
the impression that the other man does not know. Communicate to him the idea that you believe
he has overlooked the lack to which you call his attention. With modest confidence present
your capabilities. You need not assert in words that you will fill the bill. Your prospect
can see that. In everything you suggest and say, show that you genuinely like him and his business.
Manifest sincere admiration. Make him feel that you have come to his office because you especially
want to work there. That will make him want you in his service. Use suggestion to increase
his desire for you.

[Sidenote: Reduce Resistance By Suggestion]

Direct presentation of ideas indicates an intention to inform, to teach, to direct the mind
of the other man. Every human individual, whether a child or a centenarian, re-acts in opposition
to such an effort at instruction. There is something in all of us alike which makes us wish
to think and decide for ourselves. Hence the value of the art of suggestion in getting yourself
wanted.

Ideas you suggest enter the mind of the other man so unobtrusively that he does not realize
you originated them. He has no feeling that you intend to influence his mind. Consequently
he makes no resistance to the suggested ideas. It never pays to reason when selling an idea;
because reasoning invariably brings out a reaction of opposition. You will not create a desire
for your services by presenting them logically, or by making an argument regarding your capabilities.
One of the greatest students of the human mind assures us that "most persons never perform
an act of pure reasoning; but all their acts are the results of imitation, habit, suggestion,
or some related form of thinking."

[Sidenote: Three Reasons For Using Suggestion]

Suggestion is remarkably effective in persuading and in arousing desire because:

First, every "suggested" idea is accepted as absolutely true unless it is contradicted by other
ideas already in the mind of the prospect. This is because the prospect thinks a suggested
idea is his. He adopts it and makes it his own. That is, his mind takes the suggestion and
interprets it in terms of his own thoughts. Of course he believes what he himself thinks. Say
to a prospective employer that you would particularly like to work in association with him,
and he may believe you are "shooting hot air." He will have no such feeling if you tell him
details about his business that have especially interested you. Show him that you have been
studying and observing his methods. Give him to understand that you have also investigated
other businesses. Thus without saying it, you suggest to his mind that you have come to his
office because you really would prefer to be employed there. He will believe the suggested
idea; though he might have scoffed at the statement.

[Sidenote: Suggestion Avoids Contradiction]

Second, suggestion is effective in persuasion and in arousing desire because suggested ideas
which include no comparisons or criticisms very seldom arouse contradictory attitudes of mind.
The suggested idea enters the mind of the other man quietly, unaccompanied by a blare of the
trumpet "I Tell You." Opposing ideas are not aware of its presence until it has supplanted
them. Suggest to a chosen employer that he means to be up-to-date, and he agrees. If you say
his methods are behind the times, he will be apt to defend them instead of following your lead
along the line of suggested improvements.

[Sidenote: Suggested Ideas Tend to Action]

Third, every suggested idea of action tends to result in the action itself; whereas a direct
attempt to secure action is almost sure to result in opposition. Human nature works that way.
Your prospect, being unconscious that a particular idea of action is suggested to him, does
not have his will stimulated to prevent that action. If you come to your prospective employer
and ask for the job you want, he will be on the defensive. But if you suggest to him that he
wants you--that he lacks and needs such services as you present--he will be impelled to the
affirmative action of offering you the job.

[Sidenote: Selling Henry Ford]

When I was originally engaged by Henry Ford, it was in the capacity of a public accountant,
for an audit of the business of the Ford Motor Company, and later for the installation of an
accounting system that would tell accurately every month "where they were at." Back in 1904-1905
the Ford Motor Company was not showing any more profits than many other motor car manufacturers
organized on similar lines. After I completed my work as an accountant, Mr. Ford talked with
me about taking a permanent position with the Company in the capacity of "Commercial Manager."
That title covered responsibility for the distribution of products, advertising, collections,
selection of branch managers and their corps of assistants, operation of branch houses, appointment
and direction of agents, employment and control of the entire sales force, etc., etc. The position
was much broader than that of Sales Manager, as it included also the accounting and organizing
of nearly every department of the business.

For several years prior to that time I had sold my services as a public accountant and organizer
to many large concerns throughout the country, including twenty-eight different automobile
companies. I believed in my ability, not only to organize a selling and distributing force
for successfully marketing a standard product, but also to extend that force over a world field
and to control it in all the details of its operations, from opening the mail to the declaration
and payment of dividends, more efficiently than the average sales or commercial manager. So
I had no hesitancy in undertaking the Ford job, which, even at that early date, I visualized
as culminating in a big one.

When I finally engaged my services with the Ford Motor Company on a permanent basis, the business
was represented by only a few hundred scattered, unorganized, uncontrolled, and non-directed
dealers. My work during the following twelve years was concentrated on developing and enlarging
yearly this small hit-or-miss distributing aggregation into a compact force of thousands of
well-trained, highly efficient sales and service representatives of the Ford Motor Company.
They were all Ford "boosters," and by their loyalty and intensive co-operation they "put across
the Ford" in the big way that today makes the little car so conspicuous everywhere throughout
the world.

[Sidenote: Statement Avoided Suggestion Used]

Note that while my experience with the Ford Motor Company as a public accountant convinced
me that what the business needed then was a commercial manager and sales organizer, and I believed
myself fitted for the position, I did not make that statement to Mr. Ford; because it would
have been poor salesmanship. He might have thought me entirely qualified to deal with figures,
but not so capable of handling sales agents and dealers.

So I never said to him that I was the man he needed. But I suggested it by presenting my ideas
of how the job should be done. He accepted my ideas as good, and was influenced by the natural
suggestion that resulted from them. He told me that he wanted me to become Commercial and Sales
Manager. It was the opportunity for success that I most desired. I got myself wanted without
having to overcome any resistance in the mind of the man with whom I had chosen to work.

[Sidenote: Negative Suggestions]

You recognize how true to human nature are incidents of this sort. You know how powerful is
the force of affirmative suggestion. But have you appreciated how surely desire is killed by
negative suggestions? If you make displeasing impressions, you will get yourself not wanted.
Therefore you must be careful to avoid certain things your prospect would not like, just as
you should be careful in doing things that are likable.

[Sidenote: Speak the Prospect's Language]

If your prospecting and sizing up of an employer indicate that he is very painstaking, suggest
to him how particular you have been to prepare yourself in knowledge of his needs. If he is
a man who weighs ideas carefully, suggest to him your qualities of judgment and decision. Perhaps
he is characterized by a marked constructive imagination. Suggest that you, too, have imaginative
power. Bring out conspicuously the particular elements of your qualifications that are most
likely to suggest ideas akin to his own. Speak those phrases of the language of suggestion
which he best understands, and that are most likely to impress him with the idea that you and
he think alike.

[Sidenote: Deceptive Suggestions]

A caution is necessary here. In any suggestion that you make, convey neither more nor less
than the actual truth regarding your capabilities. Avoid any possibility of deception.

I recall the case of a young man who quite won the heart of a dignified bank president whose
tastes were very quiet. The young man studiously avoided the slightest appearance of flashiness
in his dress and manner. He spoke in modulated tones. His movements were subdued. He had exactly
the quiet pose that suited his prospective employer. The banker stressed his appreciation of
the characteristics manifested by the applicant, and the young man "overdid it" by suggesting
that he was always decorous in his manner.

The bank president had occasion to entertain a visiting financier who wanted to go to the ball
game. A few seats away the young man whose application was being considered rooted boisterously
for the home team, unconscious of the contradiction he presented to the suggestions he had
made in the banker's private office. The new impression was made more disagreeable because
the boisterous behavior suggested to the banker that the young man had not conveyed a true
idea of himself previously. When he came next morning for the answer to his application, he
received a cold "No."

The young man really was not boisterous except on the rare occasions when he let off steam,
as at a ball game. If he had conveyed the truthful impression that he was nearly always quiet,
and had taken pains to admit that occasionally he "let loose," but only in proper surroundings,
he would not have killed his chances by the negative suggestion of untruthfulness.

[Sidenote: Motive of Suggestion]

After all it is your motive that determines the right or wrong use of suggestion in getting
yourself wanted. If you keep carefully in mind a purpose to suggest less instead of more than
the truth about your capabilities, you need not fear that you will offend by over-drawing the
picture of your real self.

If your motive is wrong, it will lower the quality of your manhood. If you suggest a wrong
motive to the other man, the effect is to lower his manhood qualities in considering you. It
is particularly important not to stimulate a motive that may afterward operate to your detriment.

[Sidenote: Over-Suggestion of Ability]

I know a young man who was so eager to show his willingness to work that he suggested absolute
tirelessness. His employer, though he appreciated what this young man did, kept overloading
him. Finally the employee broke down and made a serious mistake. He was unjustly dismissed
from service because he had encouraged his employer to depend on him altogether too much, and
disappointment resulted.

Do not pretend a higher degree of ability than you possess. Attempt no more than you can do
well. You will succeed in getting yourself wanted if you manifest promise of growth in capability.
If you are a sapling, do not pose as a full grown tree of knowledge.

[Sidenote: Selling Out To Competitor]

Sometimes it happens that a man can present his capabilities for sale and appear especially
desirable to another man because he possesses certain knowledge the employer would like to
have. Maybe you have sought to gain your chance by carrying to a competitor of your former
employer the latter's secrets. If you come with the suggestion that you will sell out, you
are offering a service that does not command full respect, and you are appealing only to the
lower motives of your prospect. You do not thereby get yourself wanted. He wants what you know.
What you have learned fairly by working for one man, you have a right to sell fairly to another
man, of course. But do not suggest that this special knowledge is the principal element of
your desirability. Suggest, rather, that it is only incidental to your all-around fitness for
the job you want.

[Sidenote: Self-Respect]

Use what you know without pandering to the lower motives of your new employer. Impel him to
like you for what you are, and not merely for what you bring. Open his eyes to your better
nature, not to the worst side of you. He will see in you the better qualities of himself and
appreciate them. Have your own motives right; then there will be no danger that you will appeal
to the wrong motives of the other man.

Of course you must have the highest respect for your own motives. This necessitates high character.
You must be honest in the very structure of your being. You need, too, absolute faith in yourself
and in your proposition, and faith in the desirability of your service to the other man. Finally,
you must be consecrated to the motive of rendering him service.

[Sidenote: Postpone Criticism Until Desire Is Stimulated]

It is poor salesmanship to let your prospect begin to analyze your faults until you have made
yourself thoroughly pleasing to him. Before you complete the selling process you should admit
your own faults, rather than let him discover them. But skillfully postpone this step until
you get yourself wanted. Then your prospect will be inclined to co-operate in disposing of
objections to you; whereas if criticisms arise too soon in the selling process they may prevent
him from liking you thoroughly, and may check your purpose before you get yourself wanted.

[Sidenote: Right Time to "Face The Music"]

A merchant received an application for employment in his private office from a young man who
created so pleasing an impression that the employer decided to make him his secretary. He outlined
his ideas to the applicant, who entered into them most enthusiastically; thereby increasing
the liking of his prospective employer for him. Then the young man sat up straight in his chair,
looked the merchant squarely in the eye, and said, "No one in this city knows it, but when
I was eighteen years old I stole ten dollars and was sentenced to the reform school. That was
seven years ago. I never have done anything dishonest since, and I never will again. But you
have a right to know my whole record before you employ me in a position of such trust." If
the candidate had confessed his blemished record before making himself thoroughly desirable,
it is practically certain that he would not have won the place. He got it because he handled
the objection after instead of before creating the desire for his services.

[Sidenote: Concentrate On Suggesting Qualifications]

We shall consider in the next chapter how to meet and handle objections, how to deal with your
faults. But as we postpone our study of that step in the selling process; so should you postpone
consideration of your faults and shortcomings, until you get yourself wanted. Do not dodge
direct questions, but courteously request that you be permitted to answer them a little later.
At this stage of selling the true idea of your best capabilities concentrate upon the moderate,
truthful suggestion of your qualifications.

[Sidenote: Gaining Prospect's Confidence]

The first result to be desired in selling is the confidence of the buyer. Use all your manly
qualities to win this confidence deservedly. Then when you honestly admit your faults and shortcomings,
you will be aided to win out in the end by the confidence you have already inspired in the
other man.

Very often the applicant for a position fails to get it because he merely presents the abstract
idea that his services are for sale. He does not picture himself in actual service. The presentation
of abstract ideas is an appeal only to the interest or mind side of the other man. The presentation
to his imagination must go beyond his interest, if his heart desire for the services is to
be secured. Therefore it is highly important to your success in getting yourself wanted that
you plan how you actually would serve on the job, and when you are talking with your prospective
employer, speak as if you were at work.

[Sidenote: Picture Yourself At Work]

If you imagine yourself fitted into a particular job, and show yourself there to the mind's
eye of your prospect, he will have to go through the mental process of getting you out of the
imaginary job. That will be much harder for him than it would have been to keep you out in
the first place. If you merely present the services you could render, and don't picture yourself
as actually rendering them, you haven't won even the imaginary job. But if you do paint yourself
into a chosen place, and can make your prospect see you in that position, the suggestion will
impel him to copy imagination with actuality. He will consider you as if you were on the job.
Evidently when you have won this advantage, he will be inclined to want to keep you at work,
unless you do something or manifest some quality that makes you undesirable.

[Sidenote: No Doubt About Success]

Getting yourself wanted is a process that can be brought to a successful conclusion with absolute
certainty. It is not difficult to understand human nature if you are willing to see clearly
into yourself. It is only necessary, then, that you subordinate your personality to the personality
of the other man. Learn what he wants, and avoid showing him that you want something from him.
Show him instead that you can supply what he lacks. Complete and round out the process by suggesting
the particular qualities in yourself that your prospecting and size-up have indicated to be
the qualities he especially likes. He will want you then. He can't help it.

CHAPTER X

Obstacles In Your Way

[Sidenote: Mountain Climbing]

There is no great mountain in the world that has a natural, smooth road with an easy grade
all the way to the top. Mountain climbing requires some hard work. It involves getting around,
or going over, or removing many obstacles that block the path upward.

You will encounter similar difficulties, obstacles, and resistance on your way to success.
If you cannot pass them, your ambition will be defeated. You will quit the climb, discouraged;
or will be driven back, a failure. In order to assure your success you must now ascertain dependable
ways to conquer obstacles. This advance knowledge will make them seem less formidable. Since
you will have definite plans for dealing with the difficulties that may obstruct your path,
you will not feel hopelessly blocked when you face them.

[Sidenote: Knowing How]

No great mountain has ever been scaled by a novice ignorant of the science, and unskilled in
the art of climbing to supreme heights. But an expert mountaineer learns from mastering one
peak something about how to climb others. He develops ability to conquer any and all obstacles
he may meet. He proves repeatedly that what would be impossible to a novice is a certainty
to him. He starts the most difficult ascent with absolute confidence that he will gain the top.

[Sidenote: Obstacles and Resistance]

You likewise can feel sure of your ability to reach the highest peaks of success. In preceding
chapters you have been shown how to take advantage of the easiest way up by following the guide
marks of salesmanship at every step. Now we are to study the obstacles you will encounter,
in particular the objections the prospect may raise to frustrate your purpose. At this stage
of the selling process you will be like a mountaineer fighting in the Alps. It will probably
be necessary that you overcome or evade considerable human resistance while you are climbing
toward your goal.

Let us assume that you have already gained a chance to sell your capabilities to the particular
man through whom you expect to succeed. He has heeded your knock and welcomed you into his
interest. You have made such a presentation of your desirability and service value that he
wants you to be associated with him. But now it will be natural for him to begin a critical
analysis, seeking whatever faults he can discover or imagine in you or your proposition. Your
success or failure in your ultimate purpose is likely to depend on how you handle the criticisms
he raises. Therefore it is of vital importance that you learn in advance sure ways to gain
your goal despite normal opposition.

[Sidenote: Objections Are Natural]

Recognize first that it is natural for your prospect to raise objections, whether he is favorably
impressed or not. His resistance to your purpose may be only a precaution. Perhaps it does
not indicate opposition at all. He may want you to convince him you are all right; so that
he will feel entire confidence in his own judgment when he finally does as you wish. Or he
may object for no other purpose than to test you thoroughly. If this is the case, his sympathies
will all be with you while you are dealing with the obstacles he puts in your way.

Evidently objections of this sort should not be handled the same as the objections of opposition.
It is necessary that you distinguish between the two kinds and that when dealing with each
specific objection you determine in your own mind what is its source. There should be nothing
in your method of handling the obstacle that might antagonize your prospect. You should take
fullest advantage of his every inclination to cooperate with you in his thoughts and feelings.
He may be "pulling for" you strongly when he seems to be "bucking" the hardest.

[Sidenote: Objection is Favorable Sign]

An objection really is a favorable sign. If you call upon a prospective employer who, after
hearing your presentation, begins to find fault with it and with you, or tries to evade your
proposal, you may be sure that you have carried him along a considerable distance toward the
accomplishment of your purpose. He objects or evades because he is on the defensive. "You have
him going." He is wary, and so takes measures for self-protection. The moment your prospect
begins to raise objections in your way, he indicates that he is not entirely comfortable in
his own mind about escaping from your salesmanship. He has felt the tug of desire; but he does
not feel sure yet that you deserve his confidence, or else he has a pretty positive idea that
in this matter of your possible employment his interests and yours are different. He is looking
out for himself.

[Sidenote: Welcome Opportunity To Strengthen Yourself]

However, you have come with a true service purpose. You believe he needs you; that you can
satisfy a lack in his business. You feel your interests and his are alike, not different. You
know that you have no intention "to put anything over on him." You want your prospect to be
absolutely satisfied with what you propose. Therefore you should welcome every chance to convince
his mind and win his confidence. An objection affords you an opportunity to overcome it, and
so both to strengthen your proposition and to weaken his resistance.

[Sidenote: Don't Set Up Straw Men to Knock Down]

You should not, however, bring up objections that the prospect has not raised in his own mind.
That would be putting up a straw man and knocking him down, which is profitless and unconvincing.
Of course you must clear the path when there is no other way to proceed, but do not block it
yourself. Sometimes it will not be advisable to clear the path. If you can get around a difficulty
you see, without attracting your prospect's attention to it, you will be wise to go some indirect
way to your goal.

Suppose, for example, that you know the salary you want is higher than your prospect has been
accustomed to pay. It will be good salesmanship for you not to refer to the amount you have
in mind, until after you have carried him along with you to consider the profits he will make
from engaging your services. Since you plan to show him that these profits will pay your salary,
you will be wise to avoid the matter of your compensation until you have approached nearer
to the successful conclusion of your selling process.

[Sidenote: Avoid Troubles by Forethought]

Almost every difficulty and opposition you are likely to encounter can be anticipated. Don't
wait until you come face to face with an obstruction in the way of success. Let forethought
carry you imaginatively into just such a situation. Think yourself out of a possible difficulty
before you actually get into it. Then you can win the respect of your prospect by proving on
the spot that you are not a man who can be dodged or blocked, or cornered. Every time you pass
an obstacle, you will be a long step nearer to success in selling your services.

Suppose an employer says to you, "You are too young. You have had no experience in this line
of work." You cannot deny your youth and you should not defend it as if it were a fault. Nor
can you claim experience you have not had. But it is unnecessary for you to indicate any feeling
that inexperience is a demerit. An ordinary applicant might be discomfited by such resistance
to his purpose. If you are a skillful salesman, you will be prepared to deal with this very
obstacle and will turn it to good account. You can say at once:

[Sidenote: Value of Adaptability]

"Because I am young, I am adaptable to your methods, instead of being set in ways that might
differ from yours. True, I am not experienced. Therefore, I haven't any wrong ideas to unlearn.
Think of me as raw material that won't have to be re-made, and that can be easily shaped as
you want to form it. I realize it will take some work on your part, but the product will be
satisfactory to you when it is done. It seems to me that the only question involved is whether
or not I would make it worth your while to do the work on me. The fact that I have come to
you of my own choice proves I really want to be employed here. I assure you now that I will
make my services worth any pains you take to teach me your methods, and I will be just as eager
to remain as I am to start."

[Sidenote: Use Objection As a Sales Help]

Analyze this method of dealing with any particular obstacle. Plan to get rid of the obstruction
completely, leaving the way ahead smoothed. When the objection of the prospect is so skillfully
disposed of, his desire for your services is stimulated. He wants you more, because he likes
you better now that you have cleared away the obstacle. Thus you have utilized the objection
as a help in selling yourself successfully. Just so a mountain climber uses the rocks he encounters
as holding places to help him climb higher.

Your prospect may say that he has no need for such services as you offer. He may state reasons
why you are not needed in his Business. But if you have prepared yourself thoroughly, each
disclaimer of his lack, every suggestion of an objection, will give you an opportunity to prove
in some specific way your service value to him.

The president of a manufacturing company had an ironclad rule that all positions in his business
were to be filled by promotion. He never hired a new employee except to start at the bottom.
A competent young office man applied for a situation. He was turned down flatly. The company's
policy was quoted as the reason. He met this obstacle in a new way.

[Sidenote: Making an Exception]

"One of the principal reasons I came to you, Mr. Blank, is that I hope to benefit from your
rule myself. I want to get into a company where I will know that the way to advancement is
sure without going outside for my chance. But by my experience in other employment I have developed
certain capabilities that would warrant you in making an exception to your rule, in my case.

"You do not audit your own books. Yet you have been self-auditing your methods of office operation.
Another thought I want to suggest. You know that in the royal families of Europe the stock
runs down because they don't get in fresh blood. I would not advocate a change in your general
policy. But you have already made an exception to your rule in having your books checked by
a public accountant whom you engage by the year for that purpose.

"I propose to bring in the outside viewpoint for the study of your office system, with the
expectation of suggesting possible improvements. I want to introduce fresh blood, and yet to
become part of your organization family. It is sound business for you to engage me because
I am from the outside. You need an auditor of your operations as much as an auditor of your
accounts."

This view of the matter had never been presented before to the employer. It won him over to
the proposal. The new man broke in where every preceding applicant had failed.

[Sidenote: Apparent Objections]

Thus far we have considered actual obstructions, real blocks in the salesman's way. Now let
us turn our attention briefly to obstacles that are only apparent, to resistance that is but
a feint.

Your prospect may try to put you off. Or perhaps he will attempt to evade uttering a downright
refusal, and instead will make some sort of an excuse for not doing what you wish. If you dignify
these artificial or merely apparent obstacles by treating them as real obstructions, you will
hinder your own progress toward success.

[Sidenote: Danger of Losing Ground Gained]

You have secured your chance to present your services for purchase. You have made real progress
toward the successful accomplishment of your ultimate purpose. Nearly always if you let yourself
be put off for any reason, without making a definite advance toward your final goal, you will
lose some of the ground already gained. When your prospect attempts to evade the issue by making
an excuse or by postponing further consideration of the subject, he tacitly admits that your
position is strong. But if you have to start the selling process all over again at another
time, if you let him put you off when your position is strong, you will be weaker when you
attempt to resume your sale.

[Sidenote: Do One of Two Things]

Should you be put off, do one of two things. Either disregard the evasion entirely and go straight
ahead with your selling process; or, if you consent to the postponement or evasion, take advantage
of your strategical position of strength to make a definite advance toward the accomplishment
of your purpose. For examples of the two methods let us consider suppositious cases.

[Sidenote: Driving Ahead]

Your prospective employer might say, "I'll think over your application. Come in next week and
I'll let you know my decision." You can handle this evasion effectively by going directly ahead
and proposing, "I am perfectly willing that you should think over my usefulness to you, but
during the week you are considering me for future employment, let me actually work on the job.
If you decide that you don't want to keep me, tell me so at the end of the week and there will
be no charge for my time." You will be driving straight toward your goal, not even pausing
when he attempts to put you off.

[Sidenote: Strengthening Position]

This effort at evasion or postponement might be handled in a different way. You could say to
the prospective employer, "Very well. I will return in a week for your decision. Meanwhile
I will submit some additional references as to my character and energy. I ask also that you
permit me to save a week instead of wasting it. I should like your permission to spend this
next week in your office, studying the job. Then if you decide to employ me, as I believe you
will, I will be already broken in." Such a proposal is hard to refuse. While you would consent
to the postponement or evasion of decision, you would be strengthening your own position.

[Sidenote: Make Progress]

In one way or the other you can make progress. Either you can brush the evasion aside and carry
your prospect through to the closing stage of the sale of your services, or you can close an
intermediate sale on the spot, as in the second illustration.

[Sidenote: Forcing Real Objection]

Do not, therefore, treat evasions and postponements as real obstacles. Even in case you cannot
induce your prospect to go ahead with you, or close an intermediate sale, you can avoid being
blocked by his attempt to put you off. When he sees that he cannot get rid of you by his subterfuge,
he will be forced to make a real objection. He will not give you another weak excuse after
you have disposed of his first attempt to evade. When he tries to block you by making a real
objection, after the failure of his excuse or postponement, he will fall right into your plan
of the sale. You will be all ready for the objection he states. You will know exactly how to
handle it and turn it to good account so that his opposition will be weakened and you will
add to your strength.

Let us suppose your prospect comes out with the flat statement, after you prevent him from
putting you off, "No, I have made up my mind not to add any new employees for the present."
He thinks that settles the question. In reality it affords you a sales opening. You retort,
"Your attitude is perfectly right. You do not want to add to expense. I should feel the same
way myself, were I in your position. However, I am not going to be an expense. I shall be a
money-maker. I know you have no objections to increasing your profits." His opposition would
have given you your lead.

[Sidenote: Unsound Objection]

A man applied for a position in a bank. Business in general was dull; so the president tried
to put him off. The position sought offered any one filling it opportunities to develop increased
business for the bank along certain lines. Thus the objection of dull times was plainly unsound.
The applicant felt, however, that it would be a mistake to urge very strongly his ideas about
increasing the business. He believed the president would not accept them if fully stated. So
the young man met the attempted evasion by drawing the banker on to a step that committed him
only to the beginning of the program outlined.

"I appreciate that business is not rushing at present," he said. "Therefore you will have time
to study how I propose to develop some new business. If you were very busy, you would not be
able to investigate my plan thoroughly. You may not care to put it into effect just now, but
while you have comparative leisure let me give you an illustration of ways in which my idea
can be worked out.

"It is unnecessary to discuss salary or a definite engagement at present, if you prefer to
wait awhile. But with your permission I should like to come in here for a month and demonstrate
a few of my ideas in actual practice. At the end of that time I will show you a chart of the
results."

[Sidenote: Evasion Turned to Selling Aid]

The evasion was turned into a selling aid. The banker, naturally desirous of making additional
profits, could not very well turn down such a proposal. He would have felt a little ashamed
to accept services without paying for them. Therefore he gave the applicant a chance and agreed
to pay him a moderate salary from the beginning. The new man went to work immediately, and
very soon demonstrated such value that his compensation was increased to an entirely satisfactory
amount.

[Sidenote: Don't Fight Back]

Already in this chapter you have been warned against handling an objection in such a way that
the natural antagonism of the man who makes it will be increased by your method of dealing
with his opposition. When he resists you, or puts obstructions in your way, you of course must
take the measures that are necessary to enable you to proceed with your purpose, notwithstanding
the obstacles he raises. But if he acts antagonistic, be careful not to appear to fight back.
Avoid making the impression that you regard him as an opponent. Your difficulty in closing
the sale will be lessened if you keep him from feeling at any time that he needs to adopt measures
of self-protection against you.

[Sidenote: Diplomacy And Tact]

When your progress is obstructed, it is necessary that you use a very high degree of diplomacy
and tact. This will carry you much farther toward your purpose than any manifestation of naked
force. Of course you must meet many objections squarely. You will encounter obstructions that
cannot be avoided, opposition that will not step aside. There will be occasions when it will
be necessary for you to employ force. But you can always conceal "the iron hand in the velvet
glove" if you exert your force in tones and with gestures or movements, rather than by making
word statements. The art of suggestion can be employed as effectively at the objection stage
as at any other step of the selling process.

Let us assume that you are a greenhorn. But you believe yourself capable of filling a certain
position. You apply for it. Your prospective employer questions your capability because you
lack experience. He refuses your application, and declares he is unwilling to run the risk
of having you make mistakes that might be expensive to him.

[Sidenote: Using Suggestion Instead of Statement]

You know that you are very careful, and that you would not take any important action on your
own responsibility if you were in doubt whether or not you were right. You feel that his objection
is unsound; that he is exaggerating caution. But it would certainly be a mistake for you to
say, "Nonsense!" That would make him bristle.

Of course you want to show him that you do not take his objections seriously. You can make
the right impression by smiling at his statement. You can reinforce the effect of your smile
by making a horizontal gesture with your hand. If you shake your head slightly, force will
be added to your denial of incapacity or rashness. It may not be necessary for you to say anything.
Possibly your suggestion will be stronger if you simply ignore the point he has raised against
you. Usually, however, in such a case it is best to employ a few quiet words in disposing of
the objection; though chief reliance should be placed on the suggested meaning behind the statement.

[Sidenote: Your Stake In Your Opportunities]

I recall the case of a man who handled an objection of that sort by first smiling while shaking
his head and making a gesture of negation, and then said, "I could not lose much for you, but
if I were reckless or irresponsible I certainly would lose for myself this opportunity that
you see I want very much. I have a great deal more at stake than you. You may be sure I shall
not risk losing my chance to succeed, by causing you any losses." The tone used was the heart
pitch of sincerity, with the final assurance in the deeper tones of power. The tone and the
manner of the applicant for the position indicated such strength that the prospect felt the
weakness of his objection and did not persist in it.

[Sidenote: Direct and Qualified Admissions]

When you make a direct admission of the point the prospect raises against you, have a strong
answer ready and give it to him at once. Otherwise you will not rid his mind entirely of the
objection. In most cases it is preferable to make only an indirect or qualified admission of
the point raised. Then the objection, not having been strengthened by your full confirmation,
can be overcome without the use of much force or power.

[Sidenote: Straight-out Agreement With the Objection]

If your prospective employer says to you, "We are not making any money. I do not intend to
put on a new man," diplomacy requires you to admit unequivocally the truth of his assertion
that his business is not profitable. He may be exaggerating a temporary condition, but he would
take offense if you should question his blunt statement. Therefore agree with him, and having
prepared the opening with your tact, introduce to his mind agreeable ideas of satisfying his
want for profits. You might say, "I realize business is poor. That is one of the reasons I
come to you just now. If you were making plenty of money, you would not appreciate the value
of my ideas for increasing your profits. The results of the work I propose to do might not
be sufficiently conspicuous among other large earnings to attract your especial notice. This
period of depression gives me the very opportunity I need to prove to you that I would be a
money-maker, and not an expense to you. Surely you would like to have me demonstrate that.
All I ask is a chance to convince you. Judge me by the results."

Analyze this unequivocal admission of the validity of the objection. Such cases can often be
handled most effectively by granting the point raised, directly and without any reservations,
and then answering the objection in such a way that it is completely removed as an obstruction.
This is good salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Indirect Admission]

Suppose, however, you feel the objection of poor business is unsound. Let us assume that this
prospective employer you are interviewing has a dull season every year. Therefore the condition
of which he complains is simply normal, and his objection is put forward as an excuse for rejecting
your application. In such a case you do not want to make the obstruction more formidable by
fully admitting its validity. Yet tact forbids you to deny its soundness. It will be better
salesmanship to recognize indirectly the point raised than it would be to give your full agreement
with the objection, as in the above example of an unequivocal admission. You might use such
an answer as this:

[Sidenote: "That is True, But"]

"I notice, Mr. Blank, that you are making some extensive repairs on your factory. Though this
involves additional expense in your dullest season, you are having the work done now because
this is your slackest time. True, your profit showing at present will not be so good as it
would be if you did not make the repairs. But the earnings of your business will be improved
during your busiest season and you will avoid the extra expense of interrupting your production
when it is at the maximum. This, of course, is the time to have your repair work done. It would
not be good business to put it off.

"My proposal that you engage me now is directly along the line of your own policies. What I
would do in your office might be called repair work. Your dull season is the time to have it
done. I can introduce my efficiency ideas now without disorganizing your operations. Then,
when you are busiest, the new system will be in perfect working order, for your service."

[Sidenote: Adapt Solutions To Your Own Problems]

When you study illustrations of the application of basic principles, do not give them merely
superficial consideration. Examples are of slight value unless they suggest to you how you
should use your imagination to make illustrations of your own in actual practice of the principles.
Whatever your need for help in selling your services, and whatever difficulties you may have
to overcome or get around, you will find in the pages of these books cues to the methods of
certain success. Evidently, however, the scope of the series of chapters must be somewhat limited.
None of the answers to the major problems of salesmanship are omitted from the contents, but
you must apply and fit the given solutions to your individual necessities.

[Sidenote: Two Bases of Objections]

Turn your thought now to the different bases of objections. It is of the utmost importance
that you know whether the obstruction is raised by the mind or by the heart of your prospect.
Mental resistance can be met and overcome by ideas, by points introduced by your mind into
the mind of the other man. His heart may not be involved. But if there is "feeling" in his
opposition, it is necessary that you displace it with a different feeling toward you and your
proposal. The heart of your prospect must be turned from antagonism to friendliness, if it
is involved in an objection. Therefore when a point is made against you, decide from the evidence
whether the obstacle raised has an emotional or a mental basis. Treat it accordingly. Use your
own mind principally in dealing with the purely mental objection of the prospect. But depend
on drawing out his heart with yours if his emotions are involved in his opposition.

[Sidenote: Mental Basis]

Suppose you have a plan about engaging in a certain business. You have worked it out carefully
and are confident that it is "a winner." But you need financial backing. So you go to a man
who has money, and apply to him for a loan. He listens to your plan. When you finish explaining,
he refuses your request. He uses the mental tone of cold business when he states his reason.
"You offer me no security. I am not in the habit of lending money without it." His words and
manner indicate that he has listened to your plan without the slightest feeling of sympathy
for your purpose. His emotions have not been stirred. He is turning you down simply because
his mind is opposed to the form of investment you propose for his money. It would be futile
for you to make an emotional appeal to this man, in the hope of getting rid of his mental objection.
He would be disagreeably impressed were you to attempt to stir his heart. You cannot offer
him the security he has in mind, but you need not be balked for that reason. It is possible
for you to make an appeal to his mind only, and to suggest to him ideas of security that he
has not considered.

"Mr. J.P. Morgan," you might remind him, "when asked the basis upon which he loaned money,
replied, 'Character, principally.' I offer you the security that Mr. Morgan considered most
important. You know my reputation is good. You perceive that my plan is sound, and that I have
thought it out thoroughly. You do not expect me to lose money. I have proposed to protect you
as fully as possible by agreeing in advance that I will take no step until after your approval
has been given. Therefore, in addition to my character, I am offering you the security of your
own mature, sound judgment on all operations.

[Sidenote: A New Idea Of Security]

"Don't you believe that my squareness, guided by your advice, would secure you? I have applied
for a loan of only ten thousand dollars. You will absolutely control the expenditure of the
money. You know, therefore, that at the worst I could not have a large loss. I have offered
you life insurance to protect you against the possibility of my death within the next five
years. It is altogether improbable that I should have a loss of as much as a thousand dollars
in the new business. Certainly you have sufficient confidence in my ability and integrity to
believe that I could and would repay you a thousand dollars with interest before the expiration
of five years. I expect, and you expect, that my venture will prove successful. I have planned
a sound business enterprise, free from the dangers of speculation. With the cooperation of
your judgment, your loan would be a secure investment. I believe you are now convinced of that."

[Sidenote: Reaching Heart Through Mind]

Notice that the objection is dealt with powerfully; yet there is no appeal that is aimed away
from the prospect's mind. For this very reason his sympathy with the proposal is likely to
be stimulated. Such salesmanship often has the effect of enlisting the heart of the other man
after removing the objection of his mind.

[Sidenote: Objection on Emotional Basis]

Let us assume now that the prospect refuses to make the loan to you because he has been imposed
upon before by some one he has backed. He may really want to lend you the money, but his heart
has been so embittered by his previous experience that he turns a deaf ear to your proposition.
His opposition is based chiefly on feeling. His heart, not his mind, is at the bottom of his
refusal of your request for a loan. He would not be reached by the appeal that would be effective
with the man in the first example. This second prospect should be addressed something like this:

"The experiences you have had hurt you, principally because they have made you lose faith in
men. This, not the money involved, was your greatest loss. So long as you have only those experiences
to think about, you will be unable to get back your former belief in human nature. You would
like to recover it. You would be happy to feel that the men who abused your confidence were
exceptions, and not the rule.

[Sidenote: Selling a New Feeling]

"If you will lend me ten thousand dollars, and I make good my promises to you, your new experience
with me will go a long way toward restoring your lost faith in men. It is natural that you
should feel embittered, but the taste in your mouth is unpleasant. Back me up. I will help
you get rid of your bitterness, and will replace it with a glow of satisfaction. You cannot
doubt that I will make good. You should not let your old prejudice stand in the way of the
gratified feeling you will have when I prove to you that all men are not unworthy of trust.
After I justify your confidence you will be happier for the rest of your life."

In the illustration the objection is dealt with emotionally; because its basis is feeling.
No mental appeal is made. The salesmanship in this example is the direct converse of that in
the previous illustration.

[Sidenote: The Best Rule]

Usually, however, it is best to counteract objections by making appeals to both the heart and
the mind of the objector. In most cases it is safe to assume that his mental opposition involves
his feelings to some degree, and it rarely happens that an objection is so purely emotional
that the mind of the prospect does not take part in it at all. So the rule of masterly salesmanship
is to use neither the appeal to mentality nor the appeal to feeling exclusively, but rather
to stress one or the other, while using both. If the objection appears to be based principally
on opposition of mind, it is more important to reach into the prospect's mind with the answer
than it is to draw out his heart; and vice versa.

[Sidenote: Emotional and Mental Tones]

If the thought behind the objection arises principally from feeling, it will nearly always
be expressed in an emotive tone. By this pitch of the prospect's voice you can determine whether
he is speaking chiefly from his heart or from his mind. Conversely, of course, the mental objection
will be pitched in the high "head" tone. One of the most difficult features of dealing with
opposition from the other man is uncertainty as to how much he means of what he says and does.
It would be a mistake to take his resistance too seriously or too lightly. Therefore it will
aid your salesmanship a great deal if you are able to discriminate between the mental and the
emotional tones in which opposition is expressed. You can reply accordingly.

[Sidenote: The Power Pitch]

It is almost as important that you recognize the pitch of power when it reenforces the words
of objection, and that on the other hand you note when the power tone is lacking. In the first
case you will need to reply with considerable force, whether you appeal to the mind or the
heart of the prospect. But when his objection is stated in a powerless tone, even though it
may be accompanied by curtness or bluster, you need not waste much force on your answering
appeal to his mentality or his emotions.

[Sidenote: Keep Ears Alert]

The mental tone, as we recall from previous study, is pitched higher than either the tone of
feeling or the tone of power. The medium, heart tone is vibrant. It rings with sincerity. The
power tone is deep, and most sonorous of the three. Keep your ears alert for these indications
your prospect will give you unconsciously when he opposes your purpose. The discriminative
reading of the tones of objections will greatly reduce the danger of "getting your wires crossed"
when you reply.

[Sidenote: Suggest Strength Without Antagonism]

If you have to deal with opposition expressed in the tone of power or with gestures of force,
you will be safe in concluding that considerable feeling is behind the objection. Therefore
it will be necessary for you to put both feeling and power into your answer. You should be
careful, however, when you meet such resistance, not to make the impression that you are engaged
in a contest of power with your prospect. Throughout the selling process avoid any suggestion
that you are fighting back. Use the tone of force, not to indicate that your strength of purpose
is greater than the strength of the resistance, but just to emphasize the basic soundness of
your proposition. Thus you can suggest that you are sure of your ground, while you do not dispute
the force and sincerity of the other man in making his objection.

Suppose, for example, you apply for a situation in a wealthy firm, and one of the partners
turns you down most emphatically by saying that they can't afford to engage any new men at
present. You realize the firm may be losing money temporarily, but you believe that your services
in the capacity you have outlined will be valuable to the partners. You can come back firmly
and not retreat an inch from your position. You need not antagonize by manifesting your determination
to have the merits of your proposal given due consideration. You know your prospect feels pretty
strongly on the matter of increasing his payroll while business is unprofitable, but you should
make him recognize that you believe so thoroughly in your earning capacity that you feel you
would justify him in disregarding the temporary depression, while he considers your service worth.

[Sidenote: Units of Tone]

As we have noted previously, it is important to know, at the time an objection is put in your
way, whether or not it is really meant. When deciding in your mind on the right answer to this
problem, you will be helped very much if you size up not only the tone pitch of the objection,
but also the units of tone employed by the prospect in his expression of opposition. If he
refuses your application, but uses just one tone, you may be sure his negative is not strong.
If you do not strengthen it to stubbornness by antagonizing him, but use tact to get rid of
his resistance, you will not find it difficult to melt away the obstruction.

However, should the "No" be spoken in two or more tones, with increased stress at the end,
your prospect certainly means his rejection to be final. His mind is fully made up for the
time being. It would be poor salesmanship to butt your head against his fixed idea, just as
it would be foolish to tackle a strong opponent when he stands most formidably braced to resist
attack. But the two or three toned negative does not mean that the idea behind it is fixed
in the prospect's mind forever. Any one is prone to change his mind, unless he is kept so busy
supporting a position taken that he has no chance to alter his opinion.

[Sidenote: Preventing Stubborness]

Therefore leave alone at first the rock you encounter. Get behind the boulder by taking a roundabout
path. Then quietly dig the support from under the negative idea. If you make no fuss while
you are undermining the obstacle, it will be likely to topple over and roll from your path
without your prospect's noticing that it has disappeared. If his interest is diverted from
it, there is no reason why he should turn his mind back to a stubborn insistence on his objection.
Should he be conscious that the rock of his earlier opposition has rolled away, he will probably
think it lost its balance. He will not realize that you subtly undermined it and got rid of
it by your skillful salesmanship.

A salesman of an encyclopedia met a prospect who refused to give favorable attention to him
and his proposition.

"No sir-e-e!" declared this objector, shaking his head emphatically. "No more book agents can
work me. The last slick one that tried to swindle me is in ja-a-il now, and I put him the-ere!"

He gloated in two or three tones.

[Sidenote: Turning Back A Turn-down]

"Good for you!" praised the undaunted salesman, who had come prepared for adamantine obstacles
in his path. "If more book buyers would see that such rascals get what's coming to them, the
rest of us salesmen, who represent square publishers squarely, would not have to prove so often
that we are not crooks like some fellows who have happened to precede us in a territory. Please
tell me the name of the man who swindled you. He might hit my publishers for a job after he
gets out of jail, and I want to warn the boss against him. Sometimes those slick rascals pull
the wool over our eyes, too. We are always on the lookout to avoid getting tangled up with them."

The salesman pulled out his note book and pencil. When the name was given, he wrote it down
painstakingly. He asked the prospect to spell it for him; so that he would be sure to get it
right. Then he thanked the man who had said he would have nothing more to do with book agents.
Having "got around" the objector, the salesman proceeded with his selling talk on the encyclopedia,
as if he had not been turned down flatly to begin with. In less than half an hour he had secured
the signature of the prospect to a contract for the finest edition.

[Sidenote: Be Ready for Opposition]

If this salesman had not been thoroughly prepared to meet the strongest kind of mental and
emotional opposition, he could not have come back so quickly with the appropriate answer that
undermined the obstacle. You should be likewise ready for the "tough customers" one hears about.
Practice in anticipation various ways of handling every imaginable objection. Then, when you
face an actual difficulty, you will either have on the tip of your tongue a solution of the
problem, or your forethought will assist you to devise on the spur of the moment the way to
work out the right answer. Again we observe the importance of full preparation, in assuring
successful salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Two Essentials Of Resourcefulness]

No quality is more important to the salesman than resourcefulness. Its first requisite is knowledge,
particularly advance knowledge of the points that are likely to come up in the course of the
selling process. The second is a mind trained to act quickly and effectively in using its knowledge.
If you have these two essentials of resourcefulness, no objection will ever catch you napping.
It will do you no good to look up the right answer after you leave the prospect. Nothing can
be more exasperatingly worthless than an idea of something you "might have said" but could
not think of until too late. Have all your facts on tap. And be practiced in making use of
them in every imaginable way. Rare indeed will be cases that you are not prepared to handle
successfully.

[Sidenote: Practicing "Come-backs"]

I know a salesman who trained himself in resourcefulness by typing on about fifty cards all
the objections to his goods or proposition that he could imagine. For ten or fifteen minutes
every evening he played solitaire with these cards. He would shuffle them, held face down,
and then deal off, face up, objection after objection. He never could tell which was coming
next. In a few weeks he had trained himself to give an answer instantly to each objection,
and to utilize it as a help instead of a hindrance in his selling. Thereafter opposition and
criticism from prospects had no terrors for this salesman. He was able to get rid of objections
so swiftly, surely, and completely that they never had time to grow formidable in the mind
of the other man.

[Sidenote: Adaptive Originality]

Only a little less important than resourcefulness in meeting objections, is adaptive originality
in answering them. The "pat, new" reply is always very effective. But do not unduly stress
the value of the factor of originality alone. It must be coupled with adaptation to the particular
viewpoint of the other man. You must speak his language, if you would be sure of making him
understand you perfectly.

[Sidenote: Use Prospect's Language]

For example, suppose you apply to a watch manufacturer for a position in his office. He seems
inclined to question your dependability. You will make a hit with him if you quote a detail
from one of his own ads and say, "I have a seventeen jewel movement," and then particularize
that number of good points about yourself. Such a reference preceding a specification of your
qualities would be adaptive originality. It would be an expression exactly fitted to the way
this prospect thinks. So it would be more effective than an ordinary answer to the objection.
Adaptive originality in disposing of objections is a manifestation of tact and diplomacy--the
fine art of letting the other man down with a shock absorber instead of jolting him to your
way of thinking.

[Sidenote: Keep Train of Thought on Main Track]

When your prospect starts objecting, it is up to you to prevent him from wandering far afield.
At the objections stage, as at every other step in the selling process, you should dominate
the other man. Tactfully keep him concentrated on the subject and on your application. If he
starts to grumble that some man he has engaged previously was "no good," you can smile and
reply, "You would not give me credit for anybody else's fine work, and of course you do not
blame me for what that fellow did."

You know what points are relevant to the subject you have come to discuss, and what are not.
Discriminate, and make the prospect follow you. Restrict your treatment of his objections to
points, means, and methods that will keep his ideas from switching onto side-tracks of thought.
When he wanders away from the subject, do not ramble with him. Promptly and diplomatically
run his mind back on the main line of your purpose. You are operating a through train to success.
You must not be diverted into picking either daisies or thistles by the right of way while
your salesmanship engine stands idle.

[Sidenote: Patience and Calmness]

Tact and diplomacy include the qualities of patience and calmness. You cannot deal successfully
with opposition if you are impatient or flustered. Patience understands the other man and avoids
giving him offense; because it comprehends his way of thinking and is considerate of his right
to his opinions. Calmness denotes a consciousness of strength. Hence it inspires admiration.
Keep your patience open-eyed. See ahead. Do not chafe restlessly because the present moment
is not propitious. A better chance for you is coming. Because of your vision have faith in
your power to make it come. Whatever may happen, be self-possessed when you meet it. You can
give no more impressive proof of your bigness. Your calmness will win the confidence of the
other man. It will help in making the impression of courageous truth. Only an honest purpose
can meet attack with quiet fearlessness.

[Sidenote: Win Admiration by Keeping Upper Hand]

The chief danger to the salesman at the objections stage is that he may lose control of the
selling process. Be on your guard to prevent the other man from dominating you by his opposition.
You have the advantage at the start. He cannot be so well prepared to make objections as you
should be to dispose of them effectively. Keep the upper hand. If you have not antagonized
his feelings, your prospect will admire you when he sees that he cannot dominate you and realizes
that you will not let him have his own way. You will build up in him a favorable opinion of
your manhood, intelligence, and power. He cannot help appreciating your art in handling him.

[Sidenote: Make Desire Grow]

Dispose of each objection in such a way that you will get yourself wanted more and more as
you remove or get around the obstacles encountered. The prospect's desire for your services
should grow in proportion as you overcome his opposition. It is possible to use objections,
or rather their answers, to strengthen your salesmanship so greatly that it will be easy to
gain your object--the job or the promotion you seek.

[Sidenote: Hard Climb Leads to Supreme Heights]

Therefore do not quail from the obstacles you meet. Recognize in each an opportunity to succeed
in demonstrating your capability; a chance to increase the respect, confidence, and liking
of your prospective employer. Remember, if there were no difficult, steep mountains to scale,
the supreme heights of success could not be gained. So, with shining face, climb on and up
undaunted!

CHAPTER XI

The Goal of Success

[Sidenote: "Nearly Succeeded" Means "Failed"]

After an applicant for a position seems to have the coveted opportunity almost in his grasp,
he is sometimes unable to clinch the sale of his services. He does not get the job. His failure
is none the less complete because he nearly succeeded. No race was ever won by a man who could
not finish. However successful you may have been in the earlier stages of the selling process,
if your services are finally declined by the prospective employer you have interviewed, your
sales effort has ended in failure.

When one has made a fine presentation of his capability, and therefore feels confident of selling
his services, it shocks and disheartens him to have his application rejected. "It takes the
starch out of a man." He is apt to feel limp in courage when he turns his back on the lost
chance to make good, and faces the necessity of starting the selling process all over again
with another prospect. It is harder to lose a race in the shadow of the goal than to be disqualified
before the start. The prospect who seems on the point of saying, "Yes," but finally shakes
his head is the heart-breaker to the salesman.

[Sidenote: Making the Touch Down]

Of course, as you have been reminded, even the best salesman cannot get all the orders he tries
to secure. But he seldom fails to "close" a real prospect whom he has conducted successfully
through the preliminary steps of a sale. Each advance he makes increases his confidence that
he will get the order. The master salesman does not falter and fall down just before the finish.
He is at the top of his strength as he nears the goal. All his training and practice have had
but one ultimate object--a successfully completed sale. He knows that nothing else counts.
He does not lose the ball on the one-yard line. He pushes it over for a touchdown. He cannot
be held back when he gets that close to the goal posts. You must be like him if you would make
the "almost sure" victory a certainty.

[Sidenote: Don't Fear To Take Success]

Perhaps the commonest cause of the failures that occur at the closing stage is the salesman's
fear of bringing the selling process to a head. He is in doubt whether the prospect will say
"Yes" or "No." His lack of courageous confidence makes him falter when he should bravely put
his fortune to the test of decision. He does not "strike while the iron is hot," but hesitates
until the prospect's desire cools. Many an applicant for a position has talked an employer
into the idea of engaging his services, and then has gone right on talking until he changed
the other man's mind. He is the worst of all failures. Though he has won the prize, he lets
it slip through his fingers because he lacks the nerve to tighten his hold.

[Sidenote: Keep Control At the Close]

Doubt and timidity at the closing stage, after the earlier steps have been taken successfully,
are paradoxes. Surely each preliminary advance the salesman makes should add to his confidence
that he can complete the sale. His proved ability to handle objections and to overcome resistance
should have developed all the courage he needs to finish the selling process. Closing requires
less bravery and staunch faith than one must have when making his approach. Now he knows his
man, and that this prospect's mind and heart can be favorably influenced by salesmanship. Is
it not a contradiction of good sense to weaken at the finish instead of pressing the advantages
already gained and crowning the previous work with ultimate success? Yet there are salesmen
who seem so afraid of hearing a possible "No" that they dare not prompt an almost certain "Yes."

When you have presented to your prospective employer a thoroughly good case for yourself, do
not slow down or stop the selling process. Especially avoid letting him take the reins. Thus
far you have controlled the sale. Keep final developments in your own hands. Go ahead. Smile.
Be and appear entirely at ease. Look the other man in the eye. Ask him, "When shall I start
work?" Suggest that you believe he is favorable to your application. Even speak his decision
for him, as though it were a matter-of-course. If the previous trend of the interview justifies
you in assuming that he has almost made up his mind to employ you, pronounce his probable thought
as if he had announced it as his final conclusion. He will not be likely to reverse the decision
you have spoken for him. His mental inclination will be to follow your lead, and to accept
as his own judgment what you have assumed to be settled in his mind.

[Sidenote: Reversing a Negative Decision]

A stubborn merchant made a dozen objections to hiring a new clerk. The young man cleared them
all away, one after another, as soon as each was raised. But the employer leaned back obstinately
in his chair and declared, "Just the same, I don't need any more clerks." This was but a repetition
of an objection already disposed of. The applicant concluded, therefore, that he had his man
cornered. The salesman smiled broadly at the indication of his success. He stood up and took
off his overcoat.

"Well," he said, "you certainly need one less than you did, now that I'm ready to begin work.
I understand why you have been putting me off. You wanted to test my stick-to-it-ive-ness.
I'm sure I have convinced you on that point. You needn't worry about my staying on the job.
Shall I report to the superintendent, or will you start me yourself?"

The merchant drew a deep breath; then emptied his lungs with a burst of astonishment mixed
with relief. He could not help laughing.

"I meant to turn you down, but you say I've made up my mind to hire you. I didn't know it myself,
but you're right. I believe you are the sort of clerk I always want."

[Sidenote: Expect the Prospect to Say "Yes"]

Remember, when you face your prospect at the closing stage, the motive that brought you to
him. You came with the intention of rendering him services from which he will profit. You want
your capability to be a "good buy" for him. Your consciousness that your motive is right should
give you strengthened faith in yourself and in the successful outcome of your salesmanship.
It should fill you with the courage necessary to close the sale.

Neither hesitate nor flinch. Confidently prompt the decision in your favor. Believe that you
have won and you will not be intimidated by fears of failure. Your prospect is unlikely to
say "No" if you really expect to hear "Yes." Even if he speaks the negative, still believe
in your own faith. I know a man who, a minute after his application was flatly rejected, won
the position he wanted. Unrebuffed, he came back with, "Eventually, why not now?" His evident
conviction that he was needed gained the victory when his chance seemed lost.

[Sidenote: Don't Be Afraid to Pop The Question]

We all laugh at the young swain who courts a girl devotedly for months and uses every art he
knows to sell her the idea that he would make her happy as his wife; but who turns pale, then
red, and chokes whenever he has a chance to pop the question. Often the girl must go half way
with prompting. When, thus encouraged, he finally stammers out his appeal for her decision,
she accepts him so quickly that he feels foolish. Women are reputed to be better "closers"
of such sales than men.

You smile at the comparison of courting with salesmanship. Yet the selling process is as effective
in making good impressions of the sort of husband one might be as in impressing an employer
with the idea that one's services in business would prove desirable.

[Sidenote: Selling a Future Husband]

The young man bent on marriage needs to prospect for the right girl, to secure an audience,
to compel her attention, to regain it when diverted to other admirers, and to develop her curiosity
about him into interest. He must size up her likes and dislikes; then adapt his salesmanship
to her tastes, tactfully subordinating his own preferences to hers. If she is athletic, he
will play tennis or go on tramps with her, however tired he feels after his work. If she is
sentimental, he will take her canoeing and read poetry to her, though he may prefer detective
yarns. Throughout his courtship he will do his utmost to stimulate in her a desire to have
him as a life partner. Whatever objections she makes to him, he will get rid of or overcome.

Suppose he has taken all these preliminary selling steps successfully, and at last the time
comes for pinning the girl down to a definite answer to the all-important question, is there
any likelihood that it will be a refusal? Of course not! If his earlier salesmanship has been
masterly, the reasons why she will be inclined to accept him in the end are of much greater
weight and number than any causes for rejection that she may have thought of previously.

[Sidenote: Never Weaken At the Finish]

He should not fear to close the sale. He has been "going strong" until now; why should he weaken
at the finish? The master salesman does not quaver then, or doubt his success. He asks his
prospect's decision bravely and with confidence, or he assumes it as a matter of course and
kisses the girl. His heart beats faster than usual, but he is not afraid of hearing "No."

You should feel the same way after leading your prospective employer successfully through the
preliminary stages of the process of selling your services to him. Do not falter now. Promptly
emphasize the idea that the weight, amount, and quality of your merits are fully worth the
compensation previously discussed. If you are sure of that, if you have valued your services
from his standpoint, and not just from your own, you will feel no doubts about the acceptance
of your application. You will put your prospective employer through the process of decision
as courageously and confidently as you first entered his presence.

[Sidenote: Getting the Decision Pronounced]

Sometimes a prospect will be convinced, but will not express what is in his thoughts. Therefore
it is not enough to bring about a favorable conclusion of mind. Until this has been pronounced
or signified, it may easily be changed. Hence the effective process of decision includes both
the mental action of judgment and its perceptible indication. Often a prospect who is thinking
"Yes" will not say it until he is prompted by the salesman.

[Sidenote: A Lawyer Sums Up the Case]

When a lawyer is trying a case, he endeavors to bring out the evidence in favor of his client
and to make the jury see every point clearly. He shows also the fallacies and falsities of
opposing testimony. But after all the evidence has been given, the case is not turned over
immediately to the jury for decision. If that were done the lawyer would miss his best chance
to influence the jurors to make up their minds in his favor. They are not so familiar as he
with the facts and their significance. They would be apt to attach more importance to some
details of testimony, and less to others, than the circumstances warrant. So, to assist the
jurors in arriving at their verdict on the evidence, the lawyer sums up the case. He lays before
their minds his views, and tries with all his power and art to convince them that his word
pictures are true reproductions of the facts in their relation and proportion to all the circumstances
surrounding the issue.

[Sidenote: Preponderance Of Evidence]

The object of the lawyer when he addresses the jury is to make the convincing impression that
the testimony in favor of his client far outweighs the evidence on the other side. He adjures
the twelve men before him to "weigh the evidence carefully." He declares the judge will instruct
them that in a lawsuit the verdict should be given to the party who has a "preponderance" or
greater weight of proof on his side. At this closing stage of the case the lawyer acts as a
weighmaster. He wants to make the jurors feel that he has handled the scales fairly, that he
has taken into consideration the evidence against him as well as the facts in his favor; and
that the preponderance of weight is as he has shown it--so that they will accept his view and
gave him the verdict. If he feels a sincere conviction that he is right in asking for a decision
on his side, he makes his closing address with the ring of confidence. He looks the jurors
in the eye and asks for the verdict in his favor as a matter of right. He does not beg, but
claims what the weight of the evidence entitles him to receive.

[Sidenote: Treat Your Prospects As Jurors]

The jury that will decide on your application when you apply for a position will usually consist
of but one man, or will be composed of a committee or board of directors. Treat him or them
as a jury. Remember that your capabilities and your deficiencies are on trial. Close your case
with the same process the skillful lawyer uses when he sums up the evidence and weighs it before
the minds of the jurors. Do what he does as a weighmaster. Avoid making any impression that
you are not weighing your demerits fairly, though you minimize their importance; also miss
no chance to impress the full weight of your qualifications. The essence of good salesmanship
at this stage of the process is skillful, but honest weighing. That means using both sides
of the scale, to convince the prospect that the balance tips in your favor. He will not believe
in the correctness of the "Yes" weight unless you show the lesser weight of "No" in contrast.
Then he cannot help seeing which is the heavier. Decision on the respective weights is only
a process of perception.

[Sidenote: The Process Of Perception]

Let us suppose the employer has asserted the objections that you are not sufficiently experienced
to earn the salary you want, and that you don't know enough yet to fill the job. It would be
poor salesmanship to try to convince him that you have had a good deal of experience. If you
exaggerate the importance of the things you have learned, he almost surely will judge you to
be an unfair weighman of yourself. So you should tacitly admit your inexperience and treat
the value of experience lightly by reminding him that his business is unlike any other. Then
bear down hard on your eagerness to learn his ways and to work for him. Thus you can make him
perceive the two sides of the scale as you view them.

[Sidenote: Tipping the Balances Your Way]

It is possible for you so to tip the balances in your favor, though previously the mind's eye
of your prospective employer may have been seeing the greater weight on the unfavorable side.
It is legitimate salesmanship to influence the decision of the other man in this way. Your
weighing is entirely honest; though you sharply reverse the balances. Certainly you have the
right to estimate the full worth of your services, to depreciate the significance of points
against you, and to picture your desirability to the prospect as you see it, however that view
may differ from his previous conception. If your picture of the respective weights is attractive
and convincing, the other man will adopt it as his own and discard his former opinions about
you. Not only will he accept the idea of your capabilities that you make him perceive; he also
will see that your deficiencies are much less important than he had before considered them.

[Sidenote: Serving Hash For Dessert]

Beware of a mistake commonly made by applicants for positions who do not understand the art
of successfully closing the sale of one's services. When they try to clinch the final decision,
they just repeat strongly all their best points. They make no mention of their shortcomings.
For dessert, in other words, they serve a hash of the best dishes of previous courses. Is it
any wonder that such a close takes away any appetite the prospect may have had?

What would you think of a lawyer who had closed his case by simply reading to the jury all
the testimony that had been given on his side, but who had made no reference to the opposing
evidence? If you were a juror, would you vote for a verdict in favor of the side so summed
up? Of course you would have heard the testimony of both parties to the case, but you would
not feel that the lawyer who ignored the evidence against his client had helped you to arrive
at the conclusion that he had the preponderance of proof on his side. On the contrary, you
probably would be inclined to attach to the opposing evidence greater weight than the facts
justified, and would discount whatever the lawyer claimed for his client. You, yourself, would
act as weighmaster; and would give the other party to the suit the benefit of any doubt in
your mind as to the contrasting weights of the testimony pro and con. The lawyer's failure
to weigh all the evidence before your eyes would make the impression on you that his view of
the case was unfair to his opponent. If you felt at all doubtful, you would be likely to vote
against him in order to make sure that the other side received a square deal.

[Sidenote: Weigh Both Pros and Cons Before Jury]

The jury that is to decide favorably or unfavorably on your application for a position will
feel similarly inclined to reach a negative conclusion if in closing you omit the process of
weighing the pros and cons, and emphasize only your strong points. It is good salesmanship
to stress these at the finishing stage, but they should be pictured in contrast with lighter
objections to your employment. In order to convince the prospect that the reasons for employing
you outweigh the reasons for turning you down, you must show his mind both sides of the scale.
If you fail to do this, his own imagination will do the weighing and is certain to bear down
with prejudice on every point against you. It will also depreciate your view of the points
in your favor. The other man will make sure that he is getting a square deal on the weights,
since he will believe you, too, are looking out only for Number One.

[Sidenote: To Make Certain Do The Weighing Yourself]

The certain way to make your prospect perceive that the reasons for accepting your proposal
are of greater weight than any causes for turning down your application is to do the weighing
yourself. First be sure the heavier weight is on your side. When you fully believe that, use
all the arts of salesmanship to make the other man see the balances as you view them. Then
he can come to but one conclusion, that the "preponderance" is on your side. Just as soon as
you make the respective weights clear to his perception, he will be convinced. He cannot deny
what his own mind's eye has been made to see.

[Sidenote: Get Prospect Committed]

Therefore bringing about a favorable mental conclusion is not at all difficult. The judgment
that your services would be desirable is no harder to gain than a decision that the weight
of one side of a scale is greater than the other. Any one who looks at the balances sees at
once which way they tip. The rub is not in getting the decision made but in getting it pronounced.
The sale is not completed until the prospect has committed himself.

[Sidenote: Now is the Acceptance Time]

He feels that his mental processes are his own secret, which you cannot read; so he will not
guard against the conclusion of his mind that you would be a desirable employee. But for some
reason he may be unwilling to express his thoughts to you just then, however thoroughly he
is convinced. He naturally prefers not to say "Yes" at once; so that he may change his mind
if he wishes. You will endanger your chances of success if you let him put off action on his
decision. To-morrow he is likely to see the weights in a different light and to imagine less
on your side and more against you. Now is the time to close the sale, when he cannot help seeing
things your way.

[Sidenote: Two Stages Of Closing]

You know that sometimes a juror will be convinced in his own mind, yet cannot bring himself
actually to vote according to his mental conclusion. Perhaps he is a "wobbler" by nature. So
a girl may decide in her thoughts that a certain suitor would make a good husband, yet she
may hesitate to accept him just because that step is final. These illustrations impress the
importance of discriminating between the two stages of closing a sale. The success of the salesman
is made certain only by his knowledge and skillful use, first of the art of vivid weighing,
and second of the art of prompting the prospect to action on his perception of the difference
in the balances. At the closing stage we have encountered again our old acquaintance, "the
discriminative-restrictive process."

[Sidenote: Closing a Procrastinator]

A friend of mine who has an advertising agency wanted to secure the business of a prominent
manufacturer who was inclined to vacillation. The prospect was always timid about acting and
had the reputation of a chronic procrastinator. My friend went ahead with the selling process
in ordinary course until he had proved the desirability of his service and had shown that there
was no really weighty reason why the contract should not be given to him. He knew he was entitled
to the decision then, but he did not wait for the timid man to pronounce it. The advertising
agent knew the characteristics of the prospect and had planned just how he would handle the
finishing stage of the selling process so as to get the order promptly.

[Sidenote: The Clincher Held in Reserve]

He held in reserve a closing method that a less skillful salesman probably would have used
earlier in the sale instead of reserving it especially for the end. As soon as he had completed
the weighing process my friend took from his pocket a sheet of copy he had prepared for a first
advertisement along the line he had proposed. This had been worked out carefully in advance,
just as if the order had already been given for the advertising service. My friend laid the
sheet of copy before the prospect, who was taken completely by surprise.

"I knew you would want this service as soon as I explained it to you," said the salesman. "Therefore
I prepared this ad for the first publication under the plan I have submitted, and which I am
sure you approve. There is no question that you will get much better results from this copy
than you have been receiving from the advertising you are doing now. Naturally you want to
begin benefiting from my service as soon as possible. I'm all ready to deliver the goods. Just
pencil your O.K. on the corner of this copy. I'll do the rest."

[Sidenote: From Pencil To Pen]

With a smile of confidence the salesman held out a soft lead pencil. The moment the other man
involuntarily obeyed the suggestion by accepting the tendered pencil, he was started on the
purely muscular process of pronouncing his approval of the proposition likewise tendered for
his acceptance. The informality of the off-hand request that he "pencil his O.K." kept him
from being scared off. He did not feel that he had yet committed himself fully. Probably, with
characteristic timidity, he would have shied from signing a formal contract at that moment.
But he hesitated only slightly before he scribbled his initials on the corner of the proposed
ad. Then he handed the pencil back to the salesman. The advertising agent picked up the approved
copy, and at once laid before the prospect a formal contract. Simultaneously he tendered his
fountain pen. He had started the advertiser to writing his name, and did not let the process stop.

"Now just O.K. this, too," he directed, "and the whole matter will be settled to your complete
satisfaction." Then, to prevent the procrastinator from backing up, the salesman reached for
the telephone on the advertiser's desk. "With your permission, I'll call up the----magazine
and reserve choice space for this ad. It won't cost any more and by getting in early we'll
make the ad most effective."

[Sidenote: Decide For, Then Commit The Prospect]

My friend manifested complete confidence that the sale was closed. By continuing the process
of affirming the decision, he prevented the prospect from backing up after making his pencilled
O.K. Being thus committed informally, the usually vacillating advertiser could not well avoid
using the pen put into his hand to sign the formal contract laid before him. Without speaking
to him, the salesman pointed to the dotted line while he called the telephone number he wanted.
The prospect wrote his name before he had time to stop the impulse that the advertising agent
had started. The salesman had both induced the mental decision in his favor, and impelled its
pronouncement. Really he first made up the prospect's mind for him, and then committed him
to the decision so made without the other man's volition.

[Sidenote: Both Processes In Right Sequence]

Only by performing both processes in right sequence at the closing stage can a sale be finished
under the control of the salesman. If the favorable conclusion as to the respective weights
of negative and affirmative is not first worked out before the mind's eye of the prospect,
anything done to commit him to a decision will likely kill the salesman's chances for success.
The prospect whose mind is not yet made up favorably, who does not clearly perceive that the
preponderance is on the "Yes" side of the scale, will almost surely say "No" if his decision
is prematurely impelled.

[Sidenote: Discriminate And Restrict]

Hence it is important that the salesman discriminate between the two closing stages, and that
he restrict his selling methods at each stage to the selling processes that are effective then.
He must not get "the cart before the horse," as the ignorant or unskillful closer is apt to
do. The poor closer does not understand the "discriminative-restrictive" process. He lacks
comprehension of the distinction that should be drawn between the methods he previously has
used and what is now required to finish the sale. Let us be sure we know how to discriminate;
so that our work at the closing stage may be restricted to the processes that are required
to assure success in taking the particular step necessary.

[Sidenote: New Process Necessary To Close]

Throughout the series of selling steps that precede the closing stage, the continuing purpose
of the salesman is to make the prospect see the proposal in the true light, as the salesman
himself views it. When the selling process draws to a conclusion, the purpose of the salesman
changes. Now he wants the prospect to decide and then act upon what has been shown to his mind's
eye. If the salesman is to control the close, he must do something new to prompt decision and
to actuate its pronouncement.

The unskillful closer, instead of changing his previous sales tactics, nearly always devotes
his final efforts to making the prospect see more clearly the pictures already laid before
his mind. He tries to impress the prospect with a re-hash of perception, by emphasizing more
strongly than before the favorable points brought out clearly at earlier stages. Of course
it is important that at the close of the sale the prospect have all these points in view, but
it is not good salesmanship to emphasize only the appeal to his perceptive faculties. The guest
who has had a good dinner does not need to be told just afterward what he has eaten, or reminded
of the courses by having them brought in again.

[Sidenote: Logic and Reason Won't Win]

As it is a mistake to serve at the close of a sale only a re-hash of favorable points; so is
it bad salesmanship to rely on a dessert of "logic and reason" for the finishing touch. Logic
and reason provoke antagonism. They are ineffective in bringing about either a favorable conclusion
of mind or action on such a decision.

If you have presented your capabilities fully to a prospective employer, do not wind up by
marshalling reasons why he should engage you. Avoid the use of the "major premise, minor premise,
argument, and logical conclusion." You cannot debate yourself into a job, for the judge is
made antagonistic by your method, which puts him on the defensive. It is human nature to resist
a decision that logic tries to force. No man arrives at his conclusions of mind by putting
himself through a reasoning process. A normal person does not need to reason about things he
knows. He knows without reasoning. He attempts to use logic only when he is uncertain what
to think. If logic is used by the salesman to convince the other man, it will be ineffective
because it is an unnatural means that the prospect almost never employs to convince himself,
and of which he is suspicious.

[Sidenote: Why Reasoning is Futile]

A major premise is but an assumption unless it is already known. If it is known, why should
it be proved? Since the correctness of the conclusion depends entirely upon the validity of
the premise, it is evidently absurd to attempt to prove a truth from the basis of an admitted
assumption. The reasoning process that starts from a truth already known, and arrives at a
truth that must similarly have been known, is utterly useless and a waste of time. Hence, if
you use the reasoning process you will either fail to convince your prospect by starting from
a premise that he does not know, or you will irritate and unfavorably impress him by seeming
to reflect on his intelligence when you prove to him something he already knows. That is the
wrong way to bring your man to a "Yes" decision.

If the whole process of the sale could be summed up in just one logical statement at closing,
it might occasionally be practical for the salesman to apply reasoning with good effect to
help him secure the decision. But the four steps, first and second premise, argument, and conclusion,
must be applied to every point that is made with reasoning. Since the force of the conclusion
is largely lost unless the major premise is an absolute truth recognized by everybody, there
is danger of confusion, and no possibility of convincing the prospect by such methods. Besides,
a multitude of reasoning processes would be necessary to cover all the points presented by
the salesman and all the objections raised by the prospect. Moreover, as we have seen, the
whole procedure of "a logical close" falls back upon itself unless everything the salesman
hopes to prove was known and admitted to be true before he began to reason it out.

[Sidenote: Favorable Decision Defined]

Favorable decision is the prospect's mental conclusion that it is better to buy than not to
buy; better to accept than to refuse. The process of securing decision is not complex; it is
very simple. As has been said, the salesman needs only to weigh before the mind's eye of the
prospect the favorable and unfavorable ideas of the proposal. Any weighing of two mental images
always results in a judgment as to which is preferable, or that one course of action would
be better than the other. The mind is never so exactly balanced between contrasting ideas that
it does not tip at all either way.

[Sidenote: Weighing Ideas of A Steak]

The skill of the salesman weighmaster, used legitimately before the mind's eye of the prospect
to tip the scales of decision to the favorable side, is illustrated in the story of a butcher
who had been asked by a woman customer to weigh a steak for her. He knew that the weighing
process in her mind included more than the balancing of a certain number of pounds and ounces
on the scale. Against the reasons for her evident inclination to take the selected steak, she
would weigh its cost, her personal ideas of its value, and other factors of the high cost of
living.

[Sidenote: Skillful Close of The Sale]

The butcher wished to bring her quickly to a favorable decision. He wanted to make up the customer's
mind for her in such a conclusive way that she would be prevented from hesitating over the
purchase. As a weighman of pounds and ounces he only wanted to show the prospect that he was
honest. But in order to tip the buying scales in her mind he put into the balances, on the
side opposite the cost of the steak, the heavier weight of buying inducements. First he did
the actual weighing of the steak; then he added on the "Yes" side of the scales of decision
ideas of the excellence and desirability of the meat. He followed immediately with a suggestion
of action that would commit the prospect to buying.

"Two pounds and five ounces, ma'am! Only a dollar and forty-three cents. It's the very choicest
part of the loin. You couldn't get a cut any tenderer than that, or with less bone. Would you
like to have a little extra suet wrapped up with it?"

[Sidenote: Three Effects Produced]

The butcher thus combined in his close three effects. He brought about judgment of the prospect's
intellect, plus increased desire for the goods, plus the impulse to carry the desire into action.

First, by emphasizing, "Two pounds and five ounces!" in a heavy tone, and by depreciating the
cost, "Only a dollar and forty-three cents," spoken lightly, he implied that the value of the
steak far outweighed the price. Thus judgment of the prospect's intellect was effected.

Second, to stimulate increased desire for the steak, the butcher skillfully put on the favorable
side of the scales of decision the weight of a suggestion of excellence. He said temptingly,
"It's the very choicest part of the loin." At this point he also employed contrast, to make
the prospect's desire stronger still. "You couldn't get a cut any tenderer than this, or with
less bone."

Third, this skillful salesman prompted the immediate committal of his customer to a favorable
decision. He impelled her to this affirmative action by suggesting, "Would you like to have
a little extra suet wrapped up with it?" He put a question that was easy for the prospect to
answer with "Yes." Once she accepted the suet offered free, she tacitly accepted the steak
at the price stated. It is skillful salesmanship to make it easy for the buyer to say "Yes"
or to imply the favorable decision indirectly. The butcher might have been answered with "No"
if he had asked, "Will you take this steak?" But he himself nodded when he made the proposal
that he wrap up the extra suet. The woman was thus impelled to nod with him. The sale was closed,
artistically, in a few seconds.

When you plan how you will close a sale of true ideas of your best capability, work out in
advance a similar weighing process, followed at once by an indirect prompting of acceptance
of the decision you suggest. Shape and re-shape your intended "close" in your mind until it
includes the three effects the butcher produced.

[Sidenote: Put a "Kick" Into the Close]

Put a "kick" into your stimulation of desire at the closing stage. Paint the points in your
favor brightly and glowingly, though in true colors. Conversely paint all objections to your
employment unattractively.

Suppose you are applying for a secretarial position. It would be good "painting" to close something
like this:

"I am going to learn to do things your way. You would not want a man in the position who was
experienced; because he would do things some one else's way, not yours. My inexperience really
means I am adaptable to your methods. I'd become exactly the sort of secretary you want. For
instance, how do you prefer to have your mail brought to you--just as it is opened, or with
previous correspondence and notations attached?"

Such an alternative question, answered either way, leads the prospect through the stage of
favorable decision and implies his committal to acceptance of the services offered. It can
be followed by the direct proposal, "All, right, I'll bring your mail that way." Such a close
is practically sure to succeed.

[Sidenote: Using the Negative Positively]

A man who was not at all prepossessing applied to me one day for a job. He conducted the sale
of himself very skillfully, but I meant to put him off. It was our dull season, and his looks
didn't make a hit with me anyway. However, he realized there was a good deal on the negative
side of the scale, and he weighed his disqualifications honestly; though he depreciated the
importance of his unprepossessing appearance. Then, in contrast to the negative side, he showed
me very weighty and attractive reasons for employing him. He started by grinning good-humoredly.

"I'm not a prize beauty," he remarked. "But the other day I was reading about Abraham Lincoln,
and the book made me feel encouraged about myself. I don't believe I'm any homelier or any
more awkward than he was. I don't expect to be a parlor salesman, anyhow, or to rely on my
good looks to get orders. I plan to succeed by work. I'm going to be on the job early and late
and every minute between. I'll believe in what I'm selling--down to the very bottom of my heart.
I'll make anybody see I'm in dead earnest. I look honest, and I am. I'll be square with customers
and with you. I guess that out in the field a reputation for always being willing to help,
and for telling the truth straight, will count more than anything else. I know I'm inexperienced,
but that's a fault I can cure mighty soon." He grinned again. "I'll start right away to get
the greenness off, if you'll tell me where to hang up my hat."

His good nature warmed me into smiling with him. I could not help feeling inclined to try this
man. I decided to give him his chance at once. He started my impulse to accept his services,
and I pronounced the decision in his favor that he prompted. Of course he made good. That was
a foregone conclusion. He had mastered the selling process, and was an especially fine closer.
He succeeded in getting more than his quota of orders the first year. Selling never seemed
to be hard work for him.

[Sidenote: Two Ways To Prompt Pronouncement]

The pronouncement of the prospect's decision can be prompted, his favorable action can be brought
about, in two ways. First, as we have seen, the salesman can suggest, directly or indirectly,
the action he wants the other man to take. Second, the salesman himself can do something that
the prospect will be impelled to imitate.

[Sidenote: Impelling Imitation Of Action]

For example, when you apply for a position, and have completed the process of weighing the
points in your favor in contrast with the less weighty reasons for not employing you, lean
forward slightly in an attitude of easy expectancy. The prospect's mind will be inclined to
imitate your physical act. He will lean toward acceptance of your services. Your act will tend
to bring you together. Your magnetism will draw his.

Or you might extend your hand. He will have an impulse to reach out his in turn. It is natural
for a man to take a hand that is courteously offered. The moment after you reach toward the
prospect say, "Let's shake hands on it." Once his fingers start moving toward yours in imitation
of your action, it will be easy for him to commit himself.

[Sidenote: Five Essentials Of Good Close]

Now let us review the essentials of good salesmanship in closing, which we have been analyzing.
We can summarize under five divisions the entire process of completing a sale most effectively
and with the practical assurance of success.

First, the salesman must have definite, certain knowledge that the mind of the prospect has
reached the closing stage; that it is time to end the "testimony" and to begin weighing the
evidence. If the salesman has kept control of the selling process throughout all the preceding
stages, he will know when the selling point is reached, for he will be there himself, with
the prospect he has "safely conducted" thus far.

Second, at this "right time" it is necessary to change former sales tactics promptly, and to
start contrasting the affirmative and negative ideas that have previously been brought out.

Third, the salesman should weigh these contrasting ideas so vividly that the mind's eye of
the prospect will see the scales and perceive the greater weight on the "Yes" side, as the
salesman pictures it.

Fourth, it is important that the salesman color the affirmative ideas very alluringly, and
increase the contrast by painting unattractively everything on the negative side of the scale;
so that "No," besides appearing much lighter than "Yes," will seem uninviting.

Fifth, the selling process should be brought to a climax by the salesman's suggestion or imitation
of some act designed to commit the prospect to acceptance in an easy way.

[Sidenote: Unbalancing The Process]

Nothing so unbalances the process of securing a favorable decision and its pronouncement as
any indication of fear, doubt, or hesitancy in the attitude of the salesman. Therefore, even
though you may be uncertain as to the outcome of your selling efforts, do not show it. Long
before you came to the decision point, you passed the worst dangers on the road to the end
of the sale. Surely your courage should be strongest at the closing stage.

[Sidenote: Light Dissipates Fear and Doubt]

Fear usually arises from something unknown; it is due only to darkness. Since you know now
just what closing involves, and light has been shed on the problems of getting the prospect's
"Yes," your fears and doubts should be dissipated. You should not hesitate to end the sale
you have controlled successfully throughout previous stages. Our analysis has revealed that
closing is no more difficult than winning attention to your proposition in the first place.
As a result, your present attitude toward closing is positive. Your courage and self-confidence
have been built up. You realize just how success in finishing a well-conducted sale can be
made practically sure.

[Sidenote: Negatives Must be Avoided]

Certain negative attitudes at the closing stage should be avoided. Especially do not throw
into the scales of decision any little pleas for personal favor, with the hope that in so doing
you will increase the weight on the "Yes" side. Such tactics almost invariably tend to tip
the balance unfavorably. A plea of this sort is equivalent to an admission that the ideas you
have presented for buying do not themselves outweigh the prospect's images against buying.
You suggest to him that you are trying to push the balance down on your side by putting your
finger on it, by "weighing in your hand," as unfair butchers sometimes do with a chicken they
hold on the scales by the legs.

[Sidenote: "As a Personal Favor to Me"]

The prospect will instantly perceive your action. His mind, acting on the principle of the
gyroscope, will resist by greater opposition any push of the personal plea. If you ask a decision
as a personal favor, your prospect will lose confidence in the true weight of the ideas on
your side that you have already registered in his mind. You are much more likely to hurt than
to help your chances for success by making a personal plea. Even if it should prove effective,
what you get that way would be alms given to a beggar, and not the earned prize of good salesmanship.
Never buy success at the cost of self-respect. To be a successful beggar is nothing to feel
proud of.

[Sidenote: "Treating" At Close]

Do not attempt to "treat" your prospect by flattering him at the closing stage. Such "treating"
is a tacit admission that your goods of sale, your best qualifications, have not sufficient
merit to sell at their intrinsic value. Or you practically confess that you are not good enough
salesman to win out with just your goods and your ability to sell yourself for what you claim
to be worth. Flattery is a call for help. It is like the bad salesmanship of trying to buy
an order with cigars or a dinner. Never "treat" at the closing stage, for to do so is to admit
weakness when you should be your strongest.

[Sidenote: "No" Seldom Is Final]

Of course you should not take a first or second "No" as a final answer. Even if the prospect
indicates that he is inclined to decide against you, continue confidently to heap images in
favor of buying on the "Yes" side of the scale until you have used all the honest weight you
have to put in the balance. He will not respect you as a salesman if you quit at his first
"No." It is up to you to tip the scales of decision your way. Remember that you should not
bring the other man to the judgment point until after you have aroused and intensified his
desire to a very great degree. If you have made him want you at all, you will disappoint him
if you then fail to put enough weight on the "Yes" side of the scale to win his decision to
employ you.

When you receive a "No," understand it to mean, "No, that is not yet enough ideas for buying
your services." Keep right on putting weight into the "Yes" side of the balance until it tips
your way. Do not consider any "No" final until you have run out of both contrasting weight
and attractive colors; so that you cannot change the scales.

[Sidenote: Stick it Out Here and Now]

If it is possible for you to "stick," don't be put off when you come to the closing stage.
All the weighing you do at the present time will be valueless lost effort unless you complete
the selling process here and now. When your prospect tries to put you off, he tacitly admits
your weights are right. Otherwise he would say "No" and be done with you. You really have won
his mental decision. A continuance of skillful salesmanship will enable you to get him to act
favorably without delay or further evasion.

[Sidenote: Entertainment In Court Room Out of Place]

Some salesmen make the mistake of mixing entertainment with the closing process. Earlier in
the sale you may be able to secure excellent results by entertaining the prospect with clean
jokes and good stories. But the close is the stage at which he arrives at his mental conclusion
as to the "preponderance" of the evidence. Jests and light conversation are out of place when
the judge is performing his functions in the courtroom of the mind. An amusing remark or a
witty quip at this juncture would suggest that the scales of decision in the salesman's own
mind were somewhat unbalanced. Your attitude when you are weighing "Yes" and "No" before the
prospect should be pleasant, but quiet and serious, as is becoming to a convincing weighman.

When you work to secure a favorable decision, you are weighing evidence with the purpose of
impelling the prospect to take your judgment or to weigh the evidence just as you do. It is
necessary all through the process that he be made to feel you realize you are aiding in the
performance of a judicial function. He must have complete confidence in your intention and
ability to handle the scales honestly and with serious pains to determine what is the right
judgment about your proposition. Your levity at the closing stage would lessen the effect of
honest, serious, painstaking weighing of the images for buying in contrast with the images
against buying. So get the funny stories out of your system before you come to the decision
step of the sale, or else keep them bottled up inside you and don't pull the cork until you
are safely at the celebration stage.

[Sidenote: Tones and Acts When Weighing]

Do not forget when closing to add force to your words by tones and gestures that emphasize
ideas of the contrast in weights between the two sides of the scale. By your light tone you
can indicate the triviality of objections to your proposition. With the heavier tone of power
you can suggest the great weight of the favorable ideas. If you use broad gestures of your
whole hand and full arm, you can seem to pile a large heap of points on your side of the scale.
Conversely you can indicate the smallness of objections by moving your fingers only, as if
you were picking up a tiny object. Demolish unfavorable points with a strong gesture of negation,
as by sweeping your arm horizontally. Give life to the ideas on the favorable side of the scale
by accompanying your words with up and down gestures that signify vitality.

[Sidenote: Do Not Show That Closing Is Hard Work]

Your physical condition or outward appearance will help or harm your chances for success at
the closing stage. You should not manifest the least indication that you are under a strain
of anxiety as to the outcome, or that you lack the strength to control the completion of the
selling process. Why should you not have a feeling of ease when you reach the close? If your
bearing suggests your self-confidence, it will give the other man confidence in your capabilities.
When a salesman has to "sweat blood" to finish a sale, he indicates that it is usually mighty
hard work for him to get what he wants. This impression suggests to the other man that there
must be something wrong with the proposition or it wouldn't take so much effort of the salesman
to put it across. Any element of doubt at the final stage will almost surely delay or kill
the salesman's chances to close successfully.

[Sidenote: Make Sure of A Good Batting Average]

Recall once more that the measure of success in selling is not 100% of closed sales; every
possible order secured and none lost. Success is made certain when failures are reduced to
the minimum and successes are increased to the maximum of practicability. There can be no question
that if you use the right processes in closing, your chances for success will be so greatly
increased that your batting average of actual sales should take you far above the failure line.
Your career as a salesman involves continual selling. You must make sale after sale. However
skillfully you employ the right process at the closing stage, you may not accomplish your purpose
the first time you try. But if you keep on selling your services in the right way, you will
be as absolutely certain to succeed as the master salesman of "goods" is sure of closing his
quota every year he works.

CHAPTER XII

The Celebration Stage

[Sidenote: What Are You Going to Do With Success?]

You know now the certain way to get your chance to succeed in the vocation of your choice.
You are convinced that a good salesman can create and control his opportunities in any field,
can bring himself to good luck in the right market for his services. You are resolved to master
the art of selling, and so to insure your future against any possibility of failure. You feel
confident of success; because you are willing to earn it by the diligent study and practice
of salesmanship. There is no doubt in your mind that when you become a skillful salesman of
your best capabilities, you can get a chance to succeed. Now what are you going to do with
success after you gain it?

Suppose you had sold yourself into the very opportunity you want, suppose you had won the coveted
job or promotion, how would you celebrate? It has been said that a man shows his real self
either in the moment of his failure or in the moment of his success. Let us assume that you
have reached your present objective. You stand at the goal, a winner. Does your victory intoxicate,
or does it sober you with the realization that you have but opened the way to limitless fields
of bigger service ahead? Has success gone to your hands and made them tingle with eagerness
to grasp more chances to succeed, or has it gone to your head?

[Sidenote: The Stepping-Stone to More Sales]

The celebration stage of the selling process should be the first stepping-stone leading to
another successful sale. Often it proves to be a stumbling block that marks the beginning of
a downfall to failure. Rare is the man who is not spoiled a little by achievement. Success
is the severest test of salesmanship.

[Sidenote: Spoiled by Success]

I recall a chief clerk who worked more than a year for promotion to the position of assistant
manager. He earned the better job, and was assigned to the desk toward which he had been looking
longingly for sixteen months. Then he "celebrated" by starting to take life easy. He developed
a manner of superiority. He acted as if the little foothill he had climbed was a big mountain.
He sunned himself on the top, basking in complacency because he had risen above his former
clerkship.

One day he was called into the manager's office. He came out chop-fallen and took his personal
belongings from the assistant's desk. Another man was promoted to the place he had failed to
fill. He went back to his clerk's stool and is roosting there today.

[Sidenote: Egotism's Downfall]

I know a salesman who closed so many orders the first time he covered his territory that he
came back to headquarters with an inflated idea of his importance. He strutted into the president's
room and boasted of what he had done. The delighted head of the business gave him a cigar and
invited him to tell the story. The salesman betrayed such egotism that his employer was disgusted.
The president was plain-spoken. He warned the successful salesman against getting a "swelled head."

The egotist felt insulted. He resigned his position, arrogantly declaring that he would not
work for a house where results were so little appreciated. He was cocksure of himself. However,
when he offered his services to a competing firm, his application was turned down. The rebuff
stunned him. He did not realize that his egotism disgusted the second executive as much as
the first. The salesman's spirit was broken. He has never since been more than a fair peddler.

[Sidenote: Giant and Pigmy Successes]

Think of "successful" men you know. Compare them as they are now with the men they used to
be before they succeeded. As they rose did they loom bigger and bigger in your respect, or
grow smaller and smaller in admirable qualities? There are so-called successful men whose characters
seem to be dwarfed by the mountain tops they attain. Other men grow to be giants and overshadow
any eminences they climb. The littleness of the last Kaiser and Crown Prince of Germany was
only emphasized by their elevation above the common people. On the other hand the bigness of
Lincoln and Roosevelt was so tremendous that their personalities towered above even the highest
honor in the world.

[Sidenote: Breaking Training]

When football players are fighting for the championship of the season, they are governed by
rigid rules of living. They keep themselves fit by strict diet, by the avoidance of all dissipations,
by hardening exercise, and by recuperative rest. But after the "big game" is won, they break
training. They stuff themselves with rich food until their bodies and minds are sluggish. Then
they celebrate their victory by some sort of jollification that lasts half the night. The next
day a second-rate team could beat the champions.

A man who has kept himself lean, hard-muscled, and healthy all the way to the achievement of
his ambition is apt to take on flabby flesh and gout when he succeeds. The celebration of Thanksgiving
is an ordeal from which one does not recover for weeks. Turkey and mince pie immoderately eaten
are poisons. Our annual Feast Day is more deadly than the Fourth of July.

[Sidenote: Rusting in Self-Satisfaction]

A great many people "break training" mentally as well as physically at the celebration stage.
Their minds and muscles turn flabby after they succeed. They are so proud of their accomplishments
that they rust in self-satisfaction. Then, usually too late for remedy, they find themselves
afflicted by the rheumatic twinges of deep-seated discontent with what they have done.

We are all familiar with the tragedies of the farmer who sells his acres and moves into town
"so that he can take life easy," and of the business man who retires from his "daily grind"
to enjoy the fortune of success. So long as they remained at work they were vigorous in mind
and body. But nearly always men who give up their accustomed activities begin to develop mental
and physical ailments soon afterward. They age and break down in a few years. In order to stay
well, one must keep going. It is far less wearying to walk than to stand still. Normal fatigue
of mind and body are not so exhaustive of mental and physical energy as torpid idleness.

[Sidenote: Advance or You Will Slip Back]

Probably you do not think of quitting work for a long time. You look at your future retirement
as a remote possibility. Very likely you feel it is premature to consider "your declining years"
now, when you are in the full vigor of ambition. But if you stop advancing, in order to celebrate
your progress thus far, you have quit working your way ahead. If you stay contented with what
you have done, even for a little while, you have temporarily retired from the game of success
and are in danger of rusting into a partial failure. If you do not continue moving ever upward,
you will slip into a decline without realizing that you are going back and down.

[Sidenote: The Zest for Work]

The successful salesman thrives on his work, and pines for it when he "lays off." He welcomes
the end of his annual vacation with more zest than its beginning. He celebrates each order
gained by planning at once how he will get another. He is like Alexander, who sighed only when
there were no more worlds to conquer. He is as perennially tireless as Edison, the wizard who
is never weary. To the true salesman there is no enjoyment equal to selling. He often declares
that he "would rather sell than eat."

[Sidenote: Pattern after Master Salesmen]

You know the importance of being a good salesman. You have studied the methods he uses throughout
the selling process. Now at the celebration stage pattern after the masters of the profession.
Do not get into the bad habits of the mediocre fellows who slacken their efforts after each
success, and who need the spur of necessity to make them do their utmost.

When a good salesman has booked an order, and has taken pains to make a fine last impression
on his customer, he does not go to his hotel and play Kelly pool, or otherwise spend the rest
of the day just loafing around. Only the poor salesman celebrates in such a way; thereby showing
that his successes are so rare he is not used to them.

[Sidenote: Starting After The Next Chance]

The good salesman looks at his watch the moment he is out of his customer's sight. He makes
a swift calculation of the time it will take him to reach and sell the next man on his list.
If he has no other prospect nearby, he starts looking for one that minute. His keen eyes catch
every name on the business signs he passes. His imaginative mind is planning how he can use
the order he just has closed, to influence some other buyer to make a contract. If there are
no additional customers for his line in the town, he sprints to the station to catch the first
train up the road. He does not waste a minute getting to his next selling opportunity.

[Sidenote: Pepper and Poppies]

Some pretty good salesmen never win the grand quota prize in a sales contest because they take
so much time out for celebrating the big orders they close. If they land a fine contract in
the morning, they don't try to do much selling that afternoon. The prize-winning salesman,
too, is delighted to secure a big order. But he doesn't say to himself, "That will put me 'way
ahead on the sales record for today." Instead he grins and thinks, "This is my day. I'm going
to fatten up my batting average while I'm going good." Success is pepper to him, not the poppy
drug that slackens energy.

[Sidenote: Continual Accumulation]

You have worked hard to get the chance you now have. You have paid for it with your best efforts.
It represents an accumulation of your salesmanship. The good job or the promotion you have
gained is like a savings account. Let us compare it with the first hundred dollars a thrifty
man puts into the bank for a rainy day. Would he celebrate the accumulation of that moderate
amount of money, the first evidence of his ability to save, by quitting the practice of spending
less than his earnings? Would he then say to himself, "I am now successful as a saver"? Would
he stop putting a few dollars in the bank every Saturday, just because he already had a hundred?

[Sidenote: The Building Process is Gradual]

No. He would continue to save until he had enough "units of thrift," enough hundreds of dollars,
to take a longer step toward success. He would invest his accumulated savings in a lot, or
house. Perhaps he would start a business of his own. After his investment he still would continue
to save. So he would build his success.

All building is a gradual, continual process. The bricks are laid one after another. It takes
many to complete the structure. Likewise a series of minor successes must be built into a major
accomplishment. It does not rise all at once.

If you are tempted to pause where you are in order to celebrate, ask yourself, "Is this really
the celebration stage?" Probably you will find you have only laid the corner-stone, or made
an excavation for the foundation of your success. You would not think of having a housewarming
because you had finished the basement walls. Nor would you consider it an occasion for especial
jollification the day you erected the scantlings around the first floor joists. Not until the
walls are up and the roof is on, not until the house is plastered and papered and painted,
not until it is finished would you think of standing on the sidewalk to look it over pride
fully and exult, "I did that. It's a good job."

[Sidenote: Repeated Building]

But if you complete one house, you will not only feel the satisfaction of accomplishment, you
will also want to build another that would be a great improvement on the one just finished.
You will be healthily dissatisfied with what you have already done. Very likely you will sell
the first house at a profit, and straightway start to put up a better building on another lot.
In time you will sell that, too. You will continue the procedure until you become a master
builder of houses, and continually achieve more and more success.

We have assumed that you now are successfully in possession of an opportunity. You have sold
yourself into the very job you want, or into a better position that you believe will afford
you fine chances to advance. Do not slump or relax in salesmanship. Do not think back, or spend
much time contemplating your present success. Look ahead to your next sale of true ideas of
your best capabilities. The successful salesman is a quick repeater. He counts his accomplishments
in totals, not by units. He has successful "years," each made up of about three hundred successful
working days. He plans in campaigns; so he is not inclined to over-celebrate the winning of
a battle.

[Sidenote: Make Each Goal a New Starting Point]

Samuel McRoberts, vice-president of the great National City Bank of New York, started working
for Armour & Company at a small salary in the early nineties. He was a young man who was always
healthily ambitious to keep moving ahead. He "ate up" the minor work assigned to him, and celebrated
the completion of each task by asking at once, "What next?"

In a few years he had risen by successive promotions to the position of treasurer of Armour
& Company. But that wasn't a goal to McRoberts. It seemed to him only a good starting point
to bigger successes in the financial world. He became a director of several banks, an officer
in important railroad and other corporations. He continually enlarged his service value until
he was called to New York's greatest bank, and took his place among the masters of American
finance.

He did not loll back in his chair then and start taking it easy. He packed more and more accomplishments
into every day. When the war began, he went to Washington to take executive charge of the job
of procuring ordnance for the fighters. He held a post analogous to that of Lloyd-George when
he was Minister of Munitions for Great Britain. McRoberts made good as a brigadier general,
and after the war resumed his success in business. Whatever he did, wherever he worked, Samuel
McRoberts smiled welcomes to more opportunities for service, and reached out his ready hands
to grasp them.

[Sidenote: Celebrate by Tackling the Job Ahead]

That is the way to celebrate--by tackling the job ahead. There is no end to the selling process.
One sale should lead directly to another. The good salesman celebrates only the opportunity
to get the next order in prospect. He may chuckle to himself over the sale just closed, but
he does his rejoicing on his way to a new selling chance.

[Sidenote: Dynamic Confidence Static Complacency]

You haven't "arrived" yet. You are just well started. Keep moving, and you will never "see
your finish." Your successes thus far should have developed a considerable degree of self-confidence.
Be careful not to let that dynamic quality change into the static element of self-complacency.
Never be satisfied with what you have done. Always have the zest of appetite for more to do.
Add every day to your success chances.

Do not lose either your self-respect, or the respect of the men with whom you are associated,
by ceasing to grow. Do more than you are paid for, and pretty soon your job will be unable
to hold all your earning capacity. You will be promoted to bigger opportunities. If you shrink
in the place you occupy now, your future chances will shrivel to fit your smaller size. The
way to get a better-paying job, to win a bigger, more profitable field for your salesmanship,
is to crowd your present position with your capabilities. Burst out of your limited territory
and spread over more ground.

[Sidenote: Serving Friends]

Render your utmost possible service to other people. Celebrate each opportunity to form a friendship.
Make some one like you for what you are willing to do for him. Hold your friends, once they
are made. As Emerson advised, "Be concerned for other people and their welfare. Put their interests
sometimes ahead of your own. You can love your fellow men so much that you will never trample
on their rights; and while you yourself keep climbing, raise as many of them as you can along
with you. That is the way to make friends."

Celebrate the good fortune of your business associates, rather than your own. When a big contract
is closed by your employer, be as tickled over it as he feels. Genuinely rejoice in his success.
Have no envy of the man above you, then when you rise to a higher level the men below you will
not be likely to feel jealous.

[Sidenote: Ford and Schwab]

Why has Henry Ford won so unique a place in the personal regard of the everyday man? Ford is
one of the richest men in the world; yet he is not hated. What is the reason for his general
popularity? He is not an idler. He has celebrated each success by taking on another job. And
he always has given a hand-up to the other fellow instead of kicking him down so that he might
climb higher because of his failure. He has understood and sympathized with the hopes and viewpoint
of people who work. As a result countless men and women, most of whom never have seen him,
think of Henry Ford as their friend. His finest success is not signified by the millions of
money he has accumulated, but by the millions of friendships he enjoys.

Charles M. Schwab, too, is popular. He is a man whom people like. Because he was so successful
in winning friends, rather than for his generally recognized business ability, he was made
the head of the Government's ship-building program in the war. Other men were eager to work
with and for Charles M. Schwab. The co-operation of thousands of friendships, new and old,
more than anything else enabled him to succeed in his big, patriotic job. How much more he
has to celebrate in his wealth of good will than in his great fortune of dollars! Schwab has
been called the most successful salesman in the world, which is another way of saying that
he has no equal in ability to make other people both trust and like him.

[Sidenote: The Truest Wealth]

You may never accumulate millions of dollars. That in itself is not success. Many wealthy men
are failures in life. But with the aid of masterly salesmanship you can so enrich yourself
with friendships and the opportunities they bring that making all the money you want will be
merely incidental to your real success. Let every accomplishment be a stimulus to better selling
of your service. Celebrate successful sales of your ideas by undertaking to sell more true
ideas about your best capabilities in a larger field of usefulness.

[Sidenote: The Revolving Door]

The good salesman goes from opportunity to opportunity through a revolving door. As it closes
on one selling chance, it opens on another. He steps directly from a finished sale into the
prospect of getting an order elsewhere. So he never stops selling.

You have sold yourself some knowledge of salesmanship. Do not rest contented with what you
have already learned. These chapters should but whet your appetite for more opportunities to
master the principles and methods of selling true ideas of your best capabilities. So as you
close this book, reach out your hand to open another. You cannot over-study the subject of
salesmanship. Never be satisfied with what you know. Continue to search for more golden knowledge,
and make it yours by practicing everything you learn.

[Sidenote: Failure Impossible to The Good Salesman]

It is impossible to fail in life if you become a master salesman of the best that is in you.
You will be sure to succeed. So here is Good Luck to you! Keep on making it for yourself, and
you never will run out. CERTAIN SUCCESS WILL BE YOURS.

       *       *       *       *       *

    It is you that you offer for sale,
      With your traits ranged like goods on a shelf,
    And the first thing to do, without fail,
      Is to make a success of yourself.

EDGAR A. GUEST.

