If he spotted it, he gave no sign, and only came the faster. Mallory braced himself for the
forthcoming impact. However, the impact never occurred. At the last moment his antagonist directed
the spearpoint at Mallory's helmet, did something that made it separate itself from the shaft
to the accompaniment of a gout of incandescence and come streaking through the air like a little
comet. Mallory tried to dodge, but he would have been equally as successful if he had tried
to dodge a real comet. There was a deafening clang! in the region of his left audio-amplifier,
and the whole left side of his face went numb. Just before he blacked out he saw the oncoming
knight veer his steed, wheel it around, and ride off. A peal of all-too-familiar laughter drifted
back over the man's shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now," said the rent-a-robogogue, "you will try again: 'A' is for 'Atom', 'B' is for 'Bomb',
'C' is for 'Conform', 'D' is for 'Dollar', 'E' is for 'Economy', and 'F' is for 'Fun'. What
comes after 'F'?"

The boy Mallory squirmed in his ABC chair. "I don't know what comes next and I don't care!"

"I'll box your ears," the rent-a-robogogue threatened.

"You wouldn't dare!"

"Yes I would--I'm a physical-chastisement model, you know. Now, we'll try once more: 'A' is
for 'Atom', 'B' is for 'Bomb', 'C' is for 'Conform', 'D' is for 'Dollar', 'E' is for 'Economy',
and 'F' is for 'Fun'. What comes after 'F'?"

"I told you that I didn't know and that I didn't care!"

"I warned you," said the rent-a-robogogue.

"Ow!" the boy Mallory cried.

"Ow!" the man Mallory groaned, sitting up in the weeds beside the early sixth-century highway.

All was silence around him, if you discounted the stridulations of insects and the be-ke korak-korak-korak
of frogs. A few yards away, Easy Money stood immobile in the moonlight. Mallory raised his
hand to his helmet and felt the sizable dent that the spearpoint had made. Gingerly, he took
the helmet off. Who in the world would have dreamed that they had jet-rifles in this day and age!

The absurdity of the thought snapped him back to full awareness. A moment later he remembered
the peal of familiar laughter.

Perfidion!

The man must have wanted the Grail desperately to have come after it himself, which meant that
it was probably worth much more than he had let on. By 10.30 all the luggage was over, and then
began the business of forcing reluctant mules and horses to swim two hundred yards of cold,
swift stream.

The bell-mare promptly declined to lead, and only swam out to return again to the shore. Then
one or two soldiers stripped and forced their horses in, but in turn became scared, and gave it
up amidst chaff and laughter. At last a line of men, armed with stones, drove the whole herd of
seventy-five animals into the water with demoniac howls and a shower
of missiles.

Once in, they took it calmly enough, and, the brave little foal leading, soon reached the farther
bank. One old war-horse of recalcitrant views turned back, and had to be towed over.
 Then, in possession of the knowledge that Mallory was embarking into the past as Sir
Galahad, all Perfidion had had to do was to consult one of the many experts he kept at his
beck and call. The expert had undoubtedly told him where Sir Galahad was supposed to have found
the Grail before taking it to Sarras, and, equally as important, approximately when the event
was supposed to have taken place. Further questions could not have failed to elicit the additional
information that Sir Launcelot had come to the chamber of the Sangraal before Sir Galahad had,
and from this Perfidion had undoubtedly deduced that Sir Launcelot could very well have been
a time-thief in disguise, too, and that the man, having arrived on the scene first, could very
well have been responsible for the Grail's so-called return to Heaven, despite what legend
said to the contrary. Certainly it had been a gamble worth taking, and obviously Perfidion
had taken it.

And won the jackpot.

But that didn't mean he was going to keep the jackpot. Not by a long shot. Mallory encephalopathed
Easy Money to his side and pulled himself to his feet with the help of the left stirrup and
hung his helmet on the pommel. Then he picked up his spear and clambered into the saddle. "We're
not beat yet, Easy Money," he said. Giddy-ap!

Easy Money whinnied, stamped its feet, and started back toward the Yore. A short while later
they passed the lane that led to the castle of Carbonek. Presently Mallory heard the clip-clop
of approaching hoofbeats, and not wanting to risk an encounter in his weakened condition, he
encephalo-guided the rohorse off the highway and into the deep shadows of a big oak. There
was something tantalizingly familiar about the horse and rider coming down the highway. Small
wonder: the "horse" was Easy Money and the rider was himself. He was on his way to the castle
of Carbonek to lift the Holy Grail.

Mallory gazed after his retreating figure disgustedly. "Sucker!" he said.

IV

Rowena nearly threw a fit when Mallory rode into the rec-hall. "Oh, fair knight, ye be sorely
wounded indeed!" she cried, helping him down from his rohorse. "Certes, an ye bleed so much
ye may die!"

Mallory's head was throbbing, and he saw two damosels that hight Rowena instead of only one.
"I'll be all right after I lie down for a while," he said. "And don't worry about the bleeding--it's
almost stopped."

He took a step in the direction of his bedroom office, staggered and would have fallen if she
hadn't caught his arm. Her strength astonished him: for all the lightness of his armor, it
still lent him an over-all weight of some two hundred and ten pounds; and yet the shoulder
which she provided for him to lean on did not give once all the way to his bedside. She had
his pauldrons, breastplate, and arm-coverings off in no time flat. His cuisses, greaves, and
sollerets followed. The last he remembered was lying there in his under garments and his chain-mail
vest with three faces swimming in the misted sea of his vision, each of them invested with
the peculiar beauty that concern, and concern alone, can grant.

"How is mammakin's little man now?" the rent-a-mammakin asked, applying soothing sedasalve
to the boy Mallory's swollen ear.

"He hit me, mammakin," the boy Mallory sobbed. "Just because I wouldn't tell him that 'G' stands
for 'Geography'. I hate geography! I hate it, hate it, hate it!"

"Nasty old rent-a-robogogue! Mammakin sent him away. He was an old model that got rented out
by mistake. Is mammakin's little man's ear all right now?"

The boy Mallory sat up. "I want my real--" he began.

The man Mallory sat up. "I want my real--" he began.

"I have great joy of thy swift recovery, fair sir," Rowena said.

She was perched on the edge of his bed, applying a cool and soothing ointment to his ear. On
the table by the bed lay a basin of water, and on her lap lay a pink tube. He grabbed the tube,
looked at the label. Sedasalve. He sighed with relief. "Where did you find it?" he asked.

"La! fair sir, when ye did seem no longer on live I did run both toward and forward in the
castle seeking a magical salve whereby I might succor ye, whereupon I did come to a white box
in the chapel wherein lay many magical tubes of diverse colors and natures whereof I did choose
one and--"

Mallory was incredulous. "You chose a tube at random?" he demanded. "Good Lord, it might have
contained a counteragent that could have killed me!"

"The ... the letters thereon seemed of a magical nature, fair knight. And ... and the color
was seemly."

"Well anyway it was the right one." He looked at her. Could she read? he wondered. He was tempted
to ask her, but refrained for fear of embarrassing her. "In that same white box," he said,
"you will find a big bottle filled with round red pellets. Would you get it for me?"

When she returned with it, he took two of the pills, then he laid his head back on the pillow.
"They'll restore the blood I lost," he explained, "but in order for them to do the job properly
I've got to lie perfectly still for at least one hour."

She sat down on the edge of the bed. "Marry! the magic of Merlin is marvelous, albeit not as
marvelous as the magic of Joseph of Arimathea."

"What did he do that was so marvelous?"

The plum-blue eyes were fixed full upon his face. "Ye wit naught of the tale of the white shield
ye bear, fair sir? And then--"

"Hold it a minute," Mallory said. "This shield you've finally got around to mentioning--is
it the same one you set out to tell me about?"

"Wit ye well, fair sir. And so--"

"A great what?" Mallory asked. In one sense the story was familiar to him, but what bothered
him was the fact that it was familiar in another sense too--a sense he couldn't put his finger on.

"A wicked unbeliever in our Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mallory awoke, Rowena's head was resting on his chest, and she was breathing the soft
and even breaths of untroubled sleep. Her hair, viewed thus closely, was not as dark as he
had at first believed it to be. It was brown, really, rather than dark-brown. And astonishingly
lustrous. Without thinking, he rested his hand lightly upon her head. She stirred then, and
sat up, rubbing her plum-blue eyes. For a moment she stared at him uncomprehendingly, then,
"Prithee forgive me, fair sir," she said.

Mallory sat up, too. "Forgive you for what? Go open a couple of vacuum tins while I get into
my armor--I'm going to bring this caper to a close."

"Thy ... thy strength has returned?"

"I never felt better in my life."

In the rec-hall he said, sitting down at the table before one of the two vacuum tins she had
opened, "You never did ask me what happened."

"Ye will tell me of thy own will an ye wish me to know."

Mallory took a mouthful of simulsteak, chewed and swallowed. "Your Sir Launcelot turned out
to be a phony, and pulled a rabbit out of his helmet the nature of which I'd better not try
to describe to you."

Eyes round as plums, she regarded him across the table. "A ... a phony, fair sir?"

Mallory nodded. "That's a sort of felon paynim who plays golp."

"But with my own eyes I did see his armor, fair knight."

"That's right--you saw his armor. But you didn't see him. A certain character by the name of
Perfidion was residing behind that hardware--not the good Sir Launcelot."

"Perfidion?"

Mallory grinned. "Sir Jason Perfidion--a knight errant ye wit not of. But the tournament's
not over yet, and this time I've got the rabbit: he thinks I'm dead."

"He ... he left ye for dead, fair sir?"

"That he did, and if that little brain-buster of his had struck just one inch to the right,
I'd have been just that." He shoved his empty vacuum tin away and stood up. "Excuse me a minute--I've
got to visit the sorcerer's tower again."

In the control room, he took the Yore back to 7:20 p.m. of the same day and re-materialized
it half a mile farther down the valley. Turning, he saw that Rowena had followed him and was
watching him from the doorway. "Whereabouts may I find oats that I may feed thy horse, fair
knight?" she asked.

"Easy Money doesn't eat. He--" Mallory paused astonished as two of the largest tears he had
ever seen coalesced in her eyes and went tumbling down her cheeks. "Oh, it's not that he's
sick," he rushed on. "It's just that horses like him don't require food to keep them going.
Why, Easy Money's guaranteed for ... he'll live another thirty years."

The sun came up beyond the plum-blue horizons of her eyes. "It pleaseth me mickle to hear ye
speak thus, fair knight. I ... I have great joy of him."

Back in the rec-hall, Mallory pulled on his gauntlets, reset his timepiece, and donned his
helmet. The left audio-amplifier was shot, but otherwise the piece was in good condition--aside
from the dent, of course. He encephalopathed Easy Money to his side, hung his shield around
his neck, and mounted. "Hand me my spear, will you, Rowena?" he asked.

She did so. I presume its horrible taste has secured it a reputation for being good when it is down.
Close by it kindly Nature has placed a stream of clear, sweet water.
A mile or so more brought us (August 3d) to camp, which was pitched
at the end of the valley of Soda Butte.

Her concern touched him, and he removed his helmet and leaned down and kissed her on the forehead.
"Keep the home fires burning," he said; then, setting his helmet back in place, he activated
the lock, rode across the mirage-moat, and set forth into the forest once again.

V

This time when he reached the crest of the ridge that separated the two valleys, Mallory took
an azimuth on the towers of Carbonek, encephalo-fed the direction to Easy Money, and programmed
the "animal" to proceed in as straight a course as possible.

In the east, the moon was just beginning to rise; in the west, traces of the sunset lingered
blood-red just above the horizon. On the highway below, a knight sitting astride a brown rohorse
and bearing a white shield with a red cross in the center was riding toward Carbonek to challenge
a twenty-second century "felon paynim" in imitation Age-of-Chivalry armor. In the valley Mallory
had just left behind him there were two castles named Yore, and soon, a third would pop into
existence and yet another Mallory come riding out. Mallory grinned. It was a little bit like
playing chess.

The forest which Easy Money presently entered was parklike in places, and sometimes the trees
thinned out into wide, moonlit meadows. Crossing one of the meadows, Mallory saw the first
star, and when at length Easy Money emerged on the highway, the heavens were decked out in
typical midsummer panoply. The rohorse had followed its programming almost perfectly and had
emerged at a point just south of the lane leading to the castle of Carbonek. All Mallory had
to do was to encephalo-guide it farther down the highway to a point beyond the site of the
forthcoming joust. While doing so, he kept well within the concealing shadows of the bordering
oaks and beeches where the ground was soft and could give forth no telltale clip-clop of hoofbeats.
His circumspection proved wise--as in one sense, of course, it already had--and when the false
Sir Launcelot came riding by on his way to the castle and the chamber of the Sangraal, he was
no more aware of Mallory III's presence by the roadside than he would presently be aware of
Mallory II's presence in the shadows of the trees that bordered the lane.

Mallory III grinned again and brought Easy Money to a halt just beyond the next bend. "Wit
ye well, Sir Jason, that thy hours be numbered," he said.

He remained seated in the saddle, feeling pretty good about the world. In no time at all, if
his one-man ambuscade came off, he would be on his way back to the Yore, and thence to the
twenty-second century and a haircut. Selling the Sangraal without the aid of a professional
time-fence like Perfidion would be difficult, of course, but it could be done, and once it
was done, he, Mallory, could take his place on Get-Rich-Quick Street with the best of them,
and no questions would be asked. There was, to be sure, the problem of what to do about a certain
damosel that hight Rowena, but he would face that when he came to it. Maybe he could drop her
off a dozen years in the future in a region far enough removed from Carbonek to ensure her
safety. He would see.

