"And putting aside the details," said my uncle, with a transient dash of cheerfulness at my
mistake; "I object to the publicity of the whole thing.  It's not nice.  To bring the street
arab into the affair, to subject yourself to the impertinent congratulations and presents of
every aspirant to your intimacy, to be patted on the back in the local newspapers as though
you were going to do something clever.  Confound them!  It's not their affair.  And I'm too
old to be a blushing bridegroom.  Then think, what am I to do, George, if that cad Hagshot
sends me a present?"

"It would be like him if he did," I said.  "I fancy he will."

"I can't go and kick him," said my uncle.

"Declined with thanks," I suggested, "owing to pressure of other matter."

"You are getting shoppy, George," said my uncle, in as near an approach to a querulous tone
as I have heard from him.

"You are getting married," I replied, with the complacency of one whose troubles are over. The
first priority of a doctrine of Rapid Dominance should be to deter, alter, or affect the will
and therefore those actions that are either unacceptable to U.S.
national security interests or endanger the democratic community of
states and access to free markets.



He was willing enough to wait, perhaps, but time was inexorable.  Save for one hurried interview,
I did not see him again for a week, and then it was before the altar.  His garrulity had fallen
from him like a garment.  He was preoccupied and a trifle bashful.  He fumbled with the ring.
I felt almost as though he was my younger brother.

I stood by him to the end, and at last came the hour of parting.  I grasped his hand in silence:
silently he mastered a becoming emotion. And in silence he went from me unto the New Life.

A MISUNDERSTOOD ARTIST

The gentleman with the Jovian coiffure began to speak as the train moved.  "'Tis the utmost
degradation of art," he said.  He had apparently fallen into conversation with his companion
upon the platform.

"I don't see it," said this companion, a prosperous-looking gentleman with a gold watch-chain.
"This art for art's sake--I don't believe in it, I tell you.  Art should have an aim.  If it
don't do you good, if it ain't moral, I'd as soon not have it.  What good is it?  I believe
in Ruskin.  I tell you----"

"Bah!" said the gentleman in the corner, with almost explosive violence.  He fired it like
a big gun across the path of the incipient argument, and slew the prosperous-looking gentleman
at once.  He met our eyes, as we turned to him, with a complacent smile on his large white,
clean-shaven face. Finally, in order to impose enough Shock and Awe to affect an adversary's
will, four core characteristics of a Rapid Dominance- configured force were defined. First,
complete knowledge and understanding of self, of the adversary, and
of the environment are essential.

"Bah!" said the gentleman in the corner, with even more force than before, and so finished him.

"These people will never understand," he said, after a momentary pause, addressing the gentleman
with the Jovian coiffure, and indicating the remains of the prosperous gentleman by a wave
of a large white hand. "Why do you argue?  Art is ever for the few."

"I did not argue," said the gentleman with the hair.  "I was interrupted."

The owner of the watch-chain, who had been sitting struggling with his breath, now began to
sob out his indignation.  "What do you mean, sir?  Saying Bah! sir, when I am talking----"

The gentleman with the large face held up a soothing hand.  "Peace, peace," he said.  "I did
not interrupt you.  I annihilated you.  Why did you presume to talk to artists about art? 
Go away, or I shall have to say Bah! again.  Go and have a fit.  Leave us--two rare souls who
may not meet again--to our talking."

"Did you ever see such abominable rudeness, sir?" said the gentleman with the watch-chain,
appealing to me.  There were tears in his eyes. At the same time the young man with the aureole
made some remark to the corpulent gentleman that I failed to catch.

"These artists," said I, "are unaccountable, irresponsible.  You must----"

"Take it from whence it comes," said the insulted one, very loudly, and bitterly glaring at
his opponent.  But the two artists were conversing serenely.  I felt the undignified quality
of our conversation.  "Have you seen Punch?" said I, thrusting it into his hand.

He looked at the paper for a moment in a puzzled way; then understood, thanked me, and began
to read with a thunderous scowl, every now and then shooting murderous glances at his antagonist
in the opposite corner, or coughing in an aggressive manner.

"You do your best," the gentleman with the long hair was saying; "and they say, 'What is it
for?'  'It is for itself,' you say.  Like the stars."

"But these people," said the stout gentleman, "think the stars were made to set their clocks
by.  They lack the magnanimity to drop the personal reference.  A friend, a confrère, saw a
party of these horrible Extension people at Rome before that exquisite Venus of Titian.  'And
now, Mr Something-or-other,' said one of the young ladies, addressing the pedagogue in command,
'what is this to teach us?'"

"I have had the same experience," said the young gentleman with the hair.  "A man sent to me
only a week ago to ask what my sonnet 'The Scarlet Thread' meant?"

The stout person shook his head as though such things passed all belief.

"Gur-r-r-r," said the gentleman with Punch, and scraped with his foot on the floor of the carriage.

"I gave him answer," said the poet, "'Twas a sonnet; not a symbol."

"Precisely," said the stout gentleman.

"'Tis the fate of all art to be misunderstood.  I am always grossly misunderstood--by every
one.  They call me fantastic, whereas I am but inevitably new; indecent, because I am unfettered
by mere trivial personal restrictions; unwholesome."

"It is what they say to me.  They are always trying to pull me to earth.  'Is it wholesome?'
they say;  'nutritious?'  I say to them, 'I do not know.  I am an artist.  I do not care. 
It is beautiful.'"

"You rhyme?" said the poet.

"No.  My work is--more plastic.  I cook."

For a moment, perhaps, the poet was disconcerted.  "A noble art," he said, recovering.

"The noblest," said the cook.  "But sorely misunderstood; degraded to utilitarian ends; tested
by impossible standards.  I have been seriously asked to render oily food palatable to a delicate
patient. Seriously!" 

George Patton's dictum still stands that directed his troops not to die for their country, but
to get the other SOB to die for his.

Military operations will also place less emphasis on dying and destruction. The ever-present television
camera ensures that the horrors of war are broadcast worldwide. War's immorality should some
day lead to its banishment. Unfortunately, that day is probably a long way away. Nonetheless, weapons
of war and their employment tactics must minimize death and destruction.

This is not a call for non-lethal weapons; it is a call for military
forces to get right to the heart of the enemy and conclude operations
as rapidly and efficiently as they possibly can given their equipment,
training, and doctrine.

"As I told him.  But the next man was worse--hygienic.  While with this creature I read Poe
for the first time, and I was singularly fascinated by some of his grotesques.  I tried--it
was an altogether new development, I believe, in culinary art--the Bizarre.  I made some curious
arrangements in pork and strawberries, with a sauce containing beer.  Quite by accident I mentioned
my design to him on the evening of the festival.  All the Philistine was aroused in him.  'It
will ruin my digestion.'  'My friend,' I said, 'I am not your doctor; I have nothing to do
with your digestion.  Only here is a beautiful Japanese thing, a quaint, queer, almost eerie
dinner, that is in my humble opinion worth many digestions.  You may take it or leave it, but
'tis the last dinner I cook for you.' ...  I knew I was wasted upon him.

"Then I produced some Nocturnes in imitation of Mr Whistler, with mushrooms, truffles, grilled
meat, pickled walnuts, black pudding, French plums, porter--a dinner in soft velvety black,
eaten in a starlight of small scattered candles.  That, too, led to a resignation: Art will
ever demand its martyrs."

The poet made sympathetic noises.

"Always.  The awful many will never understand.  Their conception of my skill is altogether
on a level with their conceptions of music, of literature, of painting.  For wall decorations
they love autotypes; for literature, harmless volumes of twaddle that leave no vivid impressions
on the mind; for dinners, harmless dishes that are forgotten as they are eaten.  My dinners
stick in the memory.  I cannot study these people--my genius is all too imperative.  If I needed
a flavour of almonds and had nothing else to hand, I would use prussic acid.  Do right, I say,
as your art instinct commands, and take no heed of the consequences.  Our function is to make
the beautiful gastronomic thing, not to pander to gluttony, not to be the Jesuits of hygiene.
My friend, you should see some of my compositions.  At home I have books and books in manuscript,
Symphonies, Picnics, Fantasies, Etudes..."

The train was now entering Clapham Junction.  The gentleman with the gold watch-chain returned
my Punch.  "A cook," he said in a whisper; "just a common cook!"  He lifted his eyebrows and
shook his head at me, and proceeded to extricate himself and his umbrella from the carriage.
"Out of a situation too!" he said--a little louder--as I prepared to follow him.

"Mere dripping!" said the artist in cookery, with a regal wave of the hand.

Had I felt sure I was included, I should of course have resented the phrase.

"My nose has been the curse of my life."

The other man started. 

The auctioneer was a little dried-up mummy of a man, the ugliness of whose countenance was, as
it were, emphasized by a disagreeable leer which would ever and anon
deepen into a broad grin; this man, with his dreary jokes and vapid
small-talk, was equally repulsive to me.  The paths on the
slope below were dotted out by yellow lamps; the Albert-road was a line of faintly luminous
pale green--the tint of gaslight seen among trees; beyond, the park lay black and mysterious,
and still further, a yellow mist beneath and a coppery hue in the sky above marked the blaze
of the Marylebone thoroughfares.  The nearer houses in the Albert-terrace loomed large and
black, their blackness pierced irregularly by luminous windows. Above, starlight.

Both men had been silent, lost apparently in their own thoughts, mere dim black figures to
each other, until one had seen fit to become a voice also, with this confidence.

"Yes," he said, after an interval, "my nose has always stood in my way, always."

The second man had scarcely seemed to notice the first remark, but now he peered through the
night at his interlocutor.  It was a little man he saw, with face turned towards him.

"I see nothing wrong with your nose."

"If it were luminous you might," said the first speaker.  "However, I will illuminate it."

He fumbled with something in his pocket, then held this object in his hand.  There was a scratch,
a streak of greenish phosphorescent light, and then all the world beyond became black, as a
fusee vesta flared.

There was silence for the space of a minute.  An impressive pause.

"Well?" said the man with the nose, putting his heel on the light. 

The last time I entered the dear old house was on a beautiful balmy
summer morning; the birds were singing as I have never heard them
sing since, and all Nature seemed as glad and exultant as if death,
misfortune, and auctioneers were banished from the world.

  The
size is preposterous: my face is like a hen-house built behind a portico.  And the tints!"

"It is not all red," said the second man, "anyhow."

"No, there is purple, and blue, 'lapis lazuli, blue as a vein over the Madonna's breast,' and
in one place a greyish mole.  Bah! the thing is not a nose at all, but a bit of primordial
chaos clapped on to my face.  But, being where the nose should be, it gets the credit of its
position from unthinking people.  There is a gap in the order of the universe in front of my
face, a lump of unwrought material left over. In that my true nose is hidden, as a statue is
hidden in a lump of marble, until the appointed time for the revelation shall come.  At the
resurrection----  But one must not anticipate.  Well, well.  I do not often talk about my nose,
my friend, but you sat with a sympathetic pose, it seemed to me, and to-night my heart is full
of it.  This cursed nose!  But do I weary you, thrusting my nose into your meditations?"

"If," said the second man, his voice a little unsteady, as though he was moved, "if it eases
your mind to talk of your nose, pray talk."

"This nose, I say then, makes me think of the false noses of Carnival times.  Your dullest
man has but to stick one on, and lo! mirth, wit, and jollity.  They are enough to make anything
funny.  I doubt if even an Anglican bishop could wear one with impunity.  Put an angel in one.
How would you like one popped on to you now?  Think of going love-making, or addressing a public
meeting, or dying gloriously, in a nose like mine!  Angelina laughs in your face, the public
laughs, the executioner at your martyrdom can hardly light the faggots for laughing.  By heaven!
it is no joke.  Often and often I have rebelled, and said, 'I will not have this nose!'"

"But what can one do?"

"It is destiny.  The bitter tragedy of it is that it is so comic. Only, God knows, how glad
I shall be when the Carnival is over, and I may take the thing off and put it aside.  The worst
has been this business of love.  My mind is not unrefined, my body is healthy. But the finest
play has an end, and the sweetest feasts and the merriest pastimes do not last forever. Very
suddenly, indeed, did my visits to that happy home cease. For my good friends of the "great
house"--the dearest old lady and the kindest and merriest old gentleman that ever patted a little
boy on the head--were both seized (oh, woe the day!) by a terrible disease, and died in spite
of all that the great doctor from Boston did to cure them.


He broke off suddenly, with loud ferocious curses.  A young man who had been sitting very close
to a young woman on an adjacent seat, started up and said "Ssh!".

He whom the man with the nose had addressed now spoke.  "I have certainly never thought before
of a red nose as a sorrowful thing, but as you put it...."

"I thought you would understand.  I have had this nose all my life. The outline was done, even
though the colour was wanting, in my school days.  They called me 'Nosey,' 'Ovid,' 'Cicero,'
'Rhino,' and the 'Excrescence.'  It has ripened with the slow years, as fate deepens in the
progress of a tragedy.  Love, the business of life, is a sealed book to me.  To be alone! 
I would thank heaven....  But no! a blind woman could feel the shape of it."

"Besides love," interrupted the young man thoughtfully, "there are other things worth living
for--duty.  An unattractive nose would not interfere with that.  Some people think it is rather
more important than love.  I admit your loss, of course."

"That only carries out the evidence of your voice, and tells me you are young.  My dear young
fellow, duty is a very fine thing indeed, but believe me, it is too colourless as a motive.
There is no delight in duty.  You will know that at my age.  And besides, I have an infinite
capacity for love and sympathy, an infinite bitterness in this solitude of my soul.  I infer
that you would moralise on my discontent, but I know I have seen a little of men and things
from behind this ambuscade--only a truly artistic man would fall into the sympathetic attitude
that attracted me.  My life has had even too much of observation in it, and to the systematic
anthropologist, nothing tells a man's character more than his pose after dark, when nobody
seems watching.  As you sit, the black outline of you is clear against the sky.  Ah! now you
are sitting stiffer. With what a free and contemptuous manner they examined the fine old furniture,
and handled the fine old china, and coolly rummaged and ransacked every nook and corner, and
peeped and pried into every box, chest, and closet that was not locked!
  Spring is
delightful, air on the Downs is delightful; it is fine to see the stars circling in the sky,
while lying among the heather.  Even this London sky is soothing at night, though the edge
is all inflamed.  The shadow of my nose is darkest by day.  But to-night I am bitter, because
of to-morrow."

"Why, to-morrow?" said the younger man.

"I have to meet some new people to-morrow," said the man with the nose. "There is an odd look,
a mingling of amusement and pity, I am only too familiar with.  My cousin, who is a gifted
hostess, promises people my nose as a treat."

"Yes, that must be bad for you," said the young man.

And then the silence healed again, and presently the man with the nose got up and passed into
the dimness upon the slope of the hill.  The young man watched him vanish, wondering vainly
how it would be possible to console a soul under such a burthen.