Harold, son of Godwin, belonged in no way to the royal race of  Anglo-Saxon kings. The Dukes
of Normandy had contracted  alliances by marriage with the Anglo-Saxon monarchs, and were 
thought to be more nearly related to Edward the Confessor than  Harold, whose only title was
derived from his sister.

What had been the state of Europe up to that time? Since the  establishment and conversion
of the northern races, a constant  change of rulers, an ever-recurring moving of territorial
limit,  and consequently an endless disturbance in all that secures the  stability of rights,
was common everywhere: in England, under  the heptarchy; in France, under the Carlovingians;
in the  various states of Germany; everywhere, except, perhaps, in a  part of Italy, where
small republics were springing up from  municipal communes, which were better adapted to the
wants of  the people.

The great evils of those times were owing to these perpetual  changes, which all came from
the undefined rights of succession  to power, as left by Charlemagne; a striking proof that
a  monarch may be a man of genius, a great and acceptable ruler,  and still fail to see the
consequences to future times of the  legacy he leaves them in the incomplete institutions of
his own  time. Well has Bossuet said, that "human wisdom is always short  of something."

Those rapid, and, to us, wonderful partitions of empires and  kingdoms; those loose and ill-defined
rules of succession in  Germany, France, England, and elsewhere; productive of  revolution
at the death of every sovereign, and often during  every reign, showed the Popes that hereditary
rights ought to be  clear and fixed, and confined to one person in each nation. From  that
period, date the long lines of the Capetians in France, the  Plantagenets in England; while
rights of a similar kind are  introduced into Spain and Portugal; likewise into the various
states of Northern Germany, or Scandinavia; and Southern Italy,  or Norman Sicily--the rest
of Italy and Germany are placed on a  different footing, the empire and the popedom being both
elective.

Such was the grand policy of the Popes inaugurated by Hildebrand, which came out in all its
strong features, at the same time,  under his powerful influence. Such was the policy which
insured  the stability of Europe for upward of six hundred years; a set  of views to which
a word only can be devoted here, but on which  volumes would not be thrown away.

In consequence of it, for six hundred years dynasties seldom  changed; the territorial limits
of each great division of Europe  remained, on the whole, settled; and an order of society
ensued,  of such a nature that any father of a family might rest assured  of the state of his
children and grandchildren after him.

In this respect, therefore, as in many others, the papacy was  the key-stone of Christendom.

But as soon as Protestantism came to contest, not only the  temporal, but even the spiritual
supremacy of the Popes; when,  taking advantage of the trouble of the Church, the so-called
Catholic sovereigns, while pretending to render all honor to the  spiritual supremacy of the
sovereign Pontiffs, refused to  acknowledge in them any right of lifting their warning voice,
and calling on the powers of the world to obey the great and  unchangeable laws of religion
and justice, then did the long- established stability of Europe begin to give way, while the
whole continent entered upon its long era of revolution, which  is still in full way, and,
as yet, is far from having produced  its last consequences.

England, the most guilty, was the first to feel the effect of  the shock. The Tudors flattered
themselves that, by throwing  aside what they called the yoke of Rome, they had vastly  increased
their power, and so they did for the moment, while the  dynasty that succeeds them sees rebellion
triumphant, and the  head of a king fall beneath the axe of an executioner.

She is said to have benefited, nevertheless, by her great  revolution, and by the subsequent
introduction of a new dynasty.  She has certainly chanted a loud paean of triumph, and at this
moment is still exultant over the effects of her modern policy,  from the momentary success
of the new ideas she has disseminated  through the world, and above all from that immense spread
of  parliamentary governments which have sprung into existence  everywhere under her guidance,
and mainly through her agency.

And the cause of her triumph was that, after a few years of  commotion, she seemed to have
obtained a kind of stability which  was a sufficiently good copy of the old order under the
Popes,  and won for her apparently the gratitude of mankind; but that  stability is altogether
illogical, and cannot long stand. There  is an old, though now trite, saying to the effect
that when you  "sow the wind you must reap the whirlwind," and no one can fail  to see the
speedy realization of the truth of this adage on her  part. Over the full tide of her prosperity
there is a mighty,  irresistible, and inevitable storm visibly gathering. At last  she has
come to nearly the same state of mental anarchy which  she has been so powerful to spread in
Europe. After reading  "Lothair," the work of one of her great statesmen, all  intelligent
readers must exclaim, "Babylon! how hast thou fallen! " Within a few years, possibly, nothing
will remain of her  former greatness but a few shreds, and men will witness another  of those
awful examples of a mighty empire falling in the midst  of the highest seeming prosperity.

When a nation has no longer any fixed principle to go by, when  the minds of her leaders are
at sea on all great religious and  moral questions, when the people openly deny the right of
the  few to rule, when a fabric, raised altogether on aristocracy,  finds the substratum giving
way, and democratic ideas seated  even upon the summit of the edifice, there must be, as is
said,  "a rattling of old bones," and a shaking of the skeleton of what  was a body.

How long, then, will the mock stability established by the deep  wisdom of England's renowned
statesmen have stood? A century or  two of dazzling material prosperity succeeded by long ages
of  woe, such as the writer of the "Battle of Dorking," with all his  imagination, could not
find power enough to describe; for no  Prussian, or any other foreign army, will bring that
catastrophe  about, but the breath of popular fury.

But our purpose is not to utter prophecies--rather to rehearse  facts already accomplished.

England, then, was the first to feel the shock of the earthquake  which was to overthrow the
old stability of Europe. It is known  how Germany has ever since been a scene of continual
wars,  dynastic changes, and territorial confusion. What evils have not  the wars of the present
century brought upon her! Yet, owing to  the phlegmatic disposition, one might call it the
stolidity of  the majority of Germans, the disturbances have been so far  external, and the
lower masses of society have scarcely been  agitated, except by the first rude explosion of
Protestantism,  and the sudden patriotic enthusiasm of young plebeians, in 1814.  But mark
the suddenness with which, in 1848, all the thrones of  Germany fell at once under the mere
breath of what is called  "the people!" It is almost a trite thing to say that, where  religion
no longer exists, there no longer is security or peace.  Impartial travellers, Americans chiefly,
have observed of late  that, in certain parts of France, there is, in truth, very  little religious
feeling; while in all Protestant Germany,  particularly in that belonging to Prussia, there
is none at all.  How long, then, is the "new Germanic Empire," so loudly trumpeted at Versailles,
and afterward so gloriously celebrated at Berlin, without the intervention of any religion
whatever, likely to stand? How long? Can it exist till the end of this century? He would be
a bold prophet who could confidently say, "Yes."

As to France, formerly the steadiest of all nations, so deeply  attached to her dynasty of
eight hundred years, although some of  her kings were little worthy true affection; many of
whose  citizens have been born in houses a thousand years old, from  families whose names went
back to the darkness of heroic times;  which was once so retentive of her old memories, living
in her  traditions, her former deeds of glory, even in the monuments  raised in honor of her
kings, her great captains, her  illustrious citizens; which was chiefly devoted to her time-
honored religion, mindful that she was born on the day of the  baptism of Clovis; that she
grew up during the Crusades; that a  virgin sent by Heaven saved her from the yoke of the stranger;
that, on attaining her full maturity, it was religion which  chiefly ennobled her; and that
her greatest poets, orators,  literary men, respected and honored religion as the basis of
the  state, and, by their immortal masterpieces, threw a halo around  Catholicism--France,
which still retains in her external  appearance something of her old steadiness and immutability,
so  that to the eye of a stranger, who sees her for the first time,  solidity is the word which
comes naturally to his mind, as  expressive of every thing around him, has only the look of
what  she was in her days of greatness, and on the surface of the  earth there is not to-day
a more unsteady, shaky, insecure spot,  scarcely worthy of being chosen by a nomad Tartar as
a place  wherein to pitch his tent for the night, and hurry off at the  first appearance of
the rising sun on the morrow. Can the  shifting sands of Libya, the ever-shaking volcanic mountains
of  equatorial America, the rapidly-forming coral islands of the  southern seas, give an idea
of that fickleness, constant  agitation, and unceasing clamor for change, which have made 
France a by-word in our days? Who of her children can be sure  that the house he is building
for himself will ever be the  dwelling of his son; that the city he lives in to-day will  tomorrow
acknowledge him as a member of its community? Who can  be certain that the constitution of
the whole state may not  change in the night, and he wake the next day to find himself an 
outlaw and a fugitive?

It is a lamentable fact that for the last hundred years a great  nation has been reduced to
such a state of insecurity, that no  one dares to think of the future, though all have repudiated
the  past, and thus every thing is reduced for them to the present  fleeting moment.

And what is likely to be the future destiny of a nation of forty  million souls, when their
present state is such, and such the  uncertainty of their dearest interests? They are unwilling
to  quit the soil; for they have lost all power of expansion by  sending colonies to foreign
shores; it is difficult for them to  take a real interest in their own soil, for the great
moving  spring of interest is broken up by the total want of security.  May God open their
eyes to their former folly; for the folly was  all of their own making! They have allowed themselves
to be thus  thoroughly imbued with this revolutionary spirit--the first  revolution they hailed
with enthusiasm; when they saw it become  stained with frightful horrors, they paused a moment,
and were  on the point of acknowledging their error; but scribblers and  sophists came to show
them that it failed in being a glorious  and happy one only because it was not complete; another
and then  another, and another yet, would finish the work and make them a  great nation. Thus
have they become altogether a revolutionary  people; and they must abide by the consequences,
unless they  come at last to change their mind.

But the worst has not been said. This terrible example, instead  of proving a warning to nations,
has, on the contrary, drawn  nearly all of them into the same boiling vortex. England and 
France have led the whole European world captive: people ask for  a government different to
the one they have; revolution is the  consequence, and, with the entry of the revolutionary
spirit,  good-by to all stability and security. Let Italy and Spain bear  witness if this is
not so.

And the great phenomenon of the age is the collecting of all  those revolutionary particles
into one compact mass, arranged  and preordained by some master-spirits of evil, who would
be  leaders not of a state or nation only, but of a universal  republic embracing first Europe,
and then the world. So we hear  to-day of the Internationalists receiving in their "congresses"
deputies not only from all the great European centres, not only  from both ends of America,
which is now Europeanized, but from  South Africa, from Australia, New Zealand, from countries
which  a few years back were still in quiet possession of a  comparatively few aborigines.

To come back, then, to the point from which we started, it is in  this revolutionary spirit,
in those conspiracies for revolutions  to come, that some Irishmen set their hopes for the
regeneration  of their country. It would be well to remind them of the sayings  of our Lord:
"Can men gather grapes from thorns?" "By their  fruits ye shall know them."

Let the Irish who are truly devoted to their country reflect  well on the kind of men they
would have as allies. What has  Ireland in common with these men? If they know Ireland at all,
they detest her because of her Catholicism; and, if Ireland  knows them, she cannot but distrust
and abominate them.

It has seemed a decree of kind Providence that all attempts at  rebellion on her part undertaken
with the hope of such help,  have so far not only been miserable failures, but most  disgracefully
miscarried and been spent in air, leaving only  ridicule and contempt for the originators of
and partakers in  the plots.

If the vast and unholy scheme which is certainly being organized, and which is spreading its
fatal branches in all directions,  should ever succeed, it could not but result in the most
frightful despotism ever contemplated by men. Ireland in such an  event would be the infinitesimal
part of a chaotic system worthy  of Antichrist for head.

But we are confident that such a scheme cannot succeed and come  to be realized, unless indeed
it enter for a short period into  the designs of an avenging God, who has promised not to destroy
mankind again by another flood, but assured us by St. Peter that  he will purify it by fire.

As a mere design of man, intended for the regeneration of  humanity and the new creation of
an abnormal order of things, it  cannot possibly succeed, because it is opposed to the nature
of  men, among whom as a whole there can be no perfect unity of  external government and internal
organization, owing to the  infinite variety of which we spoke at the beginning, which is as
strong in human beings as elsewhere. No other body than the  Catholic Church can hope to adapt
itself to all human races, and  govern by the same rules all the children of Adam. The decree
issued of old from the mouth of God is final, and will last as  long as the earth itself. It
is contained in Moses' Canticle:

"When the Most High divided the nations, when he separated the  sons of Adam, he appointed
the bounds of each people, according  to the number of the children of Israel," or, as the
Hebrew text  has it, "He fixed the limits of each people." On this passage  Aben Ezra remarks
that interpreters understand the text as  alluding to the dispersion of nations (Genesis xi.).
Those  interpreters, were clearly right, although only Jewish rabbies.

When God deprived man of the unity of language, he took away at  the same time the possibility
of unity of institutions and  government; and it will be as hard for men to defeat that design
of Providence as for Julian the apostate to rebuild the Temple  of Jerusalem, of which our
Saviour had declared that there  should not remain "a stone upon a stone."

But, though the monstrous scheme cannot ultimately succeed, it  can and will produce untold
evils to human society. By alluring  workmen and other people of the lower class, it draws
into the  intricate folds of conspiracy, dark projects, and universal  disorder, an immense
array of human beings, whom the  revolutionary spirit had not yet, or at least had scarcely,
touched; it undermines and disturbs society in its lowest depths  and widest-spread foundations,
since the lower class always has  been and still is the most numerous, including by far the
great  majority of men. It consequently renders the stability of order  more difficult, if
not absolutely impossible; it opens up a new  era of revolutions, more disastrous than any
yet known; for, as  has already been remarked, and it should be well borne in mind,  in order
that the whole extent of the evil in prospect may be  seen, so far, all the agitations in Europe,
all the convulsions  which have rendered our age so unlike any previous one, and  productive
of so many calamities, private as well as public,  have been almost exclusively confined to
the middle classes, and  should be considered only as a reaction of the simple  bourgeoisie
against the aristocratic class. Those agitations and  convulsions are only the necessary consequence
of the secular  opposition, existing from the ninth and tenth centuries and  those immediately
following, between the strictly feudal  nobility, which arrogated to itself all prerogatives
and rights,  and the more numerous class of burghers, set on the lower step  of the social
ladder. These latter wanted, not so much to get up  to the level of their superiors, as to
bring them down to their  own, and even precipitate them into the abyss of nothingness  below.
They have almost succeeded; and the prestige of noble  blood has passed away, perhaps forever,
in spite of Vico's well- known theory. But the now triumphant burgher in his turn sees  the
dim mass, lost in the darkness and indistinctness of the  lowest pool of humanity, rising up
grim and horrible out of the  abyss, hungry and fierce and not to be pacified, to threaten
the  new-modelled aristocracy of money with a worse fate than that it  inflicted upon the old
nobility.

And, to render the prospect more appalling, the chief means,  which so eminently aided the
bourgeoisie to take their position,  namely, the wide-spread influence of secret societies,
whose  workings even lately have astonished the world by the facile and  apparently inexplicable
revolutions effected in a few days, are  now in the full possession of the lower classes, who,
no longer  rude and unintelligent, but possessed of leaders of experience  and knowledge, can
also powerfully work those mighty engines of  destruction.

In the presence of those past, present, and coming revolutions,  the face of heaven entirely
clouded, the presence of God  absolutely ignored, his rights over mankind denied, the designs
of his Providence openly derided, and man, pretending to decide  his own destiny by his own
unaided efforts, scornfully rejecting  any obligation to a superior power, not looking on high
for  assistance, but taking only for his guide his pretended wisdom,  his unbounded pride,
and his raging passions; such is now our  world.

Is Ireland to launch herself on that surging sea of wild impulse, in whose depths lies destruction
and whose waves never kiss a  peaceful coast? When she claimed and exercised a policy of her
own, she wisely persisted in not mixing herself up with the  troubles of Europe, content to
enjoy happiness in her own way,  on her ocean-bound island, she thanked God that no portion
of  her little territory touched any part of the Continent of Europe, stretching out vainly
toward her shores. So she stood when,  under God, she was mistress of her own destiny. If ever
she  thought of Europe, it was only to send her missionaries to its  help, or to receive foreign
youth in her large schools which  were open to all, where wisdom was imparted without restriction
and without price. But to follow the lead of European theorists  and vendors of so-called wisdom
and science; to originate new  schemes of pretended knowledge, or place herself in the wake
of  bold adventurers on the sea of modern inventions, she was ever  steadfast in her refusal.

And now that her autonomy is almost once again within her grasp,  now that she can carve out
a destiny of her own, would she hand  over the guidance of herself to men who know nothing
of her, who  have only heard of her through the reports of her enemies, and  who will scarcely
look at her if she is foolish enough to ask to  be admitted within their ranks?

Every one who wishes well to Ireland ought to thank God that so  far few indeed, if any, of
her children have ever joined in the  plots and conspiracies of modern times, and that in this
last  scheme just referred to, not one of them, probably, has fully  engaged himself. In the
late horrors of the Paris Commune, no  Irish name could be shown to have been implicated, and,
when the  contrary was asserted, a simple denial was sufficient to set the  question at rest.
Let them so continue to refrain from sullying  their national honor by following the lead of
men with whom they  have nothing in common.

After all, the great thing which the Irish desire is, with the  entire possession of their
rights, to enjoy that peace and  security in their own island, which they relish so keenly
when  they find it on foreign shores. But no peace or security is  possible with the attempt
to subvert all human society by wild  and impracticable theories, in which human and divine
laws are  alike set at naught. Further words are unnecessary on this  subject, as the simple
good sense and deep religious feeling of  the Irish will easily preserve them from yielding
to such  temptation.

Yet, a last consideration seems worthy of note. When, later on,  we present our views, and
explain by what means we consider that  the happiness of the Irish nation may be secured, and
its  mission fulfilled, a more fitting opportunity will be presented  of speaking of the ways
by which Providence has already led them  through former difficulties, and the consideration
of those holy  designs and past favors may enable us better to understand what  may be hoped
and attempted in the future.

Here it is enough to observe that, in whatever progress the  Irish have made of late in obtaining
a certain amount of their  rights, insurrection, revolution, plots, and the working of  secret
societies condemned by the Church, have absolutely gone  for nothing, and the little of it
all, in which Irishmen have  indulged, really formed one of the main obstacles to the  enjoyment
of what they had already obtained, and to the securing  of a greater amount for the future.

There is no doubt that revolutions abroad and dangers at home  have been the greatest inducements
to England to relax her grasp  and change her tyrannical policy toward Ireland. The success
of  the revolt of the North American colonies was the main cause of  the volunteer movement
of 1782, and of the concessions then  temporarily granted. The fearful upheaval of revolutionary
France, which filled the English heart with a wholesome dread,  was also a great means of obtaining
for Ireland the concession  of being no longer treated as though it were a lair of wild  beasts
or a nest of outlaws. The act of Catholic Emancipation in  1829 was certainly granted in view
of immediate revolutions  ready to burst forth, one of which did explode in France in the 
year following. But, in all those outbursts of popular fury,  Ireland never joined; and if
she found in them new ground for  hope, if she awaited anxiously the anticipated result turning
in  her favor, she never took any active part whatever in them. She  only relied on God, who
always knows how to draw good from evil;  she, however, profited by them, and saw her shackles
fall off of  themselves, and herself brought back, step by step, to liberty.

But so soon as any body of Irishmen entered into a scheme of a  similar nature, imitating the
secret plottings and deeds of  European revolutionists, Ireland never gained a single inch
of  ground, nor reaped the slightest advantage from such attempts.  On the contrary, ridicule,
contempt, increase of burdens,  penalties, and harsh treatment, were the only result which
ever  came from them, and, worst of all, no one pitied the victims of  all those foolish enterprises.
There is no need of entering here  into details. The first of those attempts failed long ago;
the  last is still on record, and cannot be yet said to belong to  past history.

CHAPTER XIV.

RESURRECTION.-EMIGRATION.

To the eye of a keen beholder, Ireland to-day presents the  appearance of a nation entering
upon a new career. She is  emerging from a long darkness, and opening again to the free  light
of heaven. Whoever compares her present position with that  she occupied a century ago, cannot
fail to be struck with wonder  no less at the change in her than at the agencies which brought
that change about. And when to this is added the further  reflection that she is still young,
though sprung from so old-an- origin-young in feeling, in buoyancy, in aspirations, in purity
and simplicity-the conclusion forces itself upon the mind that a  high destiny is in store
for her, and that God proposes a long  era of prosperity and active life to an ancient nation
which is  only now beginning to live.

In such cases, whether it be a people or an individual, which is  entering upon its life, crowds
of advisers are ever to be found  ready to display their wisdom and lay down the plans whose
adoption will infallibly bring prosperity and happiness to the  individual or people in question.

Ireland, to-day, suffers from no lack of wise counsellors and  ardent well-wishers. Unfortunately,
their various projects do  not always harmonize; indeed, they are sometimes contradictory,
and, as their number is by no means small, the only difficulty  is where to choose which road
the nation should take in order to  march in the right direction.

In entering upon this portion of our work, where we have to deal  with actual questions of
the day, and if not to draw the  horoscope of the future, at least to give utterance to our
ideas  for the promotion of the welfare of the nation, we shall appear  to come under the same
catalogue of advisers, fully persuaded,  with the rest, that our advice is the right, our voice
the only  one worthy of attention.

Our purpose is far humbler; our reflections take another shape;  we merely say

During the last hundred years, Ireland has changed wonderfully  for the better; and although
the old wounds are not yet quite  healed up, though they still smart, though she is still poor
and  disconsolate, and her trials and afflictions far from being  ended; nevertheless, though
sorely tried, Providence has been  kind to her. Many of her rights have been restored, and
she is  no longer the slave of hard task-masters. When she now speaks,  her voice is no longer
met by the gibe and sneer, but with a  kind of awe akin to respect, her enemies seeming to
feel  instinctively that it is the voice of a nation which no longer  may be safely despised.

This fact being indisputable, the conviction forces itself upon  us that her improved condition
is mainly, perhaps solely, due to  Providence; and that the career upon which she has entered,
and  which she is now pursuing with a clear determination of her own,  has been marked out,
designed, and already partially run, under  the guidance of that God for whom alone she has
suffered, and  who never fails in his own good time to dry up the tears shed  for his sake,
and crown his martyrs with victory.

Our task is merely to examine the progress made, the manner of  its making, the direction toward
which it tends, with the aim,  if possible, of adding to its speed. We have no new plan to
offer, no gratuitous advice to give. The plan is already  sketched out--God has sketched it;
and our only aim is to see  how man may cooperate with designs far higher than any proposed
by human wisdom.

The first thing that strikes us, standing on the verge of this  new region, opening out dimly
but gloriously before our eyes, is  one great fact which is plain to all; which is greater
than all  England's concessions to Ireland, more fruitful of happy  consequences, not alone
to the latter country itself, but to the  world at large; a fact which is the strongest proof
of the  vitality of the Irish race, which now begins to win for it  respect by bringing forth
its real strength, a strength to  astonish the world; which began feebly when the evils of
the  country were at their height, but has gone on constantly  increasing until it has now
grown to extraordinary proportions;  and which instead of, as their enemies fondly supposed,
wresting  Ireland from the Irish, has made their claim to the native soil  securer than ever,
by spreading strong supporters of their  rights through the world. This great fact is emigration.

At this moment, Irishmen are scattered abroad over the earth. In  many regions they have numbers,
and form compact bodies.  Wherever this occurs, they acquire a real power in the land  which
they have made their new home. That power is certainly  intended by Almighty God to be used
wisely, prudently, but  actively and energetically; not only for the good of those who  have
been thus transplanted in a new soil, but also for the good  of the mother-country which they
cannot, if they would, forget.  How can they utilize for such a purpose the power so recently
acquired, the wealth, the influence, the consideration they  enjoy, in their new country? How
may such a course benefit the  land of their nativity as of their origin? These are important
questions; they are not airy theories, but rise up clearly from  a standing and stupendous
fact. The turning their power of  expansion to its right use, the reproduction with Christian
aim  of that old power of expansion peculiar to the Celtic race three  thousand years ago,
is what we call the first true issue of the  Irish question:- Emigration and its Possible Effects.

In order to judge with proper understanding of the prospective  effects of Irish emigration,
it is fitting to study the fact in  all its bearings; to examine the origin and various phases
of  the mighty movement, the religious direction it has invariably  taken, the immediate good
it has produced, and the special  consideration of the vast proportions which it has finally
assumed. The task may be a long one; but it is certainly  important and interesting; and it
is only after the details of  it have been thoroughly sifted that one may be in a position
to  judge rightly of the aid it has already furnished, and which it  is destine to furnish
in a still greater degree, to the uprising  of the nation.

The movement originated with the Reformation. It began with the  flight of a few of the nobility
in the reign of Henry VIII.;  their number was increased under Elizabeth, and grew to larger
proportions still under James I.; but a far greater number,  sufficient to make a very sensible
diminution in the population  of the country, was doomed to exile by Cromwell and the Long
Parliament. It then became a compulsory banishment.

The next following movement on a large scale occurred after the  surrender of Kilkenny, when
the Irish commanders, Colonel  Fitzpatrick, Clanricard, and others, could obtain no better
terms than emigration to any foreign country then at peace with  England. The Irish troops
were eagerly caught up by the various  European monarchs, so highly were their services esteemed.
The  number that thus left their native land, many of them never to  return, amounted, according
to well-informed writers, to forty  thousand men, of noble blood most of them, many of the
first  nobility of the land, and almost all children of the old race.  The details of this
first exodus are to be found in the pages of  many modern authors, particularly in Mr. Prendergast's
"Cromwellian Settlement."

The example thus given was followed on many occasions. The  Treaty of Limerick, October 3,
1691, gave the garrison under  Saarsfield liberty to join the army of King William or enter
the  service of France. Mr. A.M. O'Sullivan has given a spirited  sketch of the making of their
choice by the heroic garrison as  it defiled out of the city:

"On the morning of the 5th of October the Irish regiments were  to make their choice between
exile for life or service in the  armies of their conqueror. At each end of a gently-rising
ground  beyond the suburbs were planted on one side the royal standard  of France, and on the
other that of England. It was agreed that  the regiments, as they marched out with all the
honors of war,  drums beating, colors flying, and matches lighted, should, on  reaching the
spot, wheel to the left or to the right, beneath  that flag under which they elected to serve.
At the head of the  Irish marched the Foot Guards, the finest regiment in the  service, fourteen
hundred strong. All eyes were fixed on this  splendid body of men. On they came, amid breathless
silence and  acute suspense; for well both the English and Irish generals  knew that the choice
of the first regiment would powerfully  influence all the rest. The Guards marched up to the
critical  spot, and in a body wheeled to the colors of France, barely  seven men turning to
the English side! Ginckle, we are told, was  greatly agitated as he witnessed the proceeding.
The next  regiment, however (Lord Iveagh's), marched as unanimously to the  Williamite banner,
as did also portions of two others. But the  bulk of the Irish army defiled under fleur-de-lys
of King Louis,  only one thousand and forty-six, out of nearly fourteen thousand  men, preferring
the service of England."

From that time out a large number of the Irish nobility and  gentry continued to enlist under
French, Spanish, or Austrian  colors; and the several Irish brigades became celebrated all
over Europe until the end of the eighteenth century. It is said  by l'abbe McGeohegan that
six hundred thousand Irishmen perished  in the armies of France alone. The abbe is generally
very  accurate, and from his long residence in France had every means  at his disposal of arriving
at the truth. Some pretend that  double the number enlisted in foreign service. There is no
doubt  that in all a million men left the island to take service under  the banners of Catholic
sovereigns, and it is needless to dwell  on the bravery and devotion of those men whom the
persecution of  an unwise and cruel Protestant government drove out of Ireland  during the
eighteenth century-it is needless to dwell upon it,  for the record is known to the world.

Without following the fortunes of the Irish brigades, the  history of one of which, that in
the service of France, has been  given us in the very interesting and valuable narrative of
John  R. O'Callaghan-its various fortunes and final dissolution at the  breaking out of the
French republic, when the English Government  was glad to receive back the scattered remnants
of it-the  question which bears most on our present subject is: What was  the occupation of
those Irishmen on the Continent when not  actually engaged in war? What service did their voluntary
or  compulsory exile do their native country? Was that long  emigration of a century productive
of something out of which  Providence may have drawn good?

The first departure of a few under Hugh O'Neill and Hugh  O'Donnell had already spread the
name of Ireland through Spain,  Italy, and Belgium. The reports of the numerous English spies,
employed to dog their steps and watch their movements, reports  some of which have been finally
brought to light, conclusively  prove that most of the exiles held honorable positions in Spain
and Portugal, at Valladolid and Lisbon, where the O'Sullivans  and O'Driscolls lived; at the
very court of Spain, or in the  Spanish navy, like the Bourkes and the Cavanaghs.

In Flanders, under the Austrian archdukes, were stationed the  McShanes, on the Groyne; the
Daniells at Antwerp; the posterity  of the earls themselves with that of their former retinue.
All  held rank in the Austrian army, and even in times of peace were  occupied in thinking
of possible entanglements whereby they  might serve their country, while they made the Irish
name  honored and respected all over that rich land. In Italy, at  Naples, Leghorn, Florence,
and Rome, in the great centres of the  peninsula, the same thing was taking place, and there,
at least,  the calumnies, everywhere so industriously circulated about  Ireland, could not
penetrate, or, if they did, only to be  received with scorn.

But, when the next emigration, at the end of the Cromwellian and  Williamite wars, landed forty
thousand soldiers, and twelve  thousand more a few years afterward, on the European Continent,
these armed men proved to the nations, by their bravery, their  deep attachment to their religion,
their perfect honor and  generosity, that the people from which a persecuting power had  driven
them forth could not be composed of the outlaws and blood- thirsty cutthroats which the reports
of their enemies would make  them. How striking and permanent must have been the effect  produced
on impartial minds by the contrast between the aspect  of the reality and the base fabrications
of skilfully-scattered  rumor!

And be it borne in mind that those men founded families in the  countries where they settled;
as well as those who continued to  flock thither during the whole of the eighteenth century.
They  carried about with them, in their very persons even, the history  of Ireland's wrongs;
and the mere sight of them was enough to  interest all with whom they came in contact in favor
of their  country. Hence the esteem and sympathy which Ireland and her  people have always
met with in France, where the calumnies and  ridicule lavished on them could never find an
entrance.

It would be a great error to imagine that they were to be found  only in the camp or in the
garrisons of cities. They made  themselves a home in their new country, and their children
entered upon all the walks of life opened up to the citizens of  the country in which they
resided. Thus, at least, the name of  Ireland did not die out altogether during that age of
gloom,  when their native isle was only the prison of the race, where it  was chained down
in abject misery, out of the sight of the world, the life of it stifled out in the deep dungeon
of oblivion.

In all honorable professions they became distinguished-in the  Church and in trade, as in the
army. Thus, speaking only of  France, an Irishman-Edgeworth-was chosen by Louis XVI. to  prepare
him for death and stand by him during his last ordeal of  ignominy; another-Lally Tollendal-would
have wrested India from  England, if his ardent temperament had not brought him enemies  where
he ought to have met with friends; another yet-Walsh- during the American War, employed the
wealth acquired by trade,  in sending cruisers against the English to American waters.

It would take long pages to record what those noble exiles  accomplished for the good of their
country and religion, quite  apart from the heroism they displayed on battle-fields, and  their
fidelity to principle during times of peace. Their very  presence in foreign countries was,
perhaps, the best protest  against the enslavement of their own. They showed by their  bearing
that they owed no allegiance to England, and that brute  force could never establish right.
By identifying themselves  with the nations which offered them hospitality and a new right
of citizenship, they proved to the world that their native isle  could be governed by native
citizens. Their honorable conduct  and successful activity in every pursuit of life showed
that, as  they were capable of governing themselves, so likewise could  they claim self-government
for their country.

The moral condition of France during the eighteenth century, and  the depths of corruption
into which the higher class sank in so  short a time, are known to all. To the honor of the
Irish  nobility and gentry then in France, not a single Irish name is  to be met with in that
long list of noble names which have  disgraced that page of French history. Not in the luxurious
bowers and palaces of Louis XV. were they to be found, but on  the battle-fields of Dettingen
and Fontenoy. It was a Scotchman- Law-who infected the higher circles of the natives with the
rage  for speculation, and the folly of gambling in paper. It was an  Italian- Cagliostro-who
traded on the superstitious credulity of  men who had lost their faith. It was an Englishman-Lord
Derwentwater-and another Scotchman-Ramsay-who, by the  introduction of the first Masonic Lodge
into France, opened the  floodgates of future revolutions.

Among those of foreign birth, no Irishman was found in France to  contribute to the corruption
of the nation, and give his aid to  set agoing that long era of woe not yet ended.

And needless is it to add that never is one of them mentioned,  among those who were so active
in propagating that broad  infidelity peculiar to that age. If a few of them shared to some
extent in the general delusion, and took part with the vast  multitude in the insane derision,
then so fashionable, of every  thing holy, their number was small indeed, and none of them
acquired in that peculiar line, the celebrity which crowned so  many others. -the Grimms, the
Gallianis, and later on the Paines, the Cloots, and other foreigners.

As a body, the Irish remained faithful to the Church of their  fathers, honoring her by their
conduct, and their respectful  demeanor toward holy names and holy things. Eventually they,
in  common with all Frenchmen, had to share in the misfortunes,  brought on by the subversion
of all the former guiding  principles; but, though sharing in the punishment, they took no
part in the great causes which called it down.

These few words will suffice for the emigration of the Irish  nobility, and its effects on
foreign countries; as well as  Ireland itself.

But another class of noblemen had emigrated to the Continent  side by side with those of whom
we have just spoken; namely,  bishops, priests, monks, and learned men. England would not 
suffer the Catholic clergy in Ireland; she was particularly  careful not to allow Irish youth
the benefit of any but a  Protestant education. Irish clergymen were compelled to fly and 
open houses of study abroad. Their various colleges in Spain,  France, Belgium, and Italy,
are well known; they have already  been referred to, and it is not necessary to enlarge on
the  subject. But, though mention has been made of the renown thus  acquired by Irishmen then
residing on the Continent, it is  fitting to speak of them again in their character of emigrants.

They took upon themselves the noble task of making the  literature and the history of their
nation known to all people;  and in so doing they have preserved a rich literature which must
otherwise have perished.

What was their situation on the Continent? They had been driven  by persecution from their
country, sometimes in troops of exiles  to be cast on some remote shore; sometimes escaping
singly and  in disguise, they went out alone to end their lives under a  foreign sky. Behind
them they left the desolate island; their  friends bowed down in misery, their enemies triumphant
and in  full power. The convents, where they had spent their happiest  days, were either demolished
or turned to vile uses; their  churches desecrated; heresy ruling the land, truth compelled
to  be silent. All the harrowing details given by the "Prophet of  Lamentations" might be applied
to their beloved country.

True, they could find peace and rest among those who offered  them their hospitality; at least,
the worship of God would be  free and untrammelled there. But it was not the place of their
birth, where they had received their first education; it was not  the mission intrusted to
them when they consecrated their lives  to God. They would bear another language, see around
them  different manners, begin life anew, perhaps, in their old age.  What a contrast to their
former hopes! What a sad ending to the  closing days of their life!

Nevertheless, they might be of use to their countrymen. It was  not for them now to convert
Europe, and preach Christianity to  barbarous tribes, as did their ancestors of old. The world
which  received them was languishing with excess of refined  civilization; corruption had entered
in, and was fast destroying  it; and they could scarcely hope to hold it back from its  downward
career. But, at least, they might open houses for the  reception of the youth of their own
country, where they should  receive an education according to the teachings of the true  Church,
which was denied them at home. So they went to Salamanca, to Valladolid, to Paris, Louvain,
Douai, Rheims, Rome, wherever  there was hope or possibility of directing Irish youth in the
ways of true piety and learning.

The labors to which they devoted themselves, though unknown to  posterity, were of great utility
at the time. They saw the youth  they educated grow up under their care; when their studies
were  concluded, they sent them to labor in the ministry among their  countrymen; they heard
of them from time to time of their  arduous life, the dangers they braved, the many persecutions
they underwent, their imprisonment when captured, their  conviction, torture often, and death
by martyrdom. And thus,  through the exertions of those emigrant monks and priests, the  true
Gospel was preached in Ireland, and the faith of the people  kept alive and strong.

A few of them chose another path, and consecrated the remainder  of their days to literary
labors, which have shed down on their  persecuted country a halo of immortal glory.

Some Franciscan friars (two of them the brothers O'Cleary) had  already begun this work in
the island itself, when driven from  their quiet homes to take refuge in the obscure "convents,"
that  is, out-of-the-way farm-houses mentioned before, where they were  received and hidden
away from the world. The literature of  Ireland was fast perishing; the rage of their enemies
being as  violently directed against their books as against their houses  and churches. Precious
manuscripts were every day given to the  flames and wantonly destroyed, seemingly for the mere
pleasure  of destruction. A very few years would have sufficed to render  the former history
of the country a perfect blank. In no spot of  the same size on earth had so many interesting
books ever been  written and treasured up; but before long there would remain no  friars on
the island to preserve them, no library to contain  them, no one to care for them in the least.
The brothers  O'Cleary saw this with dismay; and they, with two companions,  became known as
the "Four Masters." They interested in their  work the faithful Irish who still retained possession
of a farm,  or a cabin with a few acres of ground attached; the men, and  women even, were
to search the country round for every volume  concealed or preserved, for every parchment and
relic, for  vellum manuscripts, even a stray solitary page, did one remain  alone. The annals
of Ireland were thus saved by the literary  patriotism of poor and unknown peasants. All that
remains of  Irish lore was collected together in the rural convent of the  O'Clearys, and an
ardent flame was enkindled which lasted the  whole of the seventeenth century.

To this initiative must be referred the subsequent labors of  Ward, Colgan, Lynch, and others;
herculean labors truly, which  have enabled antiquarians of our days to resume the thread,
so  near being snapped, of that long and tangled web of history  wherein is woven all that
can interest the patriot and the  Christian of the island.

Knowing the position in which the writers found themselves, it  is astonishing to see what
they wrote. It was not a work of  fancy to which their pens were devoted: A strong, feeling
heart  and an active imagination were certainly theirs; but of little  service could either
prove to them in the ungrateful task of  collecting manuscripts, classifying, reading them
through,  ascertaining their age and authenticity, and finally using them  for the purpose
of preserving the annals and hagiography of the  nation.

The large libraries they found in the various cities which  received them could be of little
use to them. They had first to  collect their own libraries, to summon their authorities from
distant lands; many books were to be procured from Ireland  itself. With what precautions!
It was real, (though lawful)  smuggling; for the export of Irish books was not only under 
tariff, but strictly prohibited; the mere sight of them was more  hateful to a British custom-house
officer of those days than the  sight of a crucifix to a Japanese official of Nagasaki. It
would  be interesting to know the various stratagems devised to conceal  them, tarry them away,
and convey them triumphantly to Louvain,  Paris, or Rome.

But Ireland was not the only repository of Irish books. Many  letters, official documents,
copies of old MSS., interesting  relics of antiquity, had been gathered ages before and during
all the intervening time, in convents, churches, houses of  education, on the Continent, along
the Rhine chiefly. It is said  that even to-day the richest mines of yet unexplored lore of
this character are scattered along both sides of the great  German river. The frequent movements
of various armies, the  sieges of cities, the horrors of war which have raged there  constantly
from the days of Arminius and Varro down, have not  destroyed every thing, could not exhaust
the rich deposit of  Irish manuscripts there concealed. But the labor of striking the  mine!-of'
opening those musty pages falling to pieces between  the fingers and leaving in the hand nothing
but illegible  fragments of half-blackened parchment; and the further labor of  deciphering
them, of discovering what they speak about, and if  they are likely to prove useful to the
purposes.

It is needless to descant on such a theme. It is impossible to  give any true idea of the literary
labors of those men, without  having seen and perused their huge folios, many of which have
not yet been published to the world. Poor Colgan could give us  little more than his "Trial
Thaumaturga and that was only  destined to form the portal of the edifice he purposed erecting
as a shrine to the memory of the whole host of saints nurtured  in the island-the Acta Sanctorum
Hiberniae

The grand idea, which first germinated in the minds of those men, expanded afterward in others
under circumstances more favorable. Did they not suggest to Bollandus and his fellows the thought
whose realization has immortalized them?

In tasks such as these were the Irish emigrant monks of the time  employed.

There was yet another class of involuntary Irish exiles those  shipped to the " plantations"
of America, to the 11 tobacco" and  11 sugar" islands, to Virginia and Jamaica, but principally
to  the Barbadoes. The origin of this new kind of emigration,  already touched upon, is worthy
of the times and of the men who  called it forth.

After forty thousand soldiers had been allowed, or rather  compelled, by Cromwell to enlist
in foreign armies, it was found  that many had left behind them their wives and children. What
was to be done with these " widows" whose husbands and numerous  offspring were still living
? They could not be sent to Coff as  women, with children only, could not be expected to "plant"
that  desolate province; they could not be expected to "plant" that  desolate province; they
could not be allowed to remain in their  native place, as the decree had gone forth that all
the Irish  were to "transplant" or be transported: it would have been  inconvenient and inexcusable
to do what had been so often done  in the war-massacre them in cold blood-as the war was over.

To relieve the government of this difficulty, Bristol merchants,  and merchants probably from
other English cities, trading with  the new British colonies of North America, thought it a
providential opening for a great profit to accrue to the soils  of the benighted Irish women
and children, and likely at the  same time to add something to their own purses and those of
their friends, the West India planters.

It was only under Elizabeth that permanent colonies were sent  out from England to the continent
and islands of the New World.  The Cavaliers of Virginia are as well known in the South as
the  Puritans of New England in the North. This last colony dated  only from the time of the
Stuart dynasty. The great question for  all those transatlantic establishments was that of
labor; but in  the South it was more difficult of solution than in the North,  where Europeans
could work in the fields, a thing scarcely  possible in the tropics. The natives as we know,
were first  employed in the South by the Spaniards, and soon succumbed to  the demands of European
rapacity.

In the West Indies, natives of two different races existed: the  soft and delicate Indian of
Hayti and Cuba, and the ferocious  Caribs of many other islands. The first race soon disappeared;
the other continued refractory, indomitable, choosing to perish  rather than labor; and some
remnants of it still remain, saved  by the Catholic Church. As yet, African negroes had not
been  conveyed there in sufficient numbers.

A brilliant thought struck the minds, at once pious, active, and  business-like, of those above-mentioned
Bristol merchants-a  thought which was the doom of thousands of Irish women and  children.

The names of a few of those Bristol firms deserve to be handed  down. Those of Messrs. James
Sellick and Leader, Mr. Robert  Yeomans, Mr. Joseph Lawrence, Dudley North, and John Johnson,
are furnished by Mr. Prendergast, who tells us that-

"The Commissioners of Ireland under Cromwell gave them orders  upon the governors of garrisons
to deliver them prisoners of war  . . . . upon masters of work-houses, to hand over to them
the  destitute under their care, `who were of an age to labor,' or,  if women, those 'who were
marriageable, and not past breeding;'  and gave directions to all in authority, to seize those
who had  no visible means of livelihood, and deliver them to these agents  of the Bristol merchants;
in execution of which latter  directions, Ireland must have exhibited scenes in every part
like the slave-hunts in Africa."

A contract was signed on September 14, 1653, by the Com  missioners of Ireland and Messrs.
Sellick and Leader, "to supply  them (the merchants) with two hundred and fifty women of the
Irish nation, above twelve years and under the age, of forty- five."

The fate reserved for the human cattle, as they must have been  looked upon by the godly gentlemen
who bartered over them, may  be well imagined. It is calculated that, in four years, those
English firms of slave-dealers had shipped six thousand and four  hundred Irish men and women,
boys and maidens, to the British  colonies of North America.

The age requisite for the females who were thus shipped off may  be noted; the boys and men
were not to be under twelve or over  fifty. These latter were condemned to the task of tilling
the  soil in a climate where the negro only can work and live. As all  the cost to their masters
was summed up in the expense of  transportation, they were not induced to spare them, even
by the  consideration of the high price which, it is said, caused the  modern slave-owners
of America to treat their slaves with what  might be called a commercial humanity. It is easy
to imagine,  then, the life led by so many young men forced to work in the  open fields, under
a tropical sun. How long that life lasted, we  do not know; as their masters, on whom they
entirely depended,  were interested in keeping the knowledge of their fate a secret.  It is
well understood that, when the unfortunate victims, had  once left the Irish harbor from which
they set sail, no one ever  heard of them again; and, if the parents still lived in the old
country, they were left to their conjectures as to the probable  situation of their children
in the new.

Sir William Petty says that "of boys and girls alone "-exclusive, consequently, of men and
women-" six thousand were thus  transplanted; but the total number of Irish sent to perish
in  the tobacco-islands, as they were called, was estimated in some  Irish accounts at one
hundred thousand."

The "Irish accounts" may have been exaggerated, but the English  atoned for this by certainly
falling below the mark, as is clear  from the fact that, according to them, the Commissioners
of  Ireland required the "supply" for New England alone to come from  "the country within twenty
miles of Cork, Youghall, Kinsale,  Waterford, and Wexford;" that "the hunt lasted four years,"
and  was carried on with such ardor by the agents of many English  firms that those men-catchers
employed persons "to delude poor  people by false pretenses into by-places, and thence they
forced  them on board their ships; that for money sake they were found  to have enticed and
forced women from their husbands, and  children from their parents, who maintained them at
school; and  they had not only dealt so with the Irish, but also with the  English." For this
reason, the order was revoked, and the "hunt"  forbidden.

When agents were reduced to such straits after the government  had used force, as Henry Cromwell
acknowledged, the large extent  of country mentioned above must have been well scoured and
depopulated; and certainly a far greater number of victims must  have been secured by all those
means combined than is given in  the English accounts. We believe the Irish.

One other source of supply deserves mention. Not only women and  children, but priests also,
were hunted down and shipped off to  the same American plantations; so that persons of every
class  which is held sacred in the eyes of God and man for its  character and helplessness,
were compelled to emigrate, or  rather to undergo the worst possible fate that the imagination
of man can conceive.

In 1656 a general battue for priests took place all over Ireland. The prisons seem to have
been filled to overflowing. "-- (Cromwellian Settlement.)

In that burning island of the West Indies, deprived of all means, not only of exercising their
ministry among others, but even of  practising their religion themselves, of fulfilling their
holy  obligation of prayer and sacrifice, these victims of such an  atrocious persecution were
employed as laborers in the fields:  their transplantation had cost money, and the money had
to be  repaid a hundred-fold by the sweat of their brow.

Ship-loads of them had been discharged on the inhospitable shore  of that island; each with
a high calling which he could no  longer carry out; each, therefore, tortured in his soul,
with  all the sweet or bitter memories of his past life crowding on  his mind, and the dreary
prospect spreading before him, to the  end of his life, of no change from his rude and slavish
occupation under the burning sun, hearing no voice but that of  the harsh taskmaster; his eyes
saddened and his heart sickened  by the open and daily spectacle of immorality and woe, with
no  ending but the grave.

It seems, however, that these holy men found some means of  fulfilling their sacred duty as
God's ministers, for the inhuman  traffic in such slaves as these to the Barbadoes lasted but
one  year. In 1657 it was decreed that this island should no longer  be their place of transportation,
but, instead, the desolate  isles of Arran, opposite the entrance to the bay of Galway, and
the isle of Innisboffin, off the coast of Connemara. Mr.  Prendergast thinks that this change
of policy in their regard  may have been caused by the price of their transportation, which
probably mounted to a high aggregate sum. But he must be  mistaken. They certainly cost no
more than women and children,  and their labor in the West Indies surely covered this expense.
The reason for the change is more plainly visible in the nature  of the site substituted for
the Barbadoes as their place of  exile. The "holy isles" of Arran and the isle of Innisboffin
were then, as now, bare of every thing--almost of inhabitants.  The priests could be there
kept as in a prison, and, though they  might be of no profit to their masters, they could not
hear a  voice or see a face other than those of their fellow-captives.  In the West India islands
there existed an already thick  population, and the very women and children who had been  transported
thither before them would be consoled by their  ministry, though practised by stealth, and
strengthened in their  faith, which might thus have not only been kept alive among them, but
spread over the whole country.

Who can say if the faith, preserved among the many Irish living  in the island until quite
recently, was not owing to their  exhortations?

"The first Irish people who found permanent homes in America,"  says Thomas D'Arcy McGee, "were
certain Catholic patriots  banished by Oliver Cromwell to Barbadoes. . . . In this island,
as in the neighboring Montserrat, the Celtic language was  certainly spoken in the last century,1
(1 The Celtic language-- that sure sign of Catholicity--was not only spoken there last  century,
but is still to-day. The writer himself heard last year  (1871), from two young American seamen,
who had just returned  from a voyage to this island, that the negro porters and white  longshoremen
who load and unload the ships in the harbor, know  scarcely any other language than the Irish,
so that often the  crews of English vessels can only communicate with them by signs.) and perhaps
it is partly attributable to this early Irish  colonization, that Barbadoes became 'one of
the most populous  islands in the world.' At the end of the seventeenth century, it  was reported
to contain twenty thousand inhabitants."

Although Barbadoes is the chief island concerned in the present  considerations, nevertheless
nearly all the British colonies  then existing in America, received their share of this  emigration.
Several ship-loads of the exiles were certainly sent  to New England, at the very time that
New-Englanders were  earnestly invited by the British Government to "come and plant  Ireland;"
Virginia, too, paid probably with tobacco for the  young men and maidens sent there as slaves.
The "Thurloe State  Papers" disclose the fact that one thousand boys and one  thousand girls,
taken in Ireland by force, were dispatched to  Jamaica, lately added to the empire of England
by Admiral Penn,  father of the celebrated Quaker founder of Pennsylvania.

Thus, then, began the first extensive emigration of the Irish to  various parts of British
America--a movement quite compulsory,  which in our days has become voluntary, and is productive
of the  wonders soon to claim our attention.

The involuntary emigration of soldiers and clergymen to the  Continent of Europe during the
seventeenth and eighteenth  centuries, was, as has been seen, the cause of great advantages
to Ireland, and became, in the designs of a merciful Providence,  a powerful means of drawing
good from evil. At first sight, it  seems impossible to discover a similar advantage in this
other  most involuntary emigration to the plantations of America.

A pagan has declared that "there is no spectacle more grateful  to the eyes of God than a just
man struggling with adversity;"  and where, except in the first ages of Christianity, could
more  innocent victims, and a more cruel persecution, be witnessed?

After the horrors of a civil war, horrors unparalleled perhaps  in the annals of modern nations,
the children and young people  of both sexes are hunted down over an area of several Irish
counties, dragged in crowds to the seaports, and there jammed in  the holds of small, uncomfortable,
slow-going vessels. What  those children must have been may be easily imagined from the  specimens
of the race before us to-day. We do not speak of their  beauty and comeliness of form, on which
a Greek writer of the  age of Pericles might have dilated, and found a subject worthy  of his
pen; we speak of their moral beauty, their simplicity,  purity, love of home, attachment to
their family, and God, even  in their tenderest age. We meet them scattered over the broad
surface of this country--boys and girls of the same race, coming  from the same counties, chiefly
from sweet Wexford, the  beautiful, calm, pious south of Ireland. Who but a monster could 
think of harming those pure and affectionate creatures, so  modest, simple, and ready to trust
and confide in every one they  meet? And what could be said of those maidens, now so well known
in this New World, of whom to speak is to praise, whom to see is  to admire? Such were the
victims selected by the Bristol firms,  by "Lord" Henry Cromwell, Governor-General of Ireland,
or by  Lord Thurloe, secretary and mouth-piece of the "Protector." They  were to be violently
torn from their parents and friends, from  every one they knew and loved, to be condemned,
after surviving  the horrible ocean-passage of those days, the boys to work on  sugar and tobacco
plantations, the girls to lead a life of shame  in the harems of Jamaica planters!

Such of them as were sent North, were to be distributed among  the "saints" of New England,
to be esteemed by the said "saints"  as "idolaters," "vipers," "young reprobates," just objects
of  "the wrath of God;" or, if appearing to fall in with their new  and hard task-masters,
to be greeted with words of dubious  praise as "brands snatched from the burning," "vessels
of  reprobation," destined, perhaps, by a due imitation of the  "saints," to become some day
"vessels of election," in the mean  time to be unmercifully scourged by both master and mistress
with the "besom of righteousness" probably, at the slightest  fault or mistake.

Such was the sorrowful prospect held out to them; there was no  possibility of escape, no hope
of going back to the only country  they loved. In the South they soon, very soon, sank into
an  obscure grave. In the North a prolonged life was only a  prolongation of torment. For,
who among them could ever think of  becoming a "convert?" They had been taken from their island-home
when over twelve years of age; they had already received from  their mothers and hunted priests
a religious education, which  happily could never be effaced; they were to bury in their  hearts
all their lives long the conviction of their holy faith,  supported by the only hope they now
had, the hope of heaven.

Could the eyes of God, looking down over the earth, and marking  in all places with deep pity
his erring children, find souls  more worthy of his vast paternal love? Can we imagine that
the  ears of Heaven were deaf to their prayers poured out unceasingly  all those long days
and nights of trials and of tears? Can we  read in the designs of Providence the blessed decrees
which such  scenes called forth? Blind that we are, unable often to judge  rightly of our own
thoughts, often an enigma to ourselves, how  shall we dare to judge of what is so far above
us? No Christian  at least can pretend that all those miseries, accumulated on the  heads of
so many innocent victims, had no other object than to  make them suffer. Ireland will yet profit
by all the merits,  unknown and untold, gained by so many thousand human hearts and  souls
and bodies given over to misfortunes which baffle  expression.

And as yet we have said nothing of those cargos of priests  shipped from Carrickfergus to Barbadoes,
and afterward to Arran  and Innisboffin. Deprived of all means of making their new  country
in America a witness of Catholic prayer and worship--not  one of them probably being able to
offer the holy sacrifice even  for a single day, nor administer any sacrament unless perhaps
that of penance-by stealth; not one dared open his mouth and  preach the truth publicly to
all. What could they do? They  offered the sacrifice of themselves; the very sight of them
possessed almost the virtue of a sacrament, and their lives  preached a sermon more eloquent
than any of those which entrance  the vastest audience of a solemn cathedral.

No! the first emigration of 'the Irish to America was not  unfruitful in its results. And were
we to attribute the great  progress made by Catholicity on the American Continent in the  present
age to the merits of those numerous victims of  persecution, who could prove us to be in error,
and say that  between the sufferings of innocence in the seventeenth and the  glorious success
of their countrymen in the nineteenth century  there is no connection? The old phrase of Tertullian,
"Sanguis  martyrum, semen Christianorum," has been proved true too often  in the annals of
the Catholic Church to be falsified in this one  instance; yet, if what our days witness be
not the result of  former sufferings and sacrifices, those trials were barren, and  are consequently
inexplicable. Every cause must have its effect;  and it is a truth which no Christian can hesitate
to admit, that  the most efficacious source of blessings is the tear of the  innocent, the
anguish of the pure of heart, the humble prayer of  the persecuted servant of God.

When we come to speak of the emigration of the race to the  American Continent, which is now
in progress, the stupendous  facts which will make our narrative and excite our admiration
must be regarded and accounted for from a religious and Catholic  stand point, and we shall
then be able to refer to this first  and apparently barren emigration. Many losses, spiritual
as well  as temporal, may stagger the unreflecting, particularly when the  whole designs of
Providence are as yet scarcely in their  inceptive stage; but the more they are developed before
our eyes, the more the truth is made clear; every difficulty vanishes;  and the soul of the
beholder exclaims "Yes, God is truly wise  and merciful!"

But it is time at last to enter on the consideration of what we  esteem the first great issue
involved in the resurrection of  Ireland, namely, all the probable consequences of the present
emigration, which is the true point we are aiming at, as our  purpose is to show the benefit
that Ireland has already derived,  and is sure to derive later on, from that incessant flow
of the  great human wave starting from her shore to oversweep vast  continents and islands
of the sea. What aid will it afford to  her own resurrection at home, in order to render that
complete  and lasting? This may be said to have been our main object in  writing these pages;
for, although it may be impressive enough  for those who regard the subject attentively, and
although it  will certainly be a source of wonder to those who come after us,  nevertheless
it fails to strike as it ought the great mass of  beholders.

Often in the history of nations, while the mightiest revolutions  are in progress, they are
scarcely perceptible to the actors in  them; all their circumstances, their most active and
effective  operations, being like the silent workings of Nature, scarcely  sensible to those
around, until the end comes and the great  result is achieved; then history records the event
as one  fraught with the greatest blessings, or misfortunes, to mankind.  So will it be, we
have no doubt, with that strange concatenation  of small domestic facts which now form the
universal phenomenon  of all English-speaking countries: the spread of the Irish  everywhere.

What were its beginnings? Nothing at all. What good effects  followed it? None perceptible
for a long time. These two  reflections claim our attention first, for we must study the  phenomenon,
in all its circumstances and bearings.

This new emigration we call voluntary, to distinguish it from  the first, which was forced
upon large portions of the Irish  race. But, in reality, the Irish undertook it at the beginning
with reluctance; the intolerable state of existence which they  were compelled to undergo in
their own land acting upon them  with a kind of moral compulsion amounting to an almost  irresistible
force. For it was either the famine or persecution  of the century preceding which first drove
them to emigrate.

Necessity of expansion is a great characteristic of their race,  an instinctive impulse which
three thousand years ago carried a  part of it into the heart of Asia. But this particular
branch  had been rooted to the soil for so many centuries, by the stern  necessity of repelling
a series of successive invasions, that  this great characteristic appeared for a long time
to be totally  extinct in it. They seemed neither to know nor care any more for  foreign countries;
and no race in Europe, from the ninth to the  eighteenth century, showed itself so completely
wedded to the  soil, and incapable of the thought of spreading abroad.

At last they began to move. And what was the first origin of the  new movement? No one can
say precisely. Only, in various  accounts of occurrences taking place in the island during
the  last century, we occasionally meet with such entries as the  following by Matthew O'Connor,
in his "Irish Catholics:"

"The summer of 1728 was fatal. The heart of the politician was  steeled against the miseries
of the Catholics; their number  excited his jealousy. Their decrease by the silent waste of
famine must have been a source of secret joy; but the Protestant  interest was declining in
a proportionate degree by the ravages  of starvation. . .

"Thousands of Protestants took shipping in Belfast for the West  Indies. . . . The policy that
would starve the Catholics at home  would not deny them the privilege of flight."

This is the first mention of emigration, on any extensive scale,  which we could find in the
records of last century; and, at the  time when the Protestant Irish went to America, where
they  doubtless met with congenial minds in the Puritans of New  England, the Catholics still
turned, as before, to Spain and  France.

But a new entry in 1762 unfolds a new aspect. This time  Catholics alone are spoken of: "No
resource remained to the  peasantry but emigration. The few who had means sought an asylum
in the American plantations; such as remained were allowed  generally an acre of ground for
the support of their families,  and commonage for a cow, but at rents the most exorbitant."

This is the first instance we meet with of Irish Catholics  emigrating to America, at least
in comparatively large bodies.  They were no doubt encouraged to take this step by the accounts
which reached them of the success of the Ulster Protestants who  had gone before, and whose
posterity is now to be found in the  South chiefly, as low down as Carolina and Georgia.

But the relative prospects of the Protestants and Catholic were  at that time far from being
equally good. The first, driven from  home by famine, found a land of plenty awaiting them,
a genial  climate, perfect toleration of their religious tenets everywhere, and in some districts
they gained real political influence.  They were received with open arms by the colonists,
who were  unable to occupy the land alone, and ready to welcome new fellow- citizens, who would
aid them in their contests with the Indians,  and add materially to their prosperity and resources.
All  persons and all things then smiled on the new-comer, and within  a very short time he
found himself possessed of more than he had  ever expected. Thus others were induced to follow
from the north  of Ireland, and famine was no longer the only motive power which  impelled
them to leave their native land. Mr. Bancroft tells us  they were called Scotch-Irish.

On the other hand, the Irish Catholics found a fertile soil and  an inviting climate; Nature
welcomed them, but man recoiled,  inflamed by a bitter hostility against their faith and their
very name. This feeling of opposition, on both accounts, was  already fast wearing away in
Europe; but the "liberality"  springing up in the Old World, owing to a variety of  circumstances,
had not yet penetrated into the British colonies  of North America. They were still, in this
respect, in the state  in which the Revolution of 1688 had left them: Catholicity was  proscribed
everywhere, and the penal laws of the Old World were  attempted to be enforced in the New,
as far as the different  state of the country would permit. A few details, taken mainly  from
Mr. Bancroft's history, will give us a tolerably exact idea  of the situation in which the
newly-arrived Irish Catholic found  himself in that future land of liberty.

The consequences of the downfall of James II. were soon fully  accepted by the British colonies,
throughout which changes of  greater or less degree took place in the laws, not only without
any great opposition, but in the main with the full applause of  all parties. The Stuart dynasty
was thrown over more easily in  America than it had been in the British Isles.

It is universally admitted that one of the greatest consequences  of that downfall was the
renewed persecution of Catholics in  England and Ireland. In the words of Mr. Bancroft:

"The Revolution of 1688, narrow in its principles, imperfect in  its details, frightfully intolerant
toward Catholics, forms an  era in the liberty of England and of mankind."

It will be no surprise, then, on coming to review the various  colonies, to find the oppression
of the Catholic Church common  to all without one exception.

Beginning with the South, we find the new governor of South  Carolina, Archdale, a Quaker,
and, on that account, personally  well disposed toward all, desirous of showing that a Quaker
could respect the faith of a "Papist," commencing his  administration by sending back to the
Spanish Governor of  Florida four Indian converts of the Spanish priests, who were  exposed
as slaves for sale in Carolina. He likewise enfranchised  the Huguenots of South Carolina,
who, up to this time, had been  kept under by the High Church oligarchy. Yet, when he came
to  urge the adoption of liberal measures toward all in the state,  the colonial Legislature
consented to confer liberty of  conscience on all Christians, with the exception of "Papists."

In North Carolina, the Church of England was actually made the  state Church, in 1704, and
the Legislature enacted that "no one  who would not take the oath prescribed by law should
hold a  place of trust in the colony."

Of Maryland, Mr. Bancroft writes that the English Revolution was  a Protestant revolution.

"A convention of the associates 'for the defence of the  Protestant religion' assumed the government,
and, in an address  to King William, denounced the influence of the Jesuits, the  prevalence
of popish idolatry, the connivance by the previous  government at murders of Protestants, and
the danger from plots  with the French and Indians."

Hence, a little farther on, we read: "The Roman Catholics alone  were left without an ally,
exposed to English bigotry and  colonial injustice. They alone were disfranchised on the soil
which, long before Locke pleaded for toleration, or Penn for  religious freedom, they had chosen,
not as their own asylum only, but, with Catholic liberality, as the asylum of every  persecuted
sect. No Catholic might teach the young. If the wayward  child of a Papist would but become
an apostate, the law wrested  for him from his parents a share of their property. The  disfranchisement
of the proprietary related to his creed, not to  his family. Such were the methods adopted
'to prevent the growth  of Popery.'"

Mr. Bancroft adds with much truth and force: "Who shall say that  the faith of the cultivated
individual is firmer than the faith  of the common people? Who shall say that the many are
fickle,  that the chief is firm?

Pennsylvania appears to form an exception to that universal  animosity against Catholics. It
is said that, owing to William  Penn, "religious liberty was established, and every public
employment was open to every man professing faith in Jesus  Christ. . . . In Pennsylvania human
rights were respected: the  fundamental law of William Penn, even his detractors concede, 
was in harmony with universal reason, and true to the ancient  and just liberties of the people."

Such may have been the written law--the theory; but the law as  executed--the fact--was far
from realizing those fine promises.  As late as the end of the Revolutionary War, the Catholics
of  Philadelphia were compelled to hide away their worship in a  small chapel, surrounded by
buildings whose only access was a  dark and winding alley still in existence a few years back.

It is known, moreover, that Penn himself, in 1708, forbade mass  to be celebrated in the colony.
According to T. D. McGee,  Governor Gordon, in 1734, prohibited the erection of a Catholic
church in Walnut Street; and, in 1736, a private house having  been purchased at the corner
of Second and Chestnut streets for  the same object, it was again prohibited.

New Jersey showed her liberality in the form sacred to all the  other colonies: "Liberty of
conscience was granted to all but  papists."

There was as yet no homogeneity in New York, the Dutch still  preserving great power, and,
consequently, "the idea of  toleration was still imperfect in New Netherlands; equality  among
religious sects was unknown." If this was the case with  several Protestant organizations,
what must it have been with  the Catholics? It is well known that no one dared openly avow
his faith in the true Church, and that John Ury was hanged in  1741 for being a priest, though
whether he was a priest or not  is still a question.

Rhode Island had proclaimed in the beginning "entire freedom of  mind;" but, after the Revolution
of 1688, the colony  "interpolated into the statute-book the exclusion of papists  from the
established equality."

The spirit of Connecticut is well expressed in the words of the  address sent by the colony
to King William of Orange, on his  accession: "Great was the day when the Lord who sitteth
upon the  floods did divide his and your adversaries like the waters of  Jordan, and did begin
to magnify you like Joshua, by the  deliverance of the English dominions from popery and slavery."
We wonder how the taciturn Hollander received this effusion of  Connecticut? There is nothing
more to add on the situation of  the Catholics in the land of the "blue laws."

In Massachusetts it will be no surprise to hear that "every form  of Christianity, except the
Roman Catholic, was enfranchised."

This short sketch is eloquent enough with reference to the  position in which the poor Irish
immigrant found himself on  landing on the shores of the New World. His faith he found  proscribed
as severely almost as in his own country. He was  compelled to conceal it; and, even had he
been free to make open  profession of it, he could find no minister of his creed  tolerated
anywhere. The country was a perfect blank as far as  the ceremonies of his religion went. In
his native land he knew  where to find a priest; he was advised of the day and of the  precise
place where he might assist at the sacred mysteries of  his religion; and, were it in the cave
or on the mountain-top,  in the bog or the morass, he knew that there he could adore and  receive
his God as truly and as worthily as in the magnificent  domes looking proudly to heaven under
Catholic skies. But in  British North America, except in a few counties of Maryland,  where
the true faith had once been openly planted and taken root, where some clergymen of his own
creed were even still to be  found, though forced to conceal, or at least not expose  themselves
too freely, he knew that elsewhere it was useless for  him to inquire, not only for a sacred
edifice where he might go  to thank his God on landing, but even to look for a priest  should
he find himself at the point of death.

At the present day it is almost impossible to give any details  and move the reader by a picture
of the complete spiritual  destitution of the Irish immigrant in his new home. Here and  there,
however, we meet, in reading, facts apparently  insignificant in themselves, which at first
sight seem to have  no connection whatever with the subject on hand, yet which, with  the aid
of reflection, throw quite a flood of light on it, as  convincing as it is unexpected. Take,
for instance, the  following:

"In the last year of the administration of Andros in  Massachusetts," says Mr. Bancroft, "the
daughter of John Goodwin, a child of thirteen years, charged a laundress with having  stolen
linen from the family. Glover, the mother of the  laundress, a friendless immigrant, almost
ignorant of English,  like a true woman, with a mother's heart, rebuked the false  accusation.
Immediately, the girl, to secure revenge, became  bewitched. The infection spread. Three others
of the family, the  youngest a boy of less than five years old, soon succeeded in  equally
arresting public attention. . . . Cotton Mather went to  pray by the side of one of them, and,
lo! the child lost her  hearing till prayer was over. What was to be done? The four  ministers
of Boston and the one of Charlestown assembled in  Goodwin's house, and spent a whole day of
fasting in prayer. In  consequence, the youngest child, the little one of five years  old,
was 'delivered.' But if the ministers could thus by prayer  'deliver' a possessed child, there
must have been a witch. The  honor of the ministers required a prosecution of the affair; and
the magistrates, William Stoughton being one, with a 'vigor'  which the united ministers commended
as 'just,' made 'a  discovery of the wicked instrument of the devil.' The culprit  was evidently
a wild Irishwoman, of a strange tongue. Goodwin,  who made the complaint, 'had no proof that
could have done her  any hurt;' but the 'scandalous old hag,' whom some thought  'crazed in
her intellectuals,' was bewildered, and made strange  answers, which were taken as confessions,
sometimes, in  excitement, using her native dialect. . . . It was plain the  prisoner was a
Roman Catholic; she had never learned the Lord's  Prayer in English; she could repeat the Pater
Noster fluently  enough, but not quite correctly; so, the ministers and Goodwin's  family had
the satisfaction of getting her condemned as a witch  and executed."

The position of this poor woman, who had never openly declared  herself a Catholic, but which
fact the people were led to infer  from various circumstances, expresses the condition of all
Irish  immigrants at the time. A further fact recorded by the same  historian shows what the
feeling toward Catholics was at the  time in Massachusetts:

"The girl, who knew herself to be a deceiver, had no remorse,  and to the ministers it never
occurred that vanity and love of  power had blinded their judgment."

The reason was plain: Glover was a Catholic. How could the girl  be expected to feel remorse
for having brought about her death?  How could the ministers feel the least concern because
their  "vanity and love of power" had effected the hanging of such a  creature?--"a vessel
of wrath," in any case; a "predestined  reprobate," beyond doubt, whose ignominious death on
earth and  eternal punishment afterward were "a true source of joy in  heaven and an increase
of glory for the infinite justice of God, " if there was any truth in Calvinism.

Another fact, as suggestive as the above, is found in McGee's  "Irish Settlers in America:"
"The first Catholic church that we  find in Pennsylvania, after Penn's suppression of them
in 1708,  was connected with the house of a Miss Elizabeth McGauley, an  Irish lady, who, with
several of her tenantry, settled on land  on the road leading from Nicetown to Frankfort. Near
the site of  this ancient sanctuary stood a tomb, inscribed, 'John Michael  Brown, ob. 15th
December, A. D. 1750. R. I. P.' He had been a  priest residing there incognito."

Miss E. McGauley was not poor, like Glover. On coming to America  with some of her tenantry,
she secured herself beforehand  against the difficulty of practising her religion; and, knowing
well that no priest was to be found in the country, she brought  one with her. All the remainder
of his life did this minister of  God reside in her house incognito, keeping the ministry 
intrusted to him for the service of all a profound secret. He  never attempted, probably, to
enlighten his prejudiced and  ignorant neighbors; the knowledge of his character and the  benefits
arising from his presence were confined to the lady of  the house and her faithful tenantry.
Even after his death the  secret was still kept, and only the cabalistic characters "R. I.
P." remain to tell an intelligent reader that he was neither  Quaker nor Protestant; and, probably,
tradition alone, preserved  doubtless in the neighborhood, could assure us that he was a  priest.

How many Catholics scattered over the broad colony of  Pennsylvania, immigrants like Miss McGauley,
but unlike her in  their poverty, and therefore unable to hire a clergyman, never  knew that
they might unburden their consciences and enjoy the  consolations of their religion, by travelling
a hundred miles or  so to the house "on the road leading from Nicetown to  Frankfort?" How
many lived and died within a short distance, and  never knocked at the door, owing to their
ignorance of the class  of inmates? Thus, although there were some ministers of God in  the
country, their number was so small, and they were so far  distant from each other, that their
labors were utterly  unavailing for the great body of the Catholic immigrants, who  would have
rejoiced to throw themselves at their feet, and ease  their hearts and purify their souls by
confession.

Some Irishmen, it is true, had emigrated before such concealment  was requisite, in Maryland
at least, where an asylum for all had  been opened by Lord Baltimore, a Catholic. Thus, the
Carrolls  had settled in Prince George County. They were at liberty to  make open use of the
services of the English fathers of the  Society of Jesus, who for a long time officiated undisguisedly
among their English Catholic flocks; but, as was seen, after the  Revolution of 1688, Catholics
were disfranchised in Maryland  even, their religious rites proscribed, and penalties enacted
against the open profession of their worship.

Thus, concealment became a necessity, there also; the policy of  keeping the existence of clergymen
and the celebration of the  holy mysteries secret had to be adopted there as in other  colonies.
The Carroll family, like Miss Elizabeth McGauley, gave  refuge in their house to a minister
of their own religion, and  it was in such a chapel-house that John Carroll was born, on the
8th of January, 1735--the first Bishop and Archbishop of  Baltimore.

It is therefore no matter for wonder that the number of children  of the Church in North America
did not increase in proportion to  the number of Catholic immigrants; on the contrary, the
posterity of the majority of those who chose the British  colonies, for their home was lost
to her. The immigrants  themselves, we are confident, never lost their faith. Although  living
for years without any exterior help, without receiving a  word of instruction or advice, without
the celebration of any  religious rite whatever, or the reception of any sacrament, yet,  faith
was too deeply rooted in their minds and hearts to be ever  eradicated, or shaken even.

But, though they themselves clung fast to their faith in the  midst of so many adverse circumstances,
what of their children?

There is no doubt that many of them did, individually, every  thing possible to transmit that
faith to their children; but all  they could do was to speak privately, to warn then against
dangers, and set up before them the example of a blameless life.  Not only was there no priest
to initiate them into the mysteries, granted by Christ to the redeemed soul; there was not
even a  Catholic school-master to instruct them. Even the "hedge-school"  could not be set
on foot. Books were unknown; Catholic  literature, in the modern sense, had not yet been born;
there  was no vestige of such a thing beyond, perhaps, an occasional  old, worn, and torn,
yet dearly-prized and carefully-concealed  prayer-book, dating from the happy days of the Confederation
of  Kilkenny.

There is no reason, then, for surprise in the fact that,  although the families of those first
Irish settlers were  numerous and scattered over all the district which afterward  became the
Middle and Southern States, only a faint tradition  remained among many of them that they really
belonged to the old  Church and "ought to be Catholics." How often was this the case  thirty
years ago, particularly in the South!

It would not be right to conclude that all this was a pure and  unmitigated loss to the Church
of Christ. Later on, we shall  have to speak of more numerous and serious losses: but a few
words on this first one may not be thrown away.

As in the material world an infinite number of germs are lost,  and quantities of seeds, wafted
on the breeze from giant trees  and humble plants, fall and perish on a barren rock, in the
eddies of a swift-running brook, or, oftener still, on the hard  and unkind soil on which they
have happened to alight; so that,  out of a thousand germs, a few only find every thing congenial
to their growth, and attain to the full size allotted them by  Nature --nevertheless, despite
this loss, the species is not  only preserved, but so multiplied as to produce on the beholder,
in after-time, the impression that, not only no loss has been  sustained, but that much has
been gained. So is it with the  Catholic Church in general, and in particular with the momentous
events now being considered.

The cultivated field of the "father of the family" was about to  be extended over a new and
vast area. A whole continent was to  be "fenced around," and "olive-trees," and "fig-trees,"
and all  plants useful and ornamental, were destined to flourish in that  vast garden to the
end of time. The great and eternal Father was, by his providence, directing the mighty operation
from above,  and marking the various points of the compass to which the  floating germs were
to be wafted. He knew that he was planting a  new garden for his Son, who would, as usual,
be the first  husbandman, and employ many workmen to help him.

How could it be expected that all would be gain without loss,  when the harvest-time had not
yet arrived, and the "enemy" was  busy sowing "tares" in all directions? Was not the work human
as  well as divine? and, as human, did not the work partake of the  imperfection of human things?

The continent had evidently been predestined to form one of the  strongest branches of the
great Catholic tree. Discovered before  the modern heresies of Protestantism had shown themselves,
it  was to bring into the fold of Christ new nations, when some old  ones were to be cut off
and wither away. This has long ago been  pointed out; but another mighty design of Providence
there was  which only now begins to show itself.

Columbus was in search of Asia and the holy sepulchre when he  stumbled on the New World. Nor
was the idea of his great mind  altogether a delusion. The new continent was in future ages
to  be used as the highway from Europe to the Orient; China, Japan,  India, vast regions filled
with innumerable multitudes of human  beings, had, so far, scarcely been touched, could scarcely
be  touched, by Catholicism coming from Europe. In fact it was too  far away, and the means
of intercommunication were too  inadequate. The holy Catholic Church increases as "things which
grow;" a few husbandmen--missionaries--are required to set the  first seedlings and plants
in the soil, to water them, watch  over them, and see that they thrive and flourish; the rest
of  the process is a matter of seeds wafted by the wind, falling and  taking root in a fertile
soil, which has been already prepared  for their reception. If there were no other means of
propagation  than the toil and sweat of the husbandman, how long would it  take to cover the
whole earth with vegetation? The first  propagation of Christianity was done in this way; hence
it took  more than ten centuries to Christianize Europe. In the fifth  century, Rome was still
thoroughly pagan. Were the vast regions  of that dim, far-away East to undergo a similar slow
and painful  process, necessitating an immense amount of labor, centuries and  centuries in
duration? God hastened the process by adding to it  the wafting of seeds, and America was to
be the vast nursery  from which those seeds were to come. It was from that long and  alternately
widening and narrowing belt of land, running down  the sea from north to south, that the Japhetic
race was to  invade the "tents of Sem."

Thus was the dream of Columbus to be realized. Asia would be  reached by Europe, of which America
would form a part. The east  of Asia would become contiguous to a real European population,
large masses of which would easily come in contact with the  Mongolian and Malay races of their
immediate neighborhood, steam  and modern improvements in travel reducing the intervening 
distance to a matter of a few days. Thus the Japhetic movement  could be carried out on a large
scale, and European civilization  come to supersede the obsolete manners of those old and effete
races of Eastern Asia. The unity of mankind would be vindicated  against its blasphemers; and,
to crown the whole, Christianity  would find its way back to the cradle of man, then, to its
own  birthplace, Calvary and the sepulchre of Christ. Thus would the  conjectural vision of
the great Genoese become only an  explanation of the old prophecy of the second father of mankind.1
(1 The reader will understand that all this is merely "a view, " and not given as a pure interpretation
of Scripture or past  history.)

Thus would the Church at last become rigorously Catholic, and  not as some theologians imagined,
in their desire to make actual, incomplete facts coincide with a far wider theory, only  Catholic
by approximation.

If it were allowed us to read the designs of Providence  reverently, we might say, without
presumption, that it seems  such is to be future history, although simple conjecture may  produce
too strong an impression on our minds. But, at the  period of which we speak, shortly after
the middle of the last  century, any one who would have spoken thus would have been  justly
deemed a visionary. The south of America, though  possessed of the true religion, seemed inert;
the North was  already showing signs of an intense future activity, but all  opposed to the
truth. God was about to change those appearances,  and, by infusing the Irish element into
the North, produce, in a  comparatively short space of time, the wonderful phenomenon  which
we witness.

Yet, so short-sighted are we, that some are almost staggered in  their faith, because the children
of the earliest Irish  emigrants to this country, were apparently lost to the Church.

Nevertheless, several circumstances might be brought forward to  show that a real gain accrued
to the Church from these lost  children of the first Irish settlers. How many prejudices, so
deeply rooted in the country as to seem ineradicable, owe their  destruction to them! How many
harsh and uncharitable feelings  against Catholics were smoothed away or softened down by their
instrumentality!

Those men who, in after-life, remembered that they "ought to be  Catholics," were not ready
to accept, on the word of a "minister," all the absurd calumnies spread against the Church
throughout  those vast regions. They had heard, by a kind of tradition, kept  alive in their
families, of what their ancestors had formerly  suffered, and they at least were not inclined
to join in the  universal denunciation of a creed which they were conscious  "ought to be"
their own.

Who shall say whether it is not the old Catholic blood, running  in the veins of these children
of Irish Catholic parents, which  has been mainly instrumental in creating that spirit of true
liberality which inspires the honorable conduct of the majority  of the American people, and
in which the Church has at all times  found her safety?

It is certain that there is a vast difference between that  American spirit and the atmosphere
of distrust pervading other  countries, and that the rapid spread of the Church throughout
the broad regions of the Union has been singularly favored by  the soft breeze of a liberal
and kindly feeling so common to  those even who are not born within the fold. And that the
children of Irish parents, themselves lost to the Church, have  exercised great influence from
the start, in that regard, cannot, we think, be denied.

But, perhaps, too much space has been devoted to that first  emigration from Ireland; it is
time to come to a more recent  period of which there are more certain and positive accounts.

There is no need to speak of the happy change effected in the  position of the Catholic Church
in America by the Revolution;  Washington, in his reply to the address of the Catholics of
the  country, has given expression to the feelings of the nation in  terms so well known that
they require no comment.

From that date commences the real history of the Catholic Church  in North America, outside
of the provinces originally settled by  the French and Spaniards. The influx of Irish immigrants
now  attracts our chief attention.

From the year 1800, when the "Union" was effected between  England and Ireland, the number
of immigrants increased suddenly  and rapidly, and the situation of the new-comers on their
arrival was very different from that of their predecessors. They  found liberty not only proclaimed,
but established; few churches  indeed, but, such as there were, known and open, and a bishop
and clergymen already practising their ministry.

Before entering upon the extent, nature, and effects of this  second Irish immigration--which
may be studied from documents  existing--it will be well to say a few words on the elements
which constituted the Catholic body when first organized. We are  concerned, it is true, with
the new element introduced by the  great movement of which we begin to speak; but we are far
from  undervaluing other sources of life, which not only affected the  Church at its birth
in the United States, but have continued to  act upon her ever since with more or less of energy.
The reader  should not imagine that, by not speaking of them, we are unjust  or blind to their
efficiency; they simply lie without the scope  of our plan.

In the North the French, and in the South the Spanish  missionaries, had imparted to Catholicity
a vitality which could  not be extinguished; but its operations were almost entirely  confined
to limits outside those which circumscribe the field of  our investigations. The French element,
however, grew into  prominence even at the outset within those limits, either  through the
acquisition of Louisiana, or in consequence of the  French immigration during the terrible
revolution of last  century. It is only necessary to open the pages of Mr. R. H.  Clarke's
recently-published "Lives of the American Bishops," to  be struck with the importance of that
element. It may be said  that, for the first twenty-five years of the republic, French  prelates
and clergymen, together with several American  Marylanders, were intrusted with the care of
the infant Church.  Ireland seems to have had scarcely any office to fulfil in that  great
work, save through the humble exertions of a few devoted  but almost unknown missionaries;
so that, when bishops of Irish  birth were first chosen, they were either taken from Ireland
itself, as was Dr. England, Bishop Kelly, of Richmond, or  Conwell, of Philadelphia, or from
the monasteries of Rome, as  were Bishops Connolly and Concanen, of New York. Bishop Egan,
of  Philadelphia, can scarcely be called an exception, as he had  only spent a very few years
in this country when he was elevated  to the episcopal dignity. The German element showed itself
only  in Pennsylvania.

It was under circumstances such as these that that stream of  desolate people began to flow,
spreading gradually through  immense regions, and bringing with it only its unconquerable  faith.

From the "mustard-seed" a noble tree was to spring up; but as  yet it was only a weak sapling.
In 1785, Bishop Carroll made an  estimate of the Catholic population of the States: "In Maryland,
seventeen thousand; in Pennsylvania, over seven thousand; and,  as far as information could
be obtained, in other States, about  fifteen hundred." New York City could not yet boast of
a hundred  Catholics.

Like all things durable and mighty, the first swelling of that  great wave was slow and silent,
and scarcely perceptible, until  little by little the ripple spread over the vast ocean.

The first apparent causes have been well expressed by T. D.  McGee, in his "Irish Settlers:"
"The breaking out of the French  War in 1793, and the degrading legislative Union of 1800,
had  deprived many of bread, and all of liberty at home, and made the  mechanical as well as
the agricultural class embark to cross the  Atlantic.

"Hitherto the Irish had colonized, sowed and reaped, fought,  spoken, and legislated in the
New World, if not always in  proportion to their numbers, yet always to the measure of their
educational resources. Now they are about to plant a new emblem - -the Cross--and a new institution--the
Church--throughout the  American Continent. For, the faith of their fathers they did not  leave
behind them; nay, rather, wheresoever six Irish roof-trees  rise, there you will find the cross
of Christ reared over all,  and Celtic piety and Celtic enthusiasm, all sighs and tears,  kneeling
before it."

Let us look at a few particular signs of the coming of this  great wave in its first scarcely
perceptible movement.

"John Timon was born at Conewago, Pennsylvania, February 12,  1797, and baptized on the 17th
of the same month; his parents,  James Timon and Margaret Leddy, had quite recently arrived
in  this country from Ireland, and were from Belturbet, County Cavan. A family of ten children,
of whom John was the second son,  blessed the Catholic household of these pious parents."--(Lives
of American Bishops.)

"Francis Xavier Gartland was born in Dublin, Ireland, in 1805;  he came to America, while yet
a child, and made his studies at  Mount St. Mary's, Emmettsburg."--(Ibid.)

"John B. Fitzpatrick was born in Boston, November 1, 1812. His  parents emigrated from Ireland,
and settled in Boston in 1805."-- (Ibid.)

What did the parents of the future bishop find on their arrival  at Boston? In the year previous,
the first Catholic congregation  was assembled in that city by the Abbe La Poitre, a French
navy- chaplain, who had remained in America after the departure of the  French fleet, which
rendered such powerful assistance in the  struggle for American independence. In 1808, four
years before  the birth of him who was destined to wear the mitre, the  Catholics had obtained
the old "French Church" in School Street,  which was probably a Calvinist meeting house.

Another wavelet of a precious kind was the following: "Bishop  Lanigan was meditating" (in
Ireland) "the establishment of a  religious community in the city of Kilkenny, and designed
Miss  Alice Lalor for one of its future members. But, in 1797, her  parents emigrated from
Ireland and settled in America, and she  felt it to be her duty . . . . to accompany them.
But she  promised the bishop to return in two years. On arriving at  Philadelphia, she became
acquainted with the Reverend Leonard  Neale. . . . Feeling convinced that it was not the design
of  Providence that she should abandon America for Ireland, Father  Neale released her from
her promise to return to Kilkenny, in  order that she might become his cooperator in the foundation
of  a religious order in the United States (the Visitation Nuns)."--  (Ibid.)

Already was the young church robbing the old of some of its best  members, who were to give
some weight to the Irish element in  this country.

"George A. Carrell was born at Philadelphia. . . . He was the  seventh child of his Irish parents,
and the house they occupied,  and in which he was born, was the old mansion of William Penn,
at the corner of Market Street and Letitia Court."-- (Ibid.)

Two short observations naturally present themselves here.  Philadelphia is the city oftenest
mentioned whenever foreigners  are spoken of as landing in North America at that time. It was
then the great harbor of the country, New York not having  attained the preeminence she now
enjoys. Hence, the Church  counted seven thousand children in Pennsylvania; but very few  north
of that city. Thither came the German Catholics, also, in  great numbers to spread themselves
chiefly West and South. Such  was the direction then taken by the Catholic wave.

Our second remark only concerns the house in which he who became  Bishop Carrell was born.
It seemed only fitting that an Irish  Catholic family should thus early take possession of
the very  dwelling-place of the founder of the colony, as the Catholic  Church was destined,
through the Irish element chiefly, to  supplant and outlive the little church of the "Friends."

All the facts, however, just quoted are exceptional, and regard  only the select few. What
became of the mass, meanwhile? As  usual, history for the most part is silent with regard to
it. A  very few words constitute the only record which can afford us a  glimpse of the real
situation of the vast majority of those poor, friendless, obscure immigrants, on whom, nevertheless,
the  great hopes of the future were built.

We have, happily, some means left us of forming an opinion; and  it will be seen that their
situation was much the same as that  of their earlier compatriots. For instance, in the "Lives
of  American Bishops" we read the following startling story:

"The Abbe Cheverus very frequently made long journeys to convey  the consolations of religion
or perform acts of charity. About  this time (1803) he received a letter from two young Irish
Catholics confined in Northampton prison, who had been condemned  to death without just cause,
as was almost universally believed,  imploring him to come to them and prepare them for their
sad and  cruel fate. He hastened to their spiritual relief, and inspired  them with the most
heroic sentiments and dispositions, which  they persevered in to the last fatal moment of their
execution.  According to custom, the prisoners were carried to the nearest  church, to hear
a sermon preached immediately before their  execution; several Protestant ministers presented
themselves to  preach the sermon; but the Abbe Cheverus claimed the right to  perform that
duty, as the choice of the prisoners themselves,  and, after much difficulty, he was allowed
to ascend the pulpit.  His sermon struck all present with astonishment, awe, and  admiration."

Here, in 1803, we have almost a repetition of the death of the  poor woman Glover; and, had
it not been for the high character  of the admirable man who hastened to their assistance,
those two  young Irish Catholics would have had for their only religious  preparation before
death a sermon from one or more Protestant  ministers; and, as the great and good Cheverus
could not be  everywhere in New England, there is little doubt but that such  was the fate
of more than one of the newly-arrived immigrants.

In 1800 and the following years a comparatively large number of  Irishmen landed at New York,
and the future terrible scourge of  their race, ship-fever, soon broke out among them. Dr.
Bailey,  the father of Mrs.Seton, was Health Physician to the port of New  York at the time,
and he allowed his daughter to visit and do  good among them. She was deeply impressed by the
religious  demeanor of the Irish just landed. The Rev. Dr. White relates in  her "Life:" "'The
first thing,' she said, 'the poor people did  when they got their tents was to assemble on
the grass, and all,  kneeling, adore our Master for his mercy; and every morning sun  finds
them repeating their praises.' In a letter to her sister- in-law she describes their sufferings
under the 'plague' in the  following golden words:

"'Rebecca, I cannot sleep; the dying and the dead possess my  mind--babies expiring at the
empty breast of their mother. And  this is not fancy, but the scene that surrounds me. Father
says  that such was never known before; that there are actually twelve  children that must
die from mere want of sustenance, unable to  take more than the breast, and from the wretchedness
of their  parents deprived of it, as they have laid ill for many days in  the ship, without
food, air, or changing. Merciful Father! Oh,  how readily would I give them each a turn of
my child's treasure, if in my choice! But, Rebecca, they have a provider in heaven,  who will
soothe the pangs of the suffering innocent.'"

When she wrote the above, Mrs. Seton was not yet professedly a  Catholic; but how truly animated
with the spirit of the Church  of Christ! Happy would the poor immigrants have been had they
only met with Protestants of her stamp on landing, and of her  father's, who, although he prevented
her becoming foster-mother  to those poor children, as her first duty regarded her own child,
died himself, a victim to his charity toward their parents,  contracting, in the fulfilment
of his office, the fever they had  brought with them, which he was striving to allay!

The following fact, which will conclude this portion of our  inquiry, happened a little later,
but, on that very account,  will serve as a connecting link with the considerations which 
are to follow, and will open our eyes to the real position of  that already swelling mass of
immigrants.

"During the year 1823, Bishop Connolly (of New York) made the  visitation of his entire diocese.
. . . He extended his journey  along the route of the Erie Canal, which was commenced in 1819,
where large numbers of Irish laborers had been attracted, and  among whom the bishop labored
with indefatigable zeal." At that  time the clergy of the whole diocese consisted of eight
priests  with their bishop.

At last we find the "Irish people" at work. The spectacle is  full of sadness; and the only
emotion which can fill the heart  is one of deep pity. In that vast wilderness of the West,
for  such it then was, along public works extending hundreds of miles, large gangs of men--such
is the expression we are compelled to  use--are hard at work along that dreary Mohawk River;
blasting  rocks, digging in the hard clay, uprooting trees, clearing the  ground of briars,
tangled bushes, and the vast quantity of  debris of animal and vegetable matter accumulated
during  centuries. This was the work which "attracted" large numbers of  Irish laborers. They
had left their country, crossed the ocean  under circumstances that should come under our notice,
and  landed on these (at that time) inhospitable shores, to find work; and they found the occupation
just mentioned. We can picture  the "shanties" in which they lived, the harpies who thrived
on  them, the innumerable extortions to which they were subjected.  Bearing in mind that, in
the immense State of New York and in  one-half of New Jersey, there were just eight priests
with their  bishop, we may form some idea of the way in which they lived and  died.

How they must have blessed this bishop, who had left Rome, his  second country, and the noble
associations which surrounded him  in the Eternal City, to come to the succor of his unfortunate
countrymen scattered away in a New World! And well did he  deserve that blessing!

But his passage along the Erie Canal could be nothing more than  a veritable passage--a transient
sojourn of a few days or weeks  at most. What became of those gangs of men after, what had
happened to them before, no one has said, no one has told us, no  one now can ascertain; we
are only left to conjecture, and the  spectacle, as we said, is too sad to dwell upon.

But, hidden within this melancholy view, lies a great and  glorious fact. It was the beginning
of an "apostolic mission" on  the part of a whole people, a mission which will form one of
the  most moving and significant pages of the ecclesiastical history  of the nineteenth century.
Every Christian knows that apostolic  work is rough work; the brunt of the battle must be borne
by the  earliest in the field, that it may be said of their successors  in the words of the
Gospel: "Vos in labores eorum introistis."

Such being the hard lot of the immigrants in the interior of the  country, was that of those
who remained in the cities much more  enviable? On this point we are enabled to judge, at least
as  regards New York. In a letter written by Bishop Dubois, and  published in vol. viii. of
the "Annals of the Propagation of the  Faith," we meet with the following exhaustive description:

"At the beginning of this century, the newly-arrived immigrants  were employed as day-laborers,
servants, journeymen, clerks, and  shopmen. Now, the condition of this class here is precisely
the  same as its condition in England; it is entirely dependent upon  the will of the trader:
not because by law are they forced  thereto, but because the rich alone, being able to advance
the  capital necessary for factories, steam-engines, and workshops,  the poor are obliged to
work for them upon the masters' own  conditions. These conditions, in the case of servants
especially, sometimes degenerate into tyranny; they are frequently forced  to work on Sundays,
permission to hear even a low mass being  refused them; they are obliged betimes to assist
at the prayers  of the sect to which their masters belong, and they have no  other alternative
than either to do violence to their conscience, or lose their place at the risk of not finding
another. Add to  this the insults, the calumnies against Catholics, which they  are daily forced
to hear--a kind of persecution at the hands of  their masters, who do every thing to turn them
away from their  religion; consider the dangers to which are exposed numbers of  orphans who
lose their fathers almost immediately upon landing;  add to this the want of spiritual succor,
a necessary  consequence of the scarcity of missionaries; and you will have a  feeble idea
of the obstacles of every kind which we have to  surmount. . . . Supposing an immigrant, the
father of a family,  to die, the widow and orphans have no other resources but public  charity;
and if a home is found for the children, it is nearly  always among Protestants, who do every
thing in their power to  undermine their faith."

This picture of immigrant-life in New York was certainly  repeated through all the other large
cities. Under such a  combination of adverse circumstances it is most probable that  men and
women of any other nation would have entirely lost their  faith. Such, then, was the dreary
prospect for the new-comers.  Who at that time would have dared hope to witness the consoling
spectacle which followed soon after? To begin with the dawn of  that bright day, we must pass
on to a new period of immigration,  commencing in 1815 or shortly after, and continuing down
to the  "exodus" of 1846.

It may be well, before entering upon it, to look at the causes  which drove so many to leave
the shores of Ireland. From the  year 1815 the number of immigrants increased considerably
and  kept on a steady increase until it swelled to the startling  proportions of 1850 and the
following years.

It is easy to demonstrate that the causes were twofold: 1. The  wretched state of the vast
majority of the Irish at the best of  times. 2. The periodical famines which have regularly
visited  the island since the beginning of last century. At any time it  was in the power of
the English to remedy both causes by  effecting certain changes in the existing laws. The first
of  these is evidently the necessary result of the penal laws which  had converted the Irish,
designedly and with the wilful intent  of the legislators, into a nation of paupers. The second
can  only be the result of the laws affecting the tenure of land and  the trade and manufactures
of the country.

To attribute the pauperism which now seems a part and parcel of  the Irish nation while in
their own country to the indolence and  want of foresight on the part of the natives themselves,
as it  is a fashion with English writers to do, is wilfully to close  the eyes to two very
important things: their past history in  their own land, and their present history outside of it.

As to their past history in their own land, it is an established  fact that pauperism was unknown
in the island, until Protestant  legislators introduced it by their confiscations and laws
with  the manifest intent of destroying, rooting out, or driving away  the race. What has been
previously stated on this point cannot  be gainsaid; and it suffices for the vindication of
a falsely- accused people. There might be some hope for a speedier and  happier solution of
the vexed "Irish difficulty" did the  grandsons of those who wrought the evil only honestly
acknowledge the faults of their ancestors--the least that might  be expected of them; and it
would not be too much to imagine  them honest enough to repair those faults in these days of
severe reckoning and self-scrutiny.

As to the present history of the race outside their own land,  now that it has been scattered,
by these grievous calamities,  all over the world, whatever characteristics its children may
present, indolence and want of foresight can scarcely be  numbered among them, in view of the
success which attends their  march everywhere. And if these qualities would seem to be rooted
in the native soil, they are only "importations" like the men  who fastened them there, and
due only to the cramped position in  which their legislators so carefully confined them. Where
should  there be energy, when every motive that could urge it has been  taken away? How is
it possible to improve their condition, when  every improvement only imposes an additional
burden upon them in  the shape of rack-rent or eviction?

In his work on "The Social Condition of the People," Mr. Kay  quotes from the Edinburgh Review
of January, 1850, the evidence  on this point given by English, German, and Polish witnesses
before the Committee of Emigration, and the proofs gathered from  every source as to the rapid
improvement of the Irish emigrant,  wherever he goes, are certainly convincing.

As for the foolish (for it is nothing else, unless it be wicked)  assertion that those frightful
famines referred to are to be  attributed to the sufferers themselves, it is only necessary
to  say in refutation that in the very years when thousands were  being swept away daily by
their ravages in Ireland--1846 and  1847-- the harbors of the island were filled with English
vessels, loaded with cargoes of provisions of every kind to be  transported to England in order
to pay the rents due to absentee  landlords: and all these provisions were the product of the
famine-stricken land, won by the toil of the famine-stricken  nation. This has invariably been
the case when famine has swept  over the island: the island's riches were in her harbors, stored
in the holds of foreign vessels, to be carried away and  converted into money that these noble
Anglo-Irish landlords  might be enabled to "sustain" life

Others have ascribed these periodical visitations to a surplus  population; but, without entering
into a discussion on the  subject, Sir Robert Kane, in his "Industrial Resources of  Ireland,"
shows that, taking the island in her present state and  under the existing system of cultivation,
she could support with  ease eighteen million inhabitants; that, if the best methods of  farming
were generally adopted, the soil, by double and even  triple crops, could feed without difficulty,
not only twenty- five million, the figure stated by Mr. Gustave de Beaumont, a  French publicist
of eminence, but as many as from thirty to  thirty-five million inhabitants.

But, as the same judicious writer observes, "the enormous  quantity of cattle annually shipped
off from Ireland to England  would, in that case, be consumed in the country which produces  it."

It is clear, therefore, that the pretended surplus population of  Ireland is, as Sir Robert
Kane says, a piece of pure imagination, perfectly ideal, and that it is its unequal and not
its  aggregate amount which is to be deplored.

But no one has presented the question more clearly and solved it  more precisely than Mr. Gustave
de Beaumont in his admirable  work on Ireland, from which we note one or two telling passages,
as given in Father Perraud's "Ireland under English Rule."

"The celebrated French publicist, who was the first to present  to us (in France) a complete
picture of the condition of Ireland, examining in 1829 how emigration might or might not do
away  with all the misery he had witnessed, proposed to himself the  following questions:

"I. To what extent ought emigration to be carried, in order to  bring about a material change
in the general state of Ireland?  namely, by taking away the pretended surplus population.

"II. Would it be possible to carry it out to the proposed extent?

"III. Supposing it practicable, would it be a radical and final  solution of existing difficulties?

"The advocates of emigration replied to the first question by  estimating at a minimum of two
million the number of individuals  who would have to leave Ireland, at one time, in order to
produce there that kind of vacuum which would improve the  conditions of labor and the existence
of the rest of the  agricultural population.

"Upon these data the solution of the second question was easy.  It was by no means difficult
to prove that the system was  impracticable on so large a scale; impracticable on account of
the insufficiency of the means of transport at disposal;  impracticable on account of the enormous
sums required to carry  it out.

"In fact, supposing an emigrant-ship to carry a thousand  passengers--a very high figure--two
thousand vessels would be  required to attain the end in view, namely, the sudden and  universal
emigration of the whole so-called surplus population.  That is to say, the whole merchant navy
of Great Britain would  have to be drawn off from the commerce of the world, and  chartered
for the execution of this very chimerical plan. Where  was the sum required for the most necessary
expenses and urgent  wants of two million passengers to be got? And what country in  the world
would have submitted to a monster invasion like those  of barbarous times? Unless, indeed,
these two million  individuals were beforehand coldly devoted to death by hunger,  was there
a single country in which it could be hoped they would  immediately find work or the means
of subsistence?"

All those impossibilities, genuine indeed and at the time, 1829,  of unforeseen solution, became,
under Providence, possible by  extending the period of transportation from one year to twenty;
so that, instead of two, in reality three million and a half  were thus transported.

But, where M. de Beaumont displayed all his talent for  appreciation and keen reasoning was,
when he came to consider  the third and most embarrassing question of all. Was it certain 
that, the system of renting and cultivating land always  remaining the same, emigration would
suffice to heal those  inveterate sores, and effect, in conformity with the wishes of  its
partisans, a social transformation?

On this point, he showed, in a manner admitting of no reply,  that the emigration of a third
or even of half the population  would not radically put an end to the misery of the country.
The  difficulty with Ireland does not consist in being unable to  produce wherewith to feed
her population; it lies in the manner  in which landed property is managed, a system which
no amount of  emigration can possibly modify; for, "if one of the first  principles of the
landlord be that the farmer should gain by  tilling no more than is strictly necessary to support
him--if,  in addition, this principle is, as a general rule, rigidly  followed out, and all
economical means of living resorted to by  the farmer necessarily induce a rise in the rent--what,
upon  this supposition (of the sad reality of which every one knowing  Ireland is perfectly
conscious), can be the consequence of a  decrease of population?"

Always obliged to live as sparingly as possible, in order to  escape a rise in the rent, and
forced to undergo daily  privations in order to meet his engagements, how is the Irish  farmer
to gain by the departure of his neighbor? "Thus, after  millions of Irishmen have disappeared,
the fate of the  population which remains is in no wise changed; it will forever  be equally
wretched."

Then, glancing at the past, making a sad enumeration of  Ireland's losses during the last three
centuries, and evoking  from these too eloquent figures the accents of a touching  eloquence,
the writer asks himself how far so much bloodshed,  such armies of individuals, stricken down
by death, or hurried  out of the country by transportation--so many families extinct,  and
the like--had contributed to restore and save Ireland?

"Open the annals of Ireland, and see the small amount of  influence which all those violent
enterprises and all those  extraordinary accidental causes of depopulation have had upon  the
social state of the country. Calculate the number of souls  that perished during the religious
wars; count the thousands of  Irishmen that perished under the sword of Cromwell; to all that
the victor massacred add the myriads that he transported; think  of the hundreds of thousands
who sank under famine, the number  of whom exceeded in one year, 1741, forty thousand; do not
overlook the formerly considerable number who yearly died by the  hand of the executioner;
in fine, to this add the twenty-five or  thirty thousand individuals who emigrate from the
country every  year" (this was written before 1830); "and, having laid down  these facts, you
look for the consequences: when, in the midst  of these different crises, you see Ireland always
the same,  always equally wretched, always crammed with paupers, always  bearing about with
her the same hideous and deep wounds, you  will then recognize that the miseries of Ireland
do not arise  from the number of her inhabitants; you will conclude that it is  the nature
of her social condition to generate unmitigated  indigence and infinite distress; that, supposing
millions of  poor swept out of her by a stroke of magic, others would be seen  rising up in
abundance out of a well-spring of misery, which in  Ireland never dries up; and that the fault
does not lie in the  number of her population, but in the institutions in force in  the country."

The celebrated French writer had certainly pointed out what were  the real causes of the distress
in Ireland. He had shown how  false were the pretended causes then assigned for it by  Englishmen;
he touched the key-note--the land tenure; and, as a  well-wisher to Ireland, deprecating any
new calamities, he was  firmly opposed to those various fancy projects of emigration en  masse,
suggested by numerous British writers, many of whom, such  as the editors of the London Times,
were induced to promulgate  them by their deep hatred for the old race, which led them to 
represent under a modern garb the old Norman and Puritan  philanthropic desires of rooting
out and sweeping off the Irish  from the land.

The projects of emigration, therefore, were most eagerly  advanced by the enemies of the Irish,
their real friends being,  on the whole, opposed to the movement at the time. But, the true
causes of Irish misery being either unseen or unappreciated, or,  if known, studiously fostered,
with a view of bringing about the  one aim which ran all through the English policy, of emptying
the island and destroying the race, eventually it did actually  become a dire necessity for
the people to fly; and therefore,  from 1815 to 1845, the wave of emigration began to rise
fast,  and go on swelling in volume and widening in extent from year to  year. Midway between
the two extreme points, about 1830, it  amounted to between twenty-five and thirty thousand.
M. de  Beaumont could not see how two millions could be transported at  once. Nor were they.
But he did not foresee that in the twenty  years succeeding that in which he wrote more than
three millions  and a half would actually be shipped from the island; and all  the difficulties
that he anticipated--the number of ships  requisite, the immense amount of money needed, the
countries  where such numbers might be received--were furnished by  Providence for the spread
of the Irish in many lands. But these  considerations can only be briefly touched upon here;
they will  form the interesting subject of the next chapter. What we have  now to consider
is the commencement of the great exodus,  confined so far to Canada and the United States,
but already  working wonders over the vast stretch of country which spreads  away between the
St. Lawrence and the Gulf of Mexico.

According to the official records of emigration from the "United  Kingdom," from 1815 to 1860
inclusive, we find that, in general,  the greater number emigrated to Canada up to 1839; from
that  epoch, but chiefly after 1845, the greater number went directly  to the United States.
Let us first look for a reason for this  change of destination, and afterward for its result.

Homer, wiser than many modern philosophers, tells us that "there  are beings which have a certain
name among men and another quite  different among the gods." What is true of names, is true
likewise of what they represent, motives and things in general.  Men often assign to actions
motives far different from those  known to God; and, in like manner, the motives of men, visibly
impelled by the Spirit of God, are often far beyond the  comprehension of "philosophers." We
are far from presuming to  dive into the divine thoughts with the certainty of bringing to
the surface what lies hidden in their mysterious depths; but  every Christian should endeavor
humbly to penetrate them, and  modestly set forth what he gathers from them.

What object can be assigned for the Irish emigrating in such  large numbers to Canada for a
quarter of a century, from 1815 to  1840? It cannot be because Canada is, as it then was, a
British  colony: the English Emigration Commissioners had the honesty to  confess, later on,
that the rush to the United States was in  consequence of their desire to avoid dwelling under
the English  flag. It was not because, in Canada, a greater facility opened  up for obtaining
good land; for, in Lower Canada, where they  tarried for a long time, the land was already
occupied by French- Canadians, and, in that severe climate, the soil is not over- productive.
It cannot have been the facility for transportation-- during about six months of every year,
the mouth of the St.  Lawrence is closed to ships, and travel through a frozen land is  not
the most desirable thing, particularly to homeless and  moneyless immigrants. Last of all,
it was not the similarity of  climate and language with those of their own island. What, then,
can it have been?

In our own opinion, the human motive of the Irish can have been  no other than a religious
one; in the Divine mind, the motive  was of a still higher and more merciful character. The
Irish had  heard, from the few of their countrymen who had already  emigrated to the United
States, of the great difficulty they  experienced in practising their religion. On the other
hand,  they knew that, throughout Lower Canada, there was not a village  without its Catholic
church and priest, and that Quebec and  Montreal were important and entirely Catholic cities.
This great  fact blinded them to the many disadvantages they would have to  undergo in emigrating
to such a country; or, rather, they saw  the disadvantages, but the thought that their religion
and that  of their children would be safe in Canada was enough for them.  It is the same people
ever, in the nineteenth century as in  those which preceded it, and all noble minds must respect
them  for thus first looking to the supernatural.

But, had the Almighty a design in directing them to the north of  the continent, and establishing
so great a number of them  permanently in that country? We are fully persuaded that the  Irish
race is now, and ever has been, predestined to fulfill a  high mission on this earth. What
is now transpiring under our  eyes is too clear to be denied by any Christian; and admitting
the general fact that the race must be an instrument in the  hands of God to spread his Church
throughout, in English- speaking countries particularly, to correct, by their presence  and
influence in every quarter of the globe, the evil effects of  the spread of what we call Japhetism
among Oriental races--let  us endeavor to see how their coming to settle in Canada served 
for that great end.

The Gospel of our Lord was first preached in those dreary  regions by religious of the Gallic
race. The labors of Catholic  missionaries in Canada, of the members of the Society of Jesus
particularly, are now well known and appreciated. The French  colony in Canada was from the
first a Catholic colony: It was  not a conquest; it was not a commercial enterprise; it was
not a  transatlantic garden for luxurious Frenchmen: it was what Mr.  Bancroft has well called
it, "a mission." The desire of winning  souls to Christ had begun the work, had run all through
it  almost to the end. The blood of martyrs had consecrated it; that  of Rasles, shed by heretics;
of Lallemant, Brebeuf, and Jogues,  by pagans. But, after the surrender of the colony to England,
although the terms of the cession were as favorable to religion  as could be desired, and the
British power could not introduce  there any of the penal laws still pressing so hard on English
and Irish Catholics, nevertheless, a great danger arose in  consequence, which is particularly
visible now after more than a  century has passed away. Though Catholicity could not be  persecuted,
and, for once, England faithfully observed the terms  of a capitulation which involved a religious
side, as little  could heresy be excluded or denied some of the privileges which  it enjoys
in the mother country. The government was to be  administered mostly by Protestant officials;
the new-comers from  England would be composed, for the greater part, of Protestant  merchants
and artisans. The Anglican Church would soon gain the  prestige of wealth and influence. The
country in the east, it is  true, thickly settled by Catholic farmers, would long remain  Catholic;
but in the large towns, Quebec and Montreal chiefly,  an influx of Protestants of every sect
was to be expected; while  in the west, where the French had scarcely occupied the country,
the numerical majority would soon lean to the side of the new  arrivals from England and Scotland.
The English tongue would  gradually supersede the French, and it might have been foreseen 
from the beginning that, within a given time, notwithstanding  the rapid increase of French-Canadians
by birth, Catholicity  would lose first its preeminence, and, perhaps, after a while,  occupy
a very inferior rank.

The religion professed by the many millions connected with the  centre of unity has never shrunk
from an equal contest, and is  sure of victory when left free and untrammelled; but in Canada
it should be observed that, had it not been for the coming of  the Irish, the whole of the
Catholic population would have  spoken French, being surrounded and absorbed almost by  sectarians
of every hue, all speaking English. The strange  spectacle would there have shown itself--a
spectacle, perhaps,  never witnessed hitherto-- of a Catholic and Protestant language. The
separation of the two camps would have rested chiefly upon  this peculiar basis; and there
can be no doubt that, with the  vigorous youth of the United States, developing so rapidly
in  the South, and destined to carry with it the English tongue over  all the Northern continent,
together with the spread of the  English and Scotch North and West, the French language was
destined to become circumscribed within narrower and narrower  limits, and its final disappearance
in America would be probably  only a work of time.

If it is permitted us to study, love, and admire the designs of  Providence among men, who
shall say that it is presumption to  assert that God's was the hand which directed the Irish
exiles  and set them in their place, in order to prevent the sad  spectacle of a land settled
by holy people, belonging almost  exclusively to God and to Christ, endeared to the true Church
by  so many labors endured for the spread of truth, and memorable by  so many heroic virtues
practised in those frozen wilds and  dreary forests, from falling sooner or later into the
hands of  the most unrelenting enemies of the papacy?

It cannot be presumptuous to attribute it to the designs of  Providence, as otherwise it is
impossible to discover any reason  whatever which might influence the Irish in selecting that
desolate spot for their place of exile. They came, therefore, in  great numbers, to set themselves
under the spiritual control of  priests unable to understand either their native language or
the  borrowed English they brought with them; they came, confident  that all the Catholic churches
built prior to their coming would  be open to them, and that the pastors of those French  congregations
would receive them, not as strangers, but as long- lost children, at last let loose from a
land of bondage, come to  share the freedom secured by the settlers.

The statistics of immigration having been accurately kept since  1815, it is easy to ascertain
the number of Irish people who  landed in Canada during the precise period under investigation.
And, although a certain number, which increased with the years,  did not remain in the country
where they first landed, but pushed on immediately, or shortly after, south to the United States,
still, a large proportion settled permanently in the country.

