This is a field of enormous promise, and its practicality has already been demonstrated to
the extent of placing satellites into precise orbits, such as Tiros (weather) and Transit (navigation),
and of communicating at long distances--23 million miles in the case of Pioneer V. As a result:

     Government and industry technicians are rapidly developing new
     Earth satellites to beam not only television programs but radio
     broadcasts and phone conversations to every spot on Earth that's
     equipped to receive them. Thus this space project, far more than
     most, will touch the ordinary citizen. The goal: a workable,
     worldwide communications system in space before this decade is
     over. It will be, declares one researcher, "the ultimate in
     communications."[55]

Incidentally, the first worldwide communications system of this type, and whether it is conducted
in English or Russian, may have crucial prestige and propaganda ramifications.

Such facilities should be possible through a system of carefully placed satellites so that
radio signals can be relayed to any part of the globe at any time.

Moreover they appear to be essential when one considers that within the next 20 years existing
techniques are apt to be stretched beyond reasonable economic limits by demands for long distance
communications. It is difficult to see how transoceanic television will otherwise be possible
when it is realized that there is presently a capacity of less than 100 telephone channels
across the Atlantic and a single television channel is equivalent in band width to 1,000 telephone
channels. It appears that a system utilizing satellites is the most promising solution to this
problem.[56]

More esoteric communications systems may also arise from space research.

     In some future year when a cruising space vehicle communicates with
     another space vehicle or its orbiting station, it may use a beam of
     light instead of conventional radio. Not that radio will be
     inoperative under the airless conditions of space--rather the
     reverse--but there is reason to believe that communication by
     sunlight not only will be cheaper but will entail carrying much
     simpler and lighter equipment for certain specialized space
     applications. (The Air Force) is developing an experimental system
     that will collect sun rays, run them through a modulator, direct
     the resultant light wave in a controlled beam to a receiver. There
     the wave will be put through a detector, transposed into an
     electrical impulse and be amplified to a speaker. Depending on the
     type of modulator used, either the digital (dot-dash) message or a
     voice message can be sent.[57]

Might not such a system find practical usage on Earth, particularly in sunny, arid lands?

WEATHER PREDICTION AND MODIFICATION

Meteorological satellites should make possible weather observations over the entire globe.
Today, only 20 percent of the globe is covered by any regular observational and reporting systems.
If we can solve the problems of handling the vast amounts of data that will be received, develop
methods for timely analysis of the data and the notification of weather bureaus throughout
the world, we should be able to improve by a significant degree the accuracy of weather predictions.
An improvement of only 10 percent in accuracy could result in savings totaling hundreds of
millions of dollars annually to farmers, builders, airlines, shipping, the tourist trade, and
many other enterprises.

Perhaps even greater savings will come from warning systems devised for hurricanes and tornadoes.

The slight knowledge which humans actually have of weather forces can be seen from the fact
that at present we do not even know exactly how rain begins.[58] Learning to predict it and
to modify it, through space application, might help slow down the soil erosion of arable land--that
"geological inevitability * * * which man can only hasten or postpone."[59] It is noteworthy
that the two leading nations in space research, the United States and the U.S.S.R., are among
the most affected by soil erosion.

The "leg up" which the United States has in this particular phase of space research is illustrated
by the acute photographic talents of the Tiros satellite and their meaning to weather experts.
The following description of some of the earliest pictures by the Director of the Office of
Meteorological Research, U.S. Weather Bureau, is illuminating.

     This picture, labeled "No. 1," was the storm that was picked up in
     the early orbits of Tiros on the first day of launch, April 1. This
     shows the storm 120 miles east of Cape Cod, with dry continental
     air streaming off the United States, not shown by clouds, and off
     the coast the moist air streaming up to the north, counterclockwise
     around the center, producing widespread clouds and precipitation as
     far north as the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

     On that same day mention was made of a storm in the Midwest. That
     is illustrated by photograph No. 2. This was centered over
     southeast Nebraska, a rather extensive storm. Again, we have a
     clear air portion shown by a dark area, the ground underneath,
     which has less brightness than the clouds, the cold air from Canada
     streaming into that area, not characterized by clouds, and to the
     east the moist air from the Gulf of Mexico, in this general
     neighborhood, streaming around into that center and producing
     rather widespread rains. In this case near the Gulf of Mexico,
     where the cloud is extremely bright, indicating that the clouds are
     very high, thunderstorms were found in that area.

     It is a sort of situation in which tornadoes are to be found in
     this very bright cloudy area, especially this time of year in the
     Midwest.

     A third vortex was observed, also April 1, in the Gulf of Alaska,
     500 miles southeast of Kodiak Island. The vortex circulation is
     clearly evidenced by the clouds which form in a circular array, and
     the large clear area in the center of the storm.

     No. 4 picture refers to a very big storm 1,500 miles in diameter
     located 300 miles west of Ireland on April 2. This is a very old
     storm which was whirling around, had no fronts associated with it.
     It has long since wound up around the center. There is a rather
     well-marked structure to the clouds that you can see. It is quite
     different from the pictures in the first two. These are storms
     mostly over the continental area or just off the coast. The storms
     over the oceans seem to show more of a banded structure. By that I
     mean circular bands of clouds, of width perhaps ranging from 20
     miles to a few hundred miles, spiraling around the center in a
     counterclockwise manner.[60]

HEALTH BENEFITS

Of all the problems contingent upon space flight it is doubtful if any are more perplexing
than the biological ones. In fact, it now appears quite likely that the limiting factor on
manned space exploration will be less the nature of physical laws or the shortcoming of space
vehicle systems than the vulnerability of the human body.

In order to place humans in space for any extended period, we must solve a host of highly complicated
biological equations which demand intensive basic research. The other side of the coin, however,
is that when scientific breakthroughs do occur in this area, they will probably be among the
most beneficial to come from the space program.

An idea of what is going on in the space medicine field can be obtained from this summary:

     Engineers already have equipped man with the vehicle for space
     travel. Medical researchers now are investigating many factors
     incident to the maintenance of space life--to make possible man's
     flight into the depths of space. Placing man in a wholly new
     environment requires knowledge far beyond our current grasp of
     human biology.

     Here are some of the problems under investigation: The
     determination of man's reactions; the necessity of operating in a
     completely closed system compatible with man's physiological
     requirements (oxygen and carbon dioxide content, food, barometric
     pressure, humidity and temperature control); explosive
     decompression; psychophysiological difficulties of spatial
     disorientation as a result of weightlessness; toxicology of
     metabolites and propellants; effects of cosmic, solar, and nuclear
     ionizing radiation and protective shielding and treatment; effects
     on man's circulatory system from accelerative and decelerative g.
     forces; the establishment of a thermoneutral range for man to exist
     through preflight, flight, and reentry; regeneration of water and
     food.[61]

In addition, intensive efforts are being brought to bear on such problems as the effect on
humans who are deprived of their sensory perceptions, or whose sensory systems are overloaded,
or who are exposed to excessive boredom or anxiety or sense of unreality, or who must do their
job under hypnosis or hypothermia (cooling of warm-blooded animals).

A recent space medicine symposium heard this theory advanced by a prominent medical scholar:

     Attractive, indeed, for the space traveler would be the choice of
     hibernating during long periods when there was nothing he had to
     do. With the increase of speeds and the lowering of metabolism,
     consideration of flights running several hundred or even thousands
     of years cannot be offhandedly dismissed as mere fantasy. During
     prolonged flights of many months or years there will be very little
     to see and that of negligible interest. The most practical way of
     dealing with the problem might well be to have the pilot sleep 23
     of the 24 hours.[62]

Lowering the body temperature would be one way of inducing the necessary deep sleep.

Another possibility of handling some of the biological problems of space flight, suggested
by another physician, would be for astronauts to discard the 24-hour Earth day and establish
a longer rhythm for their lives.[63]

At any rate, and while we may not now see just how it will come about, knowledge gained from
experiments such as these may result in important medical and psychological advances.

In the drug and technological area of medicine, concrete benefits have already resulted from
the national space program. These include, as already mentioned, a drug developed from a missile
propellant to treat mental ills, a means of rapidly lowering blood temperature in operations,
and a small efficient valve which could replace the valve in a human heart.

Particularly gratifying, from the standpoint of medical value is the Army's work toward an
anti-radiation drug which could be taken before exposure to reduce the biological effects of
radiation.[64] Such a drug, which is of special interest to astronauts who might be required
to subject themselves to varying belts of radiation, might be of even greater use in the cause
of civil defense.

A final and far-reaching phase of the health side of space exploration deals with the basic
nature of biology itself--how and under what conditions life grows. Up to now biological science
has been largely "the rationalization of particular facts and we have had all too limited a
basis for the construction and testing of meaningful axioms to support a theory of life."[65]
Through research made possible by the space program it may be possible to alter this condition.
"The dynamics of celestial bodies, as can be observed from the Earth, is the richest inspiration
for the generalization of our concepts of mass and energy throughout the universe. The spectra
of the stars likewise testify to the universality of our concepts in chemistry. But biology
has lacked tools of such extension, and life until now has meant only terrestrial life."[66]

The secrets which this research may divulge and their meaning for human health can only be
imagined. But they certainly would not be minor.

EDUCATION BENEFITS

No enterprise has so stirred human imagination as the reach of man toward the exploration of
space. New worlds to explore. New distances to travel--3,680 million miles to Pluto, the outermost
planet of our solar system, 8 years journey at 50,000 miles per hour when we attain such a
capability. Innumerable problems ahead. New knowledge needed in almost every branch of science
and technology from magneto fluid dynamics to cosmology, from materials to biology and psychology.[67]

"New knowledge needed" means better and stronger education is essential. And not only in the
physical sciences. In the social sciences and the arts as well.

     Certainly man's space adventure can help profoundly to make a finer
     creature of him, but only if his adventures on Earth can do so as
     well. Essentially what this means to a social psychologist is that
     we must somehow raise our level of education to the point where
     most men most of the time can appreciate and actively absorb the
     implications of knowledge and developments in all areas
     sufficiently to let them enrich their personal philosophies.
     Obviously this kind of education is only in part a scientific
     one.[68]

Moreover, the technical and management aspects of the space program involve collaboration with
nonscientific persons such as businessmen, bankers, and public officials in assessing worthwhile
objectives and in judging the technical and economic feasibility of projects designed to accomplish
these objectives.[69] Consequently each type must educate the other in his own specialty if
an effective, stepped-up space program is to be achieved.

The demand

Apparently the demand for specific formal education in the science of astronautics is increasing
faster than it is being supplied. Although many colleges and universities have been setting
up courses dealing with astronautics, the state of the art does not seem to have crystallized
to the extent that it permits fashioning a career in the field at the educational level. Of
course, discontent is created. One publication has editorialized:

     We have received a surprising number of letters from young people
     who actually want to know how and where they can get started in a
     career in astronautics. These, for the most part, are high school
     students--and, evidently, they couldn't get the information they
     wanted from their own school. * * * Isn't the age of space yet
     important enough for all the high schools to sponsor interest in
     our space programs and to point out the need for a constant flow of
     young brains?[70]

The answer undoubtedly is that such grassroots demand will bring about increased academic curricula
in astronautics in direct proportion to its magnitude.

Meanwhile, the availability of work for persons with a background in space-related subjects
can be gaged to some extent by observing the variety of personnel requirements on major space
exploration projects.

A single American firm, for example, uses 49 different professional specialists in its work
for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and in its space work for the Department
of Defense.[71] Multiplied by the thousands of companies which are doing similar work, the
list gives an idea of the astronautic demand confronting the Nation's educational institutions:

  Acoustician
  Aerodynamicist
  Aeronautical engineer
  Agricultural engineer
  Astrodynamicist
  Astronomer
  Astrophysicist
  Biochemist
  Biophysicist
  Ceramics specialist
  Chemist
  Computer specialist
  Crystallographer
  Development engineer
  Doctor of medicine
  Electrical engineer
  Electronic engineer
  Experimental physicist
  Flight engineer
  Gyroscopics specialist
  Hydraulic engineer
  Information theory analyst
  Inorganic chemist
  Logical designer
  Magnetic device engineer
  Mathematician
  Mechanical applications engineer
  Mechanical engineer
  Mechanisms specialist
  Medical electronic engineer
  Metallurgical engineer
  Methods engineer
  Nuclear physicist
  Oceanographer
  Organic chemist
  Physical chemist
  Pneumatic engineer
  Process engineer
  Production engineer
  Project engineer
  Psychologist
  Reliability engineer
  Sociologist
  Solid state physicist
  Structural engineer
  System analyst
  Theoretical physicist
  Thermodynamicist
  Transducer engineer

FOOTNOTES:

[50] 25 supra. See also address to the American Bankers Association, Oct. 28, 1958.

[51] Space Business Daily, June 17, 1960.

[52] Feldman, George J., cited in a letter to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
Apr. 29, 1960.

[53] From Michelson, Edward J., "How Missile-Space Spending Enriches the Peacetime Economy,"
Missiles and Rockets, Sept. 14, 1959, pp. 13-17.

[54] Tischer, R. G., "A Search for the Spaceman's Food," Space Journal, December 1959, p. 46.

[55] Kraar, Louis, Wall Street Journal, May 4, 1960.

[56] 7 supra.

[57] Release No. 38-60, Air Research and Development Command, May 2, 1960.

[58] Lear, John, "Where Does Rain Begin?" New Scientist, Mar. 24, 1960, p. 724.

[59] "Wind and Soil," New Scientist, May 26, 1960, p. 1327.

[60] Wexler, Dr. Harry. Press conference conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
Apr. 22, 1960.

[61] Lockheed, Missiles and Space Division, medical research, Sunnyvale, Calif.

[62] Lewis, Dr. F. J., before the Space Flight Symposium, San Antonio, Tex., May 28, 1960.

[63] Kleitman, Prof. Nathaniel, before the Space Flight Symposium, San Antonio, Tex., May 26, 1960.

[64] Taylor, Lt. Col. Richard R., USA (MC), testimony before the House Committee on Science
and Astronautics, June 15, 1960.

[65] Lederberg, Joshua, "Exobiology-Experimental Approaches to Life Beyond Earth," Science
in Space, ch. IX, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., February 1960.

[66] Ibid.

[67] Dryden, Dr. Hugh L., speech before the Engineering Society of Cincinnati, Feb. 18, 1960.

[68] Michael, Donald N., "Space Exploration and the Values of Man," Space Journal, September
1959, p. 15.

[69] 67 supra.

[70] Space Age, August 1959, p. 3.

[71] Minneapolis-Honeywell, Military Products Group.

V. LONG-RANGE VALUES

In assessing the practical values of space exploration it does not seem logical to limit considerations
to those values which are immediate or near-future ones. The worth of a present activity may
be doubled or trebled because of its long-range potential.

Such values may not be practical within the context of today's usage, but they may be extremely
practical if we are willing to concede that those of us living today have an interest in and
a responsibility for what happens on Earth in the decades and centuries to come.

TROUBLE SPOTS

Thinking along these lines it is not difficult to conjure up a picture of some of the difficult
physical and social problems which will be facing the Earth in the years which stretch ahead.
The foregoing sections of this report, for example, have already indicated extensive difficulties
inherent in at least five major categories.

  (1) Bursting population.
  (2) Acute water shortage.
  (3) Soil erosion and disappearance.
  (4) Too much leisure.
  (5) Intensified nationalism.

In each area it is probable that space exploration will ultimately play an important role.

Population

Social scientists have been warning for years of the drastic social upheavals which must inevitably
accompany an "exploding" population. It is a problem the complexity of which grows in geometric
progression as time goes on. In the United States nearly 300 years were required to produce
90 million people. In the past 60 years this number has doubled. The implications are obvious.
They are only too plain to urban and suburban planners who endeavor to cope with the antlike
construction and activity of the human race as it burgeons with each succeeding year.

Of course, this is not a domestic matter but a global one. Its seriousness has been described
as follows: "Projection of the post-World War II rate of increase gives a population of 50
billions (the highest estimate of the population-carrying capacity of the globe ever calculated
by a responsible scholar) in less than 200 years."[72] A European professor of medicine adds
that any surge in human longevity at this time is quite undesirable from the standpoint of
making elderly persons useful or cared for. "The problems posed by the explosive growth of
populations * * * are so great that it is quite reassuring to know that biologists and medical
men have so far been unsuccessful in increasing the maximum lifespan of the human species *
* * and * * * it would be a calamity for the social and economic structure of a country if
the mean lifespan were suddenly to increase from 65 to 85 years."[73]

Some anthropologists pessimistically wonder if man is going to prove like the locust by populating
himself into near extinction from time to time.

Without subscribing to this view, one must nevertheless take notice of the difficulties posed
by population increase, not merely those of food, shelter, education, and the like but also
those resulting from cellular, cramped, close living.

Whichever phase of the problem is studied, it seems not unreasonable to conclude that space
research will help find a solution. New ways to produce food, new materials for better shelter,
new stimuli for education--all of these are coming from our space program. As for the matter
of adequate living room, space research may result in ways to permit an easy and efficient
scattering of the population without hurting its mobility. This might result from the development
of small subsidiary types of craft, or "gocarts," originally designed for local exploration
on other planets. Such craft, whether they operated by air cushion, nuclear energy, gravitational
force, power cell, or whatever, conceivably would permit Earth's population to spread out without
the need for expensive new roads--which, by the way, take millions of acres of land out of
productive use.

A development of this sort, together with new power sources to replace the fossil fuels on
which factory, home, and vehicle now depend, might also all but eliminate the growing smog
and air-pollution blight.

Water shortage

A direct result of the population increase, multiplied by the many new uses for which water
is being used in home appliances, etc., and plus the greatly increased demand for standard
uses such as indoor plumbing, irrigation, and factory processing, is the likelihood that water
shortage will be high on the list of future problems. Ways to conserve and reuse water, together
with economical desalting of sea water, will be essential in the decades ahead. Space research
may provide part of the answer here, too. (See New Water Sources and Uses, sec. III.)

Soil erosion

The Russian steppes of Kazakhstan are providing the world with a great contemporary dust bowl,
reminiscent of the middle 1930's when dust from the Great Plains stretched from Texas to Saskatchewan.
Questionable agriculture policies, drought, and strong easterly winds are among the forces
blamed for the trials of southern Russia.[74] So great is the extent of this disturbance that
the dust cloud has been identified in photographs taken by American weather satellites.

Of course, "wind erosion is only one of the processes whereby the Earth's arable land is diminishing
and the deserts increasing; erosion by water can also sweep away the soil."[75] But insofar
as the current dust bowl of the Soviet steppes has "diminished food resources at a time when
the number of mouths to feed is increasing so rapidly, the world is the poorer."[76]

What can space research do about this vital trend, which again seems destined to accelerate
in the future?

While we cannot be sure, we can conjecture that improved soil conservation might turn out to
be the greatest benefit of weather understanding and modification. Agriculture policies might
be adapted to the long-range patterns uncovered by weather satellites and, eventually, through
better understanding of the making of weather, it may be possible to modify weather forces
in a manner which will preserve the soil.

In a more remote vein, it may be that knowledge gained from a first-hand study of the Moon
or other planets in the solar system will eventually contribute to the conservation of soil
on Earth in ways as yet unimagined.

Added leisure

Acquiring more time for leisure sounds good. Very much more leisure than most people now have,
however, is apt to present trouble in itself. Since it appears that the time is not far away
when those living in the highly developed countries will no longer have to concentrate their
prime energies on the traditional quest for food, clothing, and shelter, a potentially dangerous
vacuum may be the result. At least the psychologists seem agreed that people must feel a useful
purpose in their lives and have ways to pursue it.

     Above all, leisure makes a challenge to the human spirit. Athens,
     in her Golden Age, displayed a genius for the creative use of
     leisure which can be seen as complementary, and indeed superior, to
     her genius for military and commercial ventures. There have also
     been such periods of all-pervasive inspiration in the history of
     other peoples * * *. The doubling of our standard of living will
     present a growing challenge to the human spirit and produce graver
     consequences, should we fail to meet it. We neglect the proper use
     of leisure at our peril.[77]

In other words, the answer to the problem does not lie solely with the golf course, the yacht
club, the theater, or the lengthened vacation. Much more will be required.

The intellectual stimulus of space exploration and research, which undoubtedly will divide
into numerous branches like capillary streaks from a bolt of lightning, should be markedly
useful in helping to fill this vacuum. Space research would seem particularly applicable in
this role since it deals with fundamental knowledge and concepts which are satisfying in terms
of psychological needs and sense of purpose.

Intensified nationalism

Ever since World War II the era of colonialism has been on the wane. Many nations have proclaimed,
won, or wrested their independence during that period. Others appear to be on the verge of
doing so. At any rate, it is clear that in the decades ahead the world is going to see the
rise of even more independent nations with strong nationalistic feelings.

History implies that developments of this sort are often accompanied by international unrest--because
of the normal ebullience of national adolescence and the desire to be accepted by the world
community, as well as a variety of concomitant political and economical upheavals.

For whatever trials may lie ahead on this score, space exploration may prove to be much needed
oil on rough water.

Ambitious, advanced, sophisticated space exploration in the future is almost certain to require
a high degree of international cooperation and perhaps even a pooling of resources and funds
to some degree. Already America has found it expedient, in some cases mandatory, to depend
on facilities in other countries for her ventures into space. A good example is the close cooperation
between the United States and tracking bases located in Canada, Australia, South Africa, and
elsewhere. An even better one is the important part played in U.S. efforts by England's giant
radio telescope at Jodrell Bank. Most of our launches are followed by this equipment and much
of the best scientific information gained from it. In the case of Pioneer V, Jodrell Bank was
essential to keep in touch with the satellite at the longer distances and, moreover, was actually
required to separate the fourth stage of the launch vehicle and direct the payload toward its
Venus orbit.

Mutual need and cooperation thus fostered by space exploration can be expected to siphon off
some of the political tensions of the future, especially as more and more nations become interested
in space and inaugurate complex programs of their own.

LIMITATIONS ON SPACE RESEARCH

There are some who are convinced that the exploration of space is rigidly limited and that
the landing of men on extraterrestrial bodies other than the Moon is quite improbable. They
are sure that extensive travel outside the solar system is impossible.

Admittedly, the problems of such travel are enormous. But are they incapable of solution?

     Twenty-six million miles to Venus, 49 million miles to Mars, 3,680
     million miles from the Sun to Pluto at the outer edge of the solar
     system. The nearest of the stars is 25 million, million miles away,
     and travel to it at 10 miles per second would require 80,000 years.
     Is the travel of man to the stars a futile dream? Each generation
     of man builds on the shoulders of the past. The exploration of
     space has begun; who now can set limits to its future
     accomplishments?[78]

That is the thought of one of the Nation's most expert space scientists.

"Who now can set limits * * * ?"

It seems to mesh curiously well with one of the most interesting phenomena of our day--the
emergence of a breed of engineers, technicians, teachers, and scientists who do not recognize
limits and who refuse to concede that something cannot be so because it fails to fit conventional
patterns or conform to the physical laws of the universe as we now know them. Of this there
is growing evidence.

For many years it has been an accepted "fact," for instance, that the Moon is a dead world
with no life upon it. The suggestion made by the great 16th century mathematician, Johannes
Kepler, that some life might exist on the Moon was debunked into silence long since. Yet today
a fellow of the British Royal Astronomical Society writes that the first men to arrive on the
Moon may find not only plant life but possibly animal life. "The fact that terrestrial organisms
may be unable to survive in the surroundings of another planet is by itself no more significant
than that fishes and other marine animals die when exposed to the air. From their point of
view air is uninhabitable because they have failed to equip themselves with lungs."[79] And
he adds that his surmise "leaves out of account the possibilities of the Moon's underground
world, which are incalculable, for there water, the vital gases, congenial temperatures, and
increased pressures will all be present. Only sunlight is absent."

Then there is Project Ozma, the search for life on other planets or in other star systems,
which began in April 1960 at Green Bank, W. Va.