THE DOINGS OF RAFFLES HAW

By Arthur Conan Doyle

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

 1.  A DOUBLE ENIGMA

 2.  THE TENANT OF THE NEW HALL.

 3.  A HOUSE OF WONDERS.

 4.  FROM CLIME TO CLIME.

 5.  LAURA'S REQUEST

 6.  A STRANGE VISITOR

 7.  THE WORKINGS OF WEALTH.

 8.  A BILLIONAIRE'S PLANS.

 9.  A NEW DEPARTURE

10. THE GREAT SECRET

11. A CHEMICAL DEMONSTRATION.

12. A FAMILY JAR.

13. A MIDNIGHT ADVENTURE

14. THE SPREAD OF THE BLIGHT.

15. THE GREATER SECRET.

CHAPTER I. A DOUBLE ENIGMA.

"I'm afraid that he won't come," said Laura McIntyre, in a disconsolate voice.

"Why not?"

"Oh, look at the weather; it is something too awful."

As she spoke a whirl of snow beat with a muffled patter against the cosy red-curtained window,
while a long blast of wind shrieked and whistled through the branches of the great white-limbed
elms which skirted the garden.

Robert McIntyre rose from the sketch upon which he had been working, and taking one of the
lamps in his hand peered out into the darkness. The long skeleton limbs of the bare trees tossed
and quivered dimly amid the whirling drift. His sister sat by the fire, her fancy-work in her
lap, and looked up at her brothers profile which showed against the brilliant yellow light.
It was a handsome face, young and fair and clear cut, with wavy brown hair combed backwards
and rippling down into that outward curve at the ends which one associates with the artistic
temperament. There was refinement too in his slightly puckered eyes, his dainty gold-rimmed
pince-nez glasses, and in the black velveteen coat which caught the light so richly upon its
shoulder. In his mouth only there was something--a suspicion of coarseness, a possibility of
weakness--which in the eyes of some, and of his sister among them, marred the grace and beauty
of his features. Yet, as he was wont himself to say, when one thinks that each poor mortal
is heir to a legacy of every evil trait or bodily taint of so vast a line of ancestors, lucky
indeed is the man who does not find that Nature has scored up some long-owing family debt upon
his features.

And indeed in this case the remorseless creditor had gone so far as to exact a claim from the
lady also, though in her case the extreme beauty of the upper part of the face drew the eye
away from any weakness which might be found in the lower. She was darker than her brother--so
dark that her heavily coiled hair seemed to be black until the light shone slantwise across
it. The delicate, half-petulant features, the finely traced brows, and the thoughtful, humorous
eyes were all perfect in their way, and yet the combination left something to be desired. There
was a vague sense of a flaw somewhere, in feature or in expression, which resolved itself,
when analysed, into a slight out-turning and droop of the lower lip; small indeed, and yet
pronounced enough to turn what would have been a beautiful face into a merely pretty one. Very
despondent and somewhat cross she looked as she leaned back in the armchair, the tangle of
bright-coloured silks and of drab holland upon her lap, her hands clasped behind her head,
with her snowy forearms and little pink elbows projecting on either side.

"I know he won't come," she repeated.

"Nonsense, Laura! Of course he'll come. A sailor and afraid of the weather!"

"Ha!" She raised her finger, and a smile of triumph played over her face, only to die away
again into a blank look of disappointment. "It is only papa," she murmured.

A shuffling step was heard in the hall, and a little peaky man, with his slippers very much
down at the heels, came shambling into the room. Mr. McIntyre, sen., was pale and furtive-looking,
with a thin straggling red beard shot with grey, and a sunken downcast face. Ill-fortune and
ill-health had both left their marks upon him. Ten years before he had been one of the largest
and richest gunmakers in Birmingham, but a long run of commercial bad luck had sapped his great
fortune, and had finally driven him into the Bankruptcy Court. The death of his wife on the
very day of his insolvency had filled his cup of sorrow, and he had gone about since with a
stunned, half-dazed expression upon his weak pallid face which spoke of a mind unhinged. 

As Kwing Irang later with his Demmeni and our luggage down to the Mahakam Long Deho headed and
stay there for a long time, had to have all its young people influenza illness. The boats,
which went up the river from Long Deho argued that the infection even the tribes above the
falls, but died only old and sick from the flu. The natives fear the arrival of a stranger, because
this "Benger," they think the the evil spirits that cause the common cold bring.

Every traveler who comes first with the Dayak in contact, the unpleasant Sight, their cause the
skin disease on the body affected. Above all, it is the Scaling of the bare skin, which gives
the patient a so terrifying appearance.

It can distinguish 4 different scales diseases: pityriasis versicolor, tinea circinata, Tinea
imbricata and tinea albigena, of which the first two, or very appear closely related diseases,
including Europe. These four skin diseases, which above all other prevailing in Borneo, by
various species in the skin of living fungi caused.

Favus, which is very common elsewhere often observed, I never in Bahau.

Pityriasis versicolor (Panu of the Malays; Litak the Bahau) is expressed
in the form of light, something raised spots, which by an infiltration
of the epidermis, through which the underlying Pigment layer is less
visible, are caused.

On the non-pigmented skin of Europeans The infection is manifested by light brown spots.

The size of the spots, which caused Panu or Litak varies between that of a pinhead and a palm.
The infection takes on very different dimensions, as they at the
Bahau only caused the perspiration itching, it is treated and rarely
spread therefore often the largest part of the body.

Tinea circinata (Kurabe the Malays: ki Urip the Bahau) fits most externally with Herpes tonsurans match
and shows itself in the form of round spots, very different sizes, all of which from a bubble
around which have similar concentric bubbles formed, emerged are. By drying up and jumping of the
vesicles formed scaling, mainly on the periphery. Tinea circinata
preferably attacks the places where the epidermis is the least resistant.
 What would they think if they heard you."

"I think, Robert," he said, disregarding his daughter's protest, "that I will have a drop,
just the very smallest possible drop, of brandy. A mere thimbleful will do; but I rather think
I have caught cold during the snowstorm to-day."

Robert went on sketching stolidly in his folding book, but Laura looked up from her work.

"I'm afraid there is nothing in the house, father," she said.

"Laura! Laura!" He shook his head as one more in sorrow than in anger. "You are no longer a
girl, Laura; you are a woman, the manager of a household, Laura. We trust in you. We look entirely
towards you. And yet you leave your poor brother Robert without any brandy, to say nothing
of me, your father. Good heavens, Laura! what would your mother have said? Think of accidents,
think of sudden illness, think of apoplectic fits, Laura. It is a very grave res--a very grave
response--a very great risk that you run."

"I hardly touch the stuff," said Robert curtly; "Laura need not provide any for me."

"As a medicine it is invaluable, Robert. To be used, you understand, and not to be abused.
That's the whole secret of it. But I'll step down to the Three Pigeons for half an hour."

"My dear father," cried the young man "you surely are not going out upon such a night. If you
must have brandy could I not send Sarah for some? Please let me send Sarah; or I would go myself,
or--"

Pip! came a little paper pellet from his sister's chair on to the sketch-book in front of him!
He unrolled it and held it to the light.

"For Heaven's sake let him go!" was scrawled across it.

"Well, in any case, wrap yourself up warm," he continued, laying bare his sudden change of
front with a masculine clumsiness which horrified his sister. "Perhaps it is not so cold as
it looks. You can't lose your way, that is one blessing. And it is not more than a hundred yards."

With many mumbles and grumbles at his daughter's want of foresight, old McIntyre struggled
into his great-coat and wrapped his scarf round his long thin throat. A sharp gust of cold
wind made the lamps flicker as he threw open the hall-door. His two children listened to the
dull fall of his footsteps as he slowly picked out the winding garden path.

"He gets worse--he becomes intolerable," said Robert at last. "We should not have let him out;
he may make a public exhibition of himself."

"But it's Hector's last night," pleaded Laura. "It would be dreadful if they met and he noticed
anything. That was why I wished him to go."

"Then you were only just in time," remarked her brother, "for I hear the gate go, and--yes,
you see."

As he spoke a cheery hail came from outside, with a sharp rat-tat at the window. Robert stepped
out and threw open the door to admit a tall young man, whose black frieze jacket was all mottled
and glistening with snow crystals. Laughing loudly he shook himself like a Newfoundland dog,
and kicked the snow from his boots before entering the little lamplit room.

Hector Spurling's profession was written in every line of his face. The clean-shaven lip and
chin, the little fringe of side whisker, the straight decisive mouth, and the hard weather-tanned
cheeks all spoke of the Royal Navy. Fifty such faces may be seen any night of the year round
the mess-table of the Royal Naval College in Portsmouth Dockyard--faces which bear a closer
resemblance to each other than brother does commonly to brother. They are all cast in a common
mould, the products of a system which teaches early self-reliance, hardihood, and manliness--a
fine type upon the whole; less refined and less intellectual, perhaps, than their brothers
of the land, but full of truth and energy and heroism. In figure he was straight, tall, and
well-knit, with keen grey eyes, and the sharp prompt manner of a man who has been accustomed
both to command and to obey.

"You had my note?" he said, as he entered the room. "I have to go again, Laura. Isn't it a
bore? The biggest obstacles for a boat ride on this form Route the rapids
and located below the convex side of the river gravel beds. The tortuous course of the river
between Long and Blu-u Pahngè can already have other conditions . Suspect From the top of Batu
Mili also because one can see that the river valley to East widened, with only a few hills
approach the shores and the mountains on the horizon appear Niaan Batu, Batu Batu Boh and Ajo.
A trip on the river shows a different picture; The river here has his bed in his old deposits,
several meters thick gravel and sand layers, dug and numerous small, gravel-covered islands make it difficult
to trip on the River.

These river deposits contain numerous layers of plant remains and have their origin give thanks
to the fact that the case between Blu-u and Tepai is only 20 m, while the large corner of
the bed below Tepai by congestion at high water on the momentum of the River sure is having a debilitating
effect. When Lulu Njiwung is the number of small gravel islands particularly great. Below Long
Tepai the Mahakam pushes on the mountain, the west in the Pajang expires, and he winds up here
by two narrow valleys to the south, forming two rows of large waterfalls. On this stretch of the river
is a very important case, He is from Long Tepai and Kiham Halo 80
m.

After the first series of waterfalls in western follows a wider
part of the river, where he receives the Bo, who, having come from
a large catchment area, the Mahakam 1 / 3 of water supplies.

The relatively quiet nature of this route keep the river to Long Deho
where at Kiham Udang again follow very tight spaces, since the river
is the mighty conglomerate blocks, lying in his bed, was not able
to remove.

The Kiham Udang is entirely of this blocks are formed, which crumbled away from the conglomerate
layers of round semolina, reach alternately on both sides of the river with sandstone layers
have a thickness of 10-30 meters. The soft sandstone was led away from the river, while the conglomerate
masses are stayed. The fact that such constrictions exercise a great influence on the electricity
can ersieht, one the fact that the river at Long Deho rose in 1897 to 15 in two days, but in 3 days
again reached its normal level.

Long Bagun below, the river has for its winding course a broader level, he created from its own
deposits of sand and grit, has at his disposal.

Between the mouth of the Mera and Ma Mehak Teba are very many islands, all purchased through Attachments
are formed. As Ana only 50 m above sea level, is the case further down the river no longer significant.

Gries
benches come before to Ana, but the Mahakam enters only at the Gunung Sindáwar vast plains of Kutei
and receives only from here on the character of an underflow.

The wide, completely flat area north and south of the Mahakam, the most of the Internal state
of mind Kutei seems in earlier times was a large pool of water be
obtained by the Mahakam River and its tributaries, and then gradually
filled by the Vegetation is overgrown.

The remnants of this basin are on both sides of the River peculiar lakes remained. These contribute
to its round shape and large surface a very different character from the long, tortuous, small
lakes, in the "Wester-Afdeeling" occur on both sides of the Kapuas and constitute a part of
the former river bed. Although part of the Mahakam, the Blu-u to Long Pahngè, in the opinion
of Professor Molengraaff, to the nature of sediment deposition due should not be considered as upper-run
must be there are practical but called for practical reasons, the part of the Mahakam above Long Bagun be
described as the upper reaches. The extensive gravel deposits beneath and Gries stamp of the place
the following part to the middle reaches, during the course of the river by the alluvial plain
below Gunung Sindawar has all the characteristics of a sub-run. Only the river on the coast
is forced by a ridge to the first through them Break before it forms its delta.

That the population consists of the upper Mahakam Bahaustämmen, all in the last two Centuries
from the high altitude country Apu Kajan have migrated is already in elsewhere have been reported.

In
the headwaters of the Mahakam meet until Kiham Matandow only virgin forest in the few small
groups of Bukater wander.

They belong to the Bukatstamme, in the the areas of the upper Kapuas, Mahakam and upper Njangejan
is at home. Since in each Year and go to their whereabouts every season, even knowing the local
Bahau often not exactly where they are.

They stand with the other nomadic tribes that under the same name by Bukater or Punan on Serata,
drilling, and the Kapuas river in the area the restriction, and Kréhau Mendalam stop, here.

Before
the campaign from the Dayak Serawak in 1885, the basin of the Mahakam, the Kiham Matandow
inhabited by sumwere from different offices of the Pnihingstammes. These offices were vandalized
all the time, however, with the result that all the Inhabitants of the main stream and moved
down in the first years at the Danum Parei east Kajangebiete from settled, and later, around 1893
and 1894, two residential areas in places the Kayan themselves established,
one at the mouth of Belar sumwere under the chief the other close
by to Long 'Kub, among the chiefs and Erang Paren tingang Kohi.

After the death of the former, the latter left in 1901, again above the mouth of the Kaso down.

The
villages along the tributaries have been spared the Serawakischen Dayak, such as the one on
Howong under Amun Lirung and on Penaneh under Kaja, brother Lirung Amun.

The inhabitants of the house at the mouth of Tjehan could go before her house was burned, upstream
refuge and sat reported above at the mouth of the package, where they 1898 still lived under
the chief parenchyma. From the time they live but closer to the mouth the Tjehan to make preparations
for the construction of a house at the mouth itself. On Serata, above the falls, which lie behind
the mouth, was the Pnihingniederlassung under Njangun Diu, which
they shared many Punan, spared from the Batang Lupar remained.

The root of the Seputan that does not seem to be among the Pnihing, but in its way of life more
agreement with the Dayak Bungan shows, lives in the area of ​​the Kaso, sometimes high up
on this river, partly on Penaneh.

If you drive further down the Mahakam, we arrive in the area of ​​the Kayan, after the in the 1901
death in their chief Kwing Irang under his nephew Bang Lawing displayed.

The root of the Kayan dominates the area between the sumwere and Dini part of the Mahakam. His
house, which was formerly under the Blu-u, was the Serawakischen
Dayak burned down, whereupon the inhabitants scattered in their fields
in the area of ​​settled Blu-u. When I arrived in 1898 they built
a new branch on the already high Mahakamufer at the mouth of the Blu-u.
In the land of Kajan hold no Punan.

Dini begins east of the area of ​​the Long-Glat, a tribe that is currently on the Mahakam has set itself
and that in Lulu Njiwung under NGOW thing in Batu Sala under Paren Dalong and in Long Tepai under
Bo Lea, whose property ends at the border of the Njian. With the exception of Cameras where a family of
the Ma-Suling heard the whole river basin the Long Glat. Here, again, Punan or no Bukater before.

The
branches of the Long-Glat differ from those of the Pnihing, Kajan
and Ma-Suling that reside in each of these several tribes together,
each with its own chiefs possess, which must obey the Long-Glat-chief.

These conditions have existed for the beginning of the 19th Century, when the Long-Glat developed
at the upper Mahakam great power and subjected to the two chief Ibau brothers Bo and Bo Ledju Aja
all tribes living there. The smaller tribes, such as the Ma-tuan, Ma-Tepai, Ma-Manok-Kwe and
Batu Pala of them were forced to live with them in order to enlarge their number. Since the time
allocated these strains as soon as the Long-Glat shared.

Although they adopted much of the Long-Glat and mixed by marriage to have this, has still
much of the time their independence in them receiving. They have their language, their house construction
and their worship for a century preserved, some strains also have their own type the tattoo.
Each of these tribes live in his own home next to the long the long-Glat, so that in one village,
which includes perhaps 1-2 ha, 3-4 times very different Speak languages ​​heard in agriculture very different
ceremonies, prohibition periods and sign Watch and see, especially in women, identify different
types of tattoo can.

All languages ​​that are spoken in a branch, the normal everyday language, the Busang, that is
included, the same strain as a basis. The sounds for this soft Languages, but much from each
other from, the Long-Glat example is the other tribes so strange that the Bahau something unintelligible
call "dahaun Long-Glat" = "language of the Long-Glat. In the inter-communication one uses the Busang.

Lulu
Njiwung in the Long-Glat now live with the Ma-tuan and three other smaller tribes together, in
Batu Sala live long Glat with the Ma-tuan and Uma-Tepai; Long live Tepai except the last 3 also
Manok-Kwe and Batu Pala.

The Ma-Ma-Pagong Suling and have settled in Merasègebiet in two villages together at Napo Liu
(above the island) close to the river mouth, and earlier in sirang Lulu. These two villages had
earlier been united long decades, but in 1896 separated they are such that now both in both a
house of Ma-Suling as one of the Uma-Pagong stands. The establishment of Napo Litt ruled the
chief Ledju Li and Lulu sirang the chief Bo NGOW.

On Mendalam and in the two branches at Mera's live-Uma Pagong with the Ma-Suling Although common,
but, as far as I know, in mutual independence.

According to approximate estimates, the number of souls in the Seputan 500, Pnihing 1500, the Kajan 800,
the Ma-Suling with Uma Pagong 1300, the Long-Glat 1600 and the nomadic tribes 400 so that the
people at the upper Mahakam above the falls about 6000 souls must be strong.

Addition to these "people hold in the territory of the upper Mahakam in all strains harbor them,
that is, in all but the Pnihing, numerous foreigners.

These are mostly Malays, or rather, Muslims of different blood mixture Dayak and other areas
that are above all with the collection of bush products . Deal Among the Malays there are many
who own their land near the coast Crimes or debts due to leave and have been looking at the
Bahau protection.

The numerous Types of gutta-percha and rattan, which can be found at the upper Mahakam attracted,
with time more strangers approached. appeared particularly under
your good-natured, righteous chief Kwing Irang many Malay-Busch products
collectors, who were born in the area of ​​the upper Murung; Temenggung
Itjot their chief, a descendant of the of the war with her famous
Bandjarmasin Antassari, but received no right of establishment of
the Kayan and could therefore not connect with a daughter of the chief
family in the marriage.

Itjot, who with his enemies, had moved to the Ma-Suling to the cameras, the daughter got married
there to make a Chief since 1893 and lived in the new home. It gathered around him the Busch
products finder many of whom also chose a woman among the Ma-Suling, and exploited the forests
on Meras of which were very large and full of bush products. Having exhausted the forests had moved
to the other most areas. Among other things they were looking at the long Glat to win in Long
Tepai, Batu Sala and Lulu Njiwung influence to be in their areas of Bush to seize products, but they
could, particularly when chief Bo Lea, their predatory policies operate only with great caution.
Most were not even allowed in a Village live a long time to stay. The energetic Pnihinghäuptling
Belar understood this for the tribes dangerous score even almost completely away.

The desire of the chiefs, after the tribe. opportunity to enlarge and the prestige that the stranger
by real or pretended talents as medicine men and artisans give help to know the stranger in general, the
recording in the Bahau.

The relationship between the Malay and Dayak is it odd that some of the chiefs Malaysians seek
to ward off entirely, in which they receive in other to be highly regarded. Of this influence
is the great admiration they excite in the young girl. Many Malays are, therefore, with the
principal or most beautiful girls of the tribes in which they stay straight, married. In general,
these men leave their wives when their Existence is more difficult, just down and move to other
strains or in other areas.

This was done including at the Ma-Suling, as the gutta-percha on Meras reached its end.

The Bahau which are born in the Apu Kajan, Kajan undoubtedly include
the Ma-Suling and Long-Glat.

Although the Pnihing write you on the same source, probably but incorrectly. First, it is certain
that in the area of ​​the upper Kapuas, where still a small part Pnihing lives are drawn into
the valley of the Mahakam and that since that Time to have lived continuously in its headwaters.
Secondly, a much stronger Pnihing Build and other customs than the other tribes on the Mahakam.
You may not like the Bahau, Forge swords and carve in wood and bone, and their men and women
tattooed little, piecemeal, apparently in imitation of other tribes, war dances, are among the
Bahau common, they do not know.

The fact that the meat eat the horny animals what do not other strains, it makes me very likely
that they must be counted rather than the Kapuasstämmen to Bahau. Their language is me unknown.

The
Pnihing probably belong to the people who lived in the area of ​​the Mahakam before invaded
the Bahau here.


The clergyman's eyes sparkled with emotion, and he blew his nose loudly in his big red handkerchief.

Robert McIntyre looked at him in surprise.

"I am delighted to hear it," he said. "May I ask what he has done?"

"I went up to him by appointment this morning. I had written asking him if I might call. I
spoke to him of the parish and its needs, of my long struggle to restore the south side of
the church, and of our efforts to help my poor parishioners during this hard weather. While
I spoke he said not a word, but sat with a vacant face, as though he were not listening to
me. When I had finished he took up his pen. 'How much will it take to do the church?' he asked.
'A thousand pounds,' I answered; 'but we have already raised three hundred among ourselves.
The Squire has very handsomely given fifty pounds.' 'Well,' said he, 'how about the poor folk?
How many families are there?' 'About three hundred,' I answered. 'And coals, I believe, are
at about a pound a ton', said he. 'Three tons ought to see them through the rest of the winter.
Then you can get a very fair pair of blankets for two pounds. That would make five pounds per
family, and seven hundred for the church.' He dipped his pen in the ink, and, as I am a living
man, Robert, he wrote me a cheque then and there for two thousand two hundred pounds. I don't
know what I said; I felt like a fool; I could not stammer out words with which to thank him.
All my troubles have been taken from my shoulders in an instant, and indeed, Robert, I can
hardly realise it."

"He must be a most charitable man."

"Extraordinarily so. And so unpretending. One would think that it was I who was doing the favour
and he who was the beggar. I thought of that passage about making the heart of the widow sing
for joy. He made my heart sing for joy, I can tell you. Are you coming up to the Vicarage?"

"No, thank you, Mr. Spurling. I must go home and get to work on my new picture. It's a five-foot
canvas--the landing of the Romans in Kent. I must have another try for the Academy. Good-morning."

He raised his hat and continued down the road, while the vicar turned off into the path which
led to his home.

Robert McIntyre had converted a large bare room in the upper storey of Elmdene into a studio,
and thither he retreated after lunch. It was as well that he should have some little den of
his own, for his father would talk of little save of his ledgers and accounts, while Laura
had become peevish and querulous since the one tie which held her to Tamfield had been removed.
The chamber was a bare and bleak one, un-papered and un-carpeted, but a good fire sparkled
in the grate, and two large windows gave him the needful light. His easel stood in the centre,
with the great canvas balanced across it, while against the walls there leaned his two last
attempts, "The Murder of Thomas of Canterbury" and "The Signing of Magna Charta." Robert had
a weakness for large subjects and broad effects. If his ambition was greater than his skill,
he had still all the love of his art and the patience under discouragement which are the stuff
out of which successful painters are made. Twice his brace of pictures had journeyed to town,
and twice they had come back to him, until the finely gilded frames which had made such a call
upon his purse began to show signs of these varied adventures. Yet, in spite of their depressing
company, Robert turned to his fresh work with all the enthusiasm which a conviction of ultimate
success can inspire.

But he could not work that afternoon.

In vain he dashed in his background and outlined the long curves of the Roman galleys. Do what
he would, his mind would still wander from his work to dwell upon his conversation with the
vicar in the morning. His imagination was fascinated by the idea of this strange man living
alone amid a crowd, and yet wielding such a power that with one dash of his pen he could change
sorrow into joy, and transform the condition of a whole parish. The incident of the fifty-pound
note came back to his mind. It must surely have been Raffles Haw with whom Hector Spurling
had come in contact. There could not be two men in one parish to whom so large a sum was of
so small an account as to be thrown to a bystander in return for a trifling piece of assistance.
Of course, it must have been Raffles Haw. And his sister had the note, with instructions to
return it to the owner, could he be found. He threw aside his palette, and descending into
the sitting-room he told Laura and his father of his morning's interview with the vicar, and
of his conviction that this was the man of whom Hector was in quest.

"Tut! Tut!" said old McIntyre. "How is this, Laura? I knew nothing of this. What do women know
of money or of business? Hand the note over to me and I shall relieve you of all responsibility.
I will take everything upon myself."

"I cannot possibly, papa," said Laura, with decision. "I should not think of parting with it."

"What is the world coming to?" cried the old man, with his thin hands held up in protest. "You
grow more undutiful every day, Laura. This money would be of use to me--of use, you understand.
It may be the corner-stone of the vast business which I shall re-construct. I will use it,
Laura, and I will pay something--four, shall we say, or even four and a-half--and you may have
it back on any day. And I will give security--the security of my--well, of my word of honour."

"It is quite impossible, papa," his daughter answered coldly. "It is not my money. Hector asked
me to be his banker. Those were his very words. It is not in my power to lend it. As to what
you say, Robert, you may be right or you may be wrong, but I certainly shall not give Mr. Raffles
Haw or anyone else the money without Hector's express command."

"You are very right about not giving it to Mr. Raffles Haw," cried old McIntyre, with many
nods of approbation. "I should certainly not let it go out of the family."

"Well, I thought that I would tell you."

Robert picked up his Tam-o'-Shanter and strolled out to avoid the discussion between his father
and sister, which he saw was about to be renewed. His artistic nature revolted at these petty
and sordid disputes, and he turned to the crisp air and the broad landscape to soothe his ruffled
feelings. Avarice had no place among his failings, and his father's perpetual chatter about
money inspired him with a positive loathing and disgust for the subject.

Robert was lounging slowly along his favourite walk which curled over the hill, with his mind
turning from the Roman invasion to the mysterious millionaire, when his eyes fell upon a tall,
lean man in front of him, who, with a pipe between his lips, was endeavouring to light a match
under cover of his cap. The man was clad in a rough pea-jacket, and bore traces of smoke and
grime upon his face and hands. Yet there is a Freemasonry among smokers which overrides every
social difference, so Robert stopped and held out his case of fusees.

"A light?" said he.

"Thank you." The man picked out a fusee, struck it, and bent his head to it. He had a pale,
thin face, a short straggling beard, and a very sharp and curving nose, with decision and character
in the straight thick eyebrows which almost met on either side of it. Clearly a superior kind
of workman, and possibly one of those who had been employed in the construction of the new
house. Here was a chance of getting some first-hand information on the question which had aroused
his curiosity. Robert waited until he had lit his pipe, and then walked on beside him.

"Are you going in the direction of the new Hall?" he asked.

"Yes."

The man's voice was cold, and his manner reserved.

"Perhaps you were engaged in the building of it?"

"Yes, I had a hand in it."

"They say that it is a wonderful place inside. It has been quite the talk of the district.
Is it as rich as they say?"

"I am sure I don't know. I have not heard what they say."

His attitude was certainly not encouraging, and it seemed to Robert that he gave little sidelong
suspicious glances at him out of his keen grey eyes. Yet, if he were so careful and discreet
there was the more reason to think that there was information to be extracted, if he could
but find a way to it.

"Ah, there it lies!" he remarked, as they topped the brow of the hill, and looked down once
more at the great building. "Well, no doubt it is very gorgeous and splendid, but really for
my own part I would rather live in my own little box down yonder in the village."

The workman puffed gravely at his pipe.

"You are no great admirer of wealth, then?" he said.

"Not I. I should not care to be a penny richer than I am. Of course I should like to sell my
pictures. One must make a living. But beyond that I ask nothing. I dare say that I, a poor
artist, or you, a man who work for your bread, have more happiness out of life than the owner
of that great palace."

"Indeed, I think that it is more than likely," the other answered, in a much more conciliatory
voice.

"Art," said Robert, warming to the subject, "is her own reward. What mere bodily indulgence
is there which money could buy which can give that deep thrill of satisfaction which comes
on the man who has conceived something new, something beautiful, and the daily delight as he
sees it grow under his hand, until it stands before him a completed whole? With my art and
without wealth I am happy. Without my art I should have a void which no money could fill. But
I really don't know why I should say all this to you."

The workman had stopped, and was staring at him earnestly with a look of the deepest interest
upon his smoke-darkened features.

"I am very glad to hear what you say," said he. "It is a pleasure to know that the worship
of gold is not quite universal, and that there are at least some who can rise above it. Would
you mind my shaking you by the hand?"

It was a somewhat extraordinary request, but Robert rather prided himself upon his Bohemianism,
and upon his happy facility for making friends with all sorts and conditions of men. He readily
exchanged a cordial grip with his chance acquaintance.

"You expressed some curiosity as to this house. I know the grounds pretty well, and might perhaps
show you one or two little things which would interest you. Here are the gates. Will you come
in with me?"

Here was, indeed, a chance. Robert eagerly assented, and walked up the winding drive amid the
growing fir-trees. When he found his uncouth guide, however, marching straight across the broad,
gravel square to the main entrance, he felt that he had placed himself in a false position.

"Surely not through the front door," he whispered, plucking his companion by the sleeve. "Perhaps
Mr. Raffles Haw might not like it."

"I don't think there will be any difficulty," said the other, with a quiet smile. "My name
is Raffles Haw."

CHAPTER III. A HOUSE OF WONDERS.

Robert McIntyre's face must have expressed the utter astonishment which filled his mind at
this most unlooked-for announcement. For a moment he thought that his companion must be joking,
but the ease and assurance with which he lounged up the steps, and the deep respect with which
a richly-clad functionary in the hall swung open the door to admit him, showed that he spoke
in sober earnest. Raffles Haw glanced back, and seeing the look of absolute amazement upon
the young artist's features, he chuckled quietly to himself.

"You will forgive me, won't you, for not disclosing my identity?" he said, laying his hand
with a friendly gesture upon the other's sleeve. "Had you known me you would have spoken less
freely, and I should not have had the opportunity of learning your true worth. For example,
you might hardly have been so frank upon the matter of wealth had you known that you were speaking
to the master of the Hall."

"I don't think that I was ever so astonished in my life," gasped Robert.

"Naturally you are. How could you take me for anything but a workman? So I am. Chemistry is
one of my hobbies, and I spend hours a day in my laboratory yonder. I have only just struck
work, and as I had inhaled some not-over-pleasant gases, I thought that a turn down the road
and a whiff of tobacco might do me good. That was how I came to meet you, and my toilet, I
fear, corresponded only too well with my smoke-grimed face. But I rather fancy I know you by
repute. Your name is Robert McIntyre, is it not?"

"Yes, though I cannot imagine how you knew."

"Well, I naturally took some little trouble to learn something of my neighbours. I had heard
that there was an artist of that name, and I presume that artists are not very numerous in
Tamfield. But how do you like the design? I hope it does not offend your trained taste."

"Indeed, it is wonderful--marvellous! You must yourself have an extraordinary eye for effect."

"Oh, I have no taste at all; not the slightest. I cannot tell good from bad. There never was
such a complete Philistine. But I had the best man in London down, and another fellow from
Vienna. They fixed it up between them."

They had been standing just within the folding doors upon a huge mat of bison skins. In front
of them lay a great square court, paved with many-coloured marbles laid out in a labyrinth
of arabesque design. In the centre a high fountain of carved jade shot five thin feathers of
spray into the air, four of which curved towards each corner of the court to descend into broad
marble basins, while the fifth mounted straight up to an immense height, and then tinkled back
into the central reservoir. On either side of the court a tall, graceful palm-tree shot up
its slender stem to break into a crown of drooping green leaves some fifty feet above their
heads. All round were a series of Moorish arches, in jade and serpentine marble, with heavy
curtains of the deepest purple to cover the doors which lay between them. In front, to right
and to left, a broad staircase of marble, carpeted with rich thick Smyrna rug work, led upwards
to the upper storeys, which were arranged around the central court. The temperature within
was warm and yet fresh, like the air of an English May.

"It's taken from the Alhambra," said Raffles Haw. "The palm-trees are pretty. They strike right
through the building into the ground beneath, and their roots are all girt round with hot-water
pipes. They seem to thrive very well."

"What beautifully delicate brass-work!" cried Robert, looking up with admiring eyes at the
bright and infinitely fragile metal trellis screens which adorned the spaces between the Moorish
arches.

"It is rather neat. But it is not brass-work. Brass is not tough enough to allow them to work
it to that degree of fineness. It is gold. But just come this way with me. You won't mind waiting
while I remove this smoke?"

He led the way to a door upon the left side of the court, which, to Robert's surprise, swung
slowly open as they approached it. "That is a little improvement which I have adopted," remarked
the master of the house. "As you go up to a door your weight upon the planks releases a spring
which causes the hinges to revolve. Pray step in. This is my own little sanctum, and furnished
after my own heart."

If Robert expected to see some fresh exhibition of wealth and luxury he was woefully disappointed,
for he found himself in a large but bare room, with a little iron truckle-bed in one corner,
a few scattered wooden chairs, a dingy carpet, and a large table heaped with books, bottles,
papers, and all the other debris which collect around a busy and untidy man. Motioning his
visitor into a chair, Raffles Haw pulled off his coat, and, turning up the sleeves of his coarse
flannel shirt, he began to plunge and scrub in the warm water which flowed from a tap in the wall.

"You see how simple my own tastes are," he remarked, as he mopped his dripping face and hair
with the towel. "This is the only room in my great house where I find myself in a congenial
atmosphere. It is homely to me. I can read here and smoke my pipe in peace. Anything like luxury
is abhorrent to me."

"Really, I should not have though it," observed Robert.

"It is a fact, I assure you. You see, even with your views as to the worthlessness of wealth,
views which, I am sure, are very sensible and much to your credit, you must allow that if a
man should happen to be the possessor of vast--well, let us say of considerable--sums of money,
it is his duty to get that money into circulation, so that the community may be the better
for it. There is the secret of my fine feathers. I have to exert all my ingenuity in order
to spend my income, and yet keep the money in legitimate channels. For example, it is very
easy to give money away, and no doubt I could dispose of my surplus, or part of my surplus,
in that fashion, but I have no wish to pauperise anyone, or to do mischief by indiscriminate
charity. I must exact some sort of money's worth for all the money which I lay out You see
my point, don't you?"

"Entirely; though really it is something novel to hear a man complain of the difficulty of
spending his income."

"I assure you that it is a very serious difficulty with me. But I have hit upon some plans--some
very pretty plans. Will you wash your hands? Well, then, perhaps you would care to have a look
round. Just come into this corner of the room, and sit upon this chair. So. Now I will sit
upon this one, and we are ready to start."

The angle of the chamber in which they sat was painted for about six feet in each direction
of a dark chocolate-brown, and was furnished with two red plush seats protruding from the walls,
and in striking contrast with the simplicity of the rest of the apartment.

"This," remarked Raffles Haw, "is a lift, though it is so closely joined to the rest of the
room that without the change in colour it might puzzle you to find the division. It is made
to run either horizontally or vertically. This line of knobs represents the various rooms.
You can see 'Dining,' 'Smoking,' 'Billiard,' 'Library' and so on, upon them. I will show you
the upward action. I press this one with 'Kitchen' upon it."

There was a sense of motion, a very slight jar, and Robert, without moving from his seat, was
conscious that the room had vanished, and that a large arched oaken door stood in the place
which it had occupied.

"That is the kitchen door," said Raffles Haw. "I have my kitchen at the top of the house. I
cannot tolerate the smell of cooking. We have come up eighty feet in a very few seconds. Now
I press again and here we are in my room once more."

Robert McIntyre stared about him in astonishment.

"The wonders of science are greater than those of magic," he remarked.

"Yes, it is a pretty little mechanism. Now we try the horizontal. I press the 'Dining' knob
and here we are, you see. Step towards the door, and you will find it open in front of you."

Robert did as he was bid, and found himself with his companion in a large and lofty room, while
the lift, the instant that it was freed from their weight, flashed back to its original position.
With his feet sinking into the soft rich carpet, as though he were ankle-deep in some mossy
bank, he stared about him at the great pictures which lined the walls.

"Surely, surely, I see Raphael's touch there," he cried, pointing up at the one which faced him.

"Yes, it is a Raphael, and I believe one of his best. I had a very exciting bid for it with
the French Government. They wanted it for the Louvre, but of course at an auction the longest
purse must win."

"And this 'Arrest of Catiline' must be a Rubens. One cannot mistake his splendid men and his
infamous women."

"Yes, it is a Rubens. The other two are a Velasquez and a Teniers, fair specimens of the Spanish
and of the Dutch schools. I have only old masters here. The moderns are in the billiard-room.
The furniture here is a little curious. In fact, I fancy that it is unique. It is made of ebony
and narwhals' horns. You see that the legs of everything are of spiral ivory, both the table
and the chairs. It cost the upholsterer some little pains, for the supply of these things is
a strictly limited one. Curiously enough, the Chinese Emperor had given a large order for narwhals'
horns to repair some ancient pagoda, which was fenced in with them, but I outbid him in the
market, and his celestial highness has had to wait. There is a lift here in the corner, but
we do not need it. Pray step through this door. This is the billiard-room," he continued as
they advanced into the adjoining room. "You see I have a few recent pictures of merit upon
the walls. Here is a Corot, two Meissoniers, a Bouguereau, a Millais, an Orchardson, and two
Alma-Tademas. It seems to me to be a pity to hang pictures over these walls of carved oak.
Look at those birds hopping and singing in the branches. They really seem to move and twitter,
don't they?"

"They are perfect. I never saw such exquisite work. But why do you call it a billiard-room,
Mr. Haw? I do not see any board."

"Oh, a board is such a clumsy uncompromising piece of furniture. It is always in the way unless
you actually need to use it. In this case the board is covered by that square of polished maple
which you see let into the floor. Now I put my foot upon this motor. You see!" As he spoke,
the central portion of the flooring flew up, and a most beautiful tortoise-shell-plated billiard-table
rose up to its proper position. He pressed a second spring, and a bagatelle-table appeared
in the same fashion. "You may have card-tables or what you will by setting the levers in motion,"
he remarked. "But all this is very trifling. Perhaps we may find something in the museum which
may be of more interest to you."

He led the way into another chamber, which was furnished in antique style, with hangings of
the rarest and richest tapestry. The floor was a mosaic of coloured marbles, scattered over
with mats of costly fur. There was little furniture, but a number of Louis Quatorze cabinets
of ebony and silver with delicately-painted plaques were ranged round the apartment.

"It is perhaps hardly fair to dignify it by the name of a museum," said Raffles Haw. "It consists
merely of a few elegant trifles which I have picked up here and there. Gems are my strongest
point. I fancy that there, perhaps, I might challenge comparison with any private collector
in the world. I lock them up, for even the best servants may be tempted."

He took a silver key from his watch chain, and began to unlock and draw out the drawers. A
cry of wonder and of admiration burst from Robert McIntyre, as his eyes rested upon case after
case filled with the most magnificent stones. The deep still red of the rubies, the clear scintillating
green of the emeralds, the hard glitter of the diamonds, the many shifting shades of beryls,
of amethysts, of onyxes, of cats'-eyes, of opals, of agates, of cornelians seemed to fill the
whole chamber with a vague twinkling, many-coloured light. Long slabs of the beautiful blue
lapis lazuli, magnificent bloodstones, specimens of pink and red and white coral, long strings
of lustrous pearls, all these were tossed out by their owner as a careless schoolboy might
pour marbles from his bag.

"This isn't bad," he said, holding up a great glowing yellow mass as large as his own head.
"It is really a very fine piece of amber. It was forwarded to me by my agent at the Baltic.
Twenty-eight pounds, it weighs. I never heard of so fine a one. I have no very large brilliants--there
were no very large ones in the market--but my average is good. Pretty toys, are they not?"
He picked up a double handful of emeralds from a drawer, and then let them trickle slowly back
into the heap.

"Good heavens!" cried Robert, as he gazed from case to case. "It is an immense fortune in itself.
Surely a hundred thousand pounds would hardly buy so splendid a collection."

"I don't think that you would do for a valuer of precious stones," said Raffles Haw, laughing.
"Why, the contents of that one little drawer of brilliants could not be bought for the sum
which you name. I have a memo. here of what I have expended up to date on my collection, though
I have agents at work who will probably make very considerable additions to it within the next
few weeks. As matters stand, however, I have spent--let me see-pearls one forty thousand; emeralds,
seven fifty; rubies, eight forty; brilliants, nine twenty; onyxes--I have several very nice
onyxes-two thirty. Other gems, carbuncles, agates--hum! Yes, it figures out at just over four
million seven hundred and forty thousand. I dare say that we may say five millions, for I have
not counted the odd money."

"Good gracious!" cried the young artist, with staring eyes.

"I have a certain feeling of duty in the matter. You see the cutting, polishing, and general
sale of stones is one of those industries which is entirely dependent upon wealth. If we do
not support it, it must languish, which means misfortune to a considerable number of people.
The same applies to the gold filigree work which you noticed in the court. Wealth has its responsibilities,
and the encouragement of these handicrafts are among the most obvious of them. Here is a nice
ruby. It is Burmese, and the fifth largest in existence. I am inclined to think that if it
were uncut it would be the second, but of course cutting takes away a great deal." He held
up the blazing red stone, about the size of a chestnut, between his finger and thumb for a
moment, and then threw it carelessly back into its drawer. "Come into the smoking-room," he
said; "you will need some little refreshment, for they say that sight-seeing is the most exhausting
occupation in the world."

CHAPTER IV. FROM CLIME TO CLIME

The chamber in which the bewildered Robert now found himself was more luxurious, if less rich,
than any which he had yet seen. Low settees of claret-coloured plush were scattered in orderly
disorder over a mossy Eastern carpet. Deep lounges, reclining sofas, American rocking-chairs,
all were to be had for the choosing. One end of the room was walled by glass, and appeared
to open upon a luxuriant hot-house. At the further end a double line of gilt rails supported
a profusion of the most recent magazines and periodicals. A rack at each side of the inlaid
fireplace sustained a long line of the pipes of all places and nations--English cherrywoods,
French briars, German china-bowls, carved meerschaums, scented cedar and myall-wood, with Eastern
narghiles, Turkish chibooques, and two great golden-topped hookahs. To right and left were
a series of small lockers, extending in a treble row for the whole length of the room, with
the names of the various brands of tobacco scrolled in ivory work across them. Above were other
larger tiers of polished oak, which held cigars and cigarettes.

"Try that Damascus settee," said the master of the house, as he threw himself into a rocking-chair.
"It is from the Sultan's upholsterer. The Turks have a very good notion of comfort. I am a
confirmed smoker myself, Mr. McIntyre, so I have been able, perhaps, to check my architect
here more than in most of the other departments. Of pictures, for example, I know nothing,
as you would very speedily find out. On a tobacco, I might, perhaps, offer an opinion. Now
these"--he drew out some long, beautifully-rolled, mellow-coloured cigars--"these are really
something a little out of the common. Do try one."

Robert lit the weed which was offered to him, and leaned back luxuriously amid his cushions,
gazing through the blue balmy fragrant cloud-wreaths at the extraordinary man in the dirty
pea-jacket who spoke of millions as another might of sovereigns. With his pale face, his sad,
languid air, and his bowed shoulders, it was as though he were crushed down under the weight
of his own gold. There was a mute apology, an attitude of deprecation in his manner and speech,
which was strangely at variance with the immense power which he wielded. To Robert the whole
whimsical incident had been intensely interesting and amusing. His artistic nature blossomed
out in this atmosphere of perfect luxury and comfort, and he was conscious of a sense of repose
and of absolute sensual contentment such as he had never before experienced.

"Shall it be coffee, or Rhine wine, or Tokay, or perhaps something stronger," asked Raffles
Haw, stretching out his hand to what looked like a piano-board projecting from the wall. "I
can recommend the Tokay. I have it from the man who supplies the Emperor of Austria, though
I think I may say that I get the cream of it."

He struck twice upon one of the piano-notes, and sat expectant. With a sharp click at the end
of ten seconds a sliding shutter flew open, and a small tray protruded bearing two long tapering
Venetian glasses filled with wine.

"It works very nicely," said Raffles Haw. "It is quite a new thing--never before done, as far
as I know. You see the names of the various wines and so on printed on the notes. By pressing
the note down I complete an electric circuit which causes the tap in the cellars beneath to
remain open long enough to fill the glass which always stands beneath it. The glasses, you
understand, stand upon a revolving drum, so that there must always be one there. The glasses
are then brought up through a pneumatic tube, which is set working by the increased weight
of the glass when the wine is added to it. It is a pretty little idea. But I am afraid that
I bore you rather with all these petty contrivances. It is a whim of mine to push mechanism
as far as it will go."

"On the contrary, I am filled with interest and wonder," said Robert warmly. "It is as if I
had been suddenly whipped up out of prosaic old England and transferred in an instant to some
enchanted palace, some Eastern home of the Genii. I could not have believed that there existed
upon this earth such adaptation of means to an end, such complete mastery of every detail which
may aid in stripping life of any of its petty worries."

"I have something yet to show you," remarked Raffles Haw; "but we will rest here for a few
minutes, for I wished to have a word with you. How is the cigar?"

"Most excellent."

"It was rolled in Louisiana in the old slavery days. There is nothing made like them now. The
man who had them did not know their value. He let them go at merely a few shillings apiece.
Now I want you to do me a favour, Mr. McIntyre."

"I shall be so glad."

"You can see more or less how I am situated. I am a complete stranger here. With the well-to-do
classes I have little in common. I am no society man. I don't want to call or be called on.
I am a student in a small way, and a man of quiet tastes. I have no social ambitions at all.
Do you understand?"

"Entirely."

"On the other hand, my experience of the world has been that it is the rarest thing to be able
to form a friendship with a poorer man--I mean with a man who is at all eager to increase his
income. Then we continued our way fast. We did not in Lulu
Njiwung or in other small establishments stop, but drove directly to Batu Sala, to renew the acquaintance
with its inhabitants and the chiefs Barth present. Unfortunately, there was the chief parenchyma with
his wife in Long Tepai and we were only received by his brother Bang in the gallery. Between
him and Kwing Irang on the floor, sitting, leaning back against the outer wall leaning, I started
thinking about everything they had experienced since my absence and to talk about the crop
prospects. The presence the controller, who appeared on the other side sat Kwings to intimidate the
timid Bang, I used therefore an opportune moment to imagine the two together and said, then about indifferent
things further. When, after some time of the Controller of interesting conversation involved,
it was Kwing Irang fürangebracht me to his father to lead Bo Djo, the chief of a small, is on
the Long-Glat living tribe. I the old man was treated in 1897 and now again he needed my help, because he
was suffering from bronchitis and malaria. He expressed his pleasure at my coming, asked after
his daughter Anna and their son Uniang slope and wanted to know why they do not had come along.
I did not dare to say that his daughter for our fighting cocks did not have can travel on.
Kwing Irang, the patient uncomfortable touching removed, and I looked at my surroundings at leisure
now, after I had promised the old man, him the following morning to receive medical treatment.
In this from of old wealthy establishment There were many beautiful old things and I immediately
began the tall, decorated with beads Hat by Bo Djose daughter, who headed the home to glory, yea,
I asked myself who made her the pretty embroidered skirt. My interest was great applause, and so was
allowed to I also see other beautiful things. On some items I made for provisional Negotiations to
initiate an offer. On my return to the big house, I met various acquaintances from the past
and therefore went in good spirits after our gallery before the chief home, where they had
prepared everything for a meal and the night and Barth still in conversation with Bang deepened
sat.


"I know that dress pretty well," he said. "It is my sister Laura whom you describe."

"Your sister! Really! Why, there is a resemblance, now that my attention is called to it. I
saw her the other day, and wondered who she might be. She lives with you, of course?"

"Yes; my father, she, and I live together at Elmdene."

"Where I hope to have the pleasure of making their acquaintance. You have finished your cigar?
Have another, or try a pipe. To the real smoker all is mere trifling save the pipe. I have
most brands of tobacco here. The lockers are filled on the Monday, and on Saturday they are
handed over to the old folk at the alms-houses, so I manage to keep it pretty fresh always.
Well, if you won't take anything else, perhaps you would care to see one or two of the other
effects which I have devised. On this side is the armoury, and beyond it the library. My collection
of books is a limited one; there are just over the fifty thousand volumes. But it is to some
extent remarkable for quality. I have a Visigoth Bible of the fifth century, which I rather
fancy is unique; there is a 'Biblia Pauperum' of 1430; a MS. of Genesis done upon mulberry
leaves, probably of the second century; a 'Tristan and Iseult' of the eighth century; and some
hundred black-letters, with five very fine specimens of Schoffer and Fust. But those you may
turn over any wet afternoon when you have nothing better to do. Meanwhile, I have a little
device connected with this smoking-room which may amuse you. Light this other cigar. Now sit
with me upon this lounge which stands at the further end of the room."

The sofa in question was in a niche which was lined in three sides and above with perfectly
clear transparent crystal. As they sat down the master of the house drew a cord which pulled
out a crystal shutter behind them, so that they were enclosed on all sides in a great box of
glass, so pure and so highly polished that its presence might very easily be forgotten. A number
of golden cords with crystal handles hung down into this small chamber, and appeared to be
connected with a long shining bar outside.

"Now, where would you like to smoke your cigar?" said Raffles Haw, with a twinkle in his demure
eyes. "Shall we go to India, or to Egypt, or to China, or to--"

"To South America," said Robert.

There was a twinkle, a whirr, and a sense of motion. The young artist gazed about him in absolute
amazement. Look where he would all round were tree-ferns and palms with long drooping creepers,
and a blaze of brilliant orchids. Smoking-room, house, England, all were gone, and he sat on
a settee in the heart of a virgin forest of the Amazon. It was no mere optical delusion or
trick. He could see the hot steam rising from the tropical undergrowth, the heavy drops falling
from the huge green leaves, the very grain and fibre of the rough bark which clothed the trunks.
Even as he gazed a green mottled snake curled noiselessly over a branch above his head, and
a bright-coloured paroquet broke suddenly from amid the foliage and flashed off among the tree-trunks.
Robert gazed around, speechless with surprise, and finally turned upon his host a face in which
curiosity was not un-mixed with a suspicion of fear.

"People have been burned for less, have they not?" cried Raffles Haw laughing heartily. "Have
you had enough of the Amazon? What do you say to a spell of Egypt?"

Again the whirr, the swift flash of passing objects, and in an instant a huge desert stretched
on every side of them, as far as the eye could reach. In the foreground a clump of five palm-trees
towered into the air, with a profusion of rough cactus-like plants bristling from their base.
On the other side rose a rugged, gnarled, grey monolith, carved at the base into a huge scarabaeus.
A group of lizards played about on the surface of the old carved stone. Beyond, the yellow
sand stretched away into furthest space, where the dim mirage mist played along the horizon.

"Mr. Haw, I cannot understand it!" Robert grasped the velvet edge of the settee, and gazed
wildly about him.

"The effect is rather startling, is it not? This Egyptian desert is my favourite when I lay
myself out for a contemplative smoke. It seems strange that tobacco should have come from the
busy, practical West. It has much more affinity for the dreamy, languid East. But perhaps you
would like to run over to China for a change?"

"Not to-day," said Robert, passing his hand over his forehead. "I feel rather confused by all
these wonders, and indeed I think that they have affected my nerves a little. Besides, it is
time that I returned to my prosaic Elmdene, if I can find my way out of this wilderness to
which you have transplanted me. But would you ease my mind, Mr. Haw, by showing me how this
thing is done?"

"It is the merest toy--a complex plaything, nothing more. Allow me to explain. I have a line
of very large greenhouses which extends from one end of my smoking-room. These different houses
are kept at varying degrees of heat and humidity so as to reproduce the exact climates of Egypt,
China, and the rest. You see, our crystal chamber is a tramway running with a minimum of friction
along a steel rod. By pulling this or that handle I regulate how far it shall go, and it travels,
as you have seen, with amazing speed. The effect of my hot-houses is heightened by the roofs
being invariably concealed by skies, which are really very admirably painted, and by the introduction
of birds and other creatures, which seem to flourish quite as well in artificial as in natural
heat. This explains the South American effect."

"But not the Egyptian."

"No. It is certainly rather clever. I had the best man in France, at least the best at those
large effects, to paint in that circular background. You understand, the palms, cacti, obelisk,
and so on, are perfectly genuine, and so is the sand for fifty yards or so, and I defy the
keenest-eyed man in England to tell where the deception commences. It is the familiar and perhaps
rather meretricious effect of a circular panorama, but carried out in the most complete manner.
Was there any other point?"

"The crystal box? Why was it?"

"To preserve my guests from the effects of the changes of temperature. It would be a poor kindness
to bring them back to my smoking-room drenched through, and with the seeds of a violent cold.
The crystal has to be kept warm, too, otherwise vapour would deposit, and you would have your
view spoiled. But must you really go? Then here we are back in the smoking-room. I hope that
it will not be your last visit by many a one. And if I may come down to Elmdene I should be
very glad to do so. This is the way through the museum."

As Robert McIntyre emerged from the balmy aromatic atmosphere of the great house, into the
harsh, raw, biting air of an English winter evening, he felt as though he had been away for
a long visit in some foreign country. Time is measured by impressions, and so vivid and novel
had been his feelings, that weeks and weeks might have elapsed since his chat with the smoke-grimed
stranger in the road. He walked along with his head in a whirl, his whole mind possessed and
intoxicated by the one idea of the boundless wealth and the immense power of this extraordinary
stranger. Small and sordid and mean seemed his own Elmdene as he approached it, and he passed
over its threshold full of restless discontent against himself and his surroundings.

CHAPTER V. LAURA'S REQUEST.

That night after supper Robert McIntyre poured forth all that he had seen to his father and
to his sister. So full was he of the one subject that it was a relief to him to share his knowledge
with others. Rather for his own sake, then, than for theirs he depicted vividly all the marvels
which he had seen; the profusion of wealth, the regal treasure-house of gems, the gold, the
marble, the extraordinary devices, the absolute lavishness and complete disregard for money
which was shown in every detail. For an hour he pictured with glowing words all the wonders
which had been shown him, and ended with some pride by describing the request which Mr. Raffles
Haw had made, and the complete confidence which he had placed in him.

His words had a very different effect upon his two listeners. Old McIntyre leaned back in his
chair with a bitter smile upon his lips, his thin face crinkled into a thousand puckers, and
his small eyes shining with envy and greed. His lean yellow hand upon the table was clenched
until the knuckles gleamed white in the lamplight. Laura, on the other hand, leaned forward,
her lips parted, drinking in her brother's words with a glow of colour upon either cheek. It
seemed to Robert, as he glanced from one to the other of them, that he had never seen his father
look so evil, or his sister so beautiful.

"Who is the fellow, then?" asked the old man after a considerable pause. "I hope he got all
this in an honest fashion. Five millions in jewels, you say. Good gracious me! Ready to give
it away, too, but afraid of pauperising any one. You can tell him, Robert, that you know of
one very deserving case which has not the slightest objection to being pauperised."

"But who can he possibly be, Robert?" cried Laura. "Haw cannot be his real name. He must be
some disguised prince, or perhaps a king in exile. Oh, I should have loved to have seen those
diamonds and the emeralds! I always think that emeralds suit dark people best. You must tell
me again all about that museum, Robert."

"I don't think that he is anything more than he pretends to be," her brother answered. "He
has the plain, quiet manners of an ordinary middle-class Englishman. There was no particular
polish that I could see. He knew a little about books and pictures, just enough to appreciate
them, but nothing more. No, I fancy that he is a man quite in our own position of life, who
has in some way inherited a vast sum. Of course it is difficult for me to form an estimate,
but I should judge that what I saw to-day--house, pictures, jewels, books, and so on--could
never have been bought under twenty millions, and I am sure that that figure is entirely an
under-statement."

"I never knew but one Haw," said old McIntyre, drumming his fingers on the table; "he was a
foreman in my pin-fire cartridge-case department. But he was an elderly single man. Well, I
hope he got it all honestly. I hope the money is clean."

"And really, really, he is coming to see us!" cried Laura, clapping her hands. "Oh, when do
you think he will come, Robert? Do give me warning. Do you think it will be to-morrow?"

"I am sure I cannot say."

"I should so love to see him. I don't know when I have been so interested."

"Why, you have a letter there," remarked Robert. "From Hector, too, by the foreign stamp. How
is he?"

"It only came this evening. I have not opened it yet. To tell the truth, I have been so interested
in your story that I had forgotten all about it. Poor old Hector! It is from Madeira." She
glanced rapidly over the four pages of straggling writing in the young sailor's bold schoolboyish
hand. "Oh, he is all right," she said. "They had a gale on the way out, and that sort of thing,
but he is all right now. He thinks he may be back by March. I wonder whether your new friend
will come to-morrow--your knight of the enchanted Castle."

"Hardly so soon, I should fancy."

"If he should be looking about for an investment. Robert," said the father, "you won't forget
to tell him what a fine opening there is now in the gun trade. With my knowledge, and a few
thousands at my back, I could bring him in his thirty per cent. as regular as the bank. After
all, he must lay out his money somehow. He cannot sink it all in books and precious stones.
I am sure that I could give him the highest references."

"It may be a long time before he comes, father," said Robert coldly; "and when he does I am
afraid that I can hardly use his friendship as a means of advancing your interest."

"We are his equals, father," cried Laura with spirit. "Would you put us on the footing of beggars?
He would think we cared for him only for his money. I wonder that you should think of such
a thing."

"If I had not thought of such things where would your education have been, miss?" retorted
the angry old man; and Robert stole quietly away to his room, whence amid his canvases he could
still hear the hoarse voice and the clear in their never-ending family jangle. More and more
sordid seemed the surroundings of his life, and more and more to be valued the peace which
money can buy.

Breakfast had hardly been cleared in the morning, and Robert had not yet ascended to his work,
when there came a timid tapping at the door, and there was Raffles Haw on the mat outside.
Robert ran out and welcomed him with all cordiality.

"I am afraid that I am a very early visitor," he said apologetically; "but I often take a walk
after breakfast." He had no traces of work upon him now, but was trim and neat with a dark
suit, and carefully brushed hair. "You spoke yesterday of your work. Perhaps, early as it is,
you would allow me the privilege of looking over your studio?"

"Pray step in, Mr. Haw," cried Robert, all in a flutter at this advance from so munificent
a patron of art; "I should be only too happy to show you such little work as I have on hand,
though, indeed, I am almost afraid when I think how familiar you are with some of the greatest
masterpieces. Allow me to introduce you to my father and to my sister Laura."

Old McIntyre bowed low and rubbed his thin hands together; but the young lady gave a gasp of
surprise, and stared with widely-opened eyes at the millionaire. Maw stepped forward, however,
and shook her quietly by the hand,

"I expected to find that it was you," he said. "I have already met your sister, Mr. McIntyre,
on the very first day that I came here. We took shelter in a shed from a snowstorm, and had
quite a pleasant little chat."

"I had no notion that I was speaking to the owner of the Hall," said Laura in some confusion.
"How funnily things turn out, to be sure!"

"I had often wondered who it was that I spoke to, but it was only yesterday that I discovered.
What a sweet little place you have here! It must be charming in summer. Why, if it were not
for this hill my windows would look straight across at yours."

"Yes, and we should see all your beautiful plantations," said Laura, standing beside him in
the window. "I was wishing only yesterday that the hill was not there."

"Really! I shall be happy to have it removed for you if you would like it."

"Good gracious!" cried Laura. "Why, where would you put it?"

"Oh, they could run it along the line and dump it anywhere. It is not much of a hill. A few
thousand men with proper machinery, and a line of rails brought right up to them could easily
dispose of it in a few months."

"And the poor vicar's house?" Laura asked, laughing.

"I think that might be got over. We could run him up a facsimile, which would, perhaps, be
more convenient to him. Your brother will tell you that I am quite an expert at the designing
of houses. But, seriously, if you think it would be an improvement I will see what can be done."

"Not for the world, Mr. Haw. Why, I should be a traitor to the whole village if I were to encourage
such a scheme. The hill is the one thing which gives Tamfield the slightest individuality.
It would be the height of selfishness to sacrifice it in order to improve the view from Elmdene."

"It is a little box of a place this, Mr. Haw," said old McIntyre. "I should think you must
feel quite stifled in it after your grand mansion, of which my son tells me such wonders. But
we were not always accustomed to this sort of thing, Mr. Haw. Humble as I stand here, there
was a time, and not so long ago, when I could write as many figures on a cheque as any gunmaker
in Birmingham. It was--"

"He is a dear discontented old papa," cried Laura, throwing her arm round him in a caressing
manner. He gave a sharp squeak and a grimace of pain, which he endeavoured to hide by an outbreak
of painfully artificial coughing.

"Shall we go upstairs?" said Robert hurriedly, anxious to divert his guest's attention from
this little domestic incident. "My studio is the real atelier, for it is right up under the
tiles. I shall lead the way, if you will have the kindness to follow me."

Leaving Laura and Mr. McIntyre, they went up together to the workroom. Mr. Haw stood long in
front of the "Signing of Magna Charta," and the "Murder of Thomas a Becket," screwing up his
eyes and twitching nervously at his beard, while Robert stood by in anxious expectancy.

"And how much are these?" asked Raffles Haw at last.

"I priced them at a hundred apiece when I sent them to London."

"Then the best I can wish you is that the day may come when you would gladly give ten times
the sum to have them back again. Their souls go to Apu Kesio, find them in a Abundance
of food, indulge and do not need to work.

In the beginning of this chapter has been said that the Bahau not only themselves, write but also
to all animate and inanimate beings on earth, the possession of souls; they believe that the
people and their pets: dogs and pigs and chickens, and also the Deer, gray monkeys and wild boars
of two souls, other animals, plants and dead However, only objects
of a soul to be inhabited.

Consider first the souls of the people, their character and fate.

All suffering mishaps from anxiety and dreams of torturing and to diseases, Bahau writes to the
circumstance that a part of his personality at times his body leaves, he calls this loosely affiliated
with his body part: Bruwa (Malay: mata kanan = right eye). A second part of his personality, his
life with his Body is connected, is called the Bahau: ton Luwa (Malay,
mata kiba = left eye).

This two parts of the intellectual Bahau, his two souls play, both in his life than to his death
an important role.

The always restless Bruwa flees the human body, according to the priests, in the form of an animal:
a fish, bird or snake.

The fish-shaped promises a long, snake form a short life on earth. The main residence is the
Bruwa the head of man, it leaves the body through the apex. Should a child is therefore on his head,
his Bruwa escapes easily.

One of the main tasks of the priests is to Bruwa, the people even at small events, such as fear and
depression, especially in case of illness, leaving zurückzulocken back into the body. They
do it with the help of the spirits from the Lagan and Apu but in
very different ways.

Sometimes can calm even the Bruwa by that a beautiful piece of stuff is put on the head of the
patient, otherwise split the priestess in the dark to the main bill, leaving the escaped soul
back into their old Resident return.

On the death of man leaves the Bruwa the body forever and moved to Aras Kesio. This much I
can learn, the soul dwells not here forever, but betakes later to another location, Langit
Mengun, and is only there for a real, eternal continue living spirit.

The path has to travel to the Bruwa Apu Kesio is extremely troublesome and dangerous; therefore
gives you to the deceased all his soul on the journey and later could be useful when moving around
the other side. These include: a complete and magnificent Dresses equipment according to the
old pattern, beautiful jewelry, weapons, and equipment of all kinds; Gong, placed near the
grave or graves of chiefs in the splendor (salong) down are, furthermore,
a tiny ladder to allow the soul to climb rocks and precipices to cross
and a supply of food.

To Bruwa attacks against evil spirits to protect the road, it gives her in a basket (briut)
strangely shaped rocks and Animal teeth, to attract the good spirits on the other hand a bamboo container
with sugar cane juice.

The Bruwa betakes not immediately after the death of people on the
hike, but holds as long as have the members of the grief is not stored
in the vicinity of the corpse on.

The souls of the Kapuas Dayak change this time on the mountain Batu Tilung Mandai as staging.
When putting the grief it is up to the Priest, by holding a mela for ensure that the soul
transported safely to Apu Kesio (anter) is.

The Bruwa begins its journey beneath the earth and rivers, and has,
besides the usual Terrain difficulty even bridges violently swinging
tree trunks and routes from the to overcome the sharp swords.

If they do not ignore these obstacles, is they perish; crashes for example from the bridge into the
river, so they eat the fish and is destroyed. The immortality of the Bruwa is thus limited.

The
souls of the saju Matei, who died a beautiful death, and Matei dja-ak, a bad Death dead walk,
first on communal paths, but then finds trisection instead of the way: the right is a way to
Apu Kesio, left out two ways in which the a sword, the other is marked by gongs, other Anfenthaltsorten
that for the deaths of a violent death are determined. The victim, slain, Suicides, etc down
the route of the swords, the women and children, during or died shortly
after birth, whereas the the gong are.

What does the second soul of Bahau, the ton Luwa concerns, it is his life with his body firmly.
Only when the body has died, leaving out the material soul Envelope. The ton Luwa remains
on the cemetery, where she wanders around as long, until they finally to an evil spirit. Go Bahau
therefore at a cemetery over, they throw the clay Luwa to calm them
to pieces with food, tobacco and the like, even they have not for
them and not talk about them.

The ton Luwa have the ability during their stay at the burial site in animal form, appear as a
deer and gray monkeys.

Therefore, the Bahau these animals eat only when hunger forces them to do so. Since the Malays
eat no pork, Bahau believe that their souls go after death sometimes
in pigs.

As evidence for the occasional residence of the ton Luwa in animals led me to Mendalam Kajan the
following stories of

A man went out to Silem, that is to hunt with a blowgun.

Although it all day running around, he had no success, and he finally fell asleep on a tired
and depressed A burial place. Appeared to him a beautiful girl with whom he the rest of the night
spent. On waking in the morning, the man noticed that a deer lying next to him, hurriedly
got up and fled. From this he saw that the soul of the girl during the day in a deer was staying.

Another
hunter joined at one point the forest where he was not a long time been on a house that was inhabited
by large, dark man, a little further was a second home, in which beautiful women lived, and in
a third home he found people still other kinds With all these people talking to the hunters, according
to them, chewing betel, and slept at last on the side of one of the
women.

When he awoke in the night from the cold and to heat lit a fire,
he noticed that a gun racks on the wall and into a tree branch occupants
of the house turned into gray monkeys.

He then hastily took to flight. In passing Running he still saw that the people turned in the other
two houses in deer.

Let us now turn to the souls of animals, plants and inanimate beings.

The Bahau indicate those animals that have only one soul, as Tular lan (real Animals), the pets,
and also the deer, gray monkeys and wild boars, however, are in possession
the same souls as humans, and a ton of Bruwa Luwa and can therefore
also temporarily as people live and how they live in houses.

Also this gave me the Kajan through a narrative the evidence:

A man who had gone with his blowgun to hunt wandered long through the wood, until he reached a
house that was inhabited by beautiful women.

With one of these women lived together for several months, one morning she told him, however, that
it is actually a bawui (wild boar) and that they from now on no longer in their must live on
human form, but must return to the forest. She had the Man, however, become very fond of him
and put his heart to always be there when the Hunter of his tribe
hunted wild boar, as it could easily happen that they are among the
victims of hunting.

Then she took leave and went with many other women on the banks of a pond that lay before the
house, and in these they plunged, and came on the opposite bank in the shape of wild boar reappeared.
The animals were ascended a hill and disappeared into the dense forest.

Soon after the man had returned to his village, his fellow tribesmen killed really a wild boar.
At a scar on the side of the animal recognized the man's former mistress
and therefore took possession of the corpse.

Great was his surprise when he slit of the Chest and stomach the whole animal was filled with
gold. He became the richest man in the whole Village. The Bahau hunt wild pigs, therefore,
never without their souls before a sacrifice have to.

Have a Bahau kule, shot the dreaded Borneo between Panther, they are their souls are very concerned,
because the Panthers soul is almost more powerful than theirs. You therefore exceed eight times
over the slaughtered animal under the mantra: "kule, Bruwa ika hida Bruwa akui "=" Panther, thy
soul under my soul ". be reached at home Hunters, dogs and weapons rubbed with chicken blood,
to soothe their souls and the Escape to prevent.

The Bahau eat chicken meat that is so much that they taste the same also expect from their soul, they also
believe that you have the pleasure of the blood alone sufficient. In addition to the men for eight
days, both during the day than at night swim.

After the course those eight days they have to go again on the hunt.

Have the hunters in the wild boar hunting of prey cut off the tail, they have a correctly also
go hunting after eight days again, they have killed a bear, they are already After six days
back on the hunt.

The plant is considered by the Bahau but only one soul, but this is often very demanding and takes
revenge for any violation or neglect of the people. Therefore, Kajan do after the construction
of a house, where they have many trees need to abuse, buses for a
year, that it follows a period when many of them banned (lali) is
under including the killing of bears, tigers, cats, snakes, etc.

In
the Ulu Ajar Dayak at Mandai, south of the upper Kapuas, are similar
but more rigorous Rules for building houses.

There, the duration of the buses used mainly depends on the Species from, for a house made of
precious wood iron one has three years of various Tidbits include: the lesser souls species
do about more modest claims.

Such a prohibition period culminating in a celebration (bet lali). Plays the head-hunting,
but only pro forma, also have a role to borrow namely a old skull from a neighboring tribe.

a nature are very different the souls of the arrow poisons delivered
Bäumeder Täsembaum (.

Antiaris Lesch toxicaria) seems to be difficult to satisfy, for only rarely is the Heartwood
of this tree fragrant, this is only the case if the person, who falls to bring the right victim
understands. The same applies to the present in East Borneo Camphor
tree.

The rice has a soul and the spirit of his soul is good for the crop failure of great importance,
therefore, the priests, as we shall see later, when Rice cultivation
is a very complex ceremonial meeting.

Peculiar way represent the Bahau, as I said, even the dead being their environment animate and
endowed with human qualities before. For this reason, throws a Kajan, the move is difficult to
destroy an object by burning it without hesitation in the river, in the belief that it is
in the water but could still save themselves by swimming.

A particularly considerate treatment experienced at the Mendalam Kajan and all Busang speaking
tribes of the Mahakam the souls of those objects in human life have
played an important role and will be collected during his lifetime
and after death its owner in a large pack basket, called stored.

Although no one cares Next to the pack, and it is left when leaving the house back under the roof;
However, no one would dare to destroy him. (See Chapter subs)

In the preceding we have seen the ideas that the Bahau of itself, their earthly environment and
have formed the powers above them, let us see Now the relationships that exist between the spiritual
and human world.

The need for their lifestyle as a guideline and some certainty about their future gain, has in Bahau give
rise to the belief that they are the good spirits Apu the Lagan through the agency of animals
and striking events, the will and Allfather announce the plans. This conviction has an elaborate
system of Signs developed, not only in major enterprises, but also in daily Life, specifically
in the various strains in different degrees, is of great importance has acquired.

The number of these signs is a very large and their species are very different, the most important,
which, under all circumstances at the Bahau valid, are taken from
the bird Kluge.

This is mainly a question of whether some birds the right or left of the observer or fly up
to hear her voice can be. The two most authoritative of the fortune-telling birds the Bahau are hisit
or sit (Anthreptes malaccensis) and telandjang (Platilophus coronatus),
both very common in Borneo honey birds.

The set also Kenjastämme much emphasis on the appearance of a red Trogonart (Trogon elegans) and
a common brown hawk with milchweissem head (Habiastur intermedia).

The fortune-telling animals also includes the deer, kidjang (Cervulus muntjac) and a black snake with
4 white stripes and a lacquer-red head, belly and tail (Doliophis
bivirgatus Boie).

Since a careful questioning and follow the signs to the Bahau not enough, appeared order Tamei
Tingeis goodwill and thus a happy life without sickness and accident to give, they invented a system of
prohibitions, a religious adat to them Although any freedom of action
behaves, their anxious minds, however, a great calm granted.

It would take too long at this point to the many types of prohibitions discuss it further, they
pervade the entire life of the Bahau so that the reader with the Residents of Central Borneo
at the same time will learn about this religious adat. Some Examples may illustrate, however,
what the Bahau in general with the constantly recurring them in Words "pemali" and "lali" call.

In
pemali (noun) and lali (adjective) is in the Busangsprache everything that prohibitions relating
to religious, understood. The word lali has the same meaning as the Polynesian taboo, such as the
Malay pantang and buling in Kapuas-Malay. The Dayak Send your lali in a double sense: the
first time, it means "forbidden" in general, for example is explained on the death of a chief
and the establishment of the river for lali, ie, they must be entered by any stranger, it is also
lali, at certain times to eat something, do tell. The other time is lali in the sense of "consecrated"
used, eg: "luma lali" = "consecrated rice field" that will be used only for religious purposes may,
"haureg lali"

= "consecrated hat" that are placed only in religious ceremonies How can so on the adjective
"lali" is also the related noun "pemali" a double significance. With "pemali" supports all of
the prescribed religious adat Prohibitions and sacred objects known.
All symbolic objects, through which the priests recite the spirits
of their wishes, are called "pemali", as are all objects that are
generally used in worship.

Although the Bahau independently with
the help of good spirits and with the sign-Father connect, they may
still hold a special agency by persons appointed to be necessary. In vain the sturdy
beggar cringed at his gate, and in vain the crafty letter-writer poured out a thousand fabulous
woes upon paper. Robert was astonished when he brought some tale of trouble to the Hall to
observe how swift was the perception of the recluse, and how unerringly he could detect a flaw
in a narrative, or lay his finger upon the one point which rang false. Were a man strong enough
to help himself, or of such a nature as to profit nothing by help, none would he get from the
master of the New Hall. In vain, for example, did old McIntyre throw himself continually across
the path of the millionaire, and impress upon him, by a thousand hints and innuendoes, the
hard fortune which had been dealt him, and the ease with which his fallen greatness might be
restored. Raffles Haw listened politely, bowed, smiled, but never showed the slightest inclination
to restore the querulous old gunmaker to his pedestal.

But if the recluse's wealth was a lure which drew the beggars from far and near, as the lamp
draws the moths, it had the same power of attraction upon another and much more dangerous class.
Strange hard faces were seen in the village street, prowling figures were marked at night stealing
about among the fir plantations, and warning messages arrived from city police and county constabulary
to say that evil visitors were known to have taken train to Tamfield. But if, as Raffles Haw
held, there were few limits to the power of immense wealth, it possessed, among other things,
the power of self-preservation, as one or two people were to learn to their cost.

"Would you mind stepping up to the Hall?" he said one morning, putting his head in at the door
of the Elmdene sitting-room. "I have something there that might amuse you." He was on intimate
terms with the McIntyres now, and there were few days on which they did not see something of
each other.

They gladly accompanied him, all three, for such invitations were usually the prelude of some
agreeable surprise which he had in store for them.

"I have shown you a tiger," he remarked to Laura, as he led them into the dining-room. "I will
now show you something quite as dangerous, though not nearly so pretty." There was an arrangement
of mirrors at one end of the room, with a large circular glass set at a sharp angle at the top.

"Look in there--in the upper glass," said Raffles Haw.

"Good gracious! what dreadful-looking men!" cried Laura. "There are two of them, and I don't
know which is the worse."

"What on earth are they doing?" asked Robert. "They appear to be sitting on the ground in some
sort of a cellar."

"Most dangerous-looking characters," said the old man. "I should strongly recommend you to
send for a policeman."

"I have done so. But it seems a work of supererogation to take them to prison, for they are
very snugly in prison already. However, I suppose that the law must have its own."

"And who are they, and how did they come there? Do tell us, Mr. Haw."

Laura McIntyre had a pretty beseeching way with her, which went rather piquantly with her queenly
style of beauty.

"I know no more than you do. They were not there last night, and they are here this morning,
so I suppose it is a safe inference that they came in during the night, especially as my servants
found the window open when they came down. As to their character and intentions, I should think
that is pretty legible upon their faces. They look a pair of beauties, don't they?"

"But I cannot understand in the least where they are," said Robert, staring into the mirror.
"One of them has taken to butting his head against the wall. No, he is bending so that the
other may stand upon his back. He is up there now, and the light is shining upon his face.
What a bewildered ruffianly face it is too. I should so like to sketch it. It would be a study
for the picture I am thinking of of the Reign of Terror."

"I have caught them in my patent burglar trap," said Haw. "They are my first birds, but I have
no doubt that they will not be the last. I will show you how it works. It is quite a new thing.
This flooring is now as strong as possible, but every night I disconnect it. It is done simultaneously
by a central machine for every room on the ground-floor. When the floor is disconnected one
may advance three or four steps, either from the window or door, and then that whole part turns
on a hinge and slides you into a padded strong-room beneath, where you may kick your heels
until you are released. There is a central oasis between the hinges, where the furniture is
grouped for the night. The flooring flies into position again when the weight of the intruder
is removed, and there he must bide, while I can always take a peep at him by this simple little
optical arrangement. I thought it might amuse you to have a look at my prisoners before I handed
them over to the head-constable, who I see is now coming up the avenue."

"The poor burglars!" cried Laura. "It is no wonder that they look bewildered, for I suppose,
Mr. Haw, that they neither know where they are, nor how they came there. I am so glad to know
that you guard yourself in this way, for I have often thought that you ran a danger."

"Have you so?" said he, smiling round at her. "I think that my house is fairly burglar-proof.
I have one window which may be used as an entrance, the centre one of the three of my laboratory.
I keep it so because, to tell the truth, I am somewhat of a night prowler myself, and when
I treat myself to a ramble under the stars I like to slip in and out without ceremony. It would,
however, be a fortunate rogue who picked the only safe entrance out of a hundred, and even
then he might find pitfalls. Here is the constable, but you must not go, for Miss McIntyre
has still something to see in my little place. If you will step into the billiard-room I shall
be with you in a very few moments."

CHAPTER VIII. A BILLIONAIRE'S PLANS.

That morning, and many mornings both before and afterwards, were spent by Laura at the New
Hall examining the treasures of the museum, playing with the thousand costly toys which Raffles
Haw had collected, or sallying out from the smoking-room in the crystal chamber into the long
line of luxurious hot-houses. Haw would walk demurely beside her as she flitted from one thing
to another like a butterfly among flowers, watching her out of the corner of his eyes, and
taking a quiet pleasure in her delight. The only joy which his costly possessions had ever
brought him was that which came from the entertainment of others.

By this time his attentions towards Laura McIntyre had become so marked that they could hardly
be mistaken. He visibly brightened in her presence, and was never weary of devising a thousand
methods of surprising and pleasing her. Every morning ere the McIntyre family were afoot a
great bouquet of strange and beautiful flowers was brought down by a footman from the Hall
to brighten their breakfast-table. Her slightest wish, however fantastic, was instantly satisfied,
if human money or ingenuity could do it. When the frost lasted a stream was dammed and turned
from its course that it might flood two meadows, solely in order that she might have a place
upon which to skate. With the thaw there came a groom every afternoon with a sleek and beautiful
mare in case Miss McIntyre should care to ride. Everything went to show that she had made a
conquest of the recluse of the New Hall.

And she on her side played her part admirably. With female adaptiveness she fell in with his
humour, and looked at the world through his eyes. Her talk was of almshouses and free libraries,
of charities and of improvements. He had never a scheme to which she could not add some detail
making it more complete and more effective. To Haw it seemed that at last he had met a mind
which was in absolute affinity with his own. Here was a help-mate, who could not only follow,
but even lead him in the path which he had chosen.

Neither Robert nor his father could fail to see what was going forward, but to the latter nothing
could possibly be more acceptable than a family tie which should connect him, however indirectly,
with a man of vast fortune. The glamour of the gold bags had crept over Robert also, and froze
the remonstrance upon his lips. It was very pleasant to have the handling of all this wealth,
even as a mere agent. Why should he do or say what might disturb their present happy relations?
It was his sister's business, not his; and as to Hector Spurling, he must take his chance as
other men did. It was obviously best not to move one way or the other in the matter.

But to Robert himself, his work and his surroundings were becoming more and more irksome. His
joy in his art had become less keen since he had known Raffles Haw. It seemed so hard to toll
and slave to earn such a trifling sum, when money could really be had for the asking. It was
true that he had asked for none, but large sums were for ever passing through his hands for
those who were needy, and if he were needy himself his friend would surely not grudge it to
him. So the Roman galleys still remained faintly outlined upon the great canvas, while Robert's
days were spent either in the luxurious library at the Hall, or in strolling about the country
listening to tales of trouble, and returning like a tweed-suited ministering angel to carry
Raffles Haw's help to the unfortunate. It was not an ambitious life, but it was one which was
very congenial to his weak and easy-going nature.

Robert had observed that fits of depression had frequently come upon the millionaire, and it
had sometimes struck him that the enormous sums which he spent had possibly made a serious
inroad into his capital, and that his mind was troubled as to the future. His abstracted manner,
his clouded brow, and his bent head all spoke of a soul which was weighed down with care, and
it was only in Laura's presence that he could throw off the load of his secret trouble. For
five hours a day he buried himself in the laboratory and amused himself with his hobby, but
it was one of his whims that no one, neither any of his servants, nor even Laura or Robert,
should ever cross the threshold of that outlying building. Day after day he vanished into it,
to reappear hours afterwards pale and exhausted, while the whirr of machinery and the smoke
which streamed from his high chimney showed how considerable were the operations which he undertook
single-handed.

"Could I not assist you in any way?" suggested Robert, as they sat together after luncheon
in the smoking-room. "I am convinced that you over-try your strength. I should be so glad to
help you, and I know a little of chemistry."

"Do you, indeed?" said Raffles Haw, raising his eyebrows. "I had no idea of that; it is very
seldom that the artistic and the scientific faculties go together."

"I don't know that I have either particularly developed. But I have taken classes, and I worked
for two years in the laboratory at Sir Josiah Mason's Institute."

"I am delighted to hear it," Haw replied with emphasis. "That may be of great importance to
us. It is very possible--indeed, almost certain--that I shall avail myself of your offer of
assistance, and teach you something of my chemical methods, which I may say differ considerably
from those of the orthodox school. The time, however, is hardly ripe for that. What is it, Jones?"

"A note, sir."

The butler handed it in upon a silver salver. Haw broke the seal and ran his eye over it.

"Tut! tut! It is from Lady Morsley, asking me to the Lord-Lieutenant's ball. I cannot possibly
accept. It is very kind of them, but I do wish they would leave me alone. Very well, Jones.
I shall write. Do you know, Robert, I am often very unhappy."

He frequently called the young artist by his Christian name, especially in his more confidential
moments.

"I have sometimes feared that you were," said the other sympathetically. "But how strange it
seems, you who are yet young, healthy, with every faculty for enjoyment, and a millionaire."

"Ah, Robert," cried Haw, leaning back in his chair, and sending up thick blue wreaths from
his pipe. "You have put your finger upon my trouble. If I were a millionaire I might be happy,
but, alas, I am no millionaire!"

"Good heavens!" gasped Robert.

Cold seemed to shoot to his inmost soul as it flashed upon him that this was a prelude to a
confession of impending bankruptcy, and that all this glorious life, all the excitement and
the colour and change, were about to vanish into thin air.

"No millionaire!" he stammered.

"No, Robert; I am a billionaire--perhaps the only one in the world. That is what is on my mind,
and why I am unhappy sometimes. I feel that I should spend this money--that I should put it
in circulation--and yet it is so hard to do it without failing to do good--without doing positive
harm. I feel my responsibility deeply. It weighs me down. Am I justified in continuing to live
this quiet life when there are so many millions whom I might save and comfort if I could but
reach them?"

Robert heaved a long sigh of relief. "Perhaps you take too grave a view of your responsibilities,"
he said. "Everybody knows that the good which you have done is immense. What more could you
desire? If you really wished to extend your benevolence further, there are organised charities
everywhere which would be very glad of your help."

"I have the names of two hundred and seventy of them," Haw answered. "You must run your eye
over them some time, and see if you can suggest any others. I send my annual mite to each of
them. I don't think there is much room for expansion in that direction."

"Well, really you have done your share, and more than your share. I would settle down to lead
a happy life, and think no more of the matter."

"I could not do that," Haw answered earnestly. "I have not been singled out to wield this immense
power simply in order that I might lead a happy life. I can never believe that. Now, can you
not use your imagination, Robert, and devise methods by which a man who has command of--well,
let us say, for argument's sake, boundless wealth, could benefit mankind by it, without taking
away any one's independence or in any way doing harm?"

"Well, really, now that I come to think of it, it is a very difficult problem," said Robert.

"Now I will submit a few schemes to you, and you may give me your opinion on them. Supposing
that such a man were to buy ten square miles of ground here in Staffordshire, and were to build
upon it a neat city, consisting entirely of clean, comfortable little four-roomed houses, furnished
in a simple style, with shops and so forth, but no public-houses. Supposing, too, that he were
to offer a house free to all the homeless folk, all the tramps, and broken men, and out-of-workers
in Great Britain. Then, having collected them together, let him employ them, under fitting
superintendence, upon some colossal piece of work which would last for many years, and perhaps
be of permanent value to humanity. Give them a good rate of pay, and let their hours of labour
be reasonable, and those of recreation be pleasant. Might you not benefit them and benefit
humanity at one stroke?"

"But what form of work could you devise which would employ so vast a number for so long a time,
and yet not compete with any existing industry? To do the latter would simply mean to shift
the misery from one class to another."

"Precisely so. I should compete with no one. What I thought of doing was of sinking a shaft
through the earth's crust, and of establishing rapid communication with the Antipodes. When
you had got a certain distance down--how far is an interesting mathematical problem--the centre
of gravity would be beneath you, presuming that your boring was not quite directed towards
the centre, and you could then lay down rails and tunnel as if you were on the level."

Then for the first time it flashed into Robert McIntyre's head that his father's chance words
were correct, and that he was in the presence of a madman. His great wealth had clearly turned
his brain, and made him a monomaniac. He nodded indulgently, as when one humours a child.

"It would be very nice," he said. "I have heard, however, that the interior of the earth is
molten, and your workmen would need to be Salamanders."

"The latest scientific data do not bear out the idea that the earth is so hot," answered Raffles
Haw. "It is certain that the increased temperature in coal mines depends upon the barometric
pressure. There are gases in the earth which may be ignited, and there are combustible materials
as we see in the volcanoes; but if we came across anything of the sort in our borings, we could
turn a river or two down the shaft, and get the better of it in that fashion."

"It would be rather awkward if the other end of your shaft came out under the Pacific Ocean,"
said Robert, choking down his inclination to laugh.

"I have had estimates and calculations from the first living engineers--French, English, and
American. The point of exit of the tunnel could be calculated to the yard. That portfolio in
the corner is full of sections, plans, and diagrams. I have agents employed in buying up land,
and if all goes well, we may get to work in the autumn. That is one device which may produce
results. Another is canal-cutting."

"Ah, there you would compete with the railways."

"You don't quite understand. I intend to cut canals through every neck of land where such a
convenience would facilitate commerce. Such a scheme, when unaccompanied by any toll upon vessels,
would, I think, be a very judicious way of helping the human race."

"And where, pray, would you cut the canals?" asked Robert.

"I have a map of the world here," Haw answered, rising, and taking one down from the paper-rack.
"You see the blue pencil marks. Those are the points where I propose to establish communication.
Of course, I should begin by the obvious duty of finishing the Panama business."

"Naturally." The man's lunacy was becoming more and more obvious, and yet there was such precision
and coolness in his manner, that Robert found himself against his own reason endorsing and
speculating over his plans.

"The Isthmus of Corinth also occurs to one. That, however, is a small matter, from either a
financial or an engineering point of view. I propose, however, to make a junction here, through
Kiel between the German Ocean and the Baltic. It saves, you will observe, the whole journey
round the coast of Denmark, and would facilitate our trade with Germany and Russia. Another
very obvious improvement is to join the Forth and the Clyde, so as to connect Leith with the
Irish and American routes. You see the blue line?"

"Quite so."

"And we will have a little cutting here. It will run from Uleaborg to Kem, and will connect
the White Sea with the Gulf of Bothnia. We must not allow our sympathies to be insular, must
we? Our little charities should be cosmopolitan. We will try and give the good people of Archangel
a better outlet for their furs and their tallow."

"But it will freeze."

"For six months in the year. Still, it will be something. Then we must do something for the
East. It would never do to overlook the East."

"It would certainly be an oversight," said Robert, who was keenly alive to the comical side
of the question. Raffles Haw, however, in deadly earnest, sat scratching away at his map with
his blue pencil.

"Here is a point where we might be of some little use. If we cut through from Batoum to the
Kura River we might tap the trade of the Caspian, and open up communication with all the rivers
which run into it. You notice that they include a considerable tract of country. Then, again,
I think that we might venture upon a little cutting between Beirut, on the Mediterranean, and
the upper waters of the Euphrates, which would lead us into the Persian Gulf. Those are one
or two of the more obvious canals which might knit the human race into a closer whole."

"Your plans are certainly stupendous," said Robert, uncertain whether to laugh or to be awe-struck.
"You will cease to be a man, and become one of the great forces of Nature, altering, moulding,
and improving."

"That is precisely the view which I take of myself. That is why I feel my responsibility so
acutely."

"But surely if you will do all this you may rest. It is a considerable programme." 

Such rights of the Dayak in the country are also present in collecting Busch products will be
considered and the custom requires that the relevant Dajakhäuptling 10% of the revenue to be surrendered.
are at the upper Kapuas through the back and strutting about the Strains of the claims at the
country areas has become so complicated that the Dutch administration in this basin with the use
and distribution of taxes among the chiefs has had to deal. Also coming from the outside living
Pnihinghäuptlinge Mahakam here considered, since they lived earlier in the Kapuas.

CHAPTER II

The inspector of Putus SIBAU, your already applied from Batavia to order boats been had we had already
expected, and the barracks of his military protection to absorb our Teams and goods prepared.
Having established ourselves in the old environment again had, we asked how things were with
the prospect of an expedition to the Mahakam. For now, the outlook was not brilliant, on the
Kayan Mendalam were still with the Busy harvesting, and their chief Akam Igau that accompanies
me already on the previous trip had was just on Embálau to the hereditary enemies of the Kayan,
the Batang Lupar (also Hiwan called) from Serawak to discuss, at
length the reports from the Mahakam denominated disturbing. These are a few of my plans for the future, Robert, and I shall want the
co-operation of disinterested men like yourself in all of them. But how brightly the sun shines,
and how sweet the countryside looks! The world is very beautiful, and I should like to leave
it happier than I found it. Let us walk out together, Robert, and you will tell me of any fresh
cases where I may be of assistance."

CHAPTER IX. A NEW DEPARTURE.

Whatever good Mr. Raffles Haw's wealth did to the world, there could be no doubt that there
were cases where it did harm. The very contemplation and thought of it had upon many a disturbing
and mischievous effect. Especially was this the case with the old gunmaker. From being merely
a querulous and grasping man, he had now become bitter, brooding, and dangerous. Week by week,
as he saw the tide of wealth flow as it were through his very house without being able to divert
the smallest rill to nourish his own fortunes, he became more wolfish and more hungry-eyed.
He spoke less of his own wrongs, but he brooded more, and would stand for hours on Tamfield
Hill looking down at the great palace beneath, as a thirst-stricken man might gaze at the desert
mirage.

He had worked, and peeped, and pried, too, until there were points upon which he knew more
than either his son or his daughter.

"I suppose that you still don't know where your friend gets his money?" he remarked to Robert
one morning, as they walked together through the village.

"No, father, I do not. I only know that he spends it very well."

"Well!" snarled the old man. "Yes, very well! He has helped every tramp and slut and worthless
vagabond over the countryside, but he will not advance a pound, even on the best security,
to help a respectable business man to fight against misfortune."

"My dear father, I really cannot argue with you about it," said Robert. "I have already told
you more than once what I think. Mr. Haw's object is to help those who are destitute. He looks
upon us as his equals, and would not presume to patronise us, or to act as if we could not
help ourselves. It would be a humiliation to us to take his money."

"Pshaw! Besides, it is only a question of an advance, and advances are made every day among
business men. How can you talk such nonsense, Robert?"

Early as it was, his son could see from his excited, quarrelsome manner that the old man had
been drinking. The habit had grown upon him of late, and it was seldom now that he was entirely
sober.

"Mr. Raffles Haw is the best judge," said Robert coldly. "If he earns the money, he has a right
to spend it as he likes."

"And how does he earn it? You don't know, Robert. You don't know that you aren't aiding and
abetting a felony when you help him to fritter it away. Was ever so much money earned in an
honest fashion? I tell you there never was. I tell you, also, that lumps of gold are no more
to that man than chunks of coal to the miners over yonder. He could build his house of them
and think nothing of it."

"I know that he is very rich, father. I think, however, that he has an extravagant way of talking
sometimes, and that his imagination carries him away. I have heard him talk of plans which
the richest man upon earth could not possibly hope to carry through."

"Don't you make any mistake, my son. Your poor old father isn't quite a fool, though he is
only an honest broken merchant." He looked up sideways at his son with a wink and a most unpleasant
leer. "Where there's money I can smell it. There's money there, and heaps of it. It's my belief
that he is the richest man in the world, though how he came to be so I should not like to guarantee.
I'm not quite blind yet, Robert. Have you seen the weekly waggon?"

"The weekly waggon!"

"Yes, Robert. You see I can find some news for you yet. It is due this morning. Every Saturday
morning you will see the waggon come in. Why, here it is now, as I am a living man, coming
round the curve."

Robert glanced back and saw a great heavy waggon drawn by two strong horses lumbering slowly
along the road which led to the New Hall. From the efforts of the animals and its slow pace
the contents seemed to be of great weight.

"Just you wait here," old McIntyre cried, plucking at his son's sleeve with his thin bony hand.
"Wait here and see it pass. Then we will watch what becomes of it."

They stood by the side of the road until it came abreast of them. The waggon was covered with
tarpaulin sheetings in front and at the sides, but behind some glimpse could be caught of the
contents. They consisted, as far as Robert could see, of a number of packets of the same shape,
each about two feet long and six inches high, arranged symmetrically upon the top of each other.
Each packet was surrounded by a covering of coarse sacking.

"What do you think of that?" asked old McIntyre triumphantly as the load creaked past.

"Why, father? What do you make of it?"

"I have watched it, Robert--I have watched it every Saturday, and I had my chance of looking
a little deeper into it. You remember the day when the elm blew down, and the road was blocked
until they could saw it in two. That was on a Saturday, and the waggon came to a stand until
they could clear a way for it. I was there, Robert, and I saw my chance. I strolled behind
the waggon, and I placed my hands upon one of those packets. They look small, do they not?
It would take a strong man to lift one. They are heavy, Robert, heavy, and hard with the hardness
of metal. I tell you, boy, that that waggon is loaded with gold."

"Gold!"

"With solid bars of gold, Robert. But come into the plantation and we shall see what becomes
of it."

They passed through the lodge gates, behind the waggon, and then wandered off among the fir-trees
until they gained a spot where they could command a view. The load had halted, not in front
of the house, but at the door of the out-building with the chimney. A staff of stablemen and
footmen were in readiness, who proceeded to swiftly unload and to carry the packages through
the door. It was the first time that Robert had ever seen any one save the master of the house
enter the laboratory. No sign was seen of him now, however, and in half an hour the contents
had all been safely stored and the waggon had driven briskly away.

"I cannot understand it, father," said Robert thoughtfully, as they resumed their walk. "Supposing
that your supposition is correct, who would send him such quantities of gold, and where could
it come from?"

"Ha, you have to come to the old man after all!" chuckled his companion. "I can see the little
game. It is clear enough to me. There are two of them in it, you understand. The other one
gets the gold. Never mind how, but we will hope that there is no harm. Let us suppose, for
example, that they have found a marvellous mine, where you can just shovel it out like clay
from a pit. Well, then, he sends it on to this one, and he has his furnaces and his chemicals,
and he refines and purifies it and makes it fit to sell. That's my explanation of it, Robert.
Eh, has the old man put his finger on it?"

"But if that were true, father, the gold must go back again."

"So it does, Robert, but a little at a time. Ha, ha! I've had my eyes open, you see. Every
night it goes down in a small cart, and is sent on to London by the 7.40. Not in bars this
time, but done up in iron-bound chests. I've seen them, boy, and I've had this hand upon them."

"Well," said the young man thoughtfully, "maybe you are right. It is possible that you are right."

While father and son were prying into his secrets, Raffles Haw had found his way to Elmdene,
where Laura sat reading the Queen by the fire.

"I am so sorry," she said, throwing down her paper and springing to her feet. "They are all
out except me. But I am sure that they won't be long. I expect Robert every moment."

"I would rather speak with you alone," answered Raffles Haw quietly. "Pray sit down, for I
wanted to have a little chat with you."

Laura resumed her seat with a flush upon her cheeks and a quickening of the breath. She turned
her face away and gazed into the fire; but there was a sparkle in her eyes which was not caught
from the leaping flames.

"Do you remember the first time that we met, Miss McIntyre?" he asked, standing on the rug
and looking down at her dark hair, and the beautifully feminine curve of her ivory neck.

"As if it were yesterday," she answered in her sweet mellow tones.

"Then you must also remember the wild words that I said when we parted. It was very foolish
of me. I am sure that I am most sorry if I frightened or disturbed you, but I have been a very
solitary man for a long time, and I have dropped into a bad habit of thinking aloud. Your voice,
your face, your manner, were all so like my ideal of a true woman, loving, faithful, and sympathetic,
that I could not help wondering whether, if I were a poor man, I might ever hope to win the
affection of such a one."

"Your good opinion, Mr. Raffles Haw, is very dear to me," said Laura. "I assure you that I
was not frightened, and that there is no need to apologise for what was really a compliment."

"Since then I have found," he continued, "that all that I had read upon your face was true.
That your mind is indeed that of the true woman, full of the noblest and sweetest qualities
which human nature can aspire to. You know that I am a man of fortune, but I wish you to dismiss
that consideration from your mind. Do you think from what you know of my character that you
could be happy as my wife, Laura?"

She made no answer, but still sat with her head turned away and her sparkling eyes fixed upon
the fire. One little foot from under her skirt tapped nervously upon the rug.

"It is only right that you should know a little more about me before you decide. There is,
however, little to know. I am an orphan, and, as far as I know, without a relation upon earth.
My father was a respectable man, a country surgeon in Wales, and he brought me up to his own
profession. Before I had passed my examinations, however, he died and left me a small annuity.
I had conceived a great liking for the subjects of chemistry and electricity, and instead of
going on with my medical work I devoted myself entirely to these studies, and eventually built
myself a laboratory where I could follow out my own researches. At about this time I came into
a very large sum of money, so large as to make me feel that a vast responsibility rested upon
me in the use which I made of it. After some thought I determined to build a large house in
a quiet part of the country, not too far from a great centre. There I could be in touch with
the world, and yet would have quiet and leisure to mature the schemes which were in my head.
As it chanced, I chose Tamfield as my site. All that remains now is to carry out the plans
which I have made, and to endeavour to lighten the earth of some of the misery and injustice
which weigh it down. I again ask you, Laura, will you throw in your lot with mine, and help
me in the life's work which lies before me?"

Laura looked up at him, at his stringy figure, his pale face, his keen, yet gentle eyes. Somehow
as she looked there seemed to form itself beside him some shadow of Hector Spurling, the manly
features, the clear, firm mouth, the frank manner. Now, in the very moment of her triumph,
it sprang clearly up in her mind how at the hour of their ruin he had stood firmly by them,
and had loved the penniless girl as tenderly as the heiress to fortune. That last embrace at
the door, too, came back to her, and she felt his lips warm upon her own.

"I am very much honoured, Mr. Haw," she stammered, "but this is so sudden. I have not had time
to think. I do not know what to say."

"Do not let me hurry you," he cried earnestly. "I beg that you will think well over it. I shall
come again for my answer. When shall I come? Tonight?"

"Yes, come tonight."

"Then, adieu. Believe me that I think more highly of you for your hesitation. I shall live
in hope." He raised her hand to his lips, and left her to her own thoughts.

But what those thoughts were did not long remain in doubt. Dimmer and dimmer grew the vision
of the distant sailor face, clearer and clearer the image of the vast palace, of the queenly
power, of the diamonds, the gold, the ambitious future. It all lay at her feet, waiting to
be picked up. How could she have hesitated, even for a moment? She rose, and, walking over
to her desk, she took out a sheet of paper and an envelope. The latter she addressed to Lieutenant
Spurling, H.M.S. Active, Gibraltar. The note cost some little trouble, but at last she got
it worded to her mind.

   "Dear Hector," she said--"I am convinced that your father has
   never         entirely approved of our engagement, otherwise he
   would not have thrown obstacles in the way of our marriage.
   I am sure, too, that since my poor father's misfortune it is
   only your own sense of honour and feeling of duty which have
   kept you true to me, and that you would have done infinitely
   better had you never seen me.  I cannot bear, Hector, to allow
   you to imperil your future for my sake, and I have determined,
   after thinking well over the matter, to release you from our
   boy and girl engagement, so that you may be entirely free in
   every way.  It is possible that you may think it unkind of me
   to do this now, but I am quite sure, dear Hector, that when you
   are an admiral and a very distinguished man, you will look back
   at this, and you will see that I have been a true friend to you,
   and have prevented you from making a false step early in your
   career.  For myself, whether I marry or not, I have determined
   to devote the remainder of my life to trying to do good, and to
   leaving the world happier than I found it.  Your father is very
   well, and gave us a capital sermon last Sunday.  I enclose the
   bank-note which you asked me to keep for you.  Good-bye, for ever,
   dear Hector, and believe me when I say that, come what may, I am
   ever your true friend,

   "Laura S. McIntyre."

She had hardly sealed her letter before her father and Robert returned. She closed the door
behind them, and made them a little curtsey.

"I await my family's congratulations," she said, with her head in the air. "Mr. Raffles Haw
has been here, and he has asked me to be his wife."

"The deuce he did!" cried the old man. "And you said--?"

"I am to see him again."

"And you will say--?"

"I will accept him."

"You were always a good girl, Laura," said old McIntyre, standing on his tiptoes to kiss her.

"But Laura, Laura, how about Hector?" asked Robert in mild remonstrance.

"Oh, I have written to him," his sister answered carelessly. "I wish you would be good enough
to post the letter."

CHAPTER X. THE GREAT SECRET.

And so Laura McIntyre became duly engaged to Raffles Haw, and old McIntyre grew even more hungry-looking
as he felt himself a step nearer to the source of wealth, while Robert thought less of work
than ever, and never gave as much as a thought to the great canvas which still stood, dust-covered,
upon his easel. Haw gave Laura an engagement ring of old gold, with a great blazing diamond
bulging out of it. There was little talk about the matter, however, for it was Haw's wish that
all should be done very quietly. Nearly all his evenings were spent at Elmdene, where he and
Laura would build up the most colossal schemes of philanthropy for the future. With a map stretched
out on the table in front of them, these two young people would, as it were, hover over the
world, planning, devising, and improving.

"Bless the girl!" said old McIntyre to his son; "she speaks about it as if she were born to
millions. Maybe, when once she is married, she won't be so ready to chuck her money into every
mad scheme that her husband can think of."

"Laura is greatly changed," Robert answered; "she has grown much more serious in her ideas."

"You wait a bit!" sniggered his father. "She is a good girl, is Laura, and she knows what she
is about. She's not a girl to let her old dad go to the wall if she can set him right. It's
a pretty state of things," he added bitterly: "here's my daughter going to marry a man who
thinks no more of gold than I used to of gun-metal; and here's my son going about with all
the money he cares to ask for to help every ne'er-do-well in Staffordshire; and here's their
father, who loved them and cared for them, and brought them both up, without money enough very
often to buy a bottle of brandy. I don't know what your poor dear mother would have thought of it."

"You have only to ask for what you want."

"Yes, as if I were a five-year-old child. But I tell you, Robert, I'll have my rights, and
if I can't get them one way I will another. I won't be treated as if I were no one. And there's
one thing: if I am to be this man's pa-in-law, I'll want to know something about him and his
money first. We may be poor, but we are honest. I'll up to the Hall now, and have it out with
him." He seized his hat and stick and made for the door.

"No, no, father," cried Robert, catching him by the sleeve. "You had better leave the matter
alone. Mr. Haw is a very sensitive man. He would not like to be examined upon such a point.
It might lead to a serious quarrel. I beg that you will not go."

"I am not to be put off for ever," snarled the old man, who had been drinking heavily. "I'll
put my foot down now, once and for ever." He tugged at his sleeve to free himself from his
son's grasp.

"At least you shall not go without Laura knowing. I will call her down, and we shall have her
opinion."

"Oh, I don't want to have any scenes," said McIntyre sulkily, relaxing his efforts. He lived
in dread of his daughter, and at his worst moments the mention of her name would serve to restrain
him.

"Besides," said Robert, "I have not the slightest doubt that Raffles Haw will see the necessity
for giving us some sort of explanation before matters go further. He must understand that we
have some claim now to be taken into his confidence."

He had hardly spoken when there was a tap at the door, and the man of whom they were speaking
walked in.

"Good-morning, Mr. McIntyre," said he. "Robert, would you mind stepping up to the Hall with
me? I want to have a little business chat." He looked serious, like a man who is carrying out
something which he has well weighed.

They walked up together with hardly a word on either side. Raffles Haw was absorbed in his
own thoughts. Robert felt expectant and nervous, for he knew that something of importance lay
before him. The winter had almost passed now, and the first young shoots were beginning to
peep out timidly in the face of the wind and the rain of an English March. The snows were gone,
but the countryside looked bleaker and drearier, all shrouded in the haze from the damp, sodden
meadows.

"By the way, Robert," said Raffles Haw suddenly, as they walked up the Avenue. "Has your great
Roman picture gone to London?"

"I have not finished it yet."

"But I know that you are a quick worker. You must be nearly at the end of it."

"No, I am afraid that it has not advanced much since you saw it. For one thing, the light has
not been very good."

Raffles Haw said nothing, but a pained expression flashed over his face. When they reached
the house he led the way through the museum. Two great metal cases were lying on the floor.

"I have a small addition there to the gem collection," he remarked as he passed. "They only
arrived last night, and I have not opened them yet, but I am given to understand from the letters
and invoices that there are some fine specimens. We might arrange them this afternoon, if you
care to assist me. Let us go into the smoking-room now."

He threw himself down into a settee, and motioned Robert into the armchair in front of him.

"Light a cigar," he said. "Press the spring if there is any refreshment which you would like.
Now, my dear Robert, confess to me in the first place that you have often thought me mad."

The charge was so direct and so true that the young artist hesitated, hardly knowing how to answer.

"My dear boy, I do not blame you. It was the most natural thing in the world. I should have
looked upon anyone as a madman who had talked to me as I have talked to you. But for all that,
Robert, you were wrong, and I have never yet in our conversations proposed any scheme which
it was not well within my power to carry out. I tell you in all sober earnest that the amount
of my income is limited only by my desire, and that all the bankers and financiers combined
could not furnish the sums which I can put forward without an effort."

"I have had ample proof of your immense wealth," said Robert.

"And you are very naturally curious as to how that wealth was obtained. Well, I can tell you
one thing. The money is perfectly clean. I have robbed no one, cheated no one, sweated no one,
ground no one down in the gaining of it. I can read your father's eye, Robert. I can see that
he has done me an injustice in this matter. Well, perhaps he is not to be blamed. Perhaps I
also might think uncharitable things if I were In his place. But that is why I now give an
explanation to you, Robert, and not to him. You, at least, have trusted me, and you have a
right, before I become one of your family, to know all that I can tell you. Laura also has
trusted me, but I know well that she is content still to trust me."

"I would not intrude upon your secrets, Mr. Haw," said Robert, "but of course I cannot deny
that I should be very proud and pleased if you cared to confide them to me."

"And I will. Not all. I do not think that I shall ever, while I live, tell all. But I shall
leave directions behind me so that when I die you may be able to carry on my unfinished work.
I shall tell you where those directions are to be found. In the meantime, you must be content
to learn the effects which I produce without knowing every detail as to the means."

Robert settled himself down in his chair and concentrated his attention upon his companion's
words, while Haw bent forward his eager, earnest face, like a man who knows the value of the
words which he is saying.

"You are already aware," he remarked, "that I have devoted a great deal of energy and of time
to the study of chemistry."

"So you told me."

"I commenced my studies under a famous English chemist, I continued them under the best man
in France, and I completed them in the most celebrated laboratory of Germany. I was not rich,
but my father had left me enough to keep me comfortably, and by living economically I had a
sum at my command which enabled me to carry out my studies in a very complete way. When I returned
to England I built myself a laboratory in a quiet country place where I could work without
distraction or interruption. There I began a series of investigations which soon took me into
regions of science to which none of the three famous men who taught me had ever penetrated.

"You say, Robert, that you have some slight knowledge of chemistry, and you will find it easier
to follow what I say. Chemistry is to a large extent an empirical science, and the chance experiment
may lead to greater results than could, with our present data, be derived from the closest
study or the keenest reasoning. The most important chemical discoveries from the first manufacture
of glass to the whitening and refining of sugar have all been due to some happy chance which
might have befallen a mere dabbler as easily as a deep student.

"Well, it was to such a chance that my own great discovery--perhaps the greatest that the world
has seen--was due, though I may claim the credit of having originated the line of thought which
led up to it. I had frequently speculated as to the effect which powerful currents of electricity
exercise upon any substance through which they are poured for a considerable time. I did not
here mean such feeble currents as are passed along a telegraph wire, but I mean the very highest
possible developments. Well, I tried a series of experiments upon this point. I found that
in liquids, and in compounds, the force had a disintegrating effect. The well-known experiment
of the electrolysis of water will, of course, occur to you. But I found that in the case of
elemental solids the effect was a remarkable one. The element slowly decreased in weight, without
perceptibly altering in composition. I hope that I make myself clear to you?"

"I follow you entirely," said Robert, deeply interested in his companion's narrative.

"I tried upon several elements, and always with the same result. In every case an hour's current
would produce a perceptible loss of weight. My theory at that stage was that there was a loosening
of the molecules caused by the electric fluid, and that a certain number of these molecules
were shed off like an impalpable dust, all round the lump of earth or of metal, which remained,
of course, the lighter by their loss. I had entirely accepted this theory, when a very remarkable
chance led me to completely alter my opinions.

"I had one Saturday night fastened a bar of bismuth in a clamp, and had attached it on either
side to an electric wire, in order to observe what effect the current would have upon it. I
had been testing each metal in turn, exposing them to the influence for from one to two hours.
I had just got everything in position, and had completed my connection, when I received a telegram
to say that John Stillingfleet, an old chemist in London with whom I had been on terms of intimacy,
was dangerously ill, and had expressed a wish to see me. The last train was due to leave in
twenty minutes, and I lived a good mile from the station, I thrust a few things into a bag,
locked my laboratory, and ran as hard as I could to catch it.

"It was not until I was in London that it suddenly occurred to me that I had neglected to shut
off the current, and that it would continue to pass through the bar of bismuth until the batteries
were exhausted. The fact, however, seemed to be of small importance, and I dismissed it from
my mind. I was detained in London until the Tuesday night, and it was Wednesday morning before
I got back to my work. As I unlocked the laboratory door my mind reverted to the uncompleted
experiment, and it struck me that in all probability my piece of bismuth would have been entirely
disintegrated and reduced to its primitive molecules. I was utterly unprepared for the truth.

"When I approached the table I found, sure enough, that the bar of metal had vanished, and
that the clamp was empty. Having noted the fact, I was about to turn away to something else,
when my attention was attracted to the fact that the table upon which the clamp stood was starred
over with little patches of some liquid silvery matter, which lay in single drops or coalesced
into little pools. I had a very distinct recollection of having thoroughly cleared the table
before beginning my experiment, so that this substance had been deposited there since I had
left for London. Much interested, I very carefully collected it all into one vessel, and examined
it minutely. There could be no question as to what it was. It was the purest mercury, and gave
no response to any test for bismuth.

"I at once grasped the fact that chance had placed in my hands a chemical discovery of the
very first importance. If bismuth were, under certain conditions, to be subjected to the action
of electricity, it would begin by losing weight, and would finally be transformed into mercury.
I had broken down the partition which separated two elements.

"But the process would be a constant one. It would presumably prove to be a general law, and
not an isolated fact. If bismuth turned into mercury, what would mercury turn into? There would
be no rest for me until I had solved the question. I renewed the exhausted batteries and passed
the current through the bowl of quicksilver. For sixteen hours I sat watching the metal, marking
how it slowly seemed to curdle, to grow firmer, to lose its silvery glitter and to take a dull
yellow hue. When I at last picked it up in a forceps, and threw it upon the table, it had lost
every characteristic of mercury, and had obviously become another metal. A few simple tests
were enough to show me that this other metal was platinum.

"Now, to a chemist, there was something very suggestive in the order in which these changes
had been effected. Perhaps you can see the relation, Robert, which they bear to each other?"

"No, I cannot say that I do."

Robert had sat listening to this strange statement with parted lips and staring eyes.

"I will show you. Speaking atomically, bismuth is the heaviest of the metals. Its atomic weight
is 210. The next in weight is lead, 207, and then comes mercury at 200. Possibly the long period
during which the current had acted in my absence had reduced the bismuth to lead and the lead
in turn to mercury. Now platinum stands at 197.5, and it was accordingly the next metal to
be produced by the continued current. Do you see now?"

"It is quite clear."

"And then there came the inference, which sent my heart into my mouth and caused my head to
swim round. Gold is the next in the series. Its atomic weight is 197. I remembered now, and
for the first time understood why it was always lead and mercury winch were mentioned by the
old alchemists as being the two metals which might be used in their calling. With fingers which
trembled with excitement I adjusted the wires again, and in little more than an hour--for the
length of the process was always in proportion to the difference in the metals--I had before
me a knob of ruddy crinkled metal, which answered to every reaction for gold.

"Well, Robert, this is a long story, but I think that you will agree with me that its importance
justifies me in going into detail. When I had satisfied myself that I had really manufactured
gold I cut the nugget in two. One half I sent to a jeweller and worker in precious metals,
with whom I had some slight acquaintance, asking him to report upon the quality of the metal.
With the other half I continued my series of experiments, and reduced it in successive stages
through all the long series of metals, through silver and zinc and manganese, until I brought
it to lithium, which is the lightest of all."

"And what did it turn to then?" asked Robert.

"Then came what to chemists is likely to be the most interesting portion of my discovery. It
turned to a greyish fine powder, which powder gave no further results, however much I might
treat it with electricity. And that powder is the base of all things; it is the mother of all
the elements; it is, in short, the substance whose existence has been recently surmised by
a leading chemist, and which has been christened protyle by him. I am the discoverer of the
great law of the electrical transposition of the metals, and I am the first to demonstrate
protyle, so that, I think, Robert, if all my schemes in other directions come to nothing, my
name is at least likely to live in the chemical world.

"There is not very much more for me to tell you. I had my nugget back from my friend the jeweller,
confirming my opinion as to its nature and its quality. I soon found several methods by which
the process might be simplified, and especially a modification of the ordinary electric current,
which was very much more effective. Having made a certain amount of gold, I disposed of it
for a sum which enabled me to buy improved materials and stronger batteries. In this way I
enlarged my operations until at last I was in a position to build this house and to have a
laboratory where I could carry out my work on a much larger scale. As I said before, I can
now state with all truth that the amount of my income is only limited by my desires."

"It is wonderful!" gasped Robert. "It is like a fairy tale. But with this great discovery in
your mind you must have been sorely tempted to confide it to others."

"I thought well over it. I gave it every consideration. It was obvious to me that if my invention
were made public, its immediate result would be to deprive the present precious metals of all
their special value. Some other substance--amber, we will say, or ivory--would be chosen as
a medium for barter, and gold would be inferior to brass, as being heavier and yet not so hard.
No one would be the better for such a consummation as that. Now, if I retained my secret, and
used it with wisdom, I might make myself the greatest benefactor to mankind that has ever lived.
Those were the chief reasons, and I trust that they are not dishonourable ones, which led me
to form the resolution, which I have today for the first time broken."

"But your secret is safe with me," cried Robert. "My lips shall be sealed until I have your
permission to speak."

"If I had not known that I could trust you I should have withheld it from your knowledge. And
now, my dear Robert, theory is very weak work, and practice is infinitely more interesting.
I have given you more than enough of the first. If you will be good enough to accompany me
to the laboratory I shall give you a little of the latter."

CHAPTER XI. A CHEMICAL DEMONSTRATION.

Raffles Haw led the way through the front door, and crossing over the gravelled drive pushed
open the outer door of the laboratory--the same through which the McIntyres had seen the packages
conveyed from the waggon. On passing through it Robert found that they were not really within
the building, but merely in a large bare ante-chamber, around the walls of which were stacked
the very objects which had aroused his curiosity and his father's speculations. All mystery
had gone from them now, however, for while some were still wrapped in their sackcloth coverings,
others had been undone, and revealed themselves as great pigs of lead.

"There is my raw material," said Raffles Haw carelessly, nodding at the heap. "Every Saturday
I have a waggon-load sent up, which serves me for a week, but we shall need to work double
tides when Laura and I are married, and we get our great schemes under way. I have to be very
careful about the quality of the lead, for, of course, every impurity is reproduced in the gold."

A heavy iron door led into the inner chamber. Haw unlocked it, but only to disclose a second
one about five feet further on.

"This flooring is all disconnected at night," he remarked. "I have no doubt that there is a
good deal of gossip in the servants'-hall about this sealed chamber, so I have to guard myself
against some inquisitive ostler or too adventurous butler."

The inner door admitted them into the laboratory, a high, bare, whitewashed room with a glass
roof. At one end was the furnace and boiler, the iron mouth of which was closed, though the
fierce red light beat through the cracks, and a dull roar sounded through the building. On
either side innumerable huge Leyden jars stood ranged in rows, tier topping tier, while above
them were columns of Voltaic cells. Robert's eyes, as he glanced around, lit on vast wheels,
complicated networks of wire, stands, test-tubes, coloured bottles, graduated glasses, Bunsen
burners, porcelain insulators, and all the varied debris of a chemical and electrical workshop.

"Come across here," said Raffles Haw, picking his way among the heaps of metal, the coke, the
packing-cases, and the carboys of acid. "Yours is the first foot except my own which has ever
penetrated to this room since the workmen left it. My servants carry the lead into the ante-room,
but come no further. The furnace can be cleaned and stoked from without. I employ a fellow
to do nothing else. Now take a look in here."

He threw open a door on the further side, and motioned to the young artist to enter. The latter
stood silent with one foot over the threshold, staring in amazement around him. The room, which
may have been some thirty feet square, was paved and walled with gold. Great brick-shaped ingots,
closely packed, covered the whole floor, while on every side they were reared up in compact
barriers to the very ceiling. The single electric lamp which lighted the windowless chamber
struck a dull, murky, yellow light from the vast piles of precious metal, and gleamed ruddily
upon the golden floor.

"This is my treasure house," remarked the owner. "You see that I have rather an accumulation
just now. My imports have been exceeding my exports. You can understand that I have other and
more important duties even than the making of gold, just now. This is where I store my output
until I am ready to send it off. Every night almost I am in the habit of sending a case of
it to London. I employ seventeen brokers in its sale. Each thinks that he is the only one,
and each is dying to know where I can get such large quantities of virgin gold. They say that
it is the purest which comes into the market. The popular theory is, I believe, that I am a
middleman acting on behalf of some new South African mine, which wishes to keep its whereabouts
a secret. What value would you put upon the gold in this chamber? It ought to be worth something,
for it represents nearly a week's work."

"Something fabulous, I have no doubt," said Robert, glancing round at the yellow barriers.
"Shall I say a hundred and fifty thousand pounds?" Life is only through the two souls "Bruwa" and "ton Luwa "into
the body (for more details Section V).

Anything that brings the Bruwa to escape causing disease. Since the Bruwa to the same As how a person
thinks and feels, can they drove through everything that frightens them, by which means the body
is sick. The priests are therefore looking to heal a sick person, the escaped soul zurückzulocken
in the body. based on this idea is actually all methods of healing the priest. Capturing the
soul is done with the help of good spirits Apu from the Lagan, the
main mediator between gods and humans.

Fortunately they are in their trust in the help of the spirits were not so blind that to the favorable
or unfavorable influence of some factors on the course of a disease
not even noticed.

From this it has with them a very complex system of dietary developed, in addition to the entreaties
of dajung is applied to each disease.

In general, seeks to combat the disease in that they are different types of food, of bathing,
hard work etc. contains. there are also different for the different
disease Rules that can be regarded as buses currently impossible,
they are partly have chosen so well that they are based on personal
observations and experiences.

For the most Kajan Mendalam following rules apply:

It is prohibited for diarrhea: hard rice, sugar cane juice, banana,
sticky rice, boiled bananas, cold water, some species of fish, swimming
in cold water that is high; are allowed: soft cooked rice and good
fish.

It is prohibited for fever: cold water, sugarcane juice, sugar, biscuits
and swimming at high tide.

It is prohibited for cough: Keladi, sugar, cane juice, roasted sticky rice, cucumber, smoking, Chewing
betel, and hard work.

In a knee inflammation forbids it: running, stair climbing, dry and hard boiled Rice, dried fish,
pork, eggs, salt and edible tree leaves.

Taking into account that such regulations among the Malays in Borneo only in very rudimentary
Form is present and that a large part of these requirements is also in the opinion of European
Doctors are really practical, they appear to us to Bahau so commendable. Moreover, these dietary regulations
in the circumstances, life in which the Dayak, in the absence of proper care, and the power of
the structure of their patients much important than the Europeans and their more favorable circumstances.

Also
for skin diseases and many of conduct specified, since one of it also has effective drugs
that are just as well in Bahau than European doctors unable to cure their parasitic skin diseases.
With such a cure may not bathed, can not perspire and not scratched, and the patient may no sweets,
no young bamboo, Keladi, Farrenspitzen, salt, enjoy pork, Spanish pepper and flour. Since the
remedies are removed in solution to the skin, are the first 3 rules rational and the prohibition
of food is disadvantageous because it's already annoying Health so
difficult that only very few submit to us with enough endurance.

The success its cure is often only temporary because of the contagious nature of this Diseases
have no idea and etc. with their own clothes, mats always re-infect again.

The prohibitions in diseases come from the natives as natural that if I gave them a drug, once
asked what lali prohibited, either. My Rules, whatever they were, were always faithfully observed.
I often forbade the one or other just to make the faith in my medication does not waver. Of
particular Importance of this was in some cases where compliance
is of greater dietary requirements More important than the taking
of drugs was, in very young children, I could often only intervene
in this way.

During my second stay at Mendalam were there within three days, three cases of very acute cholera-like
stomach illness before. The first, in Tandjong Kuda, was assaulted without I saw the patient. The following
day became ill in my neighborhood a woman with all cholera symptoms, but I helped her survive
with a strong dose Landanum the attack. One or two days later they called me to a man in Tandjong
Kuda, the same at the Illness suffered. Even with him laudanum had an excellent effect, but I was
forced to be left to his fate with the result that it 2 days later because of the enjoyment various
tree leaves boiled and got a relapse died. As these cases of cholera were very similar, I believe
the best environment by regulating the water use to protect. I therefore left with the two
chiefs and Akam Igau Tigang by dajung hold a great evocation banned for 4 days, drinking unboiled
water and. warning them of the river baths, by the way in the fast-flowing water of lower Were significant.
Also, immature fruit I put on the ban list and had the pleasure to see that you are both in
Tandjong Kuda Tandjong Karang than in the rules was occurred and no further cases of illness
more.

The most important part of the incantation was, that the evil spirits, as the authors the disease,
it prevented along the boardwalk that led from the river to the house, to reach the residents.
For this purpose we stretched along the shore in front of the house and and laterally about 1 m
above the ground Rotangseile to which the defense at intervals of 2 m evil spirits were hanged
long leaves of daun. At the points where the rope the way to the Crossed home, we taught on both
sides worked raw figures, a male and a male on. The characters had exaggerated large genitals, the
man one by Kajansitte perforated glans penis with wooden pins, they were also with wooden spears,
swords shields and armed than other deterrents. consented to my relief the Family who belong
in it, clothing and mats to destroy the deceased. Since the adat them prohibits the burning
of these items, they threw it without my knowledge, in the flow.

The only significant remedies of the Kayan applied against skin diseases, two them are indeed
very effective:

1. oroköp, leaves of Cassia alata, which elsewhere in the archipelago,
often for skin diseases be used.

2. njerobw bulan (in Busang) = minjak pelandjau (in Malay), a black of tar smelling oil that
flows from the black heartwood of the same tree, only to Borneo appears
to be endemic.

On standing separates the oil from a semi-liquid mass, which is called tanah pelandjau.

placed on the skin that causes inflammation pelandjau tanah. As this mass once without confusion
on the skin of a child's body stressed it was corrupted so completely that a deep wound was created.
For use, the medium with sugar cane juice are mixed.

An individual who is from head to foot with lusung covered may recover in 14-20 days if he is
proficient with tanah pelandjau avoids rubbing and bathing.

The Kajan rub daily with oroköp, so they started to take its lusung and to a much less time
marketing their Kurabe.

A very effective, but very valuable for Kajan means is petroleum, the diseased, the Skin removed,
within 8 days of healing causes.

As other methods of treatment of inflammation and pain in the Kayan cupping, Tattoo and massage
practice. The two are at first particularly painful Entzündungsgeschwülsten applied. It deprives
the blood by using a sharp knife to cut a large number of short Cuts
running and stop the bleeding by itself can.

Hemostatic agents learned I do not know. The design of small Tätowierfiguren on inflamed site
probably acts in the same manner as the blood-letting.

In body and back pain one applies especially massage, kneading in
more than rubbing exists.

The massage and the blood-letting deal mainly dajung that bring it in their art sometimes far.

For wounds Bahau not know the means, they keep them clean with water and kapok. Since not to
still understand serious bleeding, people often go to small wounds, eg on the back foot to
ground.

However, they understand each other again torn earlobe to grow (see
p. 140).

With deliveries of the body of the loop ends is kneaded by hand, other treatments are unknown. Severe
bleeding course if they do not stop by itself, physically.

The Bahau turn to steam baths. You fill a bowl of hot water, add some Leaves, and then set the sick,
which they wrap in blankets, some time the hot Vapors.

CHAPTER XIX.

The tattoos of the Dayak were originally probably as body ornaments, present however, the custom of
tattooing in all strains taken root so deeply that they are called Watch a custom "issue,
but shall have no religious significance, but with the CV the individual is closely associated.

The
nature of the tattoo is of central Borneo for the different tribal groups, for each Strains and for
male and female characteristic, nor are the occasions in which tattooed
is different in the two sexes.

In the men can see the tattoo in general regarded as a proof that they have participated in dangerous enterprises,
while it for women, such as those of the Long-Glat, the introduction of a new period of life
means.

The Long-Glat start to the girls when they are eight years old, on the back to tattoo the finger at
various places small figures, at the onset of menses is the back of the fingers tattooed completely
and over the following years continued to received until the entire back of the hand to his heart
ornament, in the same way The procedure is kicked back.

With 18 to 20 years, let the women front the leg and at a later age, or if they have had several
children, including the back the leg tattooed.

While the men Tätowiermarter like to take upon himself to brave men later identified as being
married is the custom of tattooing for women supported by the belief that the fully tattooed women
are allowed in the afterlife, in the river to bathe Telang Djulan
and thereby get into the immediate vicinity of the beads, which are
located on its ground; the incompletely tattooed on the other hand
must remain standing on the shore and completely Untätowierten are
allowed to approach the river at all.

This belief, which I at the upper Mahakam and have encountered in the kenja facilitated the women's
excruciating pain to them the process of tattooing causes.

To distinguish between related strains is the tattooing of women suitable
than the Men because they are on their travels often with the characteristic
signs of their host Men Decorating while the remaining women in the
tribe usually wear to it's own pattern.

A Insider can tell by the tattoos of the men who have visited it
strains; well-traveled people show the characteristics of the tribes
on the Mahakam, Batang Rèdjang, the Taman Dayak, Punan, etc

In central
Borneo can be regarding the Tätowierverfahrens and terms of applied
Pattern of three groups of strains differ, probably with their historical
Separation in the past centuries related.

1. Group of Bahau, Kenya and Punan.

2. Group of Bukater and Beketan.

3.

Group of tribes from the Barito and Melawi and Ulu Ajar of Mandai.

The first group with tattoos, which are made of dark blue lines, decorate the women Forearms,
hands, legs and feet, the men's shoulders, arms and chest. The thumb of the left hand and the leg
may be tattooed only for very brave men.

The men of the second group of tattoo the body of the mandible to the ankles with large, dark
blue areas from which the actual figures in the natural skin color emerge.

a Bukatjüngling has won a war on the course or on another occasion,
he shall be first on the breast, a triangular face tattooed, after
that, the shoulders, the neck, all the arms, back and lower jaw treated
in the same way; later attached to the top of the calves have a square
face.

More heroics they can be allowed, except on the inside, the entire leg tattooed.

The third group, the men begin to be larger or smaller slices on the calf, below the knees
to tattoo, let; later, in contrast to the Kayan and Punan, the isolated figures bear the arms
of the hulls and the neck fully covered with contiguous characters
from dark blue lines.

The women decorate mainly knees, lower legs and hands.

The above-mentioned three groups differ with respect to the execution of the tattoo is that the
tattooed second and third in the hand, while the artists of the the first group to be applied
only figures in relief on small boards blade (tedak = Tätowierbrettchen cut) let this coat with
soot marks on the skin and drive on the obtained lines then Damararuss under the skin.

All three groups tattooed with soot, which causes a blue discoloration of the skin, only the
third Group also used red paint.

The first two groups of women, the tattoo is applied, the third of Men. However, the under Bahau
and kenja Tätowierkünstlerinnen the adat, in the same Manner as the forging and carvers, through
various provisions prohibiting barriers set. Since each Tätowierkünstlerin is under the protection
of a special spirit, must they bring their patron saint of all the
victims hand.

They may wear different kinds of fish and Leaves do not eat, they also must hold for each new
client a mela, with the she offers her mind in her basket with Tätowiergerätschaften
old beads and Kawit.

As long as the artists have small children, they may not hold office. The highest Wage, a gong,
they may only hold office after 20 years of demand. Before that time they are content with
modest wages that exist in pearls and witnesses. Once a Artist, one of these provisions neglected,
obscure their lines or not to she falls ill and dies.

The extent Tätowierberuf is hereditary, as a young woman has the best opportunity to to learn
art from an older family member.

Sometimes form the women to recover from an illness to Tätowierkünstlerinnen from. If that is a
medical treatment by a priestess of success, it advises you the patients
come to be a guardian spirit of Abu Lagan inspired the artist, to
simultaneously recover with the help of the lost health.

The women can from this occasion only to women priests or Tätowierkünstlerinnen,
the men also infusing forging and Hirschhorn carvers can.

So I experienced myself that Uniang Anja, the second wife of Kwing Irang than them from the consequences
of abortion could not recover, from another priest with a spirit of tattoo animate left after
they already used for another condition, a spirit of dajung had had to summon.

The women of the Bahau and kenja may be tattooed only at certain times because of Tätowierperiode
the duration of the entire family is subject to prohibitions.

Mostly After the rice seed in the Jäteperiode tattooed, because of the like then the most time
exist.

For the most Kajan Mendalam in the sowing the bloodshed is forbidden, hence the tattoo.

a corpse is in the home, so must the Tätowierverfahren until after the funeral postponed be.

Two other reasons that prevent a quick and complete execution of the tattoo, exist, particularly
among girls, in the fear of pain and the inability for apply a full tattoo required sum of 25-30 fl.
The procedure will also undertake bad dreams, as is, for example by flood, the strong bleeding
stopped or completely interrupted, so you often incomplete or not
tattooed Women encounter.

A woman longs Glat must each day on which it is being tattooed as a side dish for the Artist,
a black chicken slaughter.

The men are the obstacles mentioned of far lesser importance, as her tattoo is a much less complete.

In
the kenja should not the operation at home, but only in specially built for this purpose Huts held.
The male family members have during the Tätowierperiode dress in Baumbast, they too must all the
time in the house to be there. Are The men on business trips, may not be tattooed female family member.

When
Kenjastamm the Uma Tow-may only be tattooed if also the treat the daughter of a chief can make. Is
this, however, such as following a bereavement, prevented, to submit to the operation, then allowed
the girls of the tribe not get a tattoo.

The Ulu Ajar Dayak tattooing use an instrument from a 10 cm long and 1 cm wide copper plate is, the
front ends bent at right angles into a sharp tooth. The tooth is driven into the non-stretched
skin by using a small piece of wood easy pat on the copper plate.

The Bahau and Kenjafrauen tattooed with a rectangular curved piece of wood (ulang brang) in which 2-3
copper needles are attached by means of gutta-percha (See Chart:
Quiver, Gift board etc Fig. u).

Both of these needle holder and the wound with cotton wood Klopfer (tukul ulang, shows v) are
often decorated with beautiful carvings. The artist moves as follows: After the Tätowiermuster with the
usual dyes, a mixture of water and soot of the white Damaraharzes, has pressed on the skin,
it plunges the needles in a vessel (bungan tedak, Fig t) with the same liquid and drives with these
needles the Kohlenteilchen under the skin, by hitting his knocker
on the needle holder.

This rests to be better governed, with the handle on a pillow. The operation led initially a minor bleeding,
only where thicker lines repeated motion of the Require needles, some drops of blood mixed with
the excess dye and are from an assistant. The patient sits or lies on the ground during the operation,
the artist and her assistant to take over each other to both sides of the investigating Part,
place and pull the skin taut with your toes (see graphics. Blackboard).
If sensitive body parts tattooed, so the girls doubled up in pain
and crying; often they also suffer much later by an addition which
came inflammation. A complete Leg tattoo can be finished on Mendalam
in three days, the second leg is only after the first is healed, made.
The limbs are in the following order Tattoo: Hand, foot, forearm and
thigh. The whole process may take two years.

Although the Kajan much
smarter and tattooed with less blood loss than the Ulu Ajar Dayak,
occurs at the sites but always operated on a smaller or larger swelling,
often also a serious infection. Disappears soon, you get dark later,
sharp Lines occurs on the other hand, an ulceration with severe scarring,
it loses the drawing a lot of clarity and even disappear, if formed
a keloid, completely, for the Keloid obscures the figure and the ejection
of the causes ulceration Kohlenteilchen.

He had opened the door of his room, when suddenly his ear caught the sound of slow and stealthy
footsteps upon the stairs. His own lamp was unlit, but a dim glimmer came from a moving taper,
and a long black shadow travelled down the wall. He stood motionless, listening intently. The
steps were in the hall now, and he heard a gentle creaking as the key was cautiously turned
in the door. The next instant there came a gust of cold air, the taper was extinguished, and
a sharp snap announced that the door had been closed from without.

Robert stood astonished. Who could this night wanderer be? It must be his father. But what
errand could take him out at three in the morning? And such a morning, too! With every blast
of the wind the rain beat up against his chamber-window as though it would drive it in. The
glass rattled in the frames, and the tree outside creaked and groaned as its great branches
were tossed about by the gale. What could draw any man forth upon such a night?

Hurriedly Robert struck a match and lit his lamp. His father's room was opposite his own, and
the door was ajar. He pushed it open and looked about him. It was empty. The bed had not even
been lain upon. The single chair stood by the window, and there the old man must have sat since
he left them. There was no book, no paper, no means by which he could have amused himself,
nothing but a razor-strop lying on the window-sill.

A feeling of impending misfortune struck cold to Robert's heart. There was some ill-meaning
in this journey of his father's. He thought of his brooding of yesterday, his scowling face,
his bitter threats. Yes, there was some mischief underlying it. But perhaps he might even now
be in time to prevent it. There was no use calling Laura. She could be no help in the matter.
He hurriedly threw on his clothes, muffled himself in his top-coat, and, seizing his hat and
stick, he set off after his father.

As he came out into the village street the wind whirled down it, so that he had to put his
ear and shoulder against it, and push his way forward. It was better, however, when he turned
into the lane. The high bank and the hedge sheltered him upon one side. The road, however,
was deep in mud, and the rain fell in a steady swish. Not a soul was to be seen, but he needed
to make no inquiries, for he knew whither his father had gone as certainly as though he had
seen him.

The iron side gate of the avenue was half open, and Robert stumbled his way up the gravelled
drive amid the dripping fir-trees. What could his father's intention be when he reached the
Hall? Was it merely that he wished to spy and prowl, or did he intend to call up the master
and enter into some discussion as to his wrongs? Or was it possible that some blacker and more
sinister design lay beneath his strange doings? Robert thought suddenly of the razor-strop,
and gasped with horror. What had the old man been doing with that? He quickened his pace to
a run, and hurried on until he found himself at the door of the Hall.

Thank God! all was quiet there. He stood by the big silent door and listened intently. There
was nothing to be heard save the wind and the rain. Where, then, could his father be? If he
wished to enter the Hall he would not attempt to do so by one of the windows, for had he not
been present when Raffles Haw had shown them the precautions which he had taken? But then a
sudden thought struck Robert. There was one window which was left unguarded. Haw had been imprudent
enough to tell them so. It was the middle window of the laboratory. If he remembered it so
clearly, of course his father would remember it too. There was the point of danger.

The moment that he had come round the corner of the building he found that his surmise had
been correct. An electric lamp burned in the laboratory, and the silver squares of the three
large windows stood out clear and bright in the darkness. The centre one had been thrown open,
and, even as he gazed, Robert saw a dark monkey-like figure spring up on to the sill, and vanish
into the room beyond. For a moment only it outlined itself against the brilliant light beyond,
but in that moment Robert had space to see that it was indeed his father. On tiptoe he crossed
the intervening space, and peeped in through the open window. It was a singular spectacle which
met his eyes.

There stood upon the glass table some half-dozen large ingots of gold, which had been made
the night before, but which had not been removed to the treasure-house. On these the old man
had thrown himself, as one who enters into his rightful inheritance. He lay across the table,
his arms clasping the bars of gold, his cheek pressed against them, crooning and muttering
to himself. Under the clear, still light, amid the giant wheels and strange engines, that one
little dark figure clutching and clinging to the ingots had in it something both weird and piteous.

For five minutes or more Robert stood in the darkness amid the rain, looking in at this strange
sight, while his father hardly moved save to cuddle closer to the gold, and to pat it with
his thin hands. Robert was still uncertain what he should do, when his eyes wandered from the
central figure and fell on something else which made him give a little cry of astonishment--a
cry which was drowned amid the howling of the gale.

Raffles Haw was standing in the corner of the room. Where he had come from Robert could not
say, but he was certain that he had not been there when he first looked in. He stood silent,
wrapped in some long, dark dressing-gown, his arms folded, and a bitter smile upon his pale
face. Old McIntyre seemed to see him at almost the same moment, for he snarled out an oath,
and clutched still closer at his treasure, looking slantwise at the master of the house with
furtive, treacherous eyes.

"And it has really come to this!" said Haw at last, taking a step forward. "You have actually
fallen so low, Mr. McIntyre, as to steal into my house at night like a common burglar. You
knew that this window was unguarded. I remember telling you as much. But I did not tell you
what other means I had adopted by which I might be warned if knaves made an entrance. But that
you should have come! You!"

The old gunmaker made no attempt to justify himself, but he muttered some few hoarse words,
and continued to cling to the treasure.

"I love your daughter," said Raffles Haw, "and for her sake I will not expose you. Your hideous
and infamous secret shall be safe with me. No ear shall hear what has happened this night.
I will not, as I might, arouse my servants and send for the police. But you must leave my house
without further words. I have nothing more to say to you. Go as you have come."

He took a step forward, and held out his hand as if to detach the old man's grasp from the
golden bars. The other thrust his hand into the breast of his coat, and with a shrill scream
of rage flung himself upon the alchemist. So sudden and so fierce was the movement that Haw
had no time for defence. A bony hand gripped him by the throat, and the blade of a razor flashed
in the air. Fortunately, as it fell, the weapon struck against one of the many wires which
spanned the room, and flying out of the old man's grasp, tinkled upon the stone floor. But,
though disarmed, he was still dangerous. With a horrible silent energy he pushed Haw back and
back until, coming to a bench, they both fell over it, McIntyre remaining uppermost. His other
hand was on the alchemist's throat, and it might have fared ill with him had Robert not climbed
through the window and dragged his father off from him. With the aid of Haw, he pinned the
old man down, and passed a long cravat around his arms. It was terrible to look at him, for
his face was convulsed, his eyes bulging from his head, and his lips white with foam. 

By kahe Parei held at the mela, all family members of the Priestess touched only her face, then
her chest. The process is called pelesat with. Then each with a few grains of rice ao lali
and drink some water with the tuhe lali. Then begin the feast.

Like all objects which have been used in religious ceremonies, these are also pemali carefully
preserved.

The above-mentioned rice is the first of the new harvest. He must, according to ancient custom,
in an on Bricks resting pan to be cooked. The bricks, three in number, two large (Angan banga)
and a small (Angan tepa), be prepared for this occasion. The two large stones, are based on an
edge, on the stove and take the cup, and the small stone leaning against one of the bigger and with
a Kawit. To ward off evil spirits is provided with a hook bamboo rod (udak Awak), which in use,
to the small stone is leaning. These bricks are pretty much the only remnant of the former pottery,
that in the related, but now rarely visited by the Malay traders strains still in vogue.

At the feast of the new rice for old brave men prepared a special way; he is cooked, wrapped in
banana leaves, in the form of elongated parcel, which rolled up be. Each of the brave shall be attached
to a string of eight such roles.

Also the first introduction of rice found in the barn instead of using the dajung which negotiate
with the rice souls must, in order for their future stay in the barn
propitiated.

The pemali used for this purpose are different for the different strains.

The dajung of Tandjong Karang use the bulit Barang that of the Kuda
Tandjong Telu bulit with hiköp and that of Ma-san Suling the lali.

All these pemali serve the same purpose, the attractants, collecting and storing the rice
souls.

Barang is bulit for a tiny ladder, a spatula, both with fitted Kawit, and a closed basket.
In this are, apart from a Kawit, hooks and spines of plants and ropes
of vegetable fiber, the rice spirit, if necessary by force record.

When Action touches the soul priestess of rice with a spatula along the stairs to the basket,
is to say: it brings the little lake, the rest on piles rice barn.

The bulit Telu the hiköp is a Kattunstreifen tied with a white bamboo box, in which some of
Kawit, are a cord and a tiny head. On this ladder the rice-soul with the bulit hiköp (pumping power)
in the bamboo container transported here by the dajung tied with string and hang the whole
thing in the barn. Net and ladder are also provided with Kawit. In addition to this form exists
in Tandjong Kuda another: two bamboo tubes with Kawit, hanging side
by side on a rope in the barn, you differs from those who: Tawe (string)
LEPO (barn), Parei (rice), which as Seelenweg serves, and the teha
hato toko hawo, vessel for the storage of the captured soul.

The san (manager) lali is the Ma-Suling from a ladder, a bamboo container and a Chicken feathers,
which is used for release of the soul in the vessel.

The bamboo container containing the Kawit and is wrapped with white Kattunstreifen, it's called:
njina Bruwa Parei literally Calming the soul of rice.

In njina, the daily attractants, caressing and soothing the souls of children through the Mothers
understood. An accurate representation of the word is impossible (see About the process p. 72).

In order to secure for the following year a good harvest, it is necessary
to keep the Bahau, to reach not only in the possession of the souls
of the currently available rice, but and the souls of the fallen to
the ground, eaten by deer, monkeys and pigs Rice to get hold of. I do not think that there is a man in a thousand who would
have done as well. But don't you think sometimes that it has a dangerous influence upon those
who are around you?"

"I have sometimes feared so." "We may pass over old Mr. McIntyre. It would hardly be just,
perhaps, to mention him in this connection. But there is Robert. He used to take such an interest
in his profession. He was so keen about art. If you met him, the first words he said were usually
some reference to his plans, or the progress he was making in his latest picture. He was ambitious,
pushing, self-reliant. Now he does nothing. I know for a fact that it is two months since he
put brush to canvas. He has turned from a student into an idler, and, what is worse, I fear
into a parasite. You will forgive me for speaking so plainly?"

Raffles Haw said nothing, but he threw out his hands with a gesture of pain.

"And then there is something to be said about the country folk," said the vicar. "Your kindness
has been, perhaps, a little indiscriminate there. They don't seem to be as helpful or as self-reliant
as they used. There was old Blaxton, whose cowhouse roof was blown off the other day. He used
to be a man who was full of energy and resource. Three months ago he would have got a ladder
and had that roof on again in two days' work. But now he must sit down, and wring his hands,
and write letters, because he knew that it would come to your ears, and that you would make
it good. There's old Ellary, too! Well, of course he was always poor, but at least he did something,
and so kept himself out of mischief. Not a stroke will he do now, but smokes and talks scandal
from morning to night. And the worst of it is, that it not only hurts those who have had your
help, but it unsettles those who have not. They all have an injured, surly feeling as if other
folk were getting what they had an equal right to. It has really come to such a pitch that
I thought it was a duty to speak to you about it. Well, it is a new experience to me. I have
often had to reprove my parishioners for not being charitable enough, but it is very strange
to find one who is too charitable. It is a noble error."

"I thank you very much for letting me know about it," answered Raffles Haw, as he shook the
good old clergyman's hand. "I shall certainly reconsider my conduct in that respect."

He kept a rigid and unmoved face until his visitor had gone, and then retiring to his own little
room, he threw himself upon the bed and burst out sobbing with his face buried in the pillow.
Of all men in England, this, the richest, was on that day the most miserable. How could he
use this great power which he held? Every blessing which he tried to give turned itself into
a curse. His intentions were so good, and yet the results were so terrible. It was as if he
had some foul leprosy of the mind which all caught who were exposed to his influence. His charity,
so well meant, so carefully bestowed, had yet poisoned the whole countryside. And if in small
things his results were so evil, how could he tell that they would be better in the larger
plans which he had formed? If he could not pay the debts of a simple yokel without disturbing
the great laws of cause and effect which lie at the base of all things, what could he hope
for when he came to fill the treasury of nations, to interfere with the complex conditions
of trade, or to provide for great masses of the population? He drew back with horror as he
dimly saw that vast problems faced him in which he might make errors which all his money could
not repair. The way of Providence was the straight way. Yet he, a half-blind creature, must
needs push in and strive to alter and correct it. Would he be a benefactor? Might he not rather
prove to be the greatest malefactor that the world had seen?

But soon a calmer mood came upon him, and he rose and bathed his flushed face and fevered brow.
After all, was not there a field where all were agreed that money might be well spent? It was
not the way of nature, but rather the way of man which he would alter. It was not Providence
that had ordained that folk should live half-starved and overcrowded in dreary slums. That
was the result of artificial conditions, and it might well be healed by artificial means. Why
should not his plans be successful after all, and the world better for his discovery? Then
again, it was not the truth that he cast a blight on those with whom he was brought in contact.
There was Laura; who knew more of him than she did, and yet how good and sweet and true she
was! She at least had lost nothing through knowing him. He would go down and see her. It would
be soothing to hear her voice, and to turn to her for words of sympathy in this his hour of
darkness.

The storm had died away, but a soft wind was blowing, and the smack of the coming spring was
in the air. He drew in the aromatic scent of the fir-trees as he passed down the curving drive.
Before him lay the long sloping countryside, all dotted over with the farmsteadings and little
red cottages, with the morning sun striking slantwise upon their grey roofs and glimmering
windows. His heart yearned over all these people with their manifold troubles, their little
sordid miseries, their strivings and hopings and petty soul-killing cares. How could he get
at them? How could he manage to lift the burden from them, and yet not hinder them in their
life aim? For more and more could he see that all refinement is through sorrow, and that the
life which does not refine is the life without an aim.

Laura was alone in the sitting-room at Elmdene, for Robert had gone out to make some final
arrangements about his father. She sprang up as her lover entered, and ran forward with a pretty
girlish gesture to greet him.

"Oh, Raffles!" she cried, "I knew that you would come. 

The rest of the luggage was out of the crates that were too heavy for one man, from the boats
taken. The cases were, despite the increase in boat edges, but still wet, because they do not
were completely waterproof and double-water-proof sheeting are not completely covered could,
so we have spoiled an important part of our larger ethnographic.

After we got over the Kiham Udang, we had left over time, calm us down to drift. I felt like a dark
prison in a bright world outside added. From the lowlands of the middle and lower Mahakam separated
us only the Kiham Halo. In a letter to the inspector some Kahájan Dayak, who went up for me given,
he wrote me that he later in Long Bagung waiting for me.

Although it rained the next morning and the. down low-hanging clouds enveloped the beautiful
Summit of the mountain one, also had Bilang (Baumgekko) at night sounded his warning voice But
leave was Kwing Irang as before to calm the animal a short tour through the forest and as
the river rose only slightly, we sat by 8 clock back in the boats, hoping to reach the controller
on the same day. We had this good View to encouraging much needed, because the narrow gorge
of the Halo Kiham to us in 1897 had delighted in a good light, was now, because of the difficulty
lying clouds only as a dark column in the noise that the Kayan of the raging waters began, made
a double eerie impression. Put it away, sir!"

She smoothed it away with her little white hand.

"Well, at any rate, I don't think that quite everybody is the worse," said he, looking down
at her. "There is one, at least, who is beyond taint, one who is good, and pure, and true,
and who would love me as well if I were a poor clerk struggling for a livelihood. You would,
would you not, Laura?"

"You foolish boy! of course I would."

"And yet how strange it is that it should be so. That you, who are the only woman whom I have
ever loved, should be the only one in whom I also have raised an affection which is free from
greed or interest. I wonder whether you may not have been sent by Providence simply to restore
my confidence in the world. How barren a place would it not be if it were not for woman's love!
When all seemed black around me this morning, I tell you, Laura, that I seemed to turn to you
and to your love as the one thing on earth upon which I could rely. All else seemed shifting,
unstable, influenced by this or that base consideration. In you, and you only, could I trust."

"And I in you, dear Raffles! I never knew what love was until I met you."

She took a step towards him, her hands advanced, love shining in her features, when in an instant
Raffles saw the colour struck from her face, and a staring horror spring into her eyes. Her
blanched and rigid face was turned towards the open door, while he, standing partly behind
it, could not see what it was that had so moved her.

"Hector!" she gasped, with dry lips.

A quick step in the hall, and a slim, weather-tanned young man sprang forward into the room,
and caught her up in his arms as if she had been a feather.

"You darling!" he said; "I knew that I would surprise you. I came right up from Plymouth by
the night train. And I have long leave, and plenty of time to get married. Isn't it jolly,
dear Laura?"

He pirouetted round with her in the exuberance of his delight. As he spun round, however, his
eyes fell suddenly upon the pale and silent stranger who stood by the door. Hector blushed
furiously, and made an awkward sailor bow, standing with Laura's cold and unresponsive hand
still clasped in his.

"Very sorry, sir--didn't see you," he said. "You'll excuse my going on in this mad sort of
way, but if you had served you would know what it is to get away from quarter-deck manners,
and to be a free man. Miss McIntyre will tell you that we have known each other since we were
children, and as we are to be married in, I hope, a month at the latest, we understand each
other pretty well."

Raffles Haw still stood cold and motionless. He was stunned, benumbed, by what he saw and heard.
Laura drew away from Hector, and tried to free her hand from his grasp.

"Didn't you get my letter at Gibraltar?" she asked.

"Never went to Gibraltar. Were ordered home by wire from Madeira. Those chaps at the Admiralty
never know their own minds for two hours together. But what matter about a letter, Laura, so
long as I can see you and speak with you? You have not introduced me to your friend here."

"One word, sir," cried Raffles Haw in a quivering voice. "Do I entirely understand you? Let
me be sure that there is no mistake. You say that you are engaged to be married to Miss McIntyre?"

"Of course I am. I've just come back from a four months' cruise, and I am going to be married
before I drag my anchor again."

"Four months!" gasped Haw. "Why, it is just four months since I came here. And one last question,
sir. Does Robert McIntyre know of your engagement?"

"Does Bob know? Of course he knows. Why, it was to his care I left Laura when I started. But
what is the meaning of all this? What is the matter with you, Laura? Why are you so white and
silent? And--hallo! Hold up, sir! The man is fainting!"

"It is all right!" gasped Haw, steadying himself against the edge of the door.

He was as white as paper, and his hand was pressed close to his side as though some sudden
pain had shot through him. For a moment he tottered there like a stricken man, and then, with
a hoarse cry, he turned and fled out through the open door.

"Poor devil!" said Hector, gazing in amazement after him. "He seems hard hit anyhow. But what
is the meaning of all this, Laura?"

His face had darkened, and his mouth had set.

She had not said a word, but had stood with a face like a mask looking blankly in front of
her. Now she tore herself away from him, and, casting herself down with her face buried in
the cushion of the sofa, she burst into a passion of sobbing.

"It means that you have ruined me," she cried. "That you have ruined-ruined--ruined me! Could
you not leave us alone? Why must you come at the last moment? A few more days, and we were
safe. And you never had my letter."

"And what was in your letter, then?" he asked coldly, standing with his arms folded, looking
down at her.

"It was to tell you that I released you. I love Raffles Haw, and I was to have been his wife.
And now it is all gone. Oh, Hector, I hate you, and I shall always hate you as long as I live,
for you have stepped between me and the only good fortune that ever came to me. Leave me alone,
and I hope that you will never cross our threshold again."

"Is that your last word, Laura?"

"The last that I shall ever speak to you."

"Then, good-bye. I shall see the Dad, and go straight back to Plymouth." He waited an instant,
in hopes of an answer, and then walked sadly from the room.

CHAPTER XV. THE GREATER SECRET.

It was late that night that a startled knocking came at the door of Elmdene. Laura had been
in her room all day, and Robert was moodily smoking his pipe by the fire, when this harsh and
sudden summons broke in upon his thoughts. There in the porch was Jones, the stout head-butler
of the Hall, hatless, scared, with the raindrops shining in the lamplight upon his smooth,
bald head.

"If you please, Mr. McIntyre, sir, would it trouble you to step up to the Hall?" he cried.
"We are all frightened, sir, about master."

Robert caught up his hat and started at a run, the frightened butler trotting heavily beside
him. It had been a day of excitement and disaster. The older men blamed on the many deha njam (= young People), and not with
the long travel and the care of the future used to go Sun had consumed a lot of rice, the other
alleged again that they had much wet, Rice have to throw away. Despite these statements, the
matter remained a mystery to me, since I do not would assume that they had hidden the rice for
their return trip in the woods. An explanation the fact the rice could not bring her way again, so
I called for together the chiefs to consider with them what to do next. By carelessness their
subordinates, we now had not even travel to Howong sufficient food, nevertheless raised his voice
against any continuation of the train. This was so much, because the chiefs knew very well that
we now had to travel by land in forced marches, that could be no question of rest days and the
baggage left behind and nothing was allowed. Familiarity with the chiefs of the neighborhood,
opened a prospect of the difficult Able to come out. They suggested me to first, the Dayak
Bungan Batatenfeld one, but the harvested from wild boar was to buy, nor should I them to the
watershed one days free, because they knew in the neighborhood a few places where one wild sago
gained, besides, I knew that my people kertap for an emergency all the finely pounded sticky
rice, had taken in their support baskets.

Another difficulty was that we spend some time on the watershed had
to measure the distance traveled on the Mahakam can.

This was essential as otherwise the whole topographic survey of the Mahakam related to that of the
Kapuasgebietes take place at all could not.

As quickly as possible to ascertain the most Pnihing Howong help,
it seemed to me to get on the edge, the principle of staying together
for most of the Europeans and Malays, first giving up.

 All round was a bewildering chaos of broken jars,
shattered bottles, cracked machinery, and tangled wires, all bent and draggled. And there in
the midst of this universal ruin, leaning back in his chair with his hands clasped upon his
lap, and the easy pose of one who rests after hard work safely carried through, sat Raffles
Haw, the master of the house, and the richest of mankind, with the pallor of death upon his
face. It has never been successful to
us, to enjoy such an unlimited view of Central Borneo.

Although we do not remove the rearmost mountains knew we did say some
known Summit Kapuasgebiet that she had to be very big.

Reverently and slowly they bore him to his room, for he was beloved by all who had served him.
Robert alone lingered with the policeman in the laboratory. Like a man in a dream he wandered
about, marvelling at the universal destruction. A large broad-headed hammer lay upon the ground,
and with this Haw had apparently set himself to destroy all his apparatus, having first used
his electrical machines to reduce to protyle all the stock of gold which he had accumulated.
The treasure-room which had so dazzled Robert consisted now of merely four bare walls, while
the gleaming dust upon the floor proclaimed the fate of that magnificent collection of gems
which had alone amounted to a royal fortune. Population down for the
surrounding areas, an event of great importance, since the supervision of a European Officials of the
overzealous efforts of the dealers, at the expense of innocent natives to enrich a limit set.
Another major consequence of granting the right of establishment was that the Chinese merchant steamers
now no longer in Bunut halted, but directly to Putus SIBAU drove up, pushing prices of imported
goods declined and the Busch products increased.
 It was locked, but the key was in it. He turned it and threw open
the lid. There was a white slip of paper with his own name written upon it. With trembling
fingers he unfolded it. Was he the heir to the riches of El Dorado, or was he destined to be
a poor struggling artist? The note was dated that very evening, and ran in this way:

   "MY DEAR ROBERT,--My secret shall never be used again. I cannot
   tell you how I thank Heaven that I did not entirely confide it to
   you, for I should have been handing over an inheritance of misery
   both to yourself and others.  For myself I have hardly had a happy
   moment since I discovered it. This I could have borne had I been
   able to feel that I was doing good, but, alas! the only effect of my
   attempts has been to turn workers into idlers, contented men into
   greedy parasites, and, worst of all, true, pure women into
   deceivers and hypocrites.  If this is the effect of my interference
   on a small scale, I cannot hope for anything better were I to carry
   out the plans which we have so often discussed. 

When storing live plants, we proceeded as follows: if possible, were young Specimens taken from
the soil in a way that, in order not to injure the fine root ends, same time a large quantity of
earth was lifted out. 

A member of the chief family of Ma-tuan told with pride that the inspector the last Days in her gallery
had lived, for fear of the lali stopped Parei the Long-Glat be, because he wanted to go in the
first drop of water.  It is as if wealth
   were as bad for health as it is for peace of mind.  Good-bye,
   Robert, and may you never have as sad a heart as I have to-night.
   Yours very truly,
   RAFFLES HAW."

"Was it suicide, sir? Was it suicide?" broke in the policeman as Robert put the note in his pocket.

"No," he answered; "I think it was a broken heart."

And so the wonders of the New Hall were all dismantled, the carvings and the gold, the books
and the pictures, and many a struggling man or woman who had heard nothing of Raffles Haw during
his life had cause to bless him after his death. The house has been bought by a company now,
who have turned it into a hydropathic establishment, and of all the folk who frequent it in
search of health or of pleasure there are few who know the strange story which is connected
with it.

The blight which Haw's wealth cast around it seemed to last even after his death. In order to prevent separation of the fibers,
Bast is the fixed thread or thin cord through it. Sometimes the women take the Bastkleider with
red calico one, but the work can be desired in terms of beauty much
left. His art is forgotten, and he spends
his whole small income upon chemical and electrical appliances, with which he vainly seeks
to rediscover that one hidden link. His sister keeps house for him, a silent and brooding woman,
still queenly and beautiful, but of a bitter, dissatisfied mind. A popular game is also the targets with panels River
stones at earthen pits.

None of these games ambition or envy argues, the boys play to play,
not to emerge victorious from the game. As to Hector Spurling, he
is still in her Majesty's service, and seems inclined to abide by his father's wise advice,
that he should not think of marrying until he was a Commander. It is possible that of all who
were brought within the spell of Raffles Haw he was the only one who had occasion to bless it.

