It was some weeks after the date of the events last recorded.  The storm that hung over the
destinies of King Edward was dispersed for the hour, though the scattered clouds still darkened
the horizon: the Earl of Warwick had defeated the Lancastrians on the frontier, [Croyl. 552]
and their leader had perished on the scaffold; but Edward's mighty sword had not shone in the
battle.  Chained by an attraction yet more powerful than slaughter, he had lingered at Middleham,
while Warwick led his army to York; and when the earl arrived at the capital of Edward's ancestral
duchy, he found that the able and active Hastings--having heard, even before he reached the
Duke of Gloucester's camp, of Edward's apparent seizure by the earl and the march to Middleham--had
deemed it best to halt at York, and to summon in all haste a council of such of the knights
and barons as either love to the king or envy to Warwick could collect.  The report was general
that Edward was retained against his will at Middleham; and this rumour Hastings gravely demanded
Warwick, on the arrival of the latter at York, to disprove.  The earl, to clear himself from
a suspicion that impeded all his military movements, despatched Lord Montagu to Middleham,
who returned not only with the king, but the countess and her daughters, whom Edward, under
pretence of proving the complete amity that existed between Warwick and himself, carried in
his train.  The king's appearance at York reconciled all differences; but he suffered Warwick
to march alone against the enemy, and not till after the decisive victory, which left his reign
for a while without an open foe, did he return to London.

Thither the earl, by the advice of his friends, also repaired, and in a council of peers, summoned
for the purpose, deigned to refute the rumours still commonly circulated by his foes, and not
disbelieved by the vulgar, whether of his connivance at the popular rising or his forcible
detention of the king at Middleham.  To this, agreeably to the counsel of the archbishop, succeeded
a solemn interview of the heads of the Houses of York and Warwick, in which the once fair Rose
of Raby (the king's mother) acted as mediator and arbiter.  The earl's word to the commons
at Olney was ratified.  Edward consented to the temporary retirement of the Woodvilles, though
the gallant Anthony yet delayed his pilgrimage to Compostella.  The vanity of Clarence was
contented by the government of Ireland, but, under various pretences, Edward deferred his brother's
departure to that important post. A general amnesty was proclaimed, a parliament summoned for
the redress of popular grievances, and the betrothal of the king's daughter to Montagu's heir
was proclaimed: the latter received the title of Duke of Bedford; and the whole land rejoiced
in the recovered peace of the realm, the retirement of the Woodvilles, and the reconciliation
of the young king with his all-beloved subject.  Never had the power of the Neviles seemed
so secure; never did the throne of Edward appear so stable.

It was at this time that the king prevailed upon the earl and his countess to permit the Lady
Anne to accompany the Duchess of Clarence in a visit to the palace of the Tower.  The queen
had submitted so graciously to the humiliation of her family, that even the haughty Warwick
was touched and softened; and the visit of his daughter at such a time became a homage to Elizabeth
which it suited his chivalry to render.

The public saw in this visit, which was made with great state and ceremony, the probability
of a new and popular alliance.  The archbishop had suffered the rumour of Gloucester's attachment
to the Lady Anne to get abroad, and the young prince's return from the North was anxiously
expected by the gossips of the day.

It was on this occasion that Warwick showed his gratitude for Marmaduke Nevile's devotion.
"My dear and gallant kinsman," he said, "I forget not that when thou didst leave the king and
the court for the discredited minister and his gloomy hall,--I forget not that thou didst tell
me of love to some fair maiden, which had not prospered according to thy merits.  At least
it shall not be from lack of lands, or of the gold spur, which allows the wearer to ride by
the side of king or kaisar, that thou canst not choose thy bride as the heart bids thee.  I
pray thee, sweet cousin, to attend my child Anne to the court, where the king will show thee
no ungracious countenance; but it is just to recompense thee for the loss of thy post in his
highness's chamber.  I hold the king's commission to make knights of such as can pay the fee,
and thy lands shall suffice for the dignity.  Kneel down and rise up, Sir Marmaduke Nevile,
lord of the Manor of Borrodaile, with its woodlands and its farms, and may God and our Lady
render thee puissant in battle and prosperous in love!"

Accordingly, in his new rank, and entitled to ruffle it with the bravest, Sir Marmaduke Nevile
accompanied the earl and the Lady Anne to the palace of the Tower.

As Warwick, leaving his daughter amidst the brilliant circle that surrounded Elizabeth, turned
to address the king, he said, with simple and unaffected nobleness,--

"Ah, my liege, if you needed a hostage of my faith, think that my heart is here, for verily
its best blood were less dear to me than that slight girl,--the likeness of her mother, when
her lips first felt the touch of mine!"

Edward's bold brow fell, and he blushed as he answered, "My Elizabeth will hold her as a sister.
But, cousin, part you not now for the North?"

"By your leave I go first to Warwick."

"Ah, you do not wish to approve of my seeming preparations against France?"

"Nay, your Highness is not in earnest. I promised the commons that you would need no supplies
for so thriftless a war."

"Thou knowest I mean to fulfil all thy pledges.  But the country so swarms with disbanded soldiers,
that it is politic to hold out to them a hope of service, and so let the clouds gradually pass
away."

"Alack, my liege," said Warwick, gravely, "I suppose that a crown teaches the brow to scheme;
but hearty peace or open war seems ever the best to me."

Edward smiled, and turned aside.  Warwick glanced at his daughter, whom Elizabeth flatteringly
caressed, stifled a sigh, and the air seemed lighter to the insects of the court as his proud
crest bowed beneath the doorway, and, with the pomp of his long retinue, he vanished from the
scene.

"And choose, fair Anne," said the queen, "choose from my ladies whom you will have for your
special train.  We would not that your attendance should be less than royal."

The gentle Anne in vain sought to excuse herself from an honour at once arrogant and invidious,
though too innocent to perceive the cunning so characteristic of the queen; for, under the
guise of a special compliment, Anne had received the royal request to have her female attendants
chosen from the court, and Elizabeth now desired to force upon her a selection which could
not fail to mortify those not preferred.  But glancing timidly round the circle, the noble
damsel's eye rested on one fair face, and in that face there was so much that awoke her own
interest, and stirred up a fond and sad remembrance, that she passed involuntarily to the stranger's
side, and artlessly took her hand.  The high-born maidens, grouped around, glanced at each
other with a sneer, and slunk back.  Even the queen looked surprised; but recovering herself,
inclined her head graciously, and said, "Do we read your meaning aright, Lady Anne, and would
you this gentlewoman, Mistress Sibyll Warner, as one of your chamber?"

"Sibyll, ah, I knew that my memory failed me not," murmured Anne; and, after bowing assent
to the queen, she said, "Do you not also recall, fair demoiselle, our meeting, when children
long years ago?"

"Well, noble dame," [The title of dame was at that time applied indiscriminately to ladies
whether married or single, if of high birth.] answered Sibyll.  And as Anne turned, with her
air of modest gentleness, yet of lofty birth and breeding, to explain to the queen that she
had met Sibyll in earlier years, the king approached to monopolize his guest's voice and ear.
It seemed natural to all present that Edward should devote peculiar attention to the daughter
of Warwick and the sister of the Duchess of Clarence; and even Elizabeth suspected no guiltier
gallantry in the subdued voice, the caressing manner, which her handsome lord adopted throughout
that day, even to the close of the nightly revel, towards a demoiselle too high (it might well
appear) for licentious homage.

But Anne herself, though too guileless to suspect the nature of Edward's courtesy, yet shrank
from it in vague terror.  All his beauty, all his fascination, could not root from her mind
the remembrance of the exiled prince; nay, the brilliancy of his qualities made her the more
averse to him.  It darkened the prospects of Edward of Lancaster that Edward of York should
wear so gracious and so popular a form.  She hailed with delight the hour when she was conducted
to her chamber, and dismissing gently the pompous retinue allotted to her, found herself alone
with the young maiden whom she had elected to her special service.

"And you remember me, too, fair Sibyll?" said Anne, with her dulcet and endearing voice.

"Truly, who would not? for as you, then, noble lady, glided apart from the other children,
hand in hand with the young prince, in whom all dreamed to see their future king, I heard the
universal murmur of--a false prophecy!"

"Ah! and of what?" asked Anne.

"That in the hand the prince clasped with his small rosy fingers--the hand of great Warwick's
daughter--lay the best defence of his father's throne."

Anne's breast heaved, and her small foot began to mark strange characters on the floor.

"So," she said musingly, "so even here, amidst a new court, you forget not Prince Edward of
Lancaster.  Oh, we shall find hours to talk of the past days.  But how, if your childhood was
spent in Margaret's court, does your youth find a welcome in Elizabeth's?"

"Avarice and power had need of my father's science.  He is a scholar of good birth, but fallen
fortunes, even now, and ever while night lasts, he is at work.  I belonged to the train of
her grace of Bedford; but when the duchess quitted the court, and the king retained my father
in his own royal service, her highness the queen was pleased to receive me among her maidens.
Happy that my father's home is mine!--who else could tend him?"

"Thou art his only child?--he must--love thee dearly?"

"Yet not as I love him; he lives in a life apart from all else that live.  But after all, peradventure
it is sweeter to love than to be loved."

Anne, whose nature was singularly tender and woman-like, was greatly affected by this answer.
She drew nearer to Sibyll; she twined her arm round her slight form, and kissed her forehead.

"Shall I love thee, Sibyll?" she said, with a girl's candid simplicity, "and wilt thou love me?"

"Ah, lady! there are so many to love thee,--father, mother, sister,-- all the world; the very
sun shines more kindly upon the great!"

"Nay!" said Anne, with that jealousy of a claim to suffering to which the gentler natures are
prone, "I may have sorrows from which thou art free.  I confess to thee, Sibyll, that something
I know not how to explain draws me strangely towards thy sweet face.  Marriage has lost me
my only sister, for since Isabel is wed she is changed to me--would that her place were supplied
by thee!  Shall I steal thee from the queen when I depart?  Ah, my mother--at least thou wilt
love her! for verily, to love my mother you have but to breathe the same air.  Kiss me, Sibyll."

Kindness, of late, had been strange to Sibyll, especially from her own sex, one of her own
age; it came like morning upon the folded blossom. She threw her arms round the new friend
that seemed sent to her from heaven; she kissed Anne's face and hands with grateful tears.

"Ah!" she said at last, when she could command a voice still broken with emotion--"if I could
ever serve--ever repay thee--though those gracious words were the last thy lips should ever
deign to address to me!"

Anne was delighted; she had never yet found one to protect; she had never yet found one in
whom thoroughly to confide.  Gentle as her mother was, the distinction between child and parent
was, even in the fond family she belonged to, so great in that day, that she could never have
betrayed to the countess the wild weakness of her young heart.

The wish to communicate, to reveal, is so natural to extreme youth, and in Anne that disposition
was so increased by a nature at once open and inclined to lean on others, that she had, as
we have seen, sought a confidante in Isabel; but with her, even at the first, she found but
the half-contemptuous pity of a strong and hard mind; and lately, since Edward's visit to Middleham,
the Duchess of Clarence had been so rapt in her own imperious egotism and discontented ambition,
that the timid Anne had not even dared to touch, with her, upon those secrets which it flushed
her own bashful cheek to recall.  And this visit to the court, this new, unfamiliar scene,
this estrangement from all the old accustomed affections, had produced in her that sense of
loneliness which is so irksome, till grave experience of real life accustoms us to the common
lot.  So with the exaggerated and somewhat morbid sensibility that belonged to her, she turned
at once, and by impulse, to this sudden, yet graceful friendship.  Here was one of her own
age, one who had known sorrow, one whose voice and eyes charmed her, one who would not chide
even folly, one, above all, who had seen her beloved prince, one associated with her fondest
memories, one who might have a thousand tales to tell of the day when the outlaw boy was a
monarch's heir.  In the childishness of her soft years, she almost wept at another channel
for so much natural tenderness.  It was half the woman gaining a woman-friend, half the child
clinging to a new playmate.

"Ah, Sibyll," she whispered, "do not leave me to-night; this strange place daunts me, and the
figures on the arras seem so tall and spectre-like, and they say the old tower is haunted.
Stay, dear Sibyll!"

And Sibyll stayed.

CHAPTER II.

THE SLEEPING INNOCENCE--THE WAKEFUL CRIME.

While these charming girls thus innocently conferred; while, Anne's sweet voice running on
in her artless fancies, they helped each other to undress; while hand in hand they knelt in
prayer by the crucifix in the dim recess; while timidly they extinguished the light, and stole
to rest; while, conversing in whispers, growing gradually more faint and low, they sank into
guileless sleep,--the unholy king paced his solitary chamber, parched with the fever of the
sudden and frantic passion that swept away from a heart in which every impulse was a giant
all the memories of honour, gratitude, and law.

The mechanism of this strong man's nature was that almost unknown to the modern time; it belonged
to those earlier days which furnish to Greece the terrible legends Ovid has clothed in gloomy
fire, which a similar civilization produced no less in the Middle Ages, whether of Italy or
the North,--that period when crime took a grandeur from its excess; when power was so great
and absolute that its girth burst the ligaments of conscience; when a despot was but the incarnation
of WILL; when honour was indeed a religion, but its faith was valour, and it wrote its decalogue
with the point of a fearless sword.

The youth of Edward IV. was as the youth of an ancient Titan, of an Italian Borgia; through
its veins the hasty blood rolled as a devouring flame.  This impetuous and fiery temperament
was rendered yet more fearful by the indulgence of every intemperance; it fed on wine and lust;
its very virtues strengthened its vices,--its courage stifled every whisper of prudence; its
intellect, uninured to all discipline, taught it to disdain every obstacle to its desires.
Edward could, indeed, as we have seen, be false and crafty, a temporizer, a dissimulator; but
it was only as the tiger creeps,--the better to spring, undetected, on its prey.  If detected,
the cunning ceased, the daring rose, and the mighty savage had fronted ten thousand foes, secure
in its fangs and talons, its bold heart and its deadly spring.  Hence, with all Edward's abilities,
the astonishing levities and indiscretions of his younger years.  It almost seemed, as we have
seen him play fast and loose with the might of Warwick, and with that power, whether of barons
or of people, which any other prince of half his talents would have trembled to arouse against
an unrooted throne,--it almost seemed as if he loved to provoke a danger for the pleasure it
gave the brain to baffle or the hand to crush it. His whole nature coveting excitement, nothing
was left to the beautiful, the luxurious Edward, already wearied with pomp and pleasure, but
what was unholy and forbidden.  In his court were a hundred ladies, perhaps not less fair than
Anne, at least of a beauty more commanding the common homage, but these he had only to smile
on with ease to win.  No awful danger, no inexpiable guilt, attended those vulgar frailties,
and therefore they ceased to tempt.  But here the virgin guest, the daughter of his mightiest
subject, the beloved treasure of the man whose hand had built a throne, whose word had dispersed
an army--here, the more the reason warned, the conscience started, the more the hell-born passion
was aroused.

Like men of his peculiar constitution, Edward was wholly incapable of pure and steady love.
His affection for his queen the most resembled that diviner affection; but when analyzed, it
was composed of feelings widely distinct.  From a sudden passion, not otherwise to be gratified,
he had made the rashest sacrifices for an unequal marriage. His vanity, and something of original
magnanimity, despite his vices, urged him to protect what he himself had raised,--to secure
the honour of the subject who was honoured by the king.  In common with most rude and powerful
natures, he was strongly alive to the affections of a father, and the faces of his children
helped to maintain the influence of the mother.  But in all this, we need scarcely say that
that true love, which is at once a passion and a devotion, existed not.  Love with him cared
not for the person loved, but solely for its own gratification; it was desire for possession,--nothing
more.  But that desire was the will of a king who never knew fear or scruple; and, pampered
by eternal indulgence, it was to the feeble lusts of common men what the storm is to the west
wind.  Yet still, as in the solitude of night he paced his chamber, the shadow of the great
crime advancing upon his soul appalled even that dauntless conscience.  He gasped for breath;
his cheeks flushed crimson, and the next moment grew deadly pale.  He heard the loud beating
of his heart.  He stopped still.  He flung himself on a seat, and hid his face with his hands;
then starting up, he exclaimed, "No, no!  I cannot shut out that sweet face, those blue eyes
from my gaze.  They haunt me to my destruction and her own.  Yet why say destruction?  If she
love me, who shall know the deed?  If she love me not, will she dare to reveal her shame? Shame!--nay,
a king's embrace never dishonours.  A king's bastard is a House's pride.  All is still,--the
very moon vanishes from heaven. The noiseless rushes in the gallery give no echo to the footstep.
Fie on me!  Can a Plantagenet know fear?"  He allowed himself no further time to pause; he
opened the door gently and stole along the gallery. He knew well the chamber, for it was appointed
by his command, and, besides the usual door from the corridor, a small closet conducted to
a secret panel behind the arras.  It was the apartment occupied, in her visits to the court,
by the queen's rival, the Lady Elizabeth Lucy.  He passed into the closet; he lifted the arras;
he stood in that chamber, which gratitude and chivalry and hospitable faith should have made
sacred as a shrine.  And suddenly, as he entered, the moon, before hid beneath a melancholy
cloud, broke forth in awful splendour, and her light rushed through the casement opposite his
eye, and bathed the room with the beams of a ghostlier day.

The abruptness of the solemn and mournful glory scared him as the rebuking face of a living
thing; a presence as if not of earth seemed to interpose between the victim and the guilt.
It was, however, but for a moment that his step halted.  He advanced: he drew aside the folds
of the curtain heavy with tissue of gold, and the sleeping face of Anne lay hushed before him.
It looked pale in the moonlight, but ineffably serene, and the smile on its lips seemed still
sweeter than that which it wore awake.  So fixed was his gaze, so ardently did his whole heart
and being feed through his eyes upon that exquisite picture of innocence and youth, that he
did not see for some moments that the sleeper was not alone.  Suddenly an exclamation rose
to his lips.  He clenched his hand in jealous agony; he approached; he bent over; he heard
the regular breathing which the dreams of guilt never know; and then, when he saw that pure
and interlaced embrace,--the serene yet somewhat melancholy face of Sibyll, which seemed hueless
as marble in the moonlight, bending partially over that of Anne, as if even in sleep watchful;
both charming forms so linked and woven that the two seemed as one life, the very breath in
each rising and ebbing with the other; the dark ringlets of Sibyll mingling with the auburn
gold of Anne's luxuriant hair, and the darkness and the gold, tress within tress, falling impartially
over either neck, that gleamed like ivory beneath that common veil,--when he saw this twofold
loveliness, the sentiment, the conviction of that mysterious defence which exists in purity,
thrilled like ice through his burning veins.  In all his might of monarch and of man, he felt
the awe of that unlooked-for protection,--maidenhood sheltering maidenhood, innocence guarding
innocence.  The double virtue appalled and baffled him; and that slight arm which encircled
the neck he would have perilled his realm to clasp, shielded his victim more effectually than
the bucklers of all the warriors that ever gathered round the banner of the lofty Warwick.
Night and the occasion befriended him; but in vain.  While Sibyll was there, Anne was saved.
He ground his teeth, and muttered to himself.  At that moment Anne turned restlessly.  This
movement disturbed the light sleep of her companion.  She spoke half inaudibly, but the sound
was as the hoot of shame in the ear of the guilty king. He let fall the curtain, and was gone.
And if one who lived afterwards to hear and to credit the murderous doom which, unless history
lies, closed the male line of Edward, had beheld the king stealing, felon-like, from the chamber,--his
step reeling to and fro the gallery floors, his face distorted by stormy passion, his lips
white and murmuring, his beauty and his glory dimmed and humbled,--the spectator might have
half believed that while Edward gazed upon those harmless sleepers, A VISION OF THE TRAGEDY
TO COME had stricken down his thought of guilt, and filled up its place with horror,--a vision
of a sleep as pure, of two forms wrapped in an embrace as fond, of intruders meditating a crime
scarce fouler than his own; and the sins of the father starting into grim corporeal shapes,
to become the deathsmen of the sons!

Oh, beautiful is the love of youth to youth, and touching the tenderness of womanhood to woman;
and fair in the eyes of the happy sun is the waking of holy sleep, and the virgin kiss upon
virgin lips smiling and murmuring the sweet "Good-morrow!"

Anne was the first to wake; and as the bright winter morn, robust with frosty sunbeams shone
cheerily upon Sibyll's face, she was struck with a beauty she had not sufficiently observed
the day before; for in the sleep of the young the traces of thought and care vanish, the aching
heart is lulled in the body's rest, the hard lines relax into flexile ease, a softer, warmer
bloom steals over the cheek, and, relieved from the stiff restraints of dress, the rounded
limbs repose in a more alluring grace!  Youth seems younger in its slumber, and beauty more
beautiful, and purity more pure.  Long and dark, the fringe of the eyelash rested upon the
white lids, and the freshness of the parting pouted lips invited the sister kiss that wakened
up the sleeper.

"Ah, lady," said Sibyll, parting her tresses from her dark blue eyes, "you are here, you are
safe!--blessed be the saints and our Lady! for I had a dream in the night that startled and
appalled me." 

We have seen that Fichte and Schelling, not content with this result,
had sought, though by opposite processes, to escape from this limited
knowledge; to attain an ontology as well as a psychology.

All philosophy aims at attaining a knowledge of reality, either à posteriori by means of generalisation,
or à priori from the data of mind. These two philosophers strove to attain it by the latter
mode; but their method either lacked system, or failed in its results: their philosophy was poetry
rather than logic. Hegel followed in their steps, but adopted a basis which admitted of being
developed in a formal system.

The logical rigour of his method, and the encyclopædic grasp which it gave over knowledge, partly
accounted, as in the case of Spinoza or of Wolff, for its popularity. The universe was to
be interpreted from the mind; the laws of thought were the laws of things. The microcosm and
the macrocosm were one; thought, and the mind that thinks; or, more
truly, both were phases of the universal mind which was unfolding.

The mind of man could transcend the limits of the finite and phenomenal; and, being able to apprehend
the idea, the νοούμενον, absolutely, without condition, thus possessed the solution of any branch
of universal knowledge by an à priori process.

The problem of philosophy was, to find the laws of this evolution
in thought, to catch the ideal when it strives to become immanent
and to manifest itself in the actual.

Without attempting here to explain the kind of threefold process, (35) according to which this
evolution takes place, it is better, as in the case of the former philosophies named, to exhibit
the influence of the general method rather than the effects of particular theories inculcated by
it.

The method had many advantages, in displacing a low materialism, in stimulating loftiness of conception,
and generating an historic study of every subject, by its view of the universe as a development;
and also created a largeness of sympathy with differing views, by regarding all things as in transition,
relative, true only in reference to their contradictory; and by considering all hypotheses to
contain a germ of right, and to be the result of partial views of truth; but it will also be obvious,
that the method had its evil effects. For, when applied to any department, it produced a disposition
to seize the principle, the idea, of which the concrete is the embodiment; to descend from the
type upon the individual. Its method was deductive and idealistic; giving being to abstractions,
like the realism of the middle ages. It lost the fact in the principle; it personified the
genus. Philosophy became a vast mythology.

When applied to Christianity, for example, it did not attempt to find a philosophic ground for it
psychologically in the human aspirations, as Schleiermacher had done,(805) but objectively in the
dogma. It discovered the ideal truth in religion, and regarded Christianity and Christ as
being the manifestation of the effort of the great Spirit of the universe to convert the idea
into act; the symbol which expressed the speculative truth of the essential unity of the ideal
and the real, of the divine and the human. Like the ancient Gnosticism, it believed in dogmatic
Christianity, because it descended upon it from an á priori principle, in which it found the
explanation of it. Religion and philosophy were reconciled, because religion was made a phase
of philosophy.

This system was taught by its founder at Berlin from about 1820 to 1830, contemporary with that of
Schleiermacher; and the learned theologian Marheinecke(806) is the name best known of those
who applied it to theology.

It was regarded at that time as an instrument of orthodoxy.(807) It had the advantage over
the old rationalism, in that while using similarity of method in seeking to explain mysteries,
it did not pare them down, but absorbed them in principles of philosophy; and over the school
of Schleiermacher, in that it was less subjective, less a matter of feeling, supplying a doctrine
and not merely a spirit; and therefore it satisfied the longing of the mind for dogmatic truth,
and at the same time more readily linked itself, ecclesiastically with churchlike and corporate
tendencies, and politically with conservative and autocratic ones. Yet it is easy to see that
its spirit was really far less Christian than Schleiermacher’s. For it not only confused again
philosophy and religion, which his system had severed, but it proudly claimed to explain doctrines
rationally where his had only sought to appropriate them intuitionally. It verged towards
pantheism. It was in danger of losing the historic fact in the idea; of encouraging, as it
is now sometimes called, the “ideological tendency;”(808) whereas with Schleiermacher, the historic
belief had only been regarded as less important than the emotional apprehension. Its à priori spirit
created also a depreciation of the investigations which had been pursued by the critical school.
It gave encouragement to the study of history; but it was to the history of philosophy, not
to the investigations conducted by historical criticism.

Such was the system which, along with those described in the last lecture, was regarded as contributing
to favour orthodox reaction, and was disputing theological preeminence
with that of Schleiermacher, when a work was published by one of its
disciples, which was the means, through the ferment produced, of altering
completely the whole tone and course of German thought.

It was the celebrated Life of Jesus by Strauss,(809) a criticism on the four biographies given
in the gospels; a work in which the whole destructive movement was
concentrated, with such singular ability and clearness, that hardly
any work of theology has subsequently been written without some notice
of the propositions there maintained.

It presented a double aspect: it was both philosophical and critical.

Strauss added to a general admission of the Hegelian point of view a love for the critical
studies so much neglected by that party.

Brought up in the moderate orthodoxy of Tübingen, he had studied at Berlin under Schleiermacher,
but caught the critical rather than the philosophical side of that master’s teaching, and especially
interested himself in the solution of the question relating to the origin and credibility of the
Gospels, already partially considered in the critical inquiries of the old rationalism, and of
the school of De Wette. It was an investigation which in its nature, in the spirit in which it
was decided, and in its similarity to the contemporaneous discussions of classical criticism,
bore a close resemblance to that before described in reference to the Pentateuch. A few words of
explanation concerning it are necessary, previous to the statement of the nature of Strauss’s
work.(810)

As early as the last century the resemblance between the three “synoptical”
Evangelists had excited attention; and examination was directed to
discover the cause.

Some, as Wetstein,(811) supposed that one or two of the Gospels were borrowed from the third;
others, as Michaelis(812) and Eichhorn, that the three were all derived from one common original,
now lost; others, as Schleiermacher, that they were composed from many detached written narratives;
others, as Herder, and subsequently Gieseler, that they were the
committal to writing of the oral tradition common in the church.

Thus, whether the Gospels were regarded as copies, or as being composed
from earlier documents, or from primitive tradition, the effect was,
that they were reduced to the level of natural testimony, and instead
of being three witnesses they became one.

The fourth Gospel also was involved in uncertainty.

Bretschneider added the full examination of it, and provoked a discussion concerning the alleged
disagreement of its tone and statements with those of the synoptists.(813) Thus a chasm was introduced
between the events and the record of them; and the testimony was reduced to traditional evidence.

This
alteration in the critical attempt to shake the evidence of independent authorship had been
accompanied by a corresponding change in the interpretation, as seen in the assaults made on the credibility
of the facts narrated.

In the hands of the English deists and of Reimarus this attack had been an allegation against
the moral character of the writer.

In Eichhorn and Paulus the imputation of collusion had been superseded by the rationalistic interpretation,
which, without denying the historical recital, denied the supernatural, and explained it away
by reference to the peculiarities of time at which the events were
described.

The next step was to transfer the doubt to the recital itself, and to find, in the absence
of contemporary evidence for the events, the possibility for legend,
and, in the antecedent expectation of them, the possibility for myth.

This was the state of the critical question with regard to the Gospels when the work of Strauss
appeared. The Hegelian philosophy gave him the constructive side of his work, and criticism the
destructive.

Setting out with the preconception which had lain at the basis of German philosophy and theology
since Kant, that the idea was more important than the fact,(814) the mythical interpretation
of history furnished to him the medium for applying this conception as an engine of criticism.

The
mythical system of interpretation, though slightly suggested by his
predecessors in criticism, was Strauss’s great work.

The difference between allegory, legend, and myth, is well known. Our blessed Lord’s miracles
would be allegories, if they were, as Woolston claimed, parables intentionally invented for
purposes of moral instruction, or facts which had a mystical as well as literal meaning: they
would be legends if, while containing a basis of fact, they were exaggerated by tradition: they
would be myths if, without really occurring, they were the result
of a general preconception that the Messiah ought to do mighty works,
which thus gradually became translated into fact.

A legend is a group of ideas round a nucleus of fact: a myth is an idea translated by mental
realism into fact. A legend proceeds upwards into the past; a myth downwards into the future.(815)
Strauss’s peculiarity consisted in trying to show that if a small
basis of fact, heightened by legend, be allowed in the gospel history,
the influence of myth is a psychological cause sufficient to explain
the remainder.

The idea is regarded as prior to the fact: the need of a deliverer, he pretends, created the
idea of a saviour: the misinterpretation of old prophecy presented
conditions which in the popular mind must be fulfilled by the Messiah.

The gospel history is regarded as the attempt of the idea to realise itself in fact.

The fundamental fallacy of the inquiry is apparent from one consideration. Legends are possible
in any age; myths, strictly so called, only in the earliest ages of a nation. Comparative philology
has lately shown that mythology is connected with the formation of
language, and restricted to an early period of the world’s history.(816)
But the encouragement offered to the mythic interpretation by Hegel’s
philosophy will be apparent.

The mythus embodying itself in the facts of the gospel was the miniature of the process of
universal nature. Everywhere the idea strives for realisation.

The scheme of Strauss formed the link between philosophy and criticism. Philosophy had explained
the doctrines of Christianity, but not the facts of Christian history.

Criticism had explained the facts by historical examination, but not by philosophy. Strauss attempted,
for the first time, to present the philosophical explanation of facts as well as doctrines. He
explained them, neither by charge of fraud, nor by historical causes, but by reference to the
operation of a psychological law, the same which the Hegelian philosophy regarded as exemplified
universally. Early Christian fiction was resolved into a psychological law, regulated by a definite
law of suggestion, of which plausible instances were traced.

The gospel history was regarded to be partly a creation out of nothing,
partly an adaptation of real facts to preconceived ideas.

This same philosophy, which thus contributed to the critical or destructive side of the theory,
also furnished the reconstructive.

The facts in Christianity were temporary, the ideas eternal. Christ was the type of humanity. (36)
His life and death and resurrection were the symbol of the life, death, and resurrection, of humanity.
The former were unimportant, the latter eternal. An exoteric religion for the people might
exhibit the one: the esoteric for the philosopher might retain the other.(817)

This is Strauss’s system and position. The book itself comprises three parts;—first, an historic
introduction, in which the history of previous criticism and of Hermeneutics, and of the formation
of the mythical theory is most ably presented:(818)—secondly, the main body of the work, which
consists of a critical examination of the life of Christ,(819) subdivided
into three parts; viz. an examination of the birth and childhood of
Jesus,(820) of his public life,(821) and of his death;(822) the object
of which is to point out in the narrative the historic or mythic elements:—and
thirdly, a philosophical conclusion,(823) in which the doctrinal significance
of the life is given.

As a specimen of didactic and critical writing it is perhaps unrivalled in the German literature.
The second part is the embodiment of all the difficulties which destructive criticism had
presented.

If the historic sketches captivate by their clearness, the critical
do so by their surprising acuteness and dialectical power; and the
philosophical by the appreciation of the ideal beauty of the very
doctrines, the historic embodiment of which is denied.

It is the work of a mind endowed with remarkable analytical power;
in which the force of reflective theory has overwhelmed the intuitional
perception of the personality and originality of the sacred character
which is the subject of his study.(824)

The effect of the publication
of the work was astonishing.

It produced a religious panic unequalled since the Wolfenbüttel fragments.

The first impulse of the Prussian government was to prevent the introduction of the book into
the Prussian kingdom; but Neander stood up to resist the proposal, with a courage which showed
his firm confidence in the permanent victory of truth; saying that it must be answered by argument,
not suppressed by force; and forthwith wrote his own beautiful work
on the life of Christ in reply to it.

Yet neither the peculiarity of Strauss’s theory nor the nature of the work gave ground for the
panic. For the book was in truth not a novelty, but merely a fuller development of principles
already existing in Germany; and Schleiermacher, before his death, when contemplating the tendency
of religious criticism, had predicted(825) the probability of such
an attempt being made.

Nor was the work irreligious and blasphemous in its spirit, like the attacks of the last century.
It professed to be executed solely in the interests of science; and, though subversive of historic
religion, to be conservative of ideal. The critical part was only a means to an end; its real
basis was speculative. But the literary aspect of the question was lost sight of in the religious.
The heart spoke forth its terror at the idea of losing its most sacred hope, the object of its deepest
trust, an historic Saviour. The alarm had not been anticipated by the author of the attack. He
is described by a hostile critic(826) as a “young man full of candour, of sweetness, and modesty,
of a spirit almost mystical, and as it were saddened by the disturbance which had been occasioned.”
But he became a martyr for his act, and an outcast from the sympathy of religious men. Unable
to exercise his singular gifts of teaching in any professorship, he has continued to write
from time to time literary monographs of more defiant tone; proofs of his ability, but vehicles
for the expression of his opinions. (37)

The effect on the different theological critics throughout Germany, both friendly and hostile,
was so remarkable, that the year 1835, in which the book was published, is as memorable in theology
as the year 1848 in politics. The work carried criticism and philosophy to its farthest limits,
and demanded from theologians of all classes a thorough reconsideration of the subject of
the origines of Christianity.(827) The ablest theologians either wrote in refutation of it, or
reconsidered their own opinions by the light of its criticisms. (38) The alarm at the loss of
the historic basis of Christianity created a strong reaction in favour of the Lutheran orthodoxy,
the commencement of which has already been named;(828) and gave the death-blow, not only to the
Hegelian school, but almost to the passion for ontological speculation in Germany. While some
thus assumed a churchly and conservative aspect, others outstripped Strauss, and, uniting with
French positivism, advanced into utter pantheism and materialism.

The Hegelian party, to which Strauss belonged, and which would fain have been excused from this
reductio ad absurdum of its principles,(829) became split into sections through the various
attempts made to parry the blow, and reconstruct their system on the philosophical side. The critical
tendency had now too found a home, by means of Strauss’s work, among the Hegelians; and this
led to the creation of a new school of historical criticism to be hereafter described, which
arose in Strauss’s own university of Tübingen.(830)

We have now explained the circumstances attending the change which closed the second and introduced
the third period in German theology.

 
Her admiration for him partook of worship, and she steadily sought to reason away any causes
for alarm by recalling the state cares which pressed heavily upon him, and whispering to herself
that word of "wife," which, coming in passionate music from those beloved lips, had thrown
a mist over the present, a glory over the future! and in the king's retention of Adam Warner,
despite the Duchess of Bedford's strenuous desire to carry him off with Friar Bungey, and restore
him to his tasks of alchemist and multiplier, as well as in her own promotion to the queen's
service, Sibyll could not but recognize the influence of her powerful lover.  His tones now
were tender, though grave and earnest. Surely, in the meeting he asked, all not comprehended
would be explained.  And so, with a light heart, she passed on.

Hastings sighed as his eye followed her from the room, and thus said he to himself, "Were I
the obscure gentleman I once was, how sweet a lot would that girl's love choose to me from
the urn of fate!  But, oh! when we taste of power and greatness, and master the world's dark
wisdom, what doth love shrink to?--an hour's bliss and a life's folly."  His delicate lip curled,
and breaking from his soliloquy, he entered the king's closet.  Edward was resting his face
upon the palms of his hands, and his bright eyes dwelt upon vacant space, till they kindled
into animation as they lighted on his favourite.

"Dear Will," said the king, "knowest thou that men say thou art bewitched?"

"Beau sire, often have men, when a sweet face hath captured thy great heart, said the same
of thee!"

"It may be so with truth, for verily love is the arch-devil's birth."

The king rose, and strode his chamber with a quick step; at last pausing,--

"Hastings," he said, "so thou lovest the multiplier's pretty daughter? She has just left me.
Art thou jealous?"

"Happily your Highness sees no beauty in looks that have the gloss of the raven, and eyes that
have the hue of the violet."

"No, I am a constant man, constant to one idea of beauty in a thousand forms,--eyes like the
summer's light-blue sky, and locks like its golden sunbeams!  But to set thy mind at rest,
Will, know that I have but compassionated the sickly state of the scholar, whom thou prizest
so highly; and I have placed thy fair Sibyll's chamber near her father's.  Young Lovell says
thou art bent on wedding the wizard's daughter."

"And if I were, beau sire?"

Edward looked grave.

"If thou wert, my poor Will, thou wouldst lose all the fame for shrewd wisdom which justifies
thy sudden fortunes.  No, no; thou art the flower and prince of my new seignorie,--thou must
mate thyself with a name and a barony that shall be worthy thy fame and thy prospects. Love
beauty, but marry power, Will.  In vain would thy king draw thee up, if a despised wife draw
thee down!"

Hastings listened with profound attention to these words.  The king did not wait for his answer,
but added laughingly,--

"It is thine own fault, crafty gallant, if thou dost not end all her spells."

"What ends the spells of youth and beauty, beau sire?"

"Possession!" replied the king, in a hollow and muttered voice.

Hastings was about to answer, when the door opened, and the officer in waiting announced the
Duke of Clarence.  "Ha!" said Edward, "George comes to importune me for leave to depart to
the government of Ireland, and I have to make him weet that I think my Lord Worcester a safer
viceroy of the two."

"Your Highness will pardon me; but, though I deemed you too generous in the appointment, it
were dangerous now to annul it."

"More dangerous to confirm it.  Elizabeth has caused me to see the folly of a grant made over
the malmsey,--a wine, by the way, in which poor George swears he would be content to drown
himself.  Viceroy of Ireland!  My father had that government, and once tasting the sweets of
royalty, ceased to be a subject!  No, no, Clarence--"

"Can never meditate treason against a brother's crown.  Has he the wit or the energy or the
genius for so desperate an ambition?"

"No; but he hath the vanity.  And I will wager thee a thousand marks to a silver penny that
my jester shall talk giddie Georgie into advancing a claim to be soldan of Egypt or Pope of Rome!"

CHAPTER IV.

THE FOSTER-BROTHERS.

Sir Marmaduke Nevile was sunning his bravery in the Tower Green, amidst the other idlers of
the court, proud of the gold chain and the gold spurs which attested his new rank, and not
grieved to have exchanged the solemn walls of Middleham for the gay delights of the voluptuous
palace, when to his pleasure and surprise, he perceived his foster-brother enter the gateway;
and no sooner had Nicholas entered, than a bevy of the younger courtiers hastened eagerly towards
him.

"Gramercy!" quoth Sir Marmaduke, to one of the bystanders, "what hath chanced to make Nick
Alwyn a man of such note, that so many wings of satin and pile should flutter round him like
sparrows round an owl?-- which, by the Holy Rood, his wise face somewhat resembleth."

"Know you not that Master Alwyn, since he hath commenced trade for himself, hath acquired already
the repute of the couthliest goldsmith in London?  No dague-hilts, no buckles are to be worn,
save those that he fashions; and--an he live, and the House of York prosper--verily, Master
Alwyn the goldsmith will ere long be the richest and best man from Mile-end to the Sanctuary."

"Right glad am I to hear it," said honest Marmaduke, heartily; and approaching Alwyn, he startled
the precise trader by a friendly slap on the shoulder.

"What, man, art thou too proud to remember Marmaduke Nevile?  Come to my lodgment yonder, and
talk of old days over the king's canary."

"I crave your pardon, dear Master Nevile."

"Master--avaunt!  Sir Marmaduke,--knighted by the hand of Lord Warwick,--Sir Marmaduke Nevile,
lord of a manor he hath never yet seen, sober Alwyn."

Then drawing his foster-brother's arm in his, Marmaduke led him to the chamber in which he lodged.

The young men spent some minutes in congratulating each other on their respective advances
in life: the gentleman who had attained competence and station simply by devotion to a powerful
patron, the trader who had already won repute and the prospect of wealth by ingenuity, application,
and toil; and yet, to do justice, as much virtue went to Marmaduke's loyalty to Warwick as
to Alwyn's capacities for making a fortune.  Mutual compliments over, Alwyn said hesitatingly,--

"And dost thou find Mistress Sibyll more gently disposed to thee than when thou didst complain
to me of her cruelty?"

"Marry, good Nicholas, I will be frank with thee.  When I left the court to follow Lord Warwick,
there were rumours of the gallantries of Lord Hastings to the girl, which grieved me to the
heart.  I spoke to her thereof bluntly and honourably, and got but high looks and scornful
words in return.  Good fellow, I thank thee for that squeeze of the hand and that doleful sigh.
In my absence at Middleham, I strove hard to forget one who cared so little for me.  My dear
Alwyn, those Yorkshire lasses are parlously comely, and mighty douce and debonaire.  So I stormed
cruel Sibyll out of my heart perforce of numbers."

"And thou lovest her no more?"

"Not I, by this goblet!  On coming back, it is true, I felt pleased to clank my gold spurs
in her presence, and curious to see if my new fortunes would bring out a smile of approval;
and verily, to speak sooth, the donzell was kind and friendly, and spoke to me so cheerly of
the pleasure she felt in my advancement, that I adventured again a few words of the old folly.
But my lassie drew up like a princess, and I am a cured man."

"By your troth?"

"By my troth!"

Alwyn's head sank on his bosom in silent thought.  Sir Marmaduke emptied his goblet; and really
the young knight looked so fair and so gallant, in his new surcoat of velvet, that it was no
marvel if he should find enough food for consolation in a court where men spent six hours a
day in making love,--nor in vain.

"And what say they still of the Lord Hastings?" asked Alwyn, breaking silence.  "Nothing, I
trow and trust, that arraigns the poor lady's honour, though much that may scoff at her simple
faith in a nature so vain and fickle.  'The tongue's not steel, yet it cuts,' as the proverb
saith of the slanderer."

"No! scandal spares her virtue as woman, to run down her cunning as witch!  They say that Hastings
hath not prevailed, nor sought to prevail,--that he is spell-bound.  By Saint Thomas, from
a maid of such character Marmaduke Nevile is happily rescued!"

"Sir Marmaduke," then said Alwyn, in a grave and earnest voice, "it behooves me, as true friend,
though humble, and as honest man, to give thee my secret, in return for thine own.  I love
this girl.  Ay, ay! thou thinkest that love is a strange word on a craftsman's lips, but 'cold
flint hides hot fire.'  I would not have been thy rival, Heaven forefend! hadst thou still
cherished a hope, or if thou now wilt forbid my aspiring; but if thou wilt not say me nay,
I will try my chance in delivering a pure soul from a crafty wooer."

Marmaduke stared in great surprise at his foster-brother; and though, no doubt, he spoke truth
when he said he was cured of his love for Sibyll, he yet felt a sort of jealousy at Alwyn's
unexpected confession, and his vanity was hurt at the notion that the plain- visaged trader
should attempt where the handsome gentleman had failed.--However, his blunt, generous, manly
nature after a brief struggle got the better of these sore feelings; and holding out his hand
to Alwyn, he said, "My dear foster-brother, try the hazard and cast thy dice, if thou wilt.
Heaven prosper thee, if success be for thine own good!  But if she be given to witchcraft (plague
on thee, man, sneer not at the word), small comfort to bed and hearth can such practices bring!"

"Alas!" said Alwyn, "the witchcraft is on the side of Hastings,--the witchcraft of fame and
rank, and a glozing tongue and experienced art. But she shall not fall, if a true arm can save
her; and 'though Hope be a small child; she can carry a great anchor.'"

These words were said so earnestly, that they opened new light into Marmaduke's mind; and his
native generosity standing in lieu of intellect, he comprehended sympathetically the noble
motives which actuated the son of commerce.

"My poor Alwyn," he said, "if thou canst save this young maid,--whom by my troth I loved well,
and who tells me yet that she loveth me as a sister loves,--right glad shall I be.  But thou
stakest thy peace of mind against hers!  Fair luck to thee, say I again,--and if thou wilt
risk thy chance at once (for suspense is love's purgatory), seize the moment.  I saw Sibyll,
just ere we met, pass to the ramparts, alone; at this sharp season the place is deserted; go."

"I will, this moment!" said Alwyn, rising and turning very pale; but as he gained the door,
he halted--"I had forgot, Master Nevile, that I bring the king his signet-ring, new set, of
the falcon and fetter- lock."

"They will keep thee three hours in the anteroom.  The Duke of Clarence is now with the king.
Trust the ring to me, I shall see his highness ere he dines."

Even in his love, Alwyn had the Saxon's considerations of business; he hesitated--"May I not
endanger thereby the king's favour and loss of custom?" said the trader.

"Tush, man! little thou knowest King Edward; he cares naught for the ceremonies: moreover,
the Neviles are now all-puissant in favour.  I am here in attendance on sweet Lady Anne, whom
the king loves as a daughter, though too young for sire to so well-grown a donzell; and a word
from her lip, if need be, will set all as smooth as this gorget of lawn!"

Thus assured, Alwyn gave the ring to his friend, and took his way at once to the ramparts.
Marmaduke remained behind to finish the canary and marvel how so sober a man should form so
ardent a passion.  Nor was he much less surprised to remark that his friend, though still speaking
with a strong provincial accent, and still sowing his discourse with rustic saws and proverbs,
had risen in language and in manner with the rise of his fortunes.  "An he go on so, and become
lord mayor," muttered Marmaduke, "verily he will half look like a gentleman!"

To these meditations the young knight was not long left in peace.  A messenger from Warwick
House sought and found him, with the news that the earl was on his road to London, and wished
to see Sir Marmaduke the moment of his arrival, which was hourly expected.  The young knight's
hardy brain somewhat flustered by the canary, Alwyn's secret, and this sudden tidings, he hastened
to obey his chief's summons, and forgot, till he gained the earl's mansion, the signet ring
intrusted to him by Alwyn.  "What matters it?" said he then, philosophically,-- "the king hath
rings eno' on his fingers not to miss one for an hour or so, and I dare not send any one else
with it.  Marry, I must plunge my head in cold water, to get rid of the fumes of the wine."

CHAPTER V.

THE LOVER AND THE GALLANT--WOMAN'S CHOICE.

Alwyn bent his way to the ramparts, a part of which then resembled the boulevards of a French
town, having rows of trees, green sward, a winding walk, and seats placed at frequent intervals
for the repose of the loungers.  During the summer evenings, the place was a favourite resort
of the court idlers; but now, in winter, it was usually deserted, save by the sentries, placed
at distant intervals.  The trader had not gone far in his quest when he perceived, a few paces
before him, the very man he had most cause to dread; and Lord Hastings, hearing the sound of
a footfall amongst the crisp, faded leaves that strewed the path, turned abruptly as Alwyn
approached his side.

At the sight of his formidable rival, Alwyn had formed one of those resolutions which occur
only to men of his decided, plain-spoken, energetic character.  His distinguishing shrewdness
and penetration had given him considerable insight into the nobler as well as the weaker qualities
of Hastings; and his hope in the former influenced the determination to which he came.  The
reflections of Hastings at that moment were of a nature to augur favourably to the views of
the humbler lover; for, during the stirring scenes in which his late absence from Sibyll had
been passed, Hastings had somewhat recovered from her influence; and feeling the difficulties
of reconciling his honour and his worldly prospects to further prosecution of the love, rashly
expressed but not deeply felt, he had determined frankly to cut the Gordian knot he could not
solve, and inform Sibyll that marriage between them was impossible.  With that view he had
appointed this meeting, and his conference with the king but confirmed his intention. It was
in this state of mind that he was thus accosted by Alwyn:--

"My lord, may I make bold to ask for a few moments your charitable indulgence to words you
may deem presumptuous?"

"Be brief, then, Master Alwyn,--I am waited for."

"Alas, my lord!  I can guess by whom,--by the one whom I seek myself, --by Sibyll Warner."

"How, Sir Goldsmith!" said Hastings, haughtily, "what knowest thou of my movements, and what
care I for thine?"

"Hearken, my Lord Hastings,--hearken!" said Alwyn, repressing his resentment, and in a voice
so earnest that it riveted the entire attention of the listener--"hearken, and judge not as
noble judges craftsman, but as man should judge man.  As the saw saith, 'We all lie alike in
our graves.'  From the first moment I saw this Sibyll Warner I loved her.  Yes; smile disdainfully,
but listen still.  She was obscure and in distress.  I loved her not for her fair looks alone;
I loved her for her good gifts, for her patient industry, for her filial duty, for her struggles
to give bread to her father's board.  I did not say to myself, 'This girl will make a comely
fere, a delicate paramour!'  I said, 'This good daughter will make a wife whom an honest man
may take to his heart and cherish!'"  Poor Alwyn stopped, with tears in his voice, struggled
with his emotions, and pursued: "My fortunes were more promising than hers; there was no cause
why I might not hope.  True, I had a rival then; young as myself, better born, comelier; but
she loved him not.  I foresaw that his love for her--if love it were--would cease.  Methought
that her mind would understand mine; as mine--verily I say it--yearned for hers!  I could not
look on the maidens of mine own rank, and who had lived around me, but what-- oh, no, my lord,
again I say, not the beauty, but the gifts, the mind, the heart of Sibyll, threw them all into
the shade.  You may think it strange that I--a plain, steadfast, trading, working, careful
man-- should have all these feelings; but I will tell you wherefore such as I sometimes have
them, nurse them, brood on them, more than you lords and gentlemen, with all your graceful
arts in pleasing.  We know no light loves! no brief distractions to the one arch passion! 
We sober sons of the stall and the ware are no general gallants,--we love plainly, we love
but once, and we love heartily.  But who knows not the proverb, 'What's a gentleman but his
pleasure?'--and what's pleasure but change?  When Sibyll came to the palace, I soon heard her
name linked with yours; I saw her cheek blush when you spoke.  Well, well, well! after all,
as the old wives tell us, 'Blushing is virtue's livery.'  I said, 'She is a chaste and high-hearted
girl.'  This will pass, and the time will come when she can compare your love and mine. Now,
my lord, the time has come.  I know that you seek her.  Yea, at this moment, I know that her
heart beats for your footstep.  Say but one word,--say that you love Sibyll Warner with the
thought of wedding her,--say that, on your honour, noble Hastings, as gentleman and peer, and
I will kneel at your feet, and beg your pardon for my vain follies, and go back to my ware,
and work, and not repine.  Say it! You are silent?  Then I implore you, still as peer and gentleman,
to let the honest love save the maiden from the wooing that will blight her peace and blast
her name!  And now, Lord Hastings, I wait your gracious answer."

The sensations experienced by Hastings, as Alwyn thus concluded, were manifold and complicated;
but, at the first, admiration and pity were the strongest.

"My poor friend," said he, kindly, "if you thus love a demoiselle deserving all my reverence,
your words and your thoughts bespeak you no unworthy pretender; but take my counsel, good Alwyn.
Come not-- thou from the Chepe--come not to the court for a wife.  Forget this fantasy."

"My lord, it is impossible!  Forget I cannot, regret I may.

"Thou canst not succeed, man," resumed the nobleman, more coldly, "nor couldst if William Hastings
had never lived.  The eyes of women accustomed to gaze on the gorgeous externals of the world
are blinded to plain worth like thine.  It might have been different had the donzell never
abided in a palace; but as it is, brave fellow, learn how these wounds of the heart scar over,
and the spot becomes hard and callous evermore.  What art thou, Master Nicholas Alwyn," continued
Hastings, gloomily, and with a withering smile--"what art thou, to ask for a bliss denied to
me--to all of us,--the bliss of carrying poetry into life, youth into manhood, by winning--the
FIRST LOVED?  But think not, sir lover, that I say this in jealousy or disparagement.  Look
yonder, by the leafless elm, the white robe of Sibyll Warner.  Go and plead thy suit."

"Do I understand you, my lord?" said Alwyn, somewhat confused and perplexed by the tone and
the manner Hastings adopted.  "Does report err, and you do not love this maiden?"

"Fair master," returned Hastings, scornfully, "thou hast no right that I trow of to pry into
my thoughts and secrets; I cannot acknowledge my judge in thee, good jeweller and goldsmith,--enough,
surely, in all courtesy, that I yield thee the precedence.  Tell thy tale, as movingly, if
thou wilt, as thou hast told it to me; say of me all that thou fanciest thou hast reason to
suspect; and if, Master Alwyn, thou woo and win the lady, fail not to ask me to thy wedding!"

There was in this speech and the bearing of the speaker that superb levity, that inexpressible
and conscious superiority, that cold, ironical tranquillity, which awe and humble men more
than grave disdain or imperious passion.  Alwyn ground his teeth as he listened, and gazed
in silent despair and rage upon the calm lord.  Neither of these men could strictly be called
handsome.  Of the two, Alwyn had the advantage of more youthful prime, of a taller stature,
of a more powerful, though less supple and graceful, frame.  In their very dress, there was
little of that marked distinction between classes which then usually prevailed, for the dark
cloth tunic and surcoat of Hastings made a costume even simpler than the bright-coloured garb
of the trader, with its broad trimmings of fur, and its aiglettes of elaborate lace.  Between
man and man, then, where was the visible, the mighty, the insurmountable difference in all
that can charm the fancy and captivate the eye, which, as he gazed, Alwyn confessed to himself
there existed between the two?  Alas! how the distinctions least to be analyzed are ever the
sternest!  What lofty ease in that high-bred air; what histories of triumph seemed to speak
in that quiet eye, sleeping in its own imperious lustre; what magic of command in that pale
brow; what spells of persuasion in that artful lip!  Alwyn muttered to himself, bowed his head
involuntarily, and passed on at once from Hastings to Sibyll, who now, at the distance of some
yards, had arrested her steps, in surprise to see the conference between the nobleman and the
burgher.

But as he approached Sibyll, poor Alwyn felt all the firmness and courage he had exhibited
with Hastings melt away.  And the trepidation which a fearful but deep affection ever occasions
in men of his character, made his movements more than usually constrained and awkward, as he
cowered beneath the looks of the maid he so truly loved.

"Seekest thou me, Master Alwyn?" asked Sibyll, gently, seeing that, though he paused by her
side, he spoke not.

"I do," returned Alwyn, abruptly, and again he was silent.  At length, lifting his eyes and
looking round him, he saw Hastings at the distance, leaning against the rampart, with folded
arms; and the contrast of his rival's cold and arrogant indifference, and his own burning veins
and bleeding heart, roused up his manly spirit, and gave to his tongue the eloquence which
emotion gains when it once breaks the fetters it forges for itself.

"Look, look, Sibyll!" he said, pointing to Hastings "look! that man you believe loves you.
If so--if he loved thee,--would he stand yonder--mark him--aloof, contemptuous, careless--while
he knew that I was by your side?"

Sibyll turned upon the goldsmith eyes full of innocent surprise,--eyes that asked, plainly
as eyes could speak, "And wherefore not, Master Alwyn?"

Alwyn so interpreted the look, and replied, as if she had spoken: "Because he must know how
poor and tame is that feeble fantasy which alone can come from a soul worn bare with pleasure,
to that which I feel and now own for thee,--the love of youth, born of the heart's first vigour;
because he ought to fear that that love should prevail with thee; because that love ought to
prevail.  Sibyll, between us there are not imparity and obstacle.  Oh, listen to me,--listen
still! Frown not, turn not away."  And, stung and animated by the sight of his rival, fired
by the excitement of a contest on which the bliss of his own life and the weal of Sibyll's
might depend, his voice was as the cry of a mortal agony, and affected the girl to the inmost
recesses of her soul.  "Oh, Alwyn, I frown not!" she said sweetly; "oh, Alwyn, I turn not away!
Woe is me to give pain to so kind and brave a heart; but--"

"No, speak not yet.  I have studied thee, I have read thee as a scholar would read a book.
I know thee proud; I know thee aspiring; I know thou art vain of thy gentle blood, and distasteful
of my yeoman's birth.  There, I am not blind to thy faults, but I love thee despite them; and
to please those faults I have toiled, schemed, dreamed, risen.  I offer to thee the future
with the certainty of a man who can command it.  Wouldst thou wealth?--be patient (as ambition
ever is): in a few years thou shalt have more gold than the wife of Lord Hastings can command;
thou shalt lodge more statelily, fare more sumptuously; [This was no vain promise of Master
Alwyn.  At that time a successful trader made a fortune with signal rapidity, and enjoyed greater
luxuries than most of the barons.  All the gold in the country flowed into the coffers of the
London merchants.] thou shalt walk on cloth-of-gold if thou wilt!  Wouldst thou titles?--I
will win them. Richard de la Pole, who founded the greatest duchy in the realm, was poorer
than I, when he first served in a merchant's ware.  Gold buys all things now.  Oh, would to
Heaven it could but buy me thee!"

"Master Alwyn, it is not gold that buys love.  Be soothed.  What can I say to thee to soften
the harsh word 'Nay'?"

"You reject me, then, and at once?  I ask not your hand now.  I will wait, tarry, hope,--I
care not if for years; wait till I can fulfil all I promise thee!"

Sibyll, affected to tears, shook her head mournfully; and there was a long and painful silence.
Never was wooing more strangely circumstanced than this,--the one lover pleading while the
other was in view; the one, ardent, impassioned, the other, calm and passive; and the silence
of the last, alas! having all the success which the words of the other lacked.  It might be
said that the choice before Sibyll was a type of the choice ever given, but in vain, to the
child of genius.  Here a secure and peaceful life, an honoured home, a tranquil lot, free from
ideal visions, it is true, but free also from the doubt and the terror, the storms of passion;
there, the fatal influence of an affection, born of imagination, sinister, equivocal, ominous,
but irresistible.  And the child of genius fulfilled her destiny!

"Master Alwyn," said Sibyll, rousing herself to the necessary exertion, "I shall never cease
gratefully to recall thy generous friendship, never cease to pray fervently for thy weal below.
But forever and forever let this content thee,--I can no more."

Impressed by the grave and solemn tone of Sibyll, Alwyn hushed the groan that struggled to
his lips, and gloomily replied: "I obey you, fair mistress, and I return to my workday life;
but ere I go, I pray you misthink me not if I say this much: not alone for the bliss of hoping
for a day in which I might call thee mine have I thus importuned, but, not less--I swear not
less--from the soul's desire to save thee from what I fear will but lead to woe and wayment,
to peril and pain, to weary days and sleepless nights.  'Better a little fire that warms than
a great that burns.'  Dost thou think that Lord Hastings, the vain, the dissolute--"

"Cease, sir!" said Sibyll, proudly;  "me reprove if thou wilt, but lower not my esteem for
thee by slander against another!"

"What!" said Alwyn, bitterly; "doth even one word of counsel chafe thee?  I tell thee that
if thou dreamest that Lord Hastings loves Sibyll Warner as man loves the maiden he would wed,
thou deceivest thyself to thine own misery.  If thou wouldst prove it, go to him now,--go and
say, 'Wilt thou give me that home of peace and honour, that shelter for my father's old age
under a son's roof which the trader I despise proffers me in vain?"

"If it were already proffered me--by him?" said Sibyll, in a low voice, and blushing deeply.

Alwyn started.  "Then I wronged him; and--and--" he added generously, though with a faint sickness
at his heart, "I can yet be happy in thinking thou art so.  Farewell, maiden, the saints guard
thee from one memory of regret at what hath passed between us!"

He pulled his bonnet hastily over his brows, and departed with unequal and rapid strides. 
As he passed the spot where Hastings stood leaning his arm upon the wall, and his face upon
his hand, the nobleman looked up, and said,--

"Well, Sir Goldsmith, own at least that thy trial hath been a fair one!" Then struck with the
anguish written upon Alwyn's face, he walked up to him, and, with a frank, compassionate impulse,
laid his hand on his shoulder.  "Alwyn," he said, "I have felt what you feel now; I have survived
it, and the world hath not prospered with me less!  Take with you a compassion that respects,
and does not degrade you."

"Do not deceive her, my lord,--she trusts and loves you!  You never deceived man,--the wide
world says it,--do not deceive woman!  Deeds kill men, words women!"  Speaking thus simply,
Alwyn strode on, and vanished.

Hastings slowly and silently advanced to Sibyll.  Her rejection of Alwyn had by no means tended
to reconcile him to the marriage he himself had proffered.  He might well suppose that the
girl, even if unguided by affection, would not hesitate between a mighty nobleman and an obscure
goldsmith.  His pride was sorely wounded that the latter should have even thought himself the
equal of one whom he had proposed, though but in a passionate impulse, to raise to his own
state.  And yet as he neared Sibyll, and, with a light footstep, she sprang forward to meet
him, her eyes full of sweet joy and confidence, he shrank from an avowal which must wither
up a heart opening thus all its bloom of youth and love to greet him.

"Ah, fair lord," said the maiden, "was it kindly in thee to permit poor Alwyn to inflict on
me so sharp a pain, and thou to stand calmly distant?  Sure, alas! that had thy humble rival
proffered a crown, it had been the same to Sibyll!  Oh, how the grief it was mine to cause
grieved me; and yet, through all, I had one selfish, guilty gleam of pleasure,--to think that
I had not been loved so well, if I were all unworthy the sole love I desire or covet!"

"And yet, Sibyll, this young man can in all, save wealth and a sounding name, give thee more
than I can,--a heart undarkened by moody memories, a temper unsoured by the world's dread and
bitter lore of man's frailty and earth's sorrow.  Ye are not far separated by ungenial years,
and might glide to a common grave hand in hand; but I, older in heart than in age, am yet so
far thine elder in the last, that these hairs will be gray, and this form bent, while thy beauty
is in its prime, and--but thou weepest!"

"I weep that thou shouldst bring one thought of time to sadden my thoughts, which are of eternity.
Love knows no age, it foresees no grave! its happiness and its trust behold on the earth but
one glory, melting into the hues of heaven, where they who love lastingly pass calmly on to
live forever!  See, I weep not now!"

"And did not this honest burgher," pursued Hastings, softened and embarrassed, but striving
to retain his cruel purpose, "tell thee to distrust me; tell thee that my vows were false?"

"Methinks, if an angel told me so, I should disbelieve!"

"Why, look thee, Sibyll, suppose his warning true; suppose that at this hour I sought thee
with intent to say that that destiny which ambition weaves for itself forbade me to fulfil
a word hotly spoken; that I could not wed thee,--should I not seem to thee a false wooer, a
poor trifler with thy earnest heart; and so, couldst thou not recall the love of him whose
truer and worthier homage yet lingers in thine ear, and with him be happy?"

Sibyll lifted her dark eyes, yet humid, upon the unrevealing face of the speaker, and gazed
on him with wistful and inquiring sadness; then, shrinking from his side, she crossed her arms
meekly on her bosom, and thus said,--

"If ever, since we parted, one such thought hath glanced across thee-- one thought of repentance
at the sacrifice of pride, or the lessening of power--which (she faltered, broke off the sentence,
and resumed)-- in one word, if thou wouldst retract, say it now, and I will not accuse thy
falsehood, but bless thy truth."

"Thou couldst be consoled, then, by thy pride of woman, for the loss of an unworthy lover?"

"My lord, are these questions fair?"

Hastings was silent.  The gentler part of his nature struggled severely with the harder.  The
pride of Sibyll moved him no less than her trust; and her love in both was so evident, so deep,
so exquisitely contrasting the cold and frivolous natures amidst which his lot had fallen,
that he recoiled from casting away forever a heart never to be replaced.  Standing on that
bridge of life, with age before and youth behind, he felt that never again could he be so loved,
or, if so loved by one so worthy of whatever of pure affection, of young romance, was yet left
to his melancholy and lonely soul.

He took her hand, and, as she felt its touch, her firmness forsook her, her head drooped upon
her bosom, and she burst into an agony of tears.

"Oh, Sibyll, forgive me!  Smile on me again, Sibyll!" exclaimed Hastings, subdued and melted.
But, alas! the heart once bruised and galled recovers itself but slowly, and it was many minutes
before the softest words the eloquent lover could shape to sound sufficed to dry those burning
tears, and bring back the enchanting smile,--nay, even then the smile was forced and joyless.
They walked on for some moments, both in thought, till Hastings said: "Thou lovest me, Sibyll,
and art worthy of all the love that man can feel for maid; and yet, canst thou solve me this
question, nor chide me that I ask it, Dost thou not love the world and the world's judgments
more than me?  What is that which women call honour?  What makes them shrink from all love
that takes not the form and circumstance of the world's hollow rites? Does love cease to be
love, unless over its wealth of trust and emotion the priest mouths his empty blessing?  Thou
in thy graceful pride art angered if I, in wedding thee, should remember the sacrifice which
men like me--I own it fairly--deem as great as man can make; and yet thou wouldst fly my love
if it wooed thee to a sacrifice of thine own."

Artfully was the question put, and Hastings smiled to himself in imagining the reply it must
bring; and then Sibyll answered, with the blush which the very subject called forth,

"Alas, my lord, I am but a poor casuist, but I feel that if I asked thee to forfeit whatever
men respect,--honour and repute for valour, to be traitor and dastard,--thou couldst love me
no more; and marvel you if, when man woos woman to forfeit all that her sex holds highest,--to
be in woman what dastard and traitor is in man,--she hears her conscience and her God speak
in a louder voice than can come from a human lip?  The goods and pomps of the world we are
free to sacrifice, and true love heeds and counts them not; but true love cannot sacrifice
that which makes up love,--it cannot sacrifice the right to be loved below; the hope to love
on in the realm above; the power to pray with a pure soul for the happiness it yearns to make;
the blessing to seem ever good and honoured in the eyes of the one by whom alone it would be
judged.  And therefore, sweet lord, true love never contemplates this sacrifice; and if once
it believes itself truly loved, it trusts with a fearless faith in the love on which it leans."

"Sibyll, would to Heaven I had seen thee in my youth!  Would to Heaven I were more worthy of
thee!" And in that interview Hastings had no heart to utter what he had resolved, "Sibyll,
I sought thee but to say Farewell."

It was not till late in the evening that Warwick arrived at his vast residence in London, where
he found not only Marmaduke Nevile ready to receive him, but a more august expectant, in George
Duke of Clarence. Scarcely had the earl crossed the threshold, when the duke seized his arm,
and leading him into the room that adjoined the hall, said,--

"Verily, Edward is besotted no less than ever by his wife's leech-like family.  Thou knowest
my appointment to the government of Ireland; Isabel, like myself, cannot endure the subordinate
vassalage we must brook at the court, with the queen's cold looks and sour words.  Thou knowest,
also, with what vain pretexts Edward has put me of; and now, this very day, he tells me that
he hath changed his humour,--that I am not stern enough for the Irish kernes; that he loves
me too well to banish me, forsooth; and that Worcester, the people's butcher but the queen's
favourite, must have the post so sacredly pledged to me.  I see in this Elizabeth's crafty
malice.  Is this struggle between king's blood and queen's kith to go on forever?"

"Calm thyself, George; I will confer with the king tomorrow, and hope to compass thy not too
arrogant desire.  Certes, a king's brother is the fittest vice-king for the turbulent kernes
of Ireland, who are ever flattered into obeisance by ceremony and show.  The government was
pledged to thee--Edward can scarcely be serious.  Moreover, Worcester, though forsooth a learned
man--Mort-Dieu! methinks that same learning fills the head to drain the heart!--is so abhorred
for his cruelties that his very landing in Ireland will bring a new rebellion to add to our
already festering broils and sores.  Calm thyself, I say.  Where didst thou leave Isabel?"

"With my mother."

"And Anne?--the queen chills not her young heart with cold grace?"

"Nay, the queen dare not unleash her malice against Edward's will; and, to do him justice,
he hath shown all honour to Lord Warwick's daughter."

"He is a gallant prince, with all his faults," said the father, heartily, "and we must bear
with him, George; for verily he hath bound men by a charm to love him.  Stay thou and share
my hasty repast, and over the wine we will talk of thy views.  Spare me now for a moment; I
have to prepare work eno' for a sleepless night.  This Lincolnshire rebellion promises much
trouble.  Lord Willoughby has joined it; more than twenty thousand men are in arms.  I have
already sent to convene the knights and barons on whom the king can best depend, and must urge
their instant departure for their halls, to raise men and meet the foe.  While Edward feasts,
his minister must toil.  Tarry a while till I return."  The earl re-entered the hall, and beckoned
to Marmaduke, who stood amongst a group of squires.

"Follow me; I may have work for thee."  Warwick took a taper from one of the servitors, and
led the way to his own more private apartment. On the landing of the staircase, by a small
door, stood his body- squire--"Is the prisoner within?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Good!"--The earl opened the door by which the squire had mounted guard, and bade Marmaduke
wait without.

The inmate of the chamber, whose dress bore the stains of fresh travel and hard riding, lifted
his face hastily as the earl entered.

"Robin Hilyard," said Warwick, "I have mused much how to reconcile my service to the king with
the gratitude I owe to a man who saved me from great danger.  In the midst of thy unhappy and
rebellious designs thou wert captured and brought to me; the papers found on thee attest a
Lancastrian revolt, so ripening towards a mighty gathering, and so formidable from the adherents
whom the gold and intrigues of King Louis have persuaded to risk land and life for the Red
Rose, that all the king's friends can do to save his throne is now needed.  In this revolt
thou hast been the scheming brain, the master hand, the match to the bombard, the fire brand
to the flax.  Thou smilest, man!  Alas! seest thou not that it is my stern duty to send thee
bound hand and foot before the king's council, for the brake to wring from thee thy guilty
secrets, and the gibbet to close thy days?"

"I am prepared," said Hilyard; "when the bombard explodes, the match has become useless; when
the flame smites the welkin, the firebrand is consumed!"

"Bold man! what seest thou in this rebellion that can profit thee?"

"I see, looming through the chasms and rents made in the feudal order by civil war, the giant
image of a free people."

"And thou wouldst be a martyr for the multitude, who deserted thee at Olney?"

"As thou for the king who dishonoured thee at Shene!"

Warwick frowned, and there was a moment's pause; at last, said the earl: "Look you, Robin,
I would fain not have on my hands the blood of a man who saved my life.  I believe thee, though
a fanatic and half madman,--I believe thee true in word as rash of deed.  Swear to me on the
cross of this dagger that thou wilt lay aside all scheme and plot for this rebellion, all aid
and share in civil broil and dissension, and thy life and liberty are restored to thee.  In
that intent, I have summoned my own kinsman, Marmaduke Nevile.  He waits without the door;
he shall conduct thee safely to the seashore; thou shalt gain in peace my government of Calais,
and my seneschal there shall find thee all thou canst need,--meat for thy hunger and moneys
for thy pastime. Accept my mercy, take the oath, and begone."

"My lord," answered Hilyard, much touched and affected, "blame not thyself if this carcass
feed the crows--my blood be on mine own head! I cannot take this oath; I cannot live in peace;
strife and broil are grown to me food and drink.  Oh, my lord! thou knowest not what dark and
baleful memories made me an agent in God's hand against this ruthless Edward!" and then passionately,
with whitening lips and convulsive features, Hilyard recounted to the startled Warwick the
same tale which had roused the sympathy of Adam Warner.

The earl, whose affections were so essentially homely and domestic, was even more shocked than
the scholar by the fearful narrative.

"Unhappy man!" he said with moistened eyes, "from the core of my heart I pity thee.  But thou,
the scathed sufferer from civil war, wilt thou be now its dread reviver?"

"If Edward had wronged thee, great earl, as me, poor franklin, what would be thine answer?
In vain moralize to him whom the spectre of a murdered child and the shriek of a maniac wife
haunt and hound on to vengeance!  So send me to rack and halter.  Be there one curse more on
the soul of Edward!"

"Thou shalt not die through my witness," said the earl, abruptly; and he quitted the chamber.

Securing the door by a heavy bolt on the outside, he gave orders to his squire to attend to
the comforts of the prisoner; and then turning into his closet with Marmaduke, said: "I sent
for thee, young cousin, with design to commit to thy charge one whose absence from England
I deemed needful--that design I must abandon.  Go back to the palace, and see, if thou canst,
the king before he sleeps; say that this rising in Lincolnshire is more than a riot,--it is
the first burst of a revolution! that I hold council here to-night, and every shire, ere the
morrow, shall have its appointed captain.  I will see the king at morning.  Yet stay--gain
sight of my child Anne; she will leave the court to-morrow.  I will come for her; bid her train
be prepared; she and the countess must away to Calais,--England again hath ceased to be a home
for women!  What to do with this poor rebel?" muttered the earl, when alone; "release him I
cannot; slay him I will not.  Hum, there is space enough in these walls to inclose a captive."

CHAPTER VII.

THE FEAR AND THE FLIGHT.

King Edward feasted high, and Sibyll sat in her father's chamber,--she silent with thought
of love, Adam silent in the toils of science.  The Eureka was well-nigh finished, rising from
its ruins more perfect, more elaborate, than before.  Maiden and scholar, each seeming near
to the cherished goal,--one to love's genial altar, the other to fame's lonely shrine.

Evening advanced, night began, night deepened.  King Edward's feast was over, but still in
his perfumed chamber the wine sparkled in the golden cup.  It was announced to him that Sir
Marmaduke Nevile, just arrived from the earl's house, craved an audience.  The king, pre- occupied
in deep revery, impatiently postponed it till the morrow.

"To-morrow," said the gentleman in attendance, "Sir Marmaduke bids me say, fearful that the
late hour would forbid his audience, that Lord Warwick himself will visit your Grace.  I fear,
sire, that the disturbances are great indeed, for the squires and gentlemen in Lady Anne's
train have orders to accompany her to Calais to-morrow."

"To-morrow, to-morrow!" repeated the king--"well, sir, you are dismissed."

The Lady Anne (to whom Sibyll had previously communicated the king's kindly consideration for
Master Warner) had just seen Marmaduke, and learned the new dangers that awaited the throne
and the realm.  The Lancastrians were then openly in arms for the prince of her love, and against
her mighty father!

The Lady Anne sat a while, sorrowful and musing, and then, before yon crucifix, the Lady Anne
knelt in prayer.  Sir Marmaduke Nevile descends to the court below, and some three or four
busy, curious gentlemen, not yet a-bed, seize him by the arm, and pray him to say what storm
is in the wind.

The night deepened still.  The wine is drained in King Edward's goblet; King Edward has left
his chamber; and Sibyll, entreating her father, but in vain, to suspend his toil, has kissed
the damps from his brow, and is about to retire to her neighbouring room.  She has turned to
the threshold, when, hark! a faint--a distant cry, a woman's shriek, the noise of a clapping
door!  The voice--it is the voice of Anne!  Sibyll passed the threshold, she is in the corridor;
the winter moon shines through the open arches, the air is white and cold with frost. Suddenly
the door at the farther end is thrown wide open, a form rushes into the corridor, it passes
Sibyll, halts, turns round. "Oh, Sibyll!"  cried the Lady Anne, in a voice wild with horror,
"save me--aid--help!  Merciful Heaven, the king!"

Instinctively, wonderingly, tremblingly, Sibyll drew Anne into the chamber she had just quitted,
and as they gained its shelter, as Anne sank upon the floor, the gleam of cloth-of-gold flashed
through the dim atmosphere, and Edward, yet in the royal robe in which he had dazzled all the
eyes at his kingly feast, stood within the chamber. His countenance was agitated with passion,
and its clear hues flushed red with wine.  At his entrance Anne sprang from the floor, and
rushed to Warner, who, in dumb bewilderment, had suspended his task, and stood before the Eureka,
from which steamed and rushed the dark, rapid smoke, while round and round, labouring and groaning,
rolled its fairy wheels.  [The gentle reader will doubtless bear in mind that Master Warner's
complicated model had but little resemblance to the models of the steam-engine in our own day,
and that it was usually connected with other contrivances, for the better display of the principle
it was intended to illustrate.]

"Sir," cried Anne, clinging to him convulsively, "you are a father; by your child's soul, protect
Lord Warwick's daughter!"

Roused from his abstraction by this appeal, the poor scholar wound his arm round the form thus
clinging to him, and raising his head with dignity, replied, "Thy name, youth, and sex protect
thee!"

"Unhand that lady, vile sorcerer," exclaimed the king, "I am her protector.  Come, Anne, sweet
Anne, fair lady, thou mistakest,--come!" he whispered.  "Give not to these low natures matter
for guesses that do but shame thee.  Let thy king and cousin lead thee back to thy sweet rest."

He sought, though gently, to loosen the arms that wound themselves round the old man; but Anne,
not heeding, not listening, distracted by a terror that seemed to shake her whole frame and
to threaten her very reason, continued to cry out loudly upon her father's name,--her great
father, wakeful, then, for the baffled ravisher's tottering throne!

Edward had still sufficient possession of his reason to be alarmed lest some loiterer or sentry
in the outer court might hear the cries which his attempts to soothe but the more provoked.
Grinding his teeth, and losing patience, he said to Adam, "Thou knowest me, friend,--I am thy
king.  Since the Lady Anne, in her bewilderment, prefers thine aid to mine, help to bear her
back to her apartment; and thou, young mistress, lend thine arm.  This wizard's den is no fit
chamber for our high-born guest."

"No, no; drive me not hence, Master Warner--that man--that king--give me not up to his--his--"

"Beware!" exclaimed the king.

It was not till now that Adam's simple mind comprehended the true cause of Anne's alarm, which
Sibyll still conjectured not, but stood trembling by her friend's side, and close to her father.

"Do not fear, maiden;" said Adam Warner, laying his hand upon the loosened locks that swept
over his bosom, "for though I am old and feeble, God and his angels are in every spot where
virtue trembles and resists.  My lord king, thy sceptre extends not over a human soul!"

"Dotard, prate not to me!" said Edward, laying his hand on his dagger. Sibyll saw the movement,
and instinctively placed herself between her father and the king.  That slight form, those
pure, steadfast eyes, those features, noble at once and delicate, recalled to Edward the awe
which had seized him in his first dark design; and again that awe came over him.  He retreated.

"I mean harm to none," said he, almost submissively; "and if I am so unhappy as to scare with
my presence the Lady Anne, I will retire, praying you, donzell, to see to her state, and lead
her back to her chamber when it so pleases herself.  Saying this much, I command you, old man,
and you, maiden, to stand back while I but address one sentence to the Lady Anne."

With these words he gently advanced to Anne, and took her hand; but, snatching it from him,
the poor lady broke from Adam, rushed to the casement, opened it, and seeing some figures indistinct
and distant in the court below, she called out in a voice of such sharp agony that it struck
remorse and even terror into Edward's soul.

"Alas!" he muttered, "she will not listen to me! her mind is distraught!  What frenzy has been
mine!  Pardon--pardon, Anne,--oh, pardon!"

Adam Warner laid his hand on the king's arm, and he drew the imperious despot away as easily
as a nurse leads a docile child.

"King!" said the brave old man, "may God pardon thee; for if the last evil hath been wrought
upon this noble lady, David sinned not more heavily than thou."

"She is pure, inviolate,--I swear it!" said the king, humbly.  "Anne, only say that I am forgiven."

But Anne spoke not: her eyes were fixed, her lips had fallen; she was insensible as a corpse,--dumb
and frozen with her ineffable dread. Suddenly steps were heard upon the stairs; the door opened,
and Marmaduke Nevile entered abruptly.

"Surely I heard my lady's voice,--surely!  What marvel this?--the king!  Pardon, my liege!"
and he bent his knee.

The sight of Marmaduke dissolved the spell of awe and repentant humiliation which had chained
a king's dauntless heart. Has it been wholly an injury, a chronic disease? or simply a gain?
or has it operated in both ways?

Let us find the answer, by testing each of these theories of its office by means of the facts.

The
first of the three is that which has generally been held within the Christian church. It dates from
the first ages of the church, and witnesses to a valuable truth. The sacred care with which
the Christians treasured the doctrine, and spurned the attempts of heretics to explain it away,
proves the strength of the conviction that they possessed a definite treasure of divine truth,
introduced at a definite period. Their very want of toleration,(1015) the tenacity of their
attachment to the faith, is a proof of their undoubting conviction concerning the historic verity
of the facts connected with redemption, and the definite character
of the dogmas which interpreted the facts.

In later ages however, the same idea of sacredness has been extended by the Romish church to
the mass of error which Christianity has taken up into itself in the progress of ages; and
in Protestant countries has led to the attempt to restrain the thoughts of men even on the
secular subjects most remote from religion, where the ancient sacred literature seemed to suggest
any indirect information. The doubt on the part of religious men, of any progress being made by
free thought, has often expressed itself too in the affirmation, that the history of unbelief
shows an exact recurrence of the same doubts, without progress from age to age, and an intimation
that new suggestions of doubt are only old foes under new faces.

While Christians have thus generally regarded free inquiry in religion as wholly a loss; freethinkers
have taken the very opposite view, and regarded it as an unmixed gain. The distinguished writer(1016)
of our own time on the history of civilisation, whose premature death will prevent the fulfilment
of his large design, has illustrated, with the clearness and grasp over facts which constitute some
of his excellences, the office of scepticism, in securing for the human mind the political liberty
and toleration which he prized so dearly. His central thought was, that civilisation depended
upon the progress of intellect,(1017) the emancipation of the human mind from all authority save
that of inductive science: he pointed out with triumphant enthusiasm, the services which he conceived
that unbelief had performed, in rescuing Europe from degrading beliefs
like witchcraft, and from the introduction of supernatural causes
for natural events, and in securing in France, in the eighteenth century,
the political rights of the lower orders against the claims of the
church.

Accordingly in his opinion scepticism was an almost unmixed boon.
 Marmaduke, pleased to be of importance, had willingly satisfied their
curiosity, as far as he was able, and was just about to retire to his own chamber, when the
cry of Anne had made him enter the postern-door which led up the stairs to Adam's apartment,
and which was fortunately not locked; and now, on returning, he had again a new curiosity to
allay.  Having briefly said that Master Warner had taken that untoward hour to frighten the
women with a machine that vomited smoke and howled piteously, Marmaduke dismissed the group
to their beds, and was about to seek his own, when, looking once more towards the casement,
he saw a white hand gleaming in the frosty moonlight, and beckoning to him.

The knight crossed himself, and reluctantly ascended the stairs, and re-entered the wizard's den.

The Lady Anne had so far recovered herself, that a kind of unnatural calm had taken possession
of her mind, and changed her ordinary sweet and tractable nature into one stern, obstinate
resolution,--to escape, if possible, that unholy palace.  And as soon as Marmaduke re-entered,
Anne met him at the threshold, and laying her hand convulsively on his arm, said, "By the name
you bear, by your love to my father, aid me to quit these walls."

In great astonishment, Marmaduke stared, without reply.  "Do you deny me, sir?" said Anne,
almost sternly.

"Lady and mistress mine," answered Marmaduke, "I am your servant in all things.  Quit these
walls, the palace!--How?--the gates are closed.  Nay, and what would my lord say, if at night--"

"If at night!" repeated Anne, in a hollow voice; and then pausing, burst into a terrible laugh.
Recovering herself abruptly, she moved to the door, "I will go forth alone, and trust in God
and Our Lady."

Sibyll sprang forward to arrest her steps, and Marmaduke hastened to Adam, and whispered, "Poor
lady, is her mind unsettled?  Hast thou, in truth, distracted her with thy spells and glamour?"

"Hush!" answered the old man; and he whispered in Nevile's ear.

Scarcely had the knight caught the words, than his cheek paled, his eyes flashed fire.  "The
great earl's daughter!" he exclaimed. "Infamy--horror--she is right!"  He broke from the student,
approached Anne, who still struggled with Sibyll, and kneeling before her, said, in a voice
choked with passions at once fierce and tender,--

"Lady, you are right. This denies the possibility of attaining absolute truth. All being is a
state of flux: all knowledge is relative to its age. Philosophy expires in historical criticism;
in the history of the soul of man under its various manifestations. It rests in what is; it
judges only from fact.

The absolute is displaced by the relative; being by becoming.(889) Though not positivism in
its aspects, this system is so in its scientific results.(890)

The unbelief is critical, not aggressive. The grand idea of an historical
progress, of tracing especially the historic growth of ideas, of culture,
of the great unfolding of humanity, presides over religious speculations,
and lends its fascinating power and its danger.
He uttered a joyous exclamation, loosened his long night-cloak, and praying Anne to envelop
her form in its folds, drew the hood over her head; he was about to lead her forth when he
halted suddenly.

"Alack," said he, turning to Sibyll, "even though we may escape the Tower, no boatman now can
be found on the river.  The way through the streets is dark and perilous, and beset with midnight
ruffians."

"Verily," said Warner, "the danger is past now.  Let the noble demoiselle rest here till morning.
The king dare not again--"

"Dare not!" interrupted Marmaduke.  "Alas! you little know King Edward."

At that name Anne shuddered, opened the door, and hurried down the stairs; Sibyll and Marmaduke
followed her.

"Listen, Sir Marmaduke," said Sibyll.  "Close without the Tower is the house of a noble lady,
the dame of Longueville, where Anne may rest in safety, while you seek Lord Warwick.  I will
go with you, if you can obtain egress for us both."

"Brave damsel!" said Marmaduke, with emotion; "but your own safety-- the king's anger--no--besides
a third, your dress not concealed, would create the warder's suspicion.  Describe the house."

"The third to the left, by the river's side, with an arched porch, and the fleur-de-lis embossed
on the walls."

"It is not so dark but we shall find it.  Fare you well, gentle mistress."

While they yet spoke, they had both reached the side of Anne.  Sibyll still persisted in the
wish to accompany her friend; but Marmaduke's representation of the peril to life itself that
might befall her father, if Edward learned she had abetted Anne's escape, finally prevailed.
The knight and his charge gained the outer gate.

"Haste, haste, Master Warder!" he cried, beating at the door with his dagger till it opened
jealously,--"messages of importance to the Lord Warwick.  We have the king's signet.  Open!"

The sleepy warder glanced at the ring; the gates were opened; they were without the fortress,
they hurried on.  "Cheer up, noble lady; you are safe, you shall be avenged!" said Marmaduke,
as he felt the steps of his companion falter.  But the reaction had come.  The effort Anne
had hitherto made was for escape, for liberty; the strength ceased, the object gained; her
head drooped, she muttered a few incoherent words, and then sense and life left her.  Marmaduke
paused in great perplexity and alarm.  But lo, a light in a house before him! That house the
third to the river,--the only one with the arched porch described by Sibyll. The utility of a
historic treatment of doubt is suggested by moral as well as intellectual grounds.

I hope therefore that if I follow the example of some of my predecessors,(119) in giving a course
of lectures historical rather than polemical, evincing the critic rather than the advocate,
seeking for truth rather than victory, analysing processes of evidence rather than refuting
results, my humble contribution toward the knowledge of the argument
of the Christian evidences will be considered to come fairly within
the design intended by the founder of the lecture.

It may well be believed that in the execution of so large a scheme
I have felt almost overwhelmed under a painful sense of its difficulty.

 "Mistress Sibyll Warner
told me of this house, where I come for an hour's shelter to my companion, the Lady Anne, daughter
of the Earl of Warwick."

Marmaduke resigned his charge to an old woman, who was the nurse in that sick-chamber, and
who lifted the hood and chafed the pale, cold hands of the young maiden; the knight then strode
to the recess.  The Lady of Longueville was on the bed of death--an illness of two days had
brought her to the brink of the grave; but there was in her eye and countenance a restless
and preternatural animation, and her voice was clear and shrill, as she said,--

"Why does the daughter of Warwick, the Yorkist, seek refuge in the house of the fallen and
childless Lancastrian?"

"Swear by thy hopes in Christ that thou will tend and guard her while I seek the earl, and
I reply."

"Stranger, my name is Longueville, my birth noble,--those pledges of hospitality and trust
are stronger than hollow oaths.  Say on!"

"Because, then," whispered the knight, after waving the bystanders from the spot, "because
the earl's daughter flies dishonour in a king's palace, and her insulter is the king!"

Before the dying woman could reply, Anne, recovered by the cares of the experienced nurse,
suddenly sprang to the recess, and kneeling by the bedside, exclaimed wildly,--"Save me! bide
me! save me!"

"Go and seek the earl, whose right hand destroyed my house and his lawful sovereign's throne,--go!
I will live till he arrives!" said the childless widow, and a wild gleam of triumph shot over
her haggard features.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE GROUP ROUND THE DEATH-BED OF THE LANCASTRIAN WIDOW. 

Reaching a book from a high shelf in his library, two other books came tumbling down; of which
one, a critical work of Lambert Bos, fell upon the other, which was a volume of Hume. "See!"
said he, "what has happened--procumbit humi bos." On another occasion, sitting in his room,
suffering under the effects of a slight cold, when too strong a current was let in upon him,
he cried out, "Stop, stop, that is too much. I am at present only
par levibus ventis."

"Ay, ay, ay!" said the Lancastrian noblewoman, "ye men of wrath and turbulence should reap
what ye have sown!  This is the king for whom ye dethroned the sainted Henry! this the man
for whom ye poured forth the blood of England's best!  Ha!  ha!  Look down from heaven, my
husband, my martyr-sons!  The daughter of your mightiest foe flies to this lonely hearth,--flies
to the death-bed of the powerless woman for refuge from the foul usurper whom that foe placed
upon the throne!"

"Spare me," muttered Warwick, in a low voice, and between his grinded teeth.  The room had
been cleared, and Dr. Godard (the grave man who had first accosted Marmaduke, and who was the
priest summoned to the dying) alone--save the scarce conscious Anne herself--witnessed the
ghastly and awful conference. 

Every reader of taste knows that "glance from earth to heaven" which pervades the Georgics throughout,
and that poetical almanack which the poet has made use of for pointing
out the various seasons for the different operations of husbandry.

The lady impatiently turned from the priest, and grasping the strong right arm of Warwick with
her shrivelled and trembling fingers, resumed in a voice that struggled to repress the gasps
which broke its breath,--

"But thou--oh, thou wilt bear this indignity! thou, the chief of England's barons, wilt see
no dishonour in the rank love of the vilest of England's kings!  Oh, yes, ye Yorkists have
the hearts of varlets, not of men and fathers!"

"By the symbol from which thou turnest, woman!" exclaimed the earl, giving vent to the fury
which the presence of death had before suppressed, "by Him to whom, morning and night, I have
knelt in grateful blessing for the virtuous life of this beloved child, I will have such revenge
on the recreant whom I kinged, as shall live in the rolls of England till the trump of the
Judgment Angel!" 

In the fourteenth, nominalism revived in Occam; the provinces of faith and philosophy were severed,
and the final victory on the metaphysical question remained in the
hands of the nominalists.

The scientific position of Abélard will thus be clear.  "I too am Lancastrian; I too
would lay down my life for the holy Henry; but I shudder, in the hour of death, to hear yon
pale lips, that should pray for pardon, preach to thee of revenge."

"Revenge!" shrieked out the dame of Longueville, as, sinking fast and fast, she caught the
word--"revenge!  Thou hast sworn revenge on Edward of York, Lord Warwick,--sworn it in the
chamber of death, in the ear of one who will carry that word to the hero-dead of a hundred
battlefields!  Ha! the sun has risen!  Priest--Godard--thine arms-- support--raise--bear me
to the casement!  Quick--quick!  I would see my king once more!  Quick--quick! and then--then--I
will hear thee pray!"

The priest, half chiding, yet half in pity, bore the dying woman to the casement.  She motioned
to him to open it; he obeyed. The fifth century B.C. was such an epoch in Greece;(1020) when various
causes, social and intellectual, created a sudden awakening of the
human mind to reconsider its old beliefs, and find a home for the
new views of nature and of the world which were opening.

  Repent, revenge!"

With her livid and outstretched hand, the Lancastrian pointed to the huge Wakefield tower.
The earl's dark eye beheld in the dim distance a pale and reverend countenance, recognized
even from afar.  The dying woman fixed her glazing eyes upon the wronged and mighty baron,
and suddenly her arm fell to her side, the face became set as into stone, the last breath of
life gurgled within, and fled; and still those glazing eyes were fixed on the earl's hueless
face, and still in his ear, and echoed by a thousand passions in his heart, thrilled the word
which had superseded prayer, and in which the sinner's soul had flown,--REVENGE!

