If Christopher wanted to go down to the sea he would have to pass under the Gate of St. Andrew,
with the old prison, now pulled down to make room for the modern buildings, on his right, and
go down the Salita del Prione, which is a continuation of the Vico Dritto di Ponticello.  It
slopes downwards from the Gate as the first street sloped upwards to it; and it contains the
same assortment of shops and of houses, the same mixture of handicrafts and industries, as
were seen in the Vico Dritto di Ponticello. "You cannot give a better sign," said he. "My only fear
of you was, that you would dash into debate at once, like a tumbler jumping from a precipice;
and that, like him, all that you would have gained by it would be broken limbs for life.
  Out of the Piazza you come down the Via
di San Donato and into the Piazza of that name, where for over nine centuries the church of
San Donato has faced the sun and the weather.  From there Christopher's young feet would follow
the winding Via di San Bernato, a street also inhabited by craftsmen and workers in wood and
metal; and at the last turn of it, a gash of blue between the two cliffwalls of houses, you
see the Mediterranean. 

"Not in the least. He is personally a gallant fellow; and if he wants experience, so must every
man at one time or other. His only error, hitherto, has been his condescending to come at
all with so small a force under his command.
 Genoa will tell you nothing more.  You may walk over the very spot where he
was born; you may unconsciously tread in the track of his vanished feet; you may wander about
the wharves of the city, and see the ships loading and unloading--different ships, but still
trafficking in commodities not greatly different from those of his day; you may climb the heights
behind Genoa, and look out upon the great curving Gulf from Porto Fino to where the Cape of
the western Riviera dips into the sea; you may walk along the coast to Savona, where Domenico
had one of his many habitations, where he kept the tavern, and whither Christopher's young
feet must also have walked; and you may come back and search again in the harbour, from the
old Mole and the Bank of St. George to where the port and quays stretch away to the medley
of sailing-ships and steamers; but you will not find any sign or trace of Christopher.  No
echo of the little voice that shrilled in the narrow street sounds in the Vico Dritto; the
houses stand gaunt and straight, with a brilliant strip of blue sky between their roofs and
the cool street beneath; but they give you nothing of what you seek. Burke, or some other man of metaphor,
compared him to the falcon; which, however high it may soar, always follows the prey with
its eye along the ground. But two Pitts, if nature could be prolific of such magnificent monsters,
would absolutely perplex us.  You may chase him while he runs about the wharves and stumbles over the
ropes, but you will never catch him.  He runs before you, zigzagging over the cobbles, up the
sunny street, into the narrow house; out again, running now towards the Duomo, hiding in the
porch of San Stefano, where the weavers held their meetings; back again along the wharves;
surely he is hiding behind that mooring-post!  But you look, and he is not there--nothing but
the old harbour dust that the wind stirs into a little eddy while you look.  For he belongs
not to you or me, this child; he is not yet enslaved to the great purpose, not yet caught up
into the machinery of life.  His eye has not yet caught the fire of the sun setting on a western
sea; he is still free and happy, and belongs only to those who love him.