Gradually its mad attacks weakened. Then one of his blind, thrusting blows seemed to burn into
a vital organ. A terrible choking, strangling sound came from the air. And he heard the thrashing
struggles of wild convulsions. At last all was quiet. He prodded the thing again and again
with the hot electrode, and it did not move. It was dead.

The creature's body was so heavy that Thad had to return to the bridge, and shut off the current
in the gravity plates along the keel, before he could move it. He dragged it to the lock through
which he had entered the flier, and consigned it to space....

       *       *       *       *       *

Five days later Thad brought the Red Dragon into the atmosphere of Mars. She was born in Elmira,
N.Y., but when she was two years old her parents returned to their old home in Castile and here
she spent her early life.

EARLY LIFE

She was not a strong child, and being the youngest of a large family
naturally received much attention, which in after years she concluded
was not good for her. She once described herself as a puny little
thing who wanted everything she saw and thought she ought to have
it. "I had a will of my own," she said, "and my mother found it necessary
to be very firm with me at times. An ache came in his throat.

Linda Cross, so quiet and cold and white, and yet so lovely. How terrible her last days of
life must have been, with doom shadowing the vessel, and the men vanishing mysteriously, one
by one! Terrible--until she had sought the security of death.

Strangely, Thad felt no great elation at the thought that half the incalculable treasure about
him was now safely his own, as the award of salvage. If only the girl were still living....
He felt a poignantly keen desire to hear her voice.

Thad found the note when they started to lift her from the chest. A hasty scrawl, it lay beneath
her head, among glittering gems.

     "This woman is not dead. Please have her given skilled
     medical attention as soon as possible. She lies in a state
     of suspended animation, induced by the injection of fifty
     minims of zeronel.

     "She is my daughter, Linda Cross, and my sole heir. 

     Mrs. Swain's sister Elizabeth lived a mile out of the village,
     while the home of the Swain family was within the boundary
     line, and as the little red school-house was between them
     the children of both families attended this school.

      Perhaps in a year, perhaps in a
     hundred. The purity of my drugs is uncertain, and the
     injection was made hastily, so I do not know the exact time
     that must elapse.

     "If this is found, it will be because the lurking thing upon
     the ship has destroyed me and all my men.

     "Please do not fail me.

                                    Levington Cross."

Thad bought the white tower of his dreams, slim and graceful in its Martian garden of saffron
and purple, among the low ocher hills beside Helion. He carried the sleeping girl through the
silver door where the girl of his dreams had waited, and set the coffer in a great, vaulted
chamber. Relatives and friends of Dr. Swain had carefully preserved many of her letters; and Dr.
Greene, who had long desired that these letters should be published,
conceived that the favorable time had come and urged the immediate
preparation of the work.



       *       *       *       *       *

Looking in his mirror one day, Thad saw little wrinkles about his eyes. An interesting description
of this visit is given in Mrs. Gracey's book, "Woman's Medical Work in Foreign Lands," and in Dr. Swain's
book, "A Glimpse of India." Mr. Thomas's carefully prepared Hindustani
speech was not finished before the Nawab replied graciously, "Take it!

He wondered if he should grow old and infirm, while Linda lay still young and beautiful and
unchanged in her sleep; if she might awake, after long years, and see in him only a feeble
old man. And he knew that he would not be sorry he had waited, even if he should die before
she revived.

On the next day, the nurse called him into the room where Linda lay. He was bending over her
when she opened her eyes. They were blue, glorious.

A long time she looked up at him, first in fearful wonder, then with confidence, and dawning
understanding. And at last she smiled.

       *       *       *       *       *