Several anecdotes are current having reference to the Emperor as sportsman. One of them, for
example, mentions a loving-cup of Frederick William III's time, kept at the hunting lodge of
Letzlingen, which is filled with champagne and must be emptied at a draught by anyone visiting
the lodge for the first time. This is great fun for the Emperor, who a year or two ago made
a number of Berlin guests, including Chancellor von Bethmann-Hollweg, the Austrian Ambassador,
Szoghenyi-Marich, the Secretary for the Navy, Admiral von Tirpitz, and the Crown Prince of
Greece stand before him and drain the cup. As the story goes, "the attempts of the guests to
drink out of the heavy cup, which is fixed into a set of antlers in such a way as to make it
difficult to drink without spilling the wine, caused great amusement."

The principles of sport generally, it may be here interpolated, are not quite the same in Germany
as in England, though no country has imitated England in regard to sport so closely and successfully
as Germany. Up to a comparatively few years ago the Germans had neither inclination nor means
for it, and though always enthusiastic hunters, hunting--not the English fox-hunting, but hunting
the boar and the bear, the wolf and the deer--was almost the sole form of manly sport practised.
Turnen, the most popular sort of German indoor gymnastics, only began in 1861, a couple of
years after the birth of the Emperor. There are now nearly a dozen cricket clubs alone in Berlin,
football clubs all over the Empire, tennis clubs in every town, rowing clubs at all the seaports
and along the large rivers, nearly all following English rules and in numerous cases using
English sporting terms. At the same time sport is not the religion it is in England--indeed,
to keep up the metaphor, hardly a living creed.

The German attitude towards sport is not altogether the same as the English attitude. In England
the object of the game is that the best man shall win, that he shall not be in any way unfairly
or unequally handicapped vis-à-vis his opponent, and the honour, not the intrinsic value of
the prize, is the main consideration. These principles are not yet fully understood or adopted
in Germany, possibly owing to the early military training of the German youth making the carrying
off the prize anyhow and by any means the main object. It is Realpolitik in sport, and a Realpolitik
which is not wholly unknown in England; but while the spirit of Realpolitik is still perceivable
in German sport, it is equally perceivable that the standard English way of viewing sporting
competition is becoming more and more approached in Germany.

The Emperor is an enthusiastic patron of sport of all healthy outdoor kinds, not as sympathizing
with the English youth's disposition to regard play as work and work as play, to give to his
business any time he can spare from his sport, but because he estimates at its full value its
place in the national health-budget. His personal likings are for bear-shooting, deer-stalking,
and yachting, but he also wields the lawn-tennis racket and the rapier with fair skill. The
names of several of his hunting lodges---Rominten, Springe, Hubertusstock, and so on--are familiar
to many people in all countries. Rominten preserve is in East Prussia, and embraces about four
square miles, with little lakes and some rising ground. September is the Emperor's favourite
month for visiting it. Here one year he shot a famous eight-and-twenty-ender antelope, which
had come across from Russian territory. Before the present reign the deer, or pig, or other
wild animal used to be beaten up to the royal sportsman of the day, but that practice has long
ceased, and the Emperor has to tramp many a mile, and at times crawl on all fours for hundreds
of yards, to get a shot.

We have seen that the Emperor's position as King and Emperor renders inevitable his adoption,
either of natural bent, which is extremely probable, or from a policy in harmony with the wishes
of his people, of a view of the monarch's office that to perhaps most Englishmen living under
parliamentary rule must seem antiquated, not to say absurd. This attitude apart, the Emperor
possesses, as it is hoped has been sufficiently shown, as modern and progressive a spirit as
any of his contemporaries. His instant recognition of all useful modern appliances, particularly,
of course, those of possible service in war, is a prominent feature of his mentality. He went,
doubtless, too far in heralding Count Zeppelin, in 1909, as "the greatest man of the century,"
but the very words he chose to use marked his appreciation of the new aeronautical science
Count Zeppelin was introducing. Similarly, the moment the automobile had entered on the stage
of reliability it won a place in the imperial favour, and is now his most constant means of
locomotion. He has never, it is true, emulated the enterprise of his son, the Crown Prince,
whom Mr. Orville Wright had as a companion for a quarter of an hour in the air at Potsdam three
years ago, but his interest in the aeroplane is none the less keen because he is too conscious
of his responsibilities to subject his life to unnecessary risk.

Before closing our sketch of the Emperor as a man by quoting appreciations written by two contemporary
writers, one German and the other English, it may be added that there is a statesman still--it
is pleasant to think--alive who could, an he only would, draw the Emperor's character perfectly,
both as man and monarch. Indeed, as has been seen, he has more than once sketched parts of
it in Parliament, but only parts--the whole character of the Emperor, on all its sides and
in all its ramifications, has yet to be revealed. Here need only be quoted what Chancellor
Bülow--and also, by the way, Princess Bülow--publicly said about the Emperor as man. The Prince's
most noteworthy statement was made in the Reichstag in 1903, when, in answer to Leader-of-the-Opposition
Bebel, the Prince said, "One thing at least, the Emperor is no Philistine," and proceeded to
explain, rather negatively and disappointingly, that the Emperor possesses what the Greeks
call megalopsychia--a great soul. One knows but too well the English Philistine, that stolid,
solid, self-sufficient bulwark of the British Constitution. The German Philistine is his twin
brother, the narrow-minded, conservative burgher. Other epithets the Prince applied to the
imperial character were "simple," "natural," "hearty," "magnanimous," "clear-headed," and "straightforward";
while Princess Bülow, during a conversation her husband was having with the French journalist,
M. Jules Huret, in 1907, interjected the remark that he was "a person of good birth, fils de
bonne maison, the descendant of distinguished ancestors, and a modern man of great intelligence."

But let us see how the Emperor appears to his contemporaries. Dr. Paul Liman, who has made
the most serious attempt to sketch the character of the Emperor that has yet appeared in German,
writes:--

     "We see in him a nature whose ground-tone is enthusiasm,
     phantasy, and a passionate impulse towards action. Filled
     with the highest sense of the imperial rights and duties
     assigned to him, convinced that these are the direct
     expression of a divine will, he has inwardly thrown off the
     bonds of modern constitutional ideas and in words recently
     spoken, where he claimed responsibility for fifty-eight
     million people, converted these ideas into a formula that,
     while unconstitutional, is yet moral and deeply earnest.
     These words were doubly valuable as giving insight into the
     soul of a man who can be mistaken in his conclusions and
     means, but not in his motives, since these are directed to
     the general weal. Here, too, we find the explanation of the
     fact that at one time he comes before us surrounded with the
     blue and hazy nimbus of the romantic period, and at another
     as the most modern prince of our time. Out of the rise in
     him of the consciousness of majesty there grows a greater
     sense of duty, and instead of keeping watch from his turret
     over his people he loses himself in detail. And precisely
     here must he fail, because modern life with its development
     is far too rich in complications and activities to admit of
     its submitting to patriarchal benevolence. And because an
     artistic strain and a strong fantasy simultaneously work in
     him, he moves joyfully beyond the limits of the actual to
     raise before our eyes the highly coloured dream of the
     picture of a time in which all men, all nations, will be
     friendly and reconciled--an artist's dream. Here is
     something characteristic, something unusual, to give
     particular charm to a personality which has no parallel in
     the history of the dynasty hitherto. There may be concealed
     in it the seed of illustrious deeds, but only too often
     disappointment and contempt lie scornfully in wait when the
     deed is accomplished. For the heaven we erect on earth
     always comes to naught, and the idealist is always
     vanquished in the strife with fact."

So far, Dr. Liman. Mr. Sydney Brooks, in a sketch in Maclure's Magazine for July, 1910, writes:--

     "The drawback to any and to every régime of paternal
     absolutism is that the human mind is limited. The Kaiser
     will not admit it, but his acts prove it. It is not given to
     one man to know more about everything than anybody else
     knows about anything; and the Kaiser, who is a good deal of
     a dilettante, and believes himself omniscient, at times
     speaks from a lamentable half-knowledge, and occasionally
     has to call in the imperial authority to back up his
     verdicts against the judgments of experts.

     "Unquestionably his mind is of an unusual order. It is a
     facile, quickly moving instrument; it works in flashes; it
     assimilates seemingly without effort, and it is at its best
     under the highest pressure. The Kaiser is not to be laughed
     at for wanting to know all there is to be known, but he may
     justly be criticized for failing to distinguish between the
     attempt and its failure....

     "Is it all charlatanerie? Is it all of a part with his
     speech in Russian to the regiment of which the Czar made him
     honorary colonel, a studied trumpery effort, designed for a
     momentary effect? Is the Kaiser just glitter and tinsel,
     impulse and rhapsody, with nothing solid beneath? Is it his
     supreme object to make an impression at any cost, to force,
     like another Nero, the popular applause by arts more
     becoming to a cabotin than a sovereign? Vanity,
     restlessness, a consuming desire for the palm without the
     dust--an intense and theatrical egotism--are these the
     qualities that give the clue to his character and actions?

     "I do not think so altogether. The Kaiser has scattered too
     much. In an age of specialists on many subjects he speaks
     like an amateur. He is always the hero, and often the
     victim, of his own imagination; like a star actor, he cannot
     bear to be outshone; he is morbidly, almost pruriently,
     conscious of the effect he is producing. And on all matters
     of intellect and taste his influence makes for blatant
     mediocrity. But he is not meretricious; at bottom he is not
     by any means as superficial and insincere as he often seems.
     He is one of those men in whom an instinct becomes an
     immutable truth, an idea a conviction, and a suspicion a
     certainty, by an almost instantaneous process; and, the
     process completed, action follows forthwith. The Kaiser is
     always resolved to do the right thing; the right thing, by
     some quaint but invariable coincidence, is whatever he is
     resolved to do."

These appreciations from afar may be as sound as they are brilliant, but they rather refer
to the non-essential parts of the character of the Emperor in the first flush of imperial glory
than to the essential character as it has developed with the years.

As a man--he will be dealt with as monarch presently--his essential character must be judged
from his conduct, and conduct extending over a good many years. One might say, conduct and
reputation, but that reputation is so often the result of a confused mixture of superficial
observation, gossip, tittle-tattle, envy, hatred and uncharitableness, and, in the case of
an Emperor, of merely picturesque and effective writing.

There is another source which would materially help us in forming a judgment, but it is wholly
wanting in the case of the Emperor. No private correspondence of his is, as yet, available
to the world.

Again, a man's character is determined by his motives, if it is not the other way about; in
any case, a man's motives are for the most part inscrutable and can only be deduced from conduct,
while the world usually makes the mistake of explaining conduct by attributing its own motives.
Tried, then, by the standard of conduct, the only one available, the Emperor, as a man, shows
us a high type of humanity. It may not, probably does not, appeal to Englishmen wholly, but
there are features of it which must command, and do command, the respect of people of all nationalities.
And, first of all, he is a good man; good as a Christian, good as a husband, good as a father,
good as a patriot. With all the power and temptation to gratify his inclinations, he has no
personal vices of the baser sort. He is moderate in the satisfaction of his appetites, whether
for food or wine. He is no debauchee, no voluptuary, no gambler. He is faithful to old friends
and comrades. He has high ideals, and is not ashamed of them. He is neither indolent nor fussy;
neither a cynic, nor an intriguer, nor a fool; he is neither wrong-headed nor stubborn; he
is honest and sincere to a degree that does him honour as a man, if it has sometimes proved
perilous and blameworthy in him as a monarch. He is optimistic, and on good grounds. He is
no physical or intellectual giant, but he is a man of more than average all-round intelligence
and capacity. If this appreciation is correct, or even approximately correct, it is a testimonial,
whatever may be its worth, to great merit.

Yet the Emperor as man has his failings and drawbacks, though they are such as time is almost
sure to diminish or eradicate. Notably in his earlier years he lacked judgment, the power of
balancing considerations and arriving at conclusions from them which men more gifted with poise
would endorse as logical and inevitable. He does not, like spare Cassius, see quite through
the deeds of men, as his friendship for Count Phili Eulenburg and the malodorous "Camarilla"
go to show, and his choice of Imperial Chancellors, his grand viziers, has not in every instance
been happy. He has less tact than character, as he showed once in Vienna, where he greatly
pained the Foreign Minister, Count Goluchowski, one day at a club by calling to him, "Golu,
Golu, come and sit beside your Kaiser." He has the German masculine enjoyment in a kind of
humour which would have delighted Fox and the three-bottle men, but would sadly shock the susceptibilities
of an Oxford æsthete. He has a share of personal vanity, but it springs from the desire to
look the Emperor he is, not because he supposes for a moment that he is an Adonis. He is theatrical
in exactly the same spirit--the desire imperially to impress his folk in the sense of the German
word imponieren, a word that needs no translation. If he has lost much of Dr. Liman's "romantik,"
he still retains the "scatteredness" of Mr. Sidney Brooks, though the Emperor would rather
hear it called "many-sidedness." En résumé he has the defects of his qualities, but to no man
or woman's unmerited loss or injury, and if we weigh the good qualities with the bad, we find
a fine balance remaining to his credit as a man.

The fierce light which beats upon a throne, if it is apt to dazzle the bystander, helps those
at a distance, especially in these days of the still fiercer light of modern publicity, to
judge fairly the throne's occupant. The character of the Emperor as monarch ought, therefore,
as far as is possible in the absence of archives marked "secret and confidential" and yet lying
in the ministries of all countries, to disclose itself nowadays with reasonable clearness.
Yet, even still, different and conflicting opinions regarding it are to be gathered in Germany
and out of it.

Indeed, his own people are among the severest critics. One of them, Professor Quidde, early
in the reign, made an extraordinarily ingenious, but quite unjustifiable, comparison of him
to Caligula, which, though only consisting of classical quotations and making no mention of
the Emperor, was seen by everybody to refer to him and has caused discussion ever since. While
many foreign critics have done the Emperor justice, others in turn have made him out to be
arrogant, snobbish, bombastic, superficial, incompetent, and insincere. To writers of this
class he is always the German War Lord, ready to pounce, like a highwayman or pirate, on any
unprotected person or property he may come across, regardless of treaty obligations, of international
disaster, or of the dictates of humanity. One day they announce he is planning the annexation
of Holland in order to get a further set of naval bases, the next that he means to take Belgium
to make a road for his armies into France, a third that he is about to set at naught the Monroe
doctrine and with his Dreadnoughts seize Brazil. All these things are conceivable and not impossible,
but they are in the very highest degree improbable, and, as yet at least, ought not to be considered
seriously. To sensible and better-informed people everywhere he is a Prussian king of the best
type, a sincere friend of peace, with a mania for pushing the maxim "Si vis pacem para bellum"
to extremes, politically the most influential man in Europe, and, with all his faults, one
of the greatest Germans of his time.

The character of the Emperor, as monarch, is reflected very largely in the character of the
Germany of to-day.

Germany is optimistic, ardently desirous of peace, bent on worthily maintaining the great place
she has won, and deserved to win, among the nations, and so materially prosperous as to make
many Germans tremble at the thought that the prosperity may be too great to last. This, however,
is not to assert that in Germany everything is couleur de rose. There are not a few things
in the Empire's social and political conditions which are antiquated or promise no good. Noxious
as well as beneficial forces have been introduced into the social life of the country and are
beginning to make themselves felt. German home-life is ceasing to be the admirable and exemplary
thing it was before the present era of class rivalry, commercialism, the parvenu and the snob.
The idealism which made the Empire a possibility is passing away. There is need, and a general
demand, for franchise reform in Prussia, and a change in the spirit of Prussian bureaucratic
administration would be acceptable, though it is, perhaps, hopeless to expect it. The opposition
in Germany between the monarchic and the democratic principle, if not more marked than it was
twenty or thirty years ago, is manifesting itself over a wider and perhaps deeper area. The
relations between capital and labour are far from satisfactory adjustment. Social democracy
is yearly gaining fresh adherents, and if guilty of no political violence, is yet a constant
source of danger to domestic peace. The German middle class, that bourgeoisie which is the
backbone and strength of the Empire, is losing its Spartan simplicity and its content with
small and moderate pleasures; and the national virtues of thrift and self-denial are yielding
to the temptations of wealth and luxury. Business credit is unduly stretched, speculation in
land has attained disturbing proportions, and the banking world is in too many instances allied
with hazardous or doubtful enterprises. Nevertheless the country as a whole is sound, intellectually,
morally, and financially.

It would be difficult to mention any of the greater tasks of imperial administration to which
the Emperor does not continue to devote personal attention. He is the life and soul of the
army and navy, though it should not be forgotten that as regards the latter he has in Admiral
Tirpitz an executive talent worthy of his own directive. His interest in the mercantile marine
remains what it was when in 1887, as Prince William, he drew up an expert opinion which decided
the Hamburg-Amerika Company to build their fast ocean-going steamers at home instead of abroad,
and by the success of the experiment commenced the modern development of Germany's shipbuilding
industry. Indeed, his attention to the Hamburg line, familiarly known as the "Hapag" line,
from the initial letters of its legal title, "Hamburg-Amerika Packetfahrt-Aktien Gesellschaft,"
and to the Norddeutsche line from Bremen, has given rise to the unfounded belief that he is
heavily interested in their financial success. Herr Albert Ballin, the Director of the Hamburg
line, though a Jew, is among his intimates and advisers, and the Emperor is said to have caused
umbrage more than once to Court officials and the aristocracy by giving directors of both lines
precedence at his table. Without the Emperor's personal support it is probable that neither
the firm of Krupp at Essen nor the splendid shipbuilding yards at Hamburg, Bremen, Stettin
and elsewhere would continue to progress as they are doing. He neglects no opportunity of stimulating
Germany's internal and external trade. He is at all times ready to encourage the introduction
of useful achievements of modern science and invention. And lastly, by tactful treatment of
other German rulers, and a wise policy of non-interference with their States, he is promoting
a feeling of federal solidarity.

The Emperor's conception of his relations to the people remains to-day what he was brought
up in and what it was when he mounted the throne. In England, America, and France the people
are the real rulers, and their monarch or president is their highest official servant and representative.
The idea is not perhaps constitutionally expressed, but it is universally and deeply felt in
the countries named. In Germany the opposite theory obtains--for how long it must be left to
the future to say. In Germany the Emperor is the real ruler, the genuine monarch, and the people
are his subjects, the country his country. Hence, while an English king in an official document
or public statement would not think of putting himself first and the people or country second,
the German Emperor's official statements and speeches constantly repeat such expressions as
"I and my people," "I and the army," "my capital," "me and the Fatherland," and a score more;
so that Anglo-Saxons and other foreigners acquire the impression that the word "my" is no figure
of rhetoric or pride, but a simple claim of ownership or possession. And the official relation
between monarch and people is reflected in the people's ordinary life. To the foreigner it
continually appears that the public are the servants of the official, not the contrary, whether
officialism takes the shape of a post-office clerk, a tramcar conductor, a shop salesman, a
policeman, or a waiter. All these functionaries are the possessors of an authority which the
citizen is expected to, and usually does, obey. The explanation of such a state of things is
a little abstruse, but an attempt may be made at giving it.

The period immediately preceding the reign of Frederick the Great was a period of absolute
monarchy in Germany, a system introduced from France, where Louis XIV had proclaimed the doctrine
L'etat, c'est moi, according to which the lives and property of the subject belonged to the
Prince, whose will was to be obeyed without question or demur. There were now four hundred
courts in Germany in imitation of the Court of Versailles, and the smaller the principality
the greater the absolutism. Absolutism, however, required an army to support it; hence the
establishment of standing and mercenary armies and the disuse of arms by the citizen. The result,
to quote Professor Ernst Richard's work on "German Civilization," was that

     "the pride of the burgher and the peasant was broken. A
     submissive servility hopelessly pervaded the masses, and
     even the best had lost all social and national feeling, all
     sense of being part of a greater body.... The luxurious life
     and the arrogance of the ruling classes were accepted as a
     matter of course, one might say as a divine institution.
     Thus those traits of character, which had come to light
     under the cruel stress of the Thirty Years War, fostered by
     the rule of despotism and the worst vices, took deeper root.
     To these belong that greed for social position, for titles
     and the smiles of the great; servility towards those who
     hold a higher position as bearers of official titles and
     dignity, a fear of publicity, above all a rather remarkable
     inclination to a peevish, petty, and sceptical attitude as
     regards the knowledge and ability of others. The exaltation
     of the position of the prince extended to his Court and his
     officials, as well as to the nobility, which had long since
     become a Court nobility."

But absolutism had to go with the changes in human thought under the influence of Rationalism,
which brought with it the idea of the State, not the absolute prince, as ruler. This idea was
embodied in the Rechtstaat, or State based on law, which was introduced by Frederick the Great,
the "first servant of the State." The State, he said, exists for the sake of the citizens.
"One must be insane," he wrote,

     "to imagine that men should have said to one of their
     equals, 'We will raise you so that we may be your slaves, we
     will give you the power to guide our thoughts according to
     yours.' They rather said: 'We need you in order to execute
     our laws, that you show us the way, and defend us. But we
     understand that you will respect our liberties.'"

The Rechtstaat exists in Germany to the present day, the Emperor is at the head of it, and
the people are content to live within its confines. It is not, as has been seen, coterminous
with the whole liberty of the subject, but is yet a vast bundle of rights and obligations which
in public, and much of private, life leaves as little as possible to the unaided or undirected
intelligence or goodwill of the citizen. It is an exaggeration, but still expresses a popular
feeling even in Germany itself--and certainly describes an impression made on the Anglo-Saxon--to
say that outside this bundle of laws and regulations, which, clearly and logically paragraphed,
orders to a nicety all the public, and many of the private, relations of the citizens, everything
is forbidden or discouraged by authority. Yet, as has been said, the people are satisfied with
it, and it must be admitted that if it confines individual liberty within what to the Anglo-Saxon
seem narrow limits, still, by directing the individual to common ends, it works great public
advantage. It is in truth a very intelligent and practical form of Socialism, infinitely less
oppressive to the people than would be the socialism of the professed Socialist.

It left, however, the German caste system of Frederick's day undisturbed; as Professor Richard
says:

     "The nobility retained its privileged position. It was
     considered a law of nature that the noblemen should assist
     the monarch in the administration of the State and as
     leaders of the army; the peasant should cultivate the fields
     and provide food; the commoner should provide money through
     industry and commerce."

To the Anglo-Saxon, of course, brought up with individualistic views of life and demanding
complete personal freedom, the German Rechtstaat would be galling, not to say intolerable.
The Englishman, however, has his Rechtstaat too, but the limits it places on his liberty are
not nearly so restrictive in regard to public meeting, public talking, public writing, in short,
public action of all sorts, as in Germany. Besides, the spirit of laws in England, as naturally
follows from the Englishman's political history, is a much more liberal one than the German
spirit, which is still to some extent under the influence of the age of absolutism.

The German conception of the Rechtstaat entails, as one of its consequences, a sharp contrast
between the rights and privileges of the Crown and the rights and privileges of the people;
and therefore, while the Emperor is never without apprehension that the people may try to increase
their rights and privileges at the expense of those of the Crown, the people are not without
apprehension that the Crown may try to increase its rights and privileges at the expense of
the political liberties of the people. To this apprehension on the part of the people is to
be attributed their widespread dissatisfaction with the Emperor's so-called "personal regiment,"
which, until recently, was the chief hindrance to his popularity. In truth the Emperor is in
a difficult position. To be popular with the people he must be popular with the Parliament,
but if he were to seek popularity with the Parliament he would lose popularity and prestige
with the aristocracy and large landowners, who have still a good deal of the old-time contempt
for the mere "folk," the burgher, and he would lose it with the military officer class, which
is aristocratic in spirit, and is, as the Emperor is constantly assuring it, the sole support
of throne and Empire. In addition to this it has to be remembered that a large majority of
South Germany is Catholic, and, generally speaking, no great lover of Prussia, its people,
and their airs of stiff superiority.

