
Wert thee to write as well as friend Edmund, whose speeches I often see in our papers, it would
be the very self same thing; thee wouldst be equally accused of idleness, and vain notions
not befitting thy condition. Our colonel would be often coming here to know what it is that
thee canst write so much about. Some would imagine that thee wantest to become either an assembly-man
or a magistrate, which God forbid; and that thee art telling the king's men abundance of things.
Instead of being well looked upon as now, and living in peace with all the world, our neighbours
would be making strange surmises: I had rather be as we are, neither better nor worse than
the rest of our country folks. Thee knowest what I mean, though I should be sorry to deprive
thee of any honest recreation. "The distinctions between the first and second part of the Pilgrim's
Progress are such as circumstances render appropriate; and as John Bunyan's strong mother wit
enabled him to seize upon correctly. Christian, for example, a man, and a bold one, is represented
as enduring his fatigues, trials, and combats, by his own stout courage, under the blessing of
heaven: but to express that species of inspired heroism by which women are supported in the path
of duty, notwithstanding the natural feebleness and timidity of their nature, Christiana and Mercy
obtain from the interpreter their guide, called Great-heart, by whose strength and valour
their lack of both is supplied, and the dangers and distresses of the way repelled and overcome.
 These Englishmen
are strange people; because they can live upon what they call bank notes, without working,
they think that all the world can do the same. This goodly country never would have been tilled
and cleared with these notes. I am sure when Mr. F. B. was here, he saw thee sweat and take
abundance of pains; he often told me how the Americans worked a great deal harder than the
home Englishmen; for there he told us, that they have no trees to cut down, no fences to make,
no negroes to buy and to clothe: and now I think on it, when wilt thee send him those trees
he bespoke? But if they have no trees to cut down, they have gold in abundance, they say; for
they rake it and scrape it from all parts far and near. I have often heard my grandfather tell
how they live there by writing. By writing they send this cargo unto us, that to the West,
and the other to the East Indies. "He is much worse, I am obliged to you, sir!" I bid them good
bye, and think in myself how the English are odd to enjoy bad health,
and the young ladies much oblige to me because their papa was much
worse! "Chacun à son goút," as we say. But as
thee art an early man follow thine own inclinations; thee wantest some rest, I am sure, and
why shouldst thee not employ it as it may seem meet unto thee.--However let it be a great secret;
how wouldst thee bear to be called at our country meetings, the man of the pen? If this scheme
of thine was once known, travellers as they go along would point out to our house, saying,
here liveth the scribbling fanner; better hear them as usual observe, here liveth the warm
substantial family, that never begrudgeth a meal of victuals, or a mess of oats, to any one
that steps in. Look how fat and well clad their negroes are.

