Now whether these persons were in reality exiles by choice, for the sake of keeping out of
the way of creditors, or of enjoying the society of those they preferred to their own domestic
circle, I do not venture to conjecture. But let the reader consider whether any conjecture
can be more improbable than the statement actually made.

It is, indeed, credible that ambition may prompt an unscrupulous man to make the most enormous
sacrifices of human life, and to perpetrate the most atrocious crimes, for the advancement
of his views of conquest. But that this great man—as he is usually reckoned even by adversaries—this
hero according to some—this illustrious warrior, and mighty sovereign—should have stooped to
be guilty of an act of mean and petty malice worthy of a spiteful old woman,—a piece of paltry
cruelty which could not at all conduce to his success in the war, or produce any effect except
to degrade his country, and exasperate ours;—this, surely, is quite incredible. On this point
let me refer to my prize-essay on The Freedom of the Will.

I have there explained the true meaning and origin of the persistent
illusion that the will is entirely free in every single action; and
I have indicated the cause to which it is due. A large
portion of the English nation, and among these the whole of the Whig party, are said to have
expressed the most vehement indignation, mingled with compassion, at the banishment from Europe,
and confinement in St. Helena, of this great man. No considerations of regard for the peace
and security of our own country, no dread of the power of so able and indefatigable a warrior,
and so inveterate an enemy, should have induced us, they thought, to subject this formidable
personage to a confinement, which was far less severe than that to which he was said to have
subjected such numbers of our countrymen, the harmless non-belligerent travellers, whom (according
to the story) he kidnapped in France, with no object but to gratify the basest and most unmanly
spite.

But that there is no truth in that story, and that it was not believed by those who manifested
so much sympathy and indignation on this great man's account, is sufficiently proved by that
very sympathy and indignation.

There are again other striking improbabilities connected with the Polish nation in the history
before us. Buonaparte is represented as having always expressed the strongest sympathy with
that ill-used people; and they, as being devotedly attached to him, and fighting with the utmost
fidelity and bravery in his armies, in which some of them attained high commands. Now he had
it manifestly in his power at one period (according to the received accounts), with a stroke
of his pen, to re-establish Poland as an independent state. For, in his last Russian war, he
had complete occupation of the country (of which the population was perfectly friendly); the
Russian portion of it was his by right of conquest; and Austria and Prussia, then his allies,
and almost his subjects, would gladly have resigned their portions in exchange for some of
the provinces they had ceded to France, and which were, to him, of little value, but, to them,
important. And, indeed, Prussia was (as we are told) so thoroughly humbled and weakened that
he might easily have enforced the cession of Prussian-Poland, even without any compensation.
And the re-establishment of the Polish kingdom would have been as evidently politic as it was
reasonable. The independence of a faithful and devoted ally, at enmity with the surrounding
nations—the very nations that were the most likely to combine (as they often had done) against
him,—this would have given him, at no cost, a kind of strong garrison to maintain his power,
and keep his enemies in check.

Yet this most obvious step, the history tells us, he did not take; but made flattering speeches
to the Poles, used their services, and did nothing for them!

This is, alone, sufficiently improbable. But we are required moreover to believe that the Poles,—instead
of execrating this man, who had done them the unpardonable wrong of wantonly disappointing
the expectations he had, for his own purposes, excited, thus adding treachery to ingratitude—instead
of this, continued to the last as much devoted to him as ever, and even now idolize his memory!
We are to believe, in short, that this Buonaparte, not only in his own conduct and adventures
violated all the established rules of probability, but also caused all other persons, as many
as came in contact with him, to act as no mortals ever did act before: may we not add, as no
mortals ever did act at all?

Many other improbabilities might be added to the list, and will be found in the complete edition
of that history, from which some extracts will be presently given, and which has been published
(under the title of "Historic Certainties") by Aristarchus Newlight, with a learned commentary
(not, indeed, adopting the views contained in these pages, but) quite equal in ingenuity to
a late work on the "Hebrew Monarchy." 

Does he fail to see that there are many who would act like them if only they could?

Many a criminal dies more quietly on the scaffold than many a non-criminal
in the arms of his family. The one has perceived what his will is
and has discarded it. And thus it is that the magnitude and boldness of a fraud becomes its
best support. The millions who for so many ages have believed in Mahomet or Brahma, lean as
it were on each other for support; and not having vigour of mind enough boldly to throw off
vulgar prejudices, and dare be wiser than the multitude, persuade themselves that what so many
have acknowledged must be true. But I call on those who boast their philosophical freedom of
thought, and would fain tread in the steps of Hume and other inquirers of the like exalted
and speculative genius, to follow up fairly and fully their own principles, and, throwing off
the shackles of authority, to examine carefully the evidence of whatever is proposed to them,
before they admit its truth.

That even in this enlightened age, as it is called, a whole nation may be egregiously imposed
upon, even in matters which intimately concern them, may be proved (if it has not been already
proved) by the following instance: it was stated in the newspapers, that, a month after the
battle of Trafalgar, an English officer, who had been a prisoner of war, and was exchanged,
returned to this country from France, and beginning to condole with his countrymen on the terrible
defeat they had sustained, was infinitely astonished to learn that the battle of Trafalgar
was a splendid victory. He had been assured, he said, that in that battle the English had been
totally defeated; and the French were fully and universally persuaded that such was the fact.
Now if this report of the belief of the French nation was not true, the British Public were
completely imposed upon; if it were true, then both nations were, at the same time, rejoicing
in the event of the same battle, as a signal victory to themselves; and consequently one or
other, at least, of these nations must have been the dupes of their government: for if the
battle was never fought at all, or was not decisive on either side, in that case both parties
were deceived. This instance, I conceive, is absolutely demonstrative of the point in question.

