"No, my dear."

"Then his father must be a king?"

"No, my dear.  It is quite a different thing here.  Here in France they have a great many princes."

"Well, at any rate I should like to see a prince's chateau; so I do hope you'll go."  And then
there was a pause.  "Mamma, could it come to pass, here in France, that M. Lacordaire should
ever be a prince?"

"M. Lacordaire a prince!  No; don't talk such nonsense, but mind your work."

"Isn't M. Lacordaire a very nice man?  Ain't you very fond of him?"

To this question Mrs. Thompson made no answer.

"Mamma," continued Mimmy, after a moment's pause, "won't you tell me whether you are fond of
M. Lacordaire?  I'm quite sure of this,-- that he's very fond of you."

"What makes you think that?" asked Mrs. Thompson, who could not bring herself to refrain from
the question.

"Because he looks at you in that way, mamma, and squeezes your hand."

"Nonsense, child," said Mrs. Thompson; "hold your tongue.  I don't know what can have put such
stuff into your head."

"But he does, mamma," said Mimmy, who rarely allowed her mother to put her down.

Mrs. Thompson made no further answer, but again sat with her head resting on her hand.  She
also, if the truth must be told, was thinking of M. Lacordaire and his fondness for herself.
He had squeezed her hand and he had looked into her face.  However much it may have been nonsense
on Mimmy's part to talk of such things, they had not the less absolutely occurred.  Was it
really the fact that M. Lacordaire was in love with her?

And if so, what return should she, or could she make to such a passion?  He had looked at her
yesterday, and squeezed her hand to- day. Might it not be probable that he would advance a
step further to-morrow?  If so, what answer would she be prepared to make to him?

She did not think--so she said to herself--that she had any particular objection to marrying
again.  Thompson had been dead now for four years, and neither his friends, nor her friends,
nor the world could say she was wrong on that score.  And as to marrying a Frenchman, she could
not say she felt within herself any absolute repugnance to doing that.  Of her own country,
speaking of England as such, she, in truth, knew but little--and perhaps cared less. She had
gone to India almost as a child, and England had not been specially kind to her on her return.
She had found it dull and cold, stiff, and almost ill-natured.  People there had not smiled
on her and been civil as M. Lacordaire had done.  As far as England and Englishmen were considered
she saw no reason why she should not marry M. Lacordaire.

And then, as regarded the man; could she in her heart say that she was prepared to love, honour,
and obey M. Lacordaire?  She certainly knew no reason why she should not do so.  She did not
know much of him, she said to herself at first; but she knew as much, she said afterwards,
as she had known personally of Mr. Thompson before their marriage.  She had known, to be sure,
what was Mr. Thompson's profession and what his income; or, if not, some one else had known
for her.  As to both these points she was quite in the dark as regarded M. Lacordaire.

Personally, she certainly did like him, as she said to herself more than once.  There was a
courtesy and softness about him which were very gratifying to her; and then, his appearance
was so much in his favour.  He was not very young, she acknowledged; but neither was she young
herself.  It was quite evident that he was fond of her children, and that he would be a kind
and affectionate father to them.  Indeed, there was kindness in all that he did.

Should she marry again,--and she put it to herself quite hypothetically,--she would look for
no romance in such a second marriage.  She would be content to sit down in a quiet home, to
the tame dull realities of life, satisfied with the companionship of a man who would be kind
and gentle to her, and whom she could respect and esteem.  Where could she find a companion
with whom this could be more safely anticipated than with M. Lacordaire?

And so she argued the question within her own breast in a manner not unfriendly to that gentleman.
That there was as yet one great hindrance she at once saw; but then that might be remedied
by a word.  She did not know what was his income or his profession.  The chambermaid, whom
she had interrogated, had told her that he was a "marchand."  To merchants, generally, she
felt that she had no objection.  The Barings and the Rothschilds were merchants, as was also
that wonderful man at Bombay, Sir Hommajee Bommajee, who was worth she did no know how many
thousand lacs of rupees.

That it would behove her, on her own account and that of her daughters, to take care of her
own little fortune in contracting any such connection, that she felt strongly.  She would never
so commit herself as to put security in that respect out of her power.  But then she did not
think that M. Lacordaire would ever ask her to do so; at any rate, she was determined on this,
that there should never be any doubt on that matter; and as she firmly resolved on this, she
again took up her book, and for a minute or two made an attempt to read.

"Mamma," said Mummy, "will M. Lacordaire go up to the school to see Lilian when you go away
from this?"

"Indeed, I cannot say, my dear.  If Lilian is a good girl, perhaps he may do so now and then."

"And will he write to you and tell you how she is?"

"Lilian can write for herself; can she not?"

"Oh yes; I suppose she can; but I hope M. Lacordaire will write too. We shall come back here
some day; shan't we, mamma?"

"I cannot say, my dear."

"I do so hope we shall see M. Lacordaire again.  Do you know what I was thinking, mamma?"

"Little girls like you ought not to think," said Mrs. Thompson, walking slowly out of the room
to the top of the stairs and back again; for she had felt the necessity of preventing Mimmy
from disclosing any more of her thoughts.  "And now, my dear, get yourself ready, and we will
go up to the school."

Mrs. Thompson always dressed herself with care, though not in especially fine clothes, before
she went down to dinner at the table d'hote; but on this occasion she was more than usually
particular. She hardly explained to herself why she did this; but, nevertheless, as she stood
before the glass, she did in a certain manner feel that the circumstances of her future life
might perhaps depend on what might be said and done that evening.  She had not absolutely decided
whether or no she would go to the Prince's chateau; but if she did go -.  Well, if she did;
what then?  She had sense enough, as she assured herself more than once, to regulate her own
conduct with propriety in any such emergency.

During the dinner, M. Lacordaire conversed in his usual manner, but said nothing whatever about
the visit to Polignac.  He was very kind to Mimmy, and very courteous to her mother, but did
not appear to be at all more particular than usual.  Indeed, it might be a question whether
he was not less so.  As she had entered the room Mrs. Thompson had said to herself that, perhaps,
after all, it would be better that there should be nothing more thought about it; but before
the four of five courses were over, she was beginning to feel a little disappointed.

And now the fruit was on the table, after the consumption of which it was her practice to retire.
It was certainly open to her to ask M. Lacordaire to take tea with her that evening, as she
had done on former occasions; but she felt that she must not do this now, considering the immediate
circumstances of the case.  If any further steps were to be taken, they must be taken by him,
and not by her;-- or else by Mimmy, who, just as her mother was slowly consuming her last grapes,
ran round to the back of M. Lacordaire's chair, and whispered something into his ear.  It may
be presumed that Mrs. Thompson did not see the intention of the movement in time to arrest
it, for she did nothing till the whispering had been whispered; and then she rebuked the child,
bade her not to be troublesome, and with more than usual austerity in her voice, desired her
to get herself ready to go up stairs to their chamber.

As she spoke she herself rose from her chair, and made her final little bow to the table, and
her other final little bow and smile to M. Lacordaire; but this was certain to all who saw
it, that the smile was not as gracious as usual.

As she walked forth, M. Lacordaire rose from his chair--such being his constant practice when
she left the table; but on this occasion he accompanied her to the door.

"And has madame decided," he asked, "whether she will permit me to accompany her to the chateau?"

"Well, I really don't know," said Mrs. Thompson.

"Mees Meemy," continued M. Lacordaire, "is very anxious to see the rock, and I may perhaps
hope that Mees Lilian would be pleased with such a little excursion.  As for myself--" and
then M. Lacordaire put his hand upon his heart in a manner that seemed to speak more plainly
than he had ever spoken.

"Well, if the children would really like it, and--as you are so very kind," said Mrs. Thompson;
and so the matter was conceded.

"To-morrow afternoon?" suggested M. Lacordaire.  But Mrs. Thompson fixed on Saturday, thereby
showing that she herself was in no hurry for the expedition.

"Oh, I am so glad!" said Mimmy, when they had re-entered their own room.  "Mamma, do let me
tell Lilian myself when I go up to the school to-morrow!"

But mamma was in no humour to say much to her child on this subject at the present moment.
She threw herself back on her sofa in perfect silence, and began to reflect whether she would
like to sign her name in future as Fanny Lacordaire, instead of Fanny Thompson. It certainly
seemed as though things were verging towards such a necessity.  A marchand!  But a marchand
of what?  She had an instinctive feeling that the people in the hotel were talking about her
and M. Lacordaire, and was therefore more than ever averse to asking any one a question.

As she went up to the school the next afternoon, she walked through more of the streets of
Le Puy than was necessary, and in every street she looked at the names which she saw over the
doors of the more respectable houses of business.  But she looked in vain.  It might be that
M. Lacordaire was a marchand of so specially high a quality as to be under no necessity to
put up his name at all.  Sir Hommajee Bommajee's name did not appear over any door in Bombay;--at
least, she thought not.

And then came the Saturday morning.  "We shall be ready at two," she said, as she left the
breakfast-table; "and perhaps you would not mind calling for Lilian on the way."

M. Lacordaire would be delighted to call anywhere for anybody on behalf of Mrs. Thompson; and
then, as he got to the door of the salon, he offered her his hand.  He did so with so much
French courtesy that she could not refuse it, and then she felt that his purpose was more tender
than ever it had been.  And why not, if this was the destiny which Fate had prepared for her?

