He had caused a young ecclesiastic to be sent from Spain, who came to Paris as though for his
pleasure.  There he was introduced to young Monteleon, son of a former ambassador at our Court,
who had been much liked.  The young ecclesiastic was called the Abbe Portocarrero, a name regarded
with favour in France.  Monteleon came from the Hague, and was going to Madrid.  Portocarrero
came from Madrid, and was going back there.  What more natural than that the two young men
should travel in company?  What less natural than that the two young men, meeting each other
by pure accident in Paris, should be charged by the ambassador with any packet of consequence,
he having his own couriers, and the use, for the return journey, of those sent to him from
Spain?  In fact, it may be believed that these young people themselves were perfectly ignorant
of what they were charged with, and simply believed that, as they were going to Spain, the
ambassador merely seized the occasion to entrust them with some packet of no special importance.

They set out, then, at the commencement of December, furnished with passports from the King--(for
Alberoni had openly caused almost a rupture between the two Courts)--with a Spanish banker,
who had been established in England, where he had become bankrupt for a large amount, so that
the English government had obtained permission from the Regent to arrest him, if they could,
anywhere in France.  It will sometimes be perceived that I am ill-instructed in this affair;
but I can only tell what I know: and as for the rest, I give my conjectures.  In fact, the
Abbe Dubois kept everybody so much in the dark, that even M. le Duc d'Orleans was not informed
of all.

Whether the arrival of the Abbe Portocarrero in Paris, and his short stay there, seemed suspicious
to the Abbe Dubois and his emissaries, or whether he had corrupted some of the principal people
of the Spanish Ambassador and this Court, and learned that these young men were charged with
a packet of importance; whether there was no other mystery than the bad company of the bankrupt
banker, and that the anxiety of Dubois to oblige his friends the English, induced him to arrest
the three travellers and seize their papers, lest the banker should have confided his to the
young men, I know not: but however it may have been, it is certain that the Abbe Dubois arrested
the three travellers at Poitiers, and carried off their papers, a courier bringing these papers
to him immediately afterwards.

Great things sometimes spring from chance.  The courier from Poitiers entered the house of
the Abbe Dubois just as the Regent entered the opera.  Dubois glanced over the papers, and
went and related the news of this capture to M. le Duc Orleans, as he left his box.  This prince,
who was accustomed to shut himself up with his roues at that hour, did so with a carelessness
to which everything yielded, under pretext that Dubois had not had sufficient time to examine
all the papers.  The first few hours of the morning he was not himself.  His head, still confused
by the fumes of the wine and by the undigested supper of the previous night, was not in a state
to understand anything, and the secretaries of state have often told me that was the time they
could make him sign anything. This was the moment taken by Dubois to acquaint the Regent with
as much or as little of the contents of the papers as he thought fit.  The upshot of their
interview was, that the Abbe was allowed by the Duc d'Orleans to have the control of this matter
entirely in his own hands.

