THE GREAT CONSPIRACY

                         Its Origin and History

                                 Part 5

                                   BY

                               JOHN LOGAN

                             CHAPTER XVIII.

                       FREEDOM PROCLAIMED TO ALL.

While mentally revolving the question of Emancipation--now, evidently "coming to a head,"--no
inconsiderable portion of Mr. Lincoln's thoughts centered upon, and his perplexities grew out
of, his assumption that the "physical difference" between the Black and White--the  African
and Caucasian races, precluded the idea of their living together in the one land as Free men
and equals.

In his speeches during the great Lincoln-Douglas debate we have seen this idea frequently advanced,
and so, in his later public utterances as President.

As in his appeal to the Congressional delegations from the Border-States on the 12th of July,
1862, he had held out to them the hope that "the Freed people will not be so reluctant to go"
to his projected colony in South America, when their "numbers shall be large enough to be company
and encouragement for one another," so, at a later date--on the 14th of August following--he
appealed to the Colored Free men themselves to help him found a proposed Negro colony in New
Granada, and thus aid in the solution of this part of the knotty problem, by the disenthrallment
of the new race from its unhappy environments here.

The substance of the President's interesting address, at the White House, to the delegation
of Colored men, for whom he had sent, was thus reported at the time:

"Having all been seated, the President, after a few preliminary observations, informed them
that a sum of money had been appropriated by Congress, and placed at his disposition, for the
purpose of aiding the colonization in some country of the people, or a portion of them, of
African descent, thereby making it his duty, as it had for a long time been his inclination,
to favor that cause; and why, he asked, should the people of your race be colonized, and where?

"Why should they leave this Country?  This is perhaps the first question for proper consideration.
You and we are different races.  We have between us a broader difference than exists between
almost any other two races.  Whether it is right or wrong I need not discuss; but this physical
difference is a great disadvantage to us both, as I think. Your race suffers very greatly,
many of them by living among us, while ours suffers from your presence.  In a word we suffer
on each side.  If this is admitted, it affords a reason, at least, why we should be separated.
You here are Freemen, I suppose?

"A VOICE--Yes, Sir.

"THE PRESIDENT--Perhaps you have long been free, or all your lives. Your race are suffering,
in my judgment, the greatest wrong inflicted on any people.  But even when you cease to be
Slaves, you are yet far removed from being placed on an equality with the White race.  You
are cut off from many of the advantages which the other race enjoys.  The aspiration of men
is to enjoy equality with the best when free; but on this broad continent not a single man
of your race is made the equal of a single man of ours.  Go where you are treated the best,
and the ban is still upon you.  I do not propose to discuss this, but to present it as a fact,
with which we have to deal.  I cannot alter it if I would. It is my privilege to take up their
theory from the Montreal end and in the light of the local archaeology
of this place and of early French historical lore, to supply links
which seem to throw considerable light on the problem.

  I believe in its general evil effects
on the White race.  See our present condition--the Country engaged in War!  our white men cutting
one another's throats--none knowing how far it will extend--and then consider what we know
to be the truth.  But for your race among us there could not be War, although many men engaged
on either side do not care for you one way or the other.  Nevertheless, I repeat, without the
institution of Slavery, and the Colored race as a basis, the War could not have an existence.
It is better for us both, therefore, to be separated.

"I know that there are Free men among you who, even if they could better their condition, are
not as much inclined to go out of the Country as those who, being Slaves, could obtain their
Freedom on this condition. I suppose one of the principal difficulties in the way of colonization
is that the free colored man cannot see that his comfort would be advanced by it.  You may
believe that you can live in Washington, or elsewhere in the United States, the remainder of
your life; perhaps more so than you can in any foreign country, and hence you may come to the
conclusion that you have nothing to do with the idea of going to a foreign country.

"This is, (I speak in no unkind sense) an extremely selfish view of the case.  But you ought
to do something to help those who are not so fortunate as yourselves.  There is an unwillingness
on the part of our People, harsh as it may be, for you free Colored people to remain with us.
Now if you could give a start to the White people you would open a wide door for many to be
made free.  If we deal with those who are not free at the beginning, and whose intellects are
clouded by Slavery, we have very poor material to start with.

"If intelligent Colored men, such as are before me, could move in this matter, much might be
accomplished.  It is exceedingly important that we have men at the beginning capable of thinking
as White men, and not those who have been systematically oppressed.  There is much to encourage
you.

"For the sake of your race you should sacrifice something of your present comfort for the purpose
of being as grand in that respect as the White people.  It is a cheering thought throughout
life, that something can be done to ameliorate the condition of those who have been subject
to the hard usages of the World.  It is difficult to make a man miserable while he feels he
is worthy of himself and claims kindred to the great God who made him.

"In the American Revolutionary War, sacrifices were made by men engaged in it, but they were
cheered by the future.  General Washington himself endured greater physical hardships than
if he had remained a British subject, yet he was a happy man, because he was engaged in benefiting
his race, in doing something for the children of his neighbors, having none of his own.

"The Colony of Liberia has been in existence a long time.  In a certain sense it is a success.
The old President of Liberia, Roberts, has just been with me the first time I ever saw him.
He says they have, within the bounds of that Colony, between three and four hundred thousand
people, or more than in some of our old States, such as Rhode Island, or Delaware, or in some
of our newer States, and less than in some of our larger ones.  They are not all American colonists
or their descendants. Something less than 12,000 have been sent thither from this Country.
Many of the original settlers have died, yet, like people elsewhere, their offspring outnumber
those deceased.

"The question is, if the Colored people are persuaded to go anywhere, why not there?  One reason
for unwillingness to do so is that some of you would rather remain within reach of the country
of your nativity.  I do not know how much attachment you may have toward our race.  It does
not strike me that you have the greatest reason to love them.  But still you are attached to
them at all events.

"The place I am thinking about having for a colony, is in Central America.  It is nearer to
us than Liberia--not much more than one-fourth as far as Liberia, and within seven days' run
by steamers.  Unlike Liberia, it is a great line of travel--it is a highway.  The country is
a very excellent one for any people, and with great natural resources and advantages, and especially
because of the similarity of climate with your native soil, thus being suited to your physical
condition.

"The particular place I have in view, is to be a great highway from the Atlantic or Caribbean
Sea to the Pacific Ocean, and this particular place has all the advantages for a colony.  On
both sides there are harbors among the finest in the World.  Again, there is evidence of very
rich coal mines.  A certain amount of coal is valuable in any country. Why I attach so much
importance to coal is, it will afford an opportunity to the inhabitants for immediate employment
till they get ready to settle permanently in their homes.

"If you take colonists where there is no good landing, there is a bad show; and so, where there
is nothing to cultivate, and of which to make a farm.  But if something is started so that
you can get your daily bread as soon as you reach there, it is a great advantage.  Coal land
is the best thing I know of, with which to commence an enterprise.

"To return--you have been talked to upon this subject, and told that a speculation is intended
by gentlemen who have an interest in the country, including the coal mines.  We have been mistaken
all our lives if we do not know Whites, as well as Blacks, look to their self-interest.  Unless
among those deficient of intellect, everybody you trade with makes something.  You meet with
these things here and everywhere.  If such persons have what will be an advantage to them,
the question is, whether it cannot be made of advantage to you?

"You are intelligent, and know that success does not as much depend on external help, as on
self-reliance.  Much, therefore, depends upon yourselves.  As to the coal mines, I think I
see the means available for your self-reliance.  I shall, if I get a sufficient number of you
engaged, have provision made that you shall not be wronged.  If you will engage in the enterprise,
I will spend some of the money intrusted to me.  I am not sure you will succeed.  The Government
may lose the money, but we cannot succeed unless we try; but we think, with care, we can succeed.

"The political affairs in Central America are not in quite as satisfactory condition as I wish.
There are contending factions in that quarter; but it is true, all the factions are agreed
alike on the subject of colonization, and want it; and are more generous than we are here.
To your Colored race they have no objection.  Besides, I would endeavor to have you made equals,
and have the best assurance that you should be the equals of the best.

"The practical thing I want to ascertain is, whether I can get a number of able-bodied men,
with their wives and children, who are willing to go, when I present evidence of encouragement
and protection.  Could I get a hundred tolerably intelligent men, with their wives and children,
and able to 'cut their own fodder' so to speak?  Can I have fifty?  If I could find twenty-five
able-bodied men, with a mixture of women and children--good things in the family relation,
I think I could make a successful commencement.

"I want you to let me know whether this can be done or not.  This is the practical part of
my wish to see you.  These are subjects of very great importance--worthy of a month's study,
of a speech delivered in an hour. I ask you, then, to consider seriously, not as pertaining
to yourselves merely, nor for your race, and ours, for the present time, but as one of the
things, if successfully managed, for the good of mankind--not confined to the present generation,
but as:

              "From age to age descends the lay
               To millions yet to be,
               Till far its echoes roll away
               Into eternity."'

President Lincoln's well-meant colored colonization project, however, fell through, owing partly
to opposition to it in Central America, and partly to the very natural and deeply-rooted disinclination
of the Colored free men to leave the land of their birth.

Meanwhile, limited Military Emancipation of Slaves was announced and regulated, on the 22d
July, 1862, by the following Executive Instructions, which were issued from the War Department
by order of the President--the issue of which was assigned by Jefferson Davis as one reason
for his Order of August 1, 1862, directing "that the commissioned officers of Pope's and Steinwehr's
commands be not entitled, when captured, to be treated as soldiers and entitled to the benefit
of the cartel of exchange:"

"WAR DEPARTMENT, "WASHINGTON, D.C., July 22, 1862.

"First.

On the 9th of August, 1862, Major General McClellan promulgated the Executive Order of July
22, 1862, from his Headquarters at Harrison's Landing, Va., with certain directions of his
own, among which were the following:

"Inhabitants, especially women and children, remaining peaceably at their homes, must not be
molested; and wherever commanding officers find families peculiarly exposed in their persons
or property to marauding from this Army, they will, as heretofore, so far as they can do with
safety and without detriment to the service, post guards for their protection.

"In protecting private property, no reference is intended to Persons held to service or labor
by reason of African Descent.  Such Persons will be regarded by this Army, as they heretofore
have been, as occupying simply a peculiar legal status under State laws, which condition the
Military authorities of the United States are not required to regard at all in districts where
Military operations are made necessary by the rebellious action of the State governments.

"Persons subject to suspicion of hostile purposes, residing or being near our Forces, will
be, as heretofore, subject to arrest and detention, until the cause or necessity is removed.
All such arrested parties will be sent, as usual, to the Provost-Marshal General, with a statement
of the facts in each case.

"The General Commanding takes this occasion to remind the officers and soldiers of this Army
that we are engaged in supporting the Constitution and the Laws of the United States and suppressing
Rebellion against their authority; that we are not engaged in a War of rapine, revenge, or
subjugation; that this is not a contest against populations, but against armed forces and political
organizations; that it is a struggle carried on with the United States, and should be conducted
by us upon the highest principles known to Christian civilization.

"Since this Army commenced active operations, Persons of African descent, including those held
to service or labor under State laws, have always been received, protected, and employed as
laborers at wages. Hereafter it shall be the duty of the Provost-Marshal General to cause lists
to be made of all persons of African descent employed in this Army as laborers for Military
purposes--such lists being made sufficiently accurate and in detail to show from whom such
persons shall have come.

"Persons so subject and so employed have always understood that after being received into the
Military service of the United States, in any capacity, they could never be reclaimed by their
former holders.  Except upon such understanding on their part, the order of the President,
as to this class of Persons, would be inoperative.  The General Commanding therefore feels
authorized to declare to all such employees, that they will receive permanent Military protection
against any compulsory return to a condition of servitude."

Public opinion was now rapidly advancing, under the pressure of Military necessity, and the
energetic efforts of the immediate Emancipationists, to a belief that Emancipation by Presidential
Proclamation would be wise and efficacious as an instrumentality toward subduing the Rebellion;
that it must come, sooner or later--and the sooner, the better.

Indeed, great fault was found, by some of these, with what they characterized as President
Lincoln's "obstinate slowness" to come up to their advanced ideas on the subject.  He was even
accused of failing to execute existing laws touching confiscation of Slaves of Rebels coming
within the lines of the Union Armies.

"I appeal to the testimony of your embassadors in Europe.  It is freely at your service, not
mine.  Ask them to tell you candidly whether the seeming subserviency of your policy to the
Slaveholding, Slavery-upholding interest, is not the perplexity, the despair, of Statesmen
of all parties; and be admonished by the general answer.  That Act gives Freedom to the Slaves
of Rebels coming within our lines, or whom those lines may at any time inclose.  We ask you
to render it due obedience by publicly requiring all your subordinates to recognize and obey it.

"The Rebels are everywhere using the late Anti-Negro riots in the North --as they have long
used your officers' treatment of Negroes in the South--to convince the Slaves that they have
nothing to hope from a Union success--that we mean in that case to sell them into a bitter
Bondage to defray the cost of the War.

"Let them impress this as a truth on the great mass of their ignorant and credulous Bondmen,
and the Union will never be restored--never.  We can not conquer ten millions of people united
in solid phalanx against us, powerfully aided by Northern sympathizers and European allies.

"We must have scouts, guides, spies, cooks, teamsters, diggers, and choppers, from the Blacks
of the South--whether we allow them to fight for us or not--or we shall be baffled and repelled.

On the 13th of September, 1862, a deputation from all the religious denominations of Chicago
presented to President Lincoln a memorial for the immediate issue of a Proclamation of Emancipation,
to which, and the Chairman's remarks, he thus replied:

"The subject presented in the Memorial is one upon which I have thought much for weeks past,
and I may even say, for months.  For instance, the other day, four gentlemen, of standing and
intelligence, from New York, called, as a delegation, on business connected with the War; but,
before leaving, two of them earnestly besought me to proclaim general Emancipation, upon which
the other two at once attacked them.

"You know also that the last Session of Congress had a decided majority of Anti-Slavery men,
yet they could not unite on this policy.  And the same is true of the religious people; why
the Rebel soldiers are praying with a great deal more earnestness, I fear, than our own troops,
and expecting God to favor their side; for one of our soldiers, who had been taken prisoner,
told Senator Wilson, a few days since, that he met nothing so discouraging as the evident sincerity
of those he was among, in their prayers.  But we will talk over the merits of the case.

"And suppose they could be induced by a Proclamation of Freedom from me to throw themselves
upon us, what should we do with them?  How can we feed and care for such a multitude?  General
Butler wrote me a few days since that he was issuing more rations to the Slaves who have rushed
to him, than to all the White troops under his command.  They eat, and that is all; though
it is true General Butler is feeding the Whites also, by the thousand; for it nearly amounts
to a famine there.

"If, now, the pressure of the War should call off our forces from New Orleans to defend some
other point, what is to prevent the masters from reducing the Blacks to Slavery again; for
I am told that whenever the Rebels take any Black prisoners, Free or Slave, they immediately
auction them off!  They did so with those they took from a boat that was aground in the Tennessee
river a few days ago.

"And then I am very ungenerously attacked for it!  For instance, when, after the late battles
at and near Bull Run, an expedition went out from Washington, under a flag of truce, to bury
the dead and bring in the wounded, and the Rebels seized the Blacks who went along to help,
and sent them into Slavery, Horace Greeley said in his paper that the Government would probably
do nothing about it.  What could I do?

                *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

"I admit that Slavery is at the root of the Rebellion, or, at least, its sine qua non.  The
ambition of politicians may have instigated them to act, but they would have been impotent
without Slavery as their instrument.  I will also concede that Emancipation would help us in
Europe, and convince them that we are incited by something more than ambition.  I grant, further,
that it would help somewhat at the North, though not so much, I fear, as you and those you
represent imagine.

"Still, some additional strength would be added in that way to the War, and then, unquestionably,
it would weaken the Rebels by drawing off their laborers, which is of great importance; but
I am not so sure we could do much with the Blacks.  If we were to arm them, I fear that in
a few weeks the arms would be in the hands of the Rebels; and, indeed, thus far, we have not
had arms enough to equip our White troops.

"I will mention another thing, though it meet only your scorn and contempt.  There are 50,000
bayonets in the Union Army from the Border Slave States.  It would be a serious matter if,
in consequence of a Proclamation such as you desire, they should go over to the Rebels.  I
do not think they all would--not so many, indeed, as a year ago, or as six months ago--not
so many to-day, as yesterday.  Every day increases their Union feeling.  They are also getting
their pride enlisted, and want to beat the Rebels.

"Let me say one thing more: I think you should admit that we already have an important principle
to rally and unite the People, in the fact that Constitutional Government is at stake.  This
is a fundamental idea going down about as deep as anything!

On the 22d day of September, 1862, not only the Nation, but the whole World, was electrified
by the publication--close upon the heels of the Union victory of Antietam--of the Proclamation
of Emancipation--weighted with consequences so wide and far-reaching that even at this late
day they cannot all be discerned.

This Proclamation, promising Freedom to an Enslaved race, was hailed with acclamations everywhere
save in the rebellious Southern-Slave States, and in the Border-Slave States.

At a meeting of Governors of Loyal States, held at Altoona, Pennsylvania, to take measures
for the more active support of the Government, an Address was adopted, on the very day that
the Proclamation was promulgated, which well expressed the general feeling prevailing throughout
the Northern States, at this time.  It was in these patriotic words:

"After nearly one year and a half spent in contest with an armed and gigantic Rebellion against
the National Government of the United States, the duty and purpose of the Loyal States and
people continue, and must always remain as they were at its origin--namely to restore and perpetuate
the authority of this Government and the life of the Nation. No matter what consequences are
involved in our fidelity, this work of restoring the Republic, preserving the institutions
of democratic Liberty, and justifying the hopes and toils of our Fathers, shall not fail to
be performed.

"And we pledge, without hesitation, to the President of the United States, the most loyal and
cordial support, hereto as heretofore, in the exercise of the functions of his great office.
We recognize in him the chief Executive magistrate of the Nation, the Commander-in-Chief of
the Army and Navy of the United States, their responsible and constitutional head, whose rightful
authority and power, as well as the Constitutional powers of Congress, must be rigorously and
religiously guarded and preserved, as the condition on which alone our form of Government and
the constitutional rights and liberties of the People themselves can be saved from the wreck
of anarchy or from the gulf 'despotism.

"In submission to the laws which may have been or which may be duly enacted, and to the lawful
orders of the President, cooperating always in our own spheres with the National Government,
we mean to continue in the most rigorous exercise of all our lawful and proper powers, contending
against Treason, Rebellion, and the public Enemies, and, whether in public life or in private
station, supporting the arms of the Union, until its Cause shall conquer, until final victory
shall perch upon its standard, or the Rebel foe will yield a dutiful, rightful, and unconditional
submission.  And, impressed with the conviction that an Army of reserve ought, until the War
shall end, to be constantly kept on foot, to be raised, armed, equipped, and trained at home,
and ready for emergencies, we respectfully ask the President to call such a force of volunteers
for one year's service, of not less than one hundred thousand in the aggregate, the quota of
each State to be raised after it shall have led its quota of the requisitions already made,
both for volunteers and militia.  We believe that this would be a Leasure of Military prudence,
while it would greatly promote the Military education of the People.

"We hail with heartfelt gratitude and encouraged hope the Proclamation of the President, issued
on the 22nd instant, declaring Emancipated from their bondage all Persons held to Service or
Labor as Slaves in the Rebel States, whose Rebellion shall last until the first day of January
next ensuing.

"The right of any person to retain authority to compel any portion of the subjects of the National
Government to rebel against it, or to maintain its Enemies, implies in those who are allowed
possession of such authority the right to rebel themselves; and therefore, the right to establish
Martial Law or Military Government in a State or Territory in Rebellion implies the right and
the duty of the Government to liberate the minds of all men living therein by appropriate Proclamations
and assurances of protection, in order that all who are capable, intellectually and morally,
of loyalty and obedience, may not be forced into Treason as the unwilling tools of rebellious
Traitors.

"To have continued indefinitely the most efficient cause, support, and stay of the Rebellion,
would have been, in our judgment, unjust to the Loyal people whose treasure and lives are made
a willing sacrifice on the altar of patriotism--would have discriminated against the wife who
is compelled to surrender her husband, against the parent who is to surrender his child, to
the hardships of the camp and the perils of battle, in favor of Rebel masters permitted to
retain their Slaves.  It would have been a final decision alike against humanity, justice,
the rights and dignity of the Government, and against sound and wise National policy.

"The decision of the President to strike at the root of the Rebellion will lend new vigor to
efforts, and new life and hope to the hearts of the People.  Cordially tendering to the President
our respectful assurances of personal and official confidence, we trust and believe that the
policy now inaugurated will be crowned with success, will give speedy and triumphant victories
over our enemies, and secure to this Nation and this People the blessing and favor of Almighty God.

"We believe that the blood of the heroes who have already fallen, and those who may yet give
their lives to their Country, will not have been shed in vain.

"The splendid valor of our soldiers, their patient endurance, their manly patriotism, and their
devotion to duty, demand from us and from all their countrymen the homage of the sincerest
gratitude and the pledge of our constant reinforcement and support.  A just regard for these
brave men, whom we have contributed to place in the field, and for the importance of the duties
which may lawfully pertain to us hereafter, has called us into friendly conference.

"And now, presenting to our National Chief Magistrate this conclusion of our deliberations,
we devote ourselves to our Country's service, and we will surround the President with our constant
support, trusting that the fidelity and zeal of the Loyal States and People will always assure
him that he will be constantly maintained in pursuing, with the utmost vigor, this War for
the preservation of the National life and hope of humanity.

"A. G. CURTIN, "JOHN A. ANDREW, "RICHARD YATES, "ISRAEL WASHBURNE, Jr., "EDWARD SOLOMON, "SAMUEL
J. KIRKWOOD, "O. P. MORTON,--By D.  G.  ROSE, his Representative, "WM. SPRAGUE, "F. H. PEIRPOINT,
"DAVID TOD, "N. S. BERRY, "AUSTIN BLAIR."  We have two million nine hundred and sixty-three
thousand square miles.

The popular Branch of Congress responded with heartiness to what Mr. Lincoln had done.  On
December 11, 1862, resolutions were offered by Mr. Yeaman in the House of Representatives,
as follows:

"Resolved by the House of Representatives (the Senate Concurring), That the Proclamation of
the President of the United States, of date the 22d of September, 1862, is not warranted by
the Constitution.

"Resolved, That the policy of Emancipation as indicated in that Proclamation, is not calculated
to hasten the restoration of Peace, was not well chosen as a War measure, and is an assumption
of power dangerous to the rights of citizens and to the perpetuity of a Free People."

These resolutions were laid on the table by 95 yeas to 47 nays--the yeas all Republicans, save
three, and the nays all Democrats save five.

These resolutions were adopted by 78 yeas to 52 nays--the yeas all Republicans, save two, and
the nays all Democrats, save seven.

                              CHAPTER XIX.

                           HISTORICAL REVIEW.

Let us now refresh recollection by glancing backward over the history of our Country, and we
shall see, as recorded in these pages, that, from the first, there existed in this Nation a
class of individuals greedily ambitious of power and determined to secure and maintain control
of this Government; that they left unturned no stone which would contribute to the fostering
and to the extension of African Slavery; that, hand in hand with African Slavery--and as a
natural corollary to it--they advocated Free Trade as a means of degrading Free White labor
to the level of Black Slave labor, and thus increasing their own power; that from the first,
ever taking advantage of the general necessities of the Union, they arrogantly demanded and
received from a brow-beaten People, concession after concession, and compromise after compromise;
that every possible pretext and occasion was seized by them to increase, consolidate, and secure
their power, and to extend the territorial limits over which their peculiar Pro-Slavery and
Pro-Free-Trade doctrines prevailed; and that their nature was so exacting, and their greed
so rapacious, that it was impossible ever to satisfy them.

Nor were they burdened with over-much of that high sense of honor--a quality of which they
often vaunted themselves--which impelled others to stand by their agreements.  It seemed as
though they considered the most sacred promises and covenants of no account, and made only
to be trampled upon, when in the way of their Moloch. 

At the Isle of Orleans, just below Quebec, the principal peace chief, or, Agouhanna of "Canada," Donnaconna,
came to them with 12 canoes from the town (ville) of Stadacona, or Stadaconé, which was surrounded
by tilled land on the heights. Twenty-five canoes from Stadacona afterwards visited them; and
later Donnaconna brought on board "10 or 12 other of the greatest
chiefs" with more than 500 persons, men, women and children, some
doubtless from the neighbouring settlements.

If the same 200 persons as in the previous year were absent fishing at Gaspé, and others in
other spots, these figures argue a considerable population.

Below Stadacona, were four "peoples and settlements": Ajoasté, Starnatam, Tailla (on a mountain)
and Satadin or Stadin. Above Stadacona were Tekenouday (on a mountain) and Hochelay (Achelacy or Hagouchouda)[3]
which was in open country. Further up were Hochelaga and some settlements on the island of Montreal,
and various other places unobserved by Cartier, belonging to the same race; who according to a
later statement of the remnant of them, confirmed by archæology, had several "towns" on the island
of Montreal and inhabited "all the hills to the south and east."[4] The hills to be seen from
Mount Royal to the south are the northern slopes of the Adirondacks; while to the east are
the lone volcanic eminences in the plain, Montarville, Beloeil, Rougemont, Johnson, Yamaska,
Shefford, Orford and the Green Mountains. All these hills deserve search for Huron-Iroquois town-sites.
The general sense of this paragraph includes an implication also of settlements towards and on
Lake Champlain, that is to say, when taken in connection with the landscape.


Including within the scope of States Rights, the threats of Nullification, Disunion and Secession--ideas
abhorrent to the Patriot's mind--small wonder is it that, in those days, every fresh demand
made by these political autocrats was tremblingly acceded to, until patience and concession
almost utterly exhausted themselves.

Originally disturbing only South Carolina and Georgia to any extent, these ambitious men, who
believed in anything rather than a Republic, and who were determined to destroy the Union,
gradually spread the spirit of jealousy and discontent into other States of the South; their
immediate object being to bring the Southern States into the closest possible relations the
one with the other; to inspire them all with common sympathies and purposes; to compact and
solidify them, so that in all coming movements against the other States of the Union, they
might move with proportionately increased power, and force, and effect, because of such unity
of aim and strength.

This spirit of Southern discontent, and jealousy of the Northern States, was, as we have seen,
artfully fanned by the Conspirators, in heated discussions over the Tariff Acts of 1824, and
1828, and 1832, until, by the latter date, the people of the Cotton-States were almost frantic,
and ready to fight over their imaginary grievances.  Then it was that the Conspirators thought
the time had come, for which they had so long and so earnestly prayed and worked, when the
cotton Sampson should wind his strong arms around the pillars of the Constitution and pull
down the great Temple of our Union--that they might rear upon its site another and a stronger
edifice, dedicated not to Freedom, but to Free-Trade and to other false gods.

South Carolina was to lead off, and the other Cotton States would follow.  South Carolina did
lead off--but the other Cotton-States did not follow.

It has been shown in these pages how South Carolina declared the Tariff Acts aforesaid, null
and void, armed herself to resist force, and declared that any attempt of the general Government
to enforce those Acts would cause her to withdraw from the Union.  But Jackson as we know throttled
the treason with so firm a grip that Nullification and Secession and Disunion were at once
paralyzed.

The concessions to the domineering South, in Clay's Compromise Tariff of 1833, let the Conspirators
down easily, so to speak; and they pretended to be satisfied.  But they were satisfied only
as are the thirsty sands of Africa with the passing shower.

The Conspirators had, however, after all, made substantial gains.  They had established a precedent
for an attempt to secede.  That was something.  They had demonstrated that a single Southern
State could stand up, armed and threatening, strutting, blustering, and bullying, and at least
make faces at the general Government without suffering any very dreadful consequences.  That
was still more.

They had also ascertained that, by adopting such a course, a single Southern State could force
concessions from the fears of the rest of the United States.  That was worth knowing, because
the time might come, when it might be desirable not only for one but for all the Southern States
to secede upon some other pretext, and when it would be awkward, and would interfere with the
Disunion programme, to have the other States either offer or make concessions.

They had also learned the valuable lesson that the single issue of Free-Trade was not sufficiently
strong of itself to unite all the Southern States in a determination to secede, and thus dissolve
the Union.  They saw they must agitate some other issue to unify the South more thoroughly
and justify Disunion.  On looking over the whole field they concluded that the Slavery question
would best answer their purpose, and they adopted it.

It was doubtless a full knowledge of the fact that they had adopted it, that led Jackson to
make the declaration, heretofore in these pages given, which has been termed "prophetic." 
At any rate, thenceforth the programme of the Conspirators was to agitate the Slavery question
in all ways possible, so as to increase, extend and solidify the influence and strength of
the Slave power; strain the bonds uniting them with the Free States; and weaken the Free States
by dividing them upon the question. At the same time the Free-Trade question was to be pressed
forward to a triumphal issue, so that the South might be enriched and strengthened, and the
North impoverished and weakened, by the result.

That was their programme, in the rough, and it was relentlessly adhered to.  Free-Trade and
Slavery by turns, if not together, from that time onward, were ever at the front, agitating
our People both North and South, and not only consolidating the Southern States on those lines,
as the Conspirators designed, but also serving ultimately to consolidate, to some extent--in
a manner quite unlooked for by the Conspirators --Northern sentiment, on the opposite lines
of Protection and Freedom.

The Compromise Tariff Act of 1833--which Clay was weak enough to concede, and even stout old
Jackson to permit to become law without his signature--gave to the Conspirators great joy for
years afterward, as they witnessed the distress and disaster brought by it to Northern homes
and incomes--not distress and disaster alone, but absolute and apparently irreparable ruin.

The reaction occasioned by this widespread ruin having brought the Whigs into power, led to
the enactment of the Protective-Tariff of 1842 and --to the chagrin of the Conspirators--industrial
prosperity and plenty to the Free North again ensued.

Even as Cain hated his brother Abel because his sacrifices were acceptable in the sight of
God, while his own were not, so the Southern Conspirators, and other Slave-owners also, had,
by this time, come to hate the Northern free-thinking, free-acting, freedom-loving mechanic
and laboring man, because the very fact and existence of his Godgiven Freedom and higher-resulting
civilization was a powerful and perpetual protest against the--abounding iniquities and degradations
of Slavery as practiced by themselves.

Hence, by trickery, by cajoling the People With his, and their own, assurances that he was
in favor of Protection--they secured the election in 1844 of a Free-Trade President, the consequent
repeal of the Protective-Tariff of 1842--which had repaired the dreadful mischief wrought by
the Compromise Act of 1833--and the enactment of the infamous Free-Trade Tariff of 1846, which
blasted the manufacturing and farming and trade industries of the Country again, as with fire.

The discovery of the great gold fields of California, and the enormous amount of the precious
metal poured by her for many succeeding years into the lap of the Nation, alone averted what
otherwise would inevitably have been total ruin.  As it was, in 1860, the National credit had
sunk to a lower point than ever before in all its history. It was confessedly bankrupt, and
ruin stalked abroad throughout the United States.

But while, with rapid pen, the carrying out of that part of the Southern Conspirators' Disunion
programme which related to Free-Trade, is thus brought again to mind, the other part of that
programme, which related to Slavery, must not be neglected or overlooked.  On this question
they had determined, as we have seen, to agitate without ceasing--having in view, primarily,
as already hinted, the extension of Slave territory and the resulting increase of Slave power
in the Land; and, ulteriorly, the solidifying of that power, and Disunion of the Republic,
with a view to its conversion into an Oligarchy, if not a Monarchy.

The bitterness of the struggle over the admission of Missouri as a Slave State in 1820, under
the Missouri Compromise, was to be revived by the Conspirators, at the earliest possible moment.

Accordingly in 1836--only three years after the failure of Nullification in South Carolina,
the Territory, of Arkansas was forced in as a Slave State, and simultaneously the Slave-owning
henchmen of the Conspirators, previously settled there for the purpose, proclaimed the secession
from Mexico, and independence, of Texas.  This was quickly followed, in 1844, by Calhoun's
hastily negotiated treaty of annexation with Texas; its miscarriage in the Senate; and the
Act of March 2, 1845--with its sham compromise--consenting to the admission of Texas to the
Union of States.

Then came the War with Mexico; the attempt by means of the Wilmot proviso to check the growing
territorial-greed and rapacity of the Slave-power; and the acquisition by the United States,
of California and New Mexico, under the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, which brought Peace.

Then occurred the agitation over the organization of  Territorial governments for Oregon, California,
and New Mexico, and the strong effort to extend to the Pacific Ocean the Missouri-Compromise
line of 36  30', and to extend to all future Territorial organizations the principles of that
compromise.

Then came the struggle in 1850, over the admission of California as a State, and New Mexico
and Utah to Territorial organization--ending in the passage of Clay's Compromise measures of 1850.

Yet still the Southern Conspirators--whose forces, both in Congress and out, were now well-disciplined,
compacted, solidified, experienced, and bigotedly enthusiastic and overbearing--were not satisfied.
It was not their intention to be satisfied with anything less than the destruction of the Union
and of our Republican form of Government.  The trouble was only beginning, and, so far, almost
everything had progressed to their liking.  The work must proceed.

In 1852-3 they commenced the Kansas-Nebraska agitation; and, what with their incessant political
and colonizing movements in those Territories; the frequent and dreadful atrocities committed
by their tools, the Border-ruffians; the incessant turmoil created by cruelties to their Fugitive-slaves;
their persistent efforts to change the Supreme Court to their notions; these-with the decision
and opinion of the Supreme Court in the Dred Scott case--together worked the Slavery question
up to a dangerous degree of heat, by the year 1858.

And, by 1860--when the people of the Free States, grown sick unto death of the rule of the
Slave-power in the General Government, arose in their political might, and shook off this "Old
Man of the Sea," electing, beyond cavil and by the Constitutional mode, to the Presidential
office, a man who thoroughly represented in himself their conscience, on the one hand, which
instinctively revolted against human Slavery as a wrong committed against the laws of God,
and their sense of justice and equity on the other, which would not lightly overlook, or interfere
with vested rights under the Constitution and the laws of man--the Conspirators had reached
the point at which they had been aiming ever since that failure in 1832 of their first attempt
at Disunion, in South Carolina.

They had now succeeded in irritating both the Free and the Slave-holding Sections of our Country
against each other, to an almost unbearable point; had solidified the Southern States on the
Slavery and Free-Trade questions; and at last--the machinations of these same Conspirators
having resulted in a split in the Democratic Party, and the election of the Republican candidate
to the Presidency, as the embodiment of the preponderating National belief in Freedom and equality
to all before the Law, with Protection to both Labor and Capital--they also had the pretext
for which they had both been praying and scheming and preparing all those long, long years--they,
and some of their fathers before them.

It cannot be too often repeated that to secure a Monarchy, or at least an Oligarchy, over which
the leading Conspirators should rule for life --whether that Monarchy or that Oligarchy should
comprise the States of the South by themselves, or all the States on a new basis of Union--was
the great ultimate aim of the Conspirators; and this could be secured only by first disrupting
the then existing Republican Union of Republican States.

The doctrine of the right of Secession had now long been taught, and had become a part of the
Southern Slave-holders' Democratic creed, as fully as had the desirability of Slavery and Free-Trade--and
even many of the Northern Democrats, and some Republicans as well, were not much inclined to
dispute, although they cared not to canvass, the point.

The programme of action was therefore much the same as had been laid down in the first attempt
in 1832:--first South Carolina would secede and declare her independence; then the other Slave
States in quick succession would do likewise; then a new Constitution for a solid Southern
Union; then, if necessary, a brief War to cement it--which would end, of course, in the independence
of the South at least, but more probably in the utter subjugation and humiliation of the Free
States.

When the time should come, during, or after this War--as come, in their belief, it would--for
a change in the form of Government, then they could seize the first favorable occasion and
change it.  At present, however, the cry must be for "independence."  That accomplished, the
rest would be easy.  And until that independence was accomplished, no terms of any sort, no
settlement of any kind, were either to be proposed or accepted by them.

These were their dreams, their ambitions, their plans; and the tenacious courage with which
they stuck to them "through thick and thin," through victory and disaster, were worthy of a
better cause.

While, therefore, the pretexts for Secession were "Slavery" and "Free-Trade"--both of which
were alleged to be jeopardized in the election and inauguration of Abraham Lincoln--yet, no
sooner had hostilities commenced between the seceding States and the Union, than they declared
to the World that their fight was not for Slavery, but for Independence.

They dared not acknowledge to the World that they fought for Slavery, lest the sympathies of
the World should be against them.  But it was well understood by the Southern masses, as well
as the other people of the Union, that both Slavery and Free-Trade were involved in the fight
--as much as independence, and the consequent downfall of the Union.

President Lincoln, however, had made up his mind to do all he properly could to placate the
South.  None knew better than he, the history of this Secession movement, as herein described.
None knew better than he, the fell purpose and spirit of the Conspirators.  Yet still, his
kindly heart refused to believe that the madness of the Southern leaders was so frenzied, and
their hatred of Free men, Free labor, and Free institutions, so implacable, that they would
wilfully refuse to listen to reason and ever insist on absolutely inadmissible terms of reconciliation.

From the very beginning of his Administration, he did all that was possible to mollify their
resentment and calm their real or pretended fears.

And early in 1860, in his famous New York Cooper Institute speech he had said "Let us have
faith that right makes might, and in that faith, let us, to the end, dare to do our duty as
we understand it."  He plainly believed to the end, that "right makes might;" and he believed
in the power of numbers--as also did Napoleon, if we may judge from his famous declaration
that "The God of battles is always on the side of the heaviest battalions."  Yet, so believing,
President Lincoln exerted himself in all possible ways to mollify the South. His assurances,
however, were far from satisfying the Conspirators.  They never had been satisfied with anything
in the shape of concession.  They never would be.  They had been dissatisfied with and had
broken all the compacts and compromises, and had spit upon all the concessions, of the past;
and nothing would now satisfy them, short of the impossible.

They were not satisfied now with Lincoln's promise that the Government would not assail them--organized
as, by this time, they were into a so-called Southern "Confederacy" of States--and they proceeded
accordingly to assail that Government which would not assail them.  They opened fire on Fort
Sumter.

This was done, as has duly appeared, in the hope that the shedding of blood would not only
draw the States of the Southern Confederacy more closely together in their common cause, and
prevent the return of any of them to their old allegiance, but also to so influence the wavering
allegiance to the Union, of the Border States, as to strengthen that Confederacy and equivalently
weaken that Union, by their Secession.

Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas, of the Border States that were wavering,
were thus gathered into the Confederate fold, by this policy of blood-spilling--carried bodily
thither, by a desperate and frenzied minority, against the wishes of a patriotic majority.

Virginia, especially, was a great accession to the Rebel cause.  She brought to it the prestige
of her great name.  To secure the active cooperation of "staid old Virginia," "the Mother of
Statesmen," in the struggle, was, in the estimation of the Rebels, an assurance of victory
to their cause.  And the Secession of Virginia for a time had a depressing influence upon the
friends of the Union everywhere.

The refusal of West Virginia to go with the rest of the State into Rebellion, was, to be sure,
some consolation; and the checkmating of the Conspirators' designs to secure to the Confederacy
the States of Maryland, Kentucky and Missouri, helped the confidence of Union men.  In fact,
as long as the National Capital was secure, it was felt that the Union was still safe.

But while the Confederacy, by the firing upon Fort Sumter, and thus assailing that Government
which Lincoln had promised would not assail the Rebels, had gained much in securing the aid
of the States mentioned, yet the Union Cause, by that very act, had gained more.  For the echoes
of the Rebel guns of Fort Moultrie were the signal for such an uprising of the Patriots of
the North and West and Middle States, as, for the moment, struck awe to the hearts of Traitors
and inspired with courage and hopefulness the hearts of Union men throughout the Land.

Moreover it put the Rebels in their proper attitude, in the eyes of the World--as the first
aggressors--and thus deprived them, to a certain extent, of that moral support from the outside
which flows from sympathy.

Those echoes were the signal, not only of that call to arms which led to such an uprising,
but for the simultaneous calling together of the Thirty-seventh Congress of the United States
in Extra Session--the Congress whose measures ultimately enabled President Lincoln and the
Union Armies to subdue the Rebellion and save the Union--the Congress whose wise and patriotic
deliberations resulted in the raising of those gigantic Armies and Navies, and in supplying
the unlimited means, through the Tariff and National Bank Systems and otherwise, by which those
tremendous Forces could be both created and effectively operated --the Congress which cooperated
with President Lincoln and those Forces in preparing the way for the destruction of the very
corner-stone of the Confederacy, Slavery itself.

                              CHAPTER XX.

                  LINCOLN'S TROUBLES AND TEMPTATIONS.

The Rebels themselves, as has already been noted, by the employment of their Slaves in the
construction of earthworks and other fortifications, and even in battle, at Bull Run and elsewhere,
against the Union Forces, brought the Thirty-seventh Congress, as well as the Military Commanders,
and the President, to an early consideration of the Slavery question. But it was none the less
a question to be treated with the utmost delicacy.

The Union men, as well as the Secession-sympathizers, of Kentucky and Tennessee and Missouri
and Maryland, largely believed in Slavery, or at least were averse to any interference with
it.  These, would not see that the right to destroy that unholy Institution could pertain to
any authority, or be justified by any exigency; much less that, as held by some authorities,
its existence ceased at the moment when its hands, or those of the State in which it had existed,
were used to assail the General Government.

They looked with especial suspicion and distrust upon the guarded utterances of the President
upon all questions touching the future of the Colored Race.

     [At Faneuil Hall, Edward Everett is reported to have said, in
     October of 1864:

     "It is very doubtful whether any act of the Government of the
     United States was necessary to liberate the Slaves in a State which
     is in Rebellion.  There is much reason for the opinion that, by the
     simple act of levying War against the United States, the relation
     of Slavery was terminated; certainly, so far as concerns the duty
     of the United States to recognize it, or to refrain from
     interfering with it.

     "Not being founded on the Law of Nature, and resting solely on
     positive Local Law--and that, not of the United States--as soon as
     it becomes either the motive or pretext of an unjust War against
     the Union--an efficient instrument in the hands of the Rebels for
     carrying on the War--source of Military strength to the Rebellion,
     and of danger to the Government at home and abroad, with the
     additional certainty that, in any event but its abandonment, it
     will continue, in all future time to work these mischiefs, who can
     suppose it is the duty of the United States to continue to
     recognize it.

     "To maintain this would be a contradiction in terms.  It would be
     two recognize a right in a Rebel master to employ his Slave in acts
     of Rebellion and Treason, and the duty of the Slave to aid and abet
     his master in the commission of the greatest crime known to the
     Law.

                     *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

     "SEC. 4.  And whenever
     thereafter the person claiming such Labor or Service shall seek to
     enforce his claim, it shall be a full and sufficient answer to such
     claim that the person whose Service or Labor is claimed had been
     employed in hostile service against the Government of the United
     States, contrary to the provisions of this act."

It seemed as impossible to satisfy these Border-State men as it had been to satisfy the Rebels
themselves.

The Act of Congress, to which President Lincoln referred in his Order modifying Fremont's proclamation,
had itself been opposed by them, under the lead of their most influential Representative and
spokesman, Mr. Crittenden, of Kentucky, in its passage through that Body.  It did not satisfy them.

Neither had they been satisfied, when, within one year and four days after "Slavery opened
its batteries of Treason, upon Fort Sumter," that National curse and shame was banished from
the Nation's Capital by Congressional enactment.

They were not satisfied even with Mr. Lincoln's conservative suggestions embodied in the Supplemental
Act.

Nor were they satisfied with the General Instructions, of October 14, 1861, from the War Department
to its Generals, touching the employment of Fugitive Slaves within the Union Lines, and the
assurance of just compensation to loyal masters, therein contained, although all avoidable
interference with the Institution was therein reprobated.

Nothing satisfied them.  It was indeed one of the most curious of the many phenomena of the
War of the Rebellion, that when--as at the end of 1861--it had become evident, as Secretary
Cameron held, that it "would be National suicide" to leave the Rebels in "peaceful and secure
possession of Slave Property, more valuable and efficient to them for War, than forage, cotton,
and Military stores," and that the Slaves coming within our lines could not "be held by the
Government as Slaves," and should not be held as prisoners of War--still the loyal people of
these Border-States, could not bring themselves to save that Union, which they professed to
love, by legislation on this tender subject.

On the contrary, they opposed all legislation looking to any interference with such Slave property.
Nothing that was proposed by Mr. Lincoln, or any other, on this subject, could satisfy them.
In both Houses, the loyal Border-State Representatives spoke and voted against its passage.

One week previously (March 6, 1862), President Lincoln, in an admirable Message, hitherto herein
given at length, found himself driven to broach to Congress the subject of Emancipation.

It was high time, he thought, that the idea of a gradual, compensated Emancipation, should
begin to occupy the minds of those interested, "so that," to use his own words, "they may begin
to consider whether to accept or reject it," should Congress approve the suggestion.

Congress did approve, and adopt, the Joint-Resolution, as we know --despite the opposition
from the loyal element of the Border States--an opposition made in the teeth of their concession
that Mr. Lincoln, in recommending its adoption, was "solely moved by a high patriotism and
sincere devotion to the glory of his Country."

But, consistently with their usual course, they went to the House of Representatives, fresh
from the Presidential presence, and, with their ears still ringing with the common-sense utterances
of the President, half of them voted against the Resolution, while the other half refrained
from voting at all.  And their opposition to this wise and moderate proposition was mainly
based upon the idea that it carried with it a threat--a covert threat.

It certainly was a warning, taking it in connection with the balance of the Message, but a
very wise and timely one.

These loyal Border-State men, however, could not see its wisdom, and at a full meeting held
upon the subject decided to oppose it, as they afterward did.  Its conciliatory spirit they
could not comprehend; the kindly, temperate warning, they would not heed.  The most moderate
of them all,--[Mr. Crittenden of Kentucky.]--in the most moderate of his utterances, could
not bring himself to the belief that this Resolution was "a measure exactly suited to the times."

     [And such was the fatuity existing among the Slave-holders of the
     Border States, that not one of those Slave States had wisdom enough
     to take the liberal offer thus made by the General Government, of
     compensation.  They afterward found their Slaves freed without
     compensation.]

So, also, one month later, (April 11, 1862), when the Senate Bill proposing Emancipation in
the District of Columbia, was before the House, the same spokesman and leader of the loyal
Border-State men opposed it strenuously as not being suited to the times.  For, he persuasively
protested: "I do not say that you have not the power; but would not that power be, at such
a time as this, most unwisely and indiscreetly exercised.  That is the point.  Of all the times
when an attempt was ever made to carry this measure, is not this the most inauspicious?  Is
it not a time when the measure is most likely to produce danger and mischief to the Country
at large?  So it seems to me."

It was not now, nor would it ever be, the time, to pass this, or any other measure, touching
the Institution of Slavery, likely to benefit that Union to which these men professed such
love and loyalty.

Their opposition, however, to the march of events, was of little avail --even when backed,
as was almost invariably the case, by the other Democratic votes from the Free States.  The
opposition was obstructive, but not effectual.  For this reason it was perhaps the more irritating
to the Republicans, who were anxious to put Slavery where their great leader, Mr. Lincoln,
had long before said it should be placed--"in course of ultimate extinction."

This very irritation, however, only served to press such Anti-Slavery Measures more rapidly
forward.  By the 19th of June, 1862, a Bill "to secure Freedom to all persons within the Territories
of the United States"--after a more strenuous fight against it than ever, on the part of Loyal
and Copperhead Democrats, both from the Border and Free States,--had passed Congress, and been
approved by President Lincoln. It provided, in just so many words, "That, from and after the
passage of this Act, there shall be neither Slavery nor involuntary servitude in any of the
Territories of the United States now existing, or which may at any time hereafter be formed
or acquired by the United States, otherwise than in punishment of crime, whereof the party
shall have been duly convicted."

Here, then, at last, was the great end and aim, with which Mr. Lincoln and the Republican Party
started out, accomplished.  To repeat his phrase, Slavery was certainly now in course of ultimate
extinction.

But since that doctrine had been first enunciated by Mr. Lincoln, events had changed the aspect
of things.  War had broken out, and the Slaves of those engaged in armed Rebellion against
the authority of the United States Government, had been actually employed, as we have seen,
on Rebel works and fortifications whose guns were trailed upon the Armies of the Union.

And now, the question of Slavery had ceased to be simply whether it should be put in course
of ultimate extinction, but whether, as a War Measure--as a means of weakening the Enemy and
strengthening the Union --the time had not already come to extinguish it, so far, at least,
as the Slaves of those participating in the Rebellion, were concerned.

Congress, as has been heretofore noted, had already long and heatedly debated various propositions
referring to Slavery and African Colonization, and had enacted such of them as, in its wisdom,
were considered necessary; and was now entering a further stormy period of contention upon
various other projects touching the Abolition of the Fugitive Slave Laws, the Confiscation
of Rebel Property, and the Emancipation of Slaves--all of which, of course, had been, and would
be, vehemently assailed by the loyal Border-States men and their Free-State Democratic allies.

Mr. Crittenden, the leader of the loyal Border-States men in Congress, was at this time especially
eloquent on this latter view of the Constitution.  In his speech of April 23, 1862, in the
House of Representatives, he even undertook to defend American Slavery under the shield of
English Liberty!

Said he: "It is necessary for the prosperity of any Government, for peace and harmony, that
every man who acquires property shall feel that he shall be protected in the enjoyment of it,
and in his right to hold it.  It elevates the man; it gives him a feeling of dignity.  It is
the great old English doctrine of Liberty.  Said Lord Mansfield, the rain may beat against
the cabin of an Englishman, the snow may penetrate it, but the King dare not enter it without
the consent of its owner.  That is the true English spirit.  It is the source of England's power."

And again: "The idea of property is deeply seated in our minds.  By the English Law and by
the American Law you have the right to take the life of any man who attempts, by violence,
to take your property from you. So far does the Spirit of these Laws go.  Let us not break
down this idea of property.  It is the animating spirit of the Country.  Indeed it is the Spirit
of Liberty and Freedom."

There was at this time, a growing belief in the minds of these loyal Border-States men, that
this question of Slavery-abolition was reaching a crisis.  They saw "the handwriting on the
wall," but left no stone unturned to prevent, or at least to avert for a time, the coming catastrophe.
They egged Congress, in the language of the distinguished Kentuckian, to "Let these unnecessary
measures alone, for the present;" and, as to the President, they now, not only volunteered
in his defense, against the attacks of others, but strove also to capture him by their arch
flatteries.

"Sir,"--said Mr. Crittenden, in one of his most eloquent bursts, in the House of Representatives,--"it
is not my duty, perhaps, to defend the President of the United States.  * * * I voted against
Mr. Lincoln, and opposed him honestly and sincerely; but Mr. Lincoln has won me to his side.
There is a niche in the Temple of Fame, a niche near to Washington, which should be occupied
by the statue of him who shall, save this Country.  Mr. Lincoln has a mighty destiny.  It is
for him, if he will, to step into that niche.  It is for him to be but President of the People
of the United States, and there will his statue be.  But, if he choose to be, in these times,
a mere sectarian and a party man, that niche will be reserved for some future and better Patriot.
It is in his power to occupy a place next Washington,--the Founder, and the Preserver, side
by side.  Sir, Mr. Lincoln is no coward.  His not doing what the Constitution forbade him to
do, is no proof of his cowardice."

On the other hand, Owen Lovejoy, the fiery Abolitionist, the very next day after the above
remarks of Mr. Crittenden were delivered in the House, made a great speech in reply, taking
the position that "either Slavery, or the Republic, must perish; and the question for us to
decide is, which shall it be?"

He declared to the House: "You cannot put down the rebellion and restore the Union, without
destroying Slavery." Where is it?  He pointed upward!  But, Sir, should the President follow
the counsels of that gentleman, and become the defender and perpetuator of human Slavery, he
should point downward to some dungeon in the Temple of Moloch, who feeds on human blood and
is surrounded with fires, where are forged manacles and chains for human limbs--in the crypts
and recesses of whose Temple, woman is scourged, and man tortured, and outside whose walls
are lying dogs, gorged with human flesh, as Byron describes them stretched around Stamboul.
That is a suitable place for the statue of one who would defend and perpetuate human Slavery."

And then--after saying that "the friends of American Slavery need not beslime the President
with their praise.  He is an Anti-Slavery man.  He hates human Bondage "--the orator added
these glowing words:

"I, too, have a niche for Abraham Lincoln; but it is in Freedom's Holy Fane, and not in the
blood-besmeared Temple of human Bondage; not surrounded by Slaves, fetters and chains, but
with the symbols of Freedom; not dark with Bondage, but radiant with the light of Liberty.
In that niche he shall stand proudly, nobly, gloriously, with shattered fetters and broken
chains and slave-whips beneath his feet.  If Abraham Lincoln pursues the path, evidently pointed
out for him in the providence of God, as I believe he will, then he will occupy the proud position
I have indicated.  That is a fame worth living for; ay, more, that is a fame worth dying for,
though that death led through the blood of Gethsemane and the agony of the Accursed Tree. 
That is a fame which has glory and honor and immortality and Eternal Life.  Let Abraham Lincoln
make himself, as I trust he will, the Emancipator, the Liberator, as he has the opportunity
of doing, and his name shall not only be enrolled in this Earthly Temple, but it will be traced
on the living stones of that Temple which rears itself amid the Thrones and Hierarchies of
Heaven, whose top-stone is to be brought in with shouting of 'Grace, grace unto it!'"

We have seen how the loyal Border-State men, through their chosen Representative--finding that
their steady and unfaltering opposition to all Mr. Lincoln's propositions, while quite ineffectual,
did not serve by any means to increase his respect for their peculiar kind of loyalty --offered
him posthumous honors and worship if he would but do as they desired.  Had they possessed the
power, no doubt they would have taken him up into an exceeding high mountain and have offered
to him all the Kingdoms of the Earth to do their bidding.  But their temptations were of no avail.

President Lincoln's duty, and inclination alike--no less than the earnest importunities of
the Abolitionists--carried him in the opposite direction; but carried him no farther than he
thought it safe, and wise, to go.  For, in whatever he might do on this burning question of
Emancipation, he was determined to secure that adequate support from the People without which
even Presidential Proclamations are waste paper.

But now, May 9, 1862, was suddenly issued by General Hunter, commanding the "Department of
the South," comprising Georgia, Florida and South Carolina, his celebrated Order announcing
Martial Law, in those States, as a Military Necessity, and--as "Slavery and Martial Law in
a Free Country are altogether incompatible"--declaring all Slaves therein, "forever Free."

This second edition, as it were, of Fremont's performance, at once threw the loyal Border-State
men into a terrible ferment.  Again, they, and their Copperhead and other Democratic friends
of the North, meanly professed belief that this was but a part of Mr. Lincoln's programme,
and that his apparent backwardness was the cloak to hide his Anti-Slavery aggressiveness and
insincerity.

How hurtful the insinuations, and even direct charges, of the day, made by these men against
President Lincoln, must have been to his honest, sincere, and sensitive nature, can scarcely
be conceived by those who did not know him; while, on the other hand, the reckless impatience
of some of his friends for "immediate and universal Emancipation," and their complaints at
his slow progress toward that goal of their hopes, must have been equally trying.

True to himself, however, and to the wise conservative course which he had marked out, and,
thus far, followed, President Lincoln hastened to disavow Hunter's action in the premises,
by a Proclamation, heretofore given, declaring that no person had been authorized by the United
States Government to declare the Slaves of any State, Free; that Hunter's action in this respect
was void; that, as Commander-in-chief he reserved solely to himself, the questions, first,
as to whether he had the power to declare the Slaves of any State or States, Free, and, second,
whether the time and necessity for the exercise of such supposed power had arrived.  And then,
as we may remember, he proceeded to cite the adoption, by overwhelming majorities in Congress,
of the Joint Resolution offering pecuniary aid from the National Government to "any State which
may adopt a gradual abolishment of Slavery;" and to make a most earnest appeal, for support,
to the Border-States and to their people, as being "the most interested in the subject matter."

In his Special Message to Congress,--[Of March 6, 1862.]--recommending the passage of that
Joint Resolution, he had plainly and emphatically declared himself against sudden Emancipation
of Slaves.  He had therein distinctly said: "In my judgment, gradual, and not immediate, Emancipation,
is better for all."  And now, in this second appeal of his to the Border-States men, to patriotically
close with the proposal embraced in that.

     [The following letter, from Sumner, shows the impatience of some of
     the President's friends, the confidence he inspired in others
     nearer in his counsels, and how entirely, at this time, his mind
     was absorbed in his project for gradual and compensated
     Emancipation.]

                         "SENATE CHAMBER, June 5, 1862.

     "MY DEAR SIR.--Your criticism of the President is hasty.  I am
     confident that, if you knew him as I do, you would not make it.  Of
     course the President cannot be held responsible for the
     misfeasances of subordinates, unless adopted or at least tolerated
     by him.  And I am sure that nothing unjust or ungenerous will be
     tolerated, much less adopted, by him.

     "I am happy to let you know that he has no sympathy with Stanly in
     his absurd wickedness, closing the schools, nor again in his other
     act of turning our camp into a hunting ground for Slaves.  He
     repudiates both--positively.  The latter point has occupied much of
     his thought; and the newspapers have not gone too far in recording
     his repeated declarations, which I have often heard from his own
     lips, that Slaves finding their way into the National lines are
     never to be Re-enslaved--This is his conviction, expressed without
     reserve.

     "Could you have seen the President--as it was my privilege often
     --while he was considering the great questions on which he has
     already acted--the invitation to Emancipation in the States,
     Emancipation in the District of Columbia, and the acknowledgment of
     the Independence of Hayti and Liberia--even your zeal would have
     been satisfied, for you would have felt the sincerity of his
     purpose to do what he could to carry forward the principles of the
     Declaration of Independence.

     "His whole soul was occupied, especially by the first proposition,
     which was peculiarly his own.  In familiar intercourse with him, I
     remember nothing more touching than the earnestness and
     completeness with which he embraced this idea.  To his mind, it was
     just and beneficent, while it promised the sure end of Slavery.  Of
     course, to me, who had already proposed a bridge of gold for the
     retreating fiend, it was most welcome.  Proceeding from the
     President, it must take its place among the great events of
     history.

     "If you are disposed to be impatient at any seeming
     shortcomings, think, I pray you, of what has been done in a brief
     period, and from the past discern the sure promise of the future.
     Knowing something of my convictions and of the ardor with which I
     maintain them, you may, perhaps, derive some assurance from my
     confidence; I may say to you, therefore, stand by the
     Administration.  If need be, help it by word and act, but stand by
     it and have faith in it.

     "I wish that you really knew the President, and had heard the
     artless expression of his convictions on those questions which
     concern you so deeply.  You might, perhaps, wish that he were less
     cautious, but you would be grateful that he is so true to all that
     you have at heart.  Believe me, therefore, you are wrong, and I
     regret it the more because of my desire to see all our friends
     stand firmly together.

     "If I write strongly it is because I feel strongly; for my constant
     and intimate intercourse with the President, beginning with the 4th
     of March, not only binds me peculiarly to his Administration, but
     gives me a personal as well as a political interest in seeing that
     justice is done him.

     "Believe me, my dear Sir, with much regard, ever faithfully yours,
                              "CHARLES SUMNER."

But stones are not more deaf to entreaty than were the ears of the loyal Border-State men and
their allies to President Lincoln's renewed appeal. "Ephraim" was "wedded to his idols."

McClellan too--immediately after his retreat from the Chickahominy to the James River--seized
the opportunity afforded by the disasters to our arms, for which he was responsible, to write
to President Lincoln a letter (dated July 7, 1862) in which he admonished him that owing to
the "critical" condition of the Army of the Potomac, and the danger of its being "overwhelmed"
by the Enemy in front, the President must now substantially assume and exercise the powers
of a Dictator, or all would be lost; that "neither Confiscation of property * * * nor forcible
Abolition of Slavery, should be contemplated for a moment;" and that "A declaration of Radical
views, especially upon Slavery, will rapidly disintegrate our present Armies."

Harried, and worried, on all sides,--threatened even by the Commander of the Army of the Potomac,--it
is not surprising, in view of the apparently irreconcilable attitude of the loyal Border-State
men to gradual and compensated Emancipation, that the tension of President Lincoln's mind began
to feel a measure of relief in contemplating Military Emancipation in the teeth of all such
threats.

He had long since made up his mind that the existence of Slavery was not compatible with the
preservation of the Union.  The only question now was, how to get rid of it? "The probability,"
writes Mr. Beauchamp--privately to the writer--"is that a division took place at Lake Erie,
or perhaps further west; some passed on the north side and became the Neutrals and Hurons;
the vanguard becoming the Mohawks or Hochelagans, afterwards Mohawks and Oneidas. Part went
far south, as the Tuscaroras and Cherokees, and a more northern branch,
the Andastes; part followed the south shore and became the Eries,
Senecas and Cayugas; part went to the east of Lake Ontario, removing
and becoming the Onondagas, when the Huron war began."

     
     
     It is noticeable that the earliest accounts of the Five Nations
     speak of them as of two kinds--Mohawks and "Sinnekes," or as termed
     by the French the Inferior and Superior Iroquois. For example Antony
     Van Corlear's Journal, edited by Gen. James Grant Wilson, also certain
     of the New York documents. The most thorough local student of
     early Mohawk town-sites, Mr. S.L. Frey, of Palatine Bridge, N.Y., supports
     Mr. Beauchamp in his view of the late coming of the Mohawks into
the Mohawk River Valley, where they have always been settled in historic
times.

According to him, although these people changed their sites every 25 or 30 years from failure
of the wood supply and other causes, only four prehistoric sites have been discovered in that
district, all the others containing relics of European origin. Mr. Beauchamp believes even this
number too large. Both put forward the idea that the Mohawks were the ancient race of Hochelaga, whose
town on the island of Montreal was visited by Jacques Cartier in 1535, and had disappeared completely
in 1608 when Champlain founded Quebec. "What had become of these people?" writes Mr. Frey, in
his pamphlet "The Mohawks." "An overwhelming force of wandering Algonquins had destroyed their
towns. To what new land had they gone?

I think we shall find them seated in the impregnable strongholds among the hills and in the
dense forests of the Mohawk Valley."

It was about this time (July 12, 1862) that President Lincoln determined to make a third, and
last, attempt to avert the necessity for thus emancipating and arming the Slaves.  He invited
all the Senators and Representatives in Congress from the Border-States, to an interview at
the White House, and made to them the appeal, heretofore in these pages given at length.

It was an earnest, eloquent, wise, kindly, patriotic, fatherly appeal in behalf of his old
proposition, for a gradual, compensated Emancipation, by the Slave States, aided by the resources
of the National Government.

At the very time of making it, he probably had, in his drawer, the rough draft of the Proclamation
which was soon to give Liberty to all the Colored millions of the Land.

     [McPherson gives a letter, written from Washington, by Owen Lovejoy
     (Feb. 22, 1864), to Wm. Lloyd Garrison, in which the following
     passage occurs:

     "Recurring to the President, there are a great many reports
     concerning him which seem to be reliable and authentic, which,
     after all, are not so.  It was currently reported among the
     Anti-Slavery men of Illinois that the Emancipation Proclamation was
     extorted from him by the outward pressure, and particularly by the
     Delegation from the Christian Convention that met at Chicago.

     "Now, the fact is this, as I had it from his own lips: He had
     written the Proclamation in the Summer, as early as June, I think
     --but will not be certain as to the precise time--and called his
     Cabinet together, and informed them he had written it and meant to
     make it, but wanted to read it to them for any criticism or remarks
     as to its features or details.

     "After having done so, Mr. Seward suggested whether it would not be
     well for him to withhold its publication until after we had gained
     some substantial advantage in the Field, as at that time we had met
     with many reverses, and it might be considered a cry of despair.
     He told me he thought the suggestion a wise one, and so held on to
     the Proclamation until after the Battle of Antietam."]

Be that as it may, however, sufficient evidences exist, to prove that he must have been fully
aware, at the time of making that appeal to the supposed patriotism of these Border-State men,
how much, how very much, depended on the manner of their reception of it.

To him, that meeting was a very solemn and portentous one.  He had studied the question long
and deeply--not from the standpoint of his own mere individual feelings and judgment, but from
that of fair Constitutional construction, as interpreted by the light of Natural or General
Law and right reason.  What he sought to impress upon them was, that an immediate decision
by the Border-States to adopt, and in due time carry out, with the financial help of the General
Government, a policy of gradual Emancipation, would simultaneously solve the two intimately-blended
problems of Slavery-destruction and Union-preservation, in the best possible manner for the
pockets and feelings of the Border-State Slave-holder, and for the other interests of both
Border-State Slave-holder and Slave.

His great anxiety was to "perpetuate," as well as to save, to the People of the World, the
imperiled form of Popular Government, and assure to it a happy and a grand future.

He begged these Congressmen from the Border-States, to help him carry out this, his beneficent
plan, in the way that was best for all, and thus at the same time utterly deprive the Rebel
Confederacy of that hope, which still possessed them, of ultimately gathering these States
into their rebellious fold.  And he very plainly, at the same time, confessed that he desired
this relief from the Abolition pressure upon him, which had been growing more intense ever
since he had repudiated the Hunter proclamation.

But the President's earnest appeal to these loyal Representatives in Congress from the Border-States,
was, as we have seen, in vain.  It might as well have been made to actual Rebels, for all the
good it did. For, a few days afterward, they sent to him a reply signed by more than two-thirds
of those present, hitherto given at length in these pages, in which-after loftily sneering
at the proposition as "an interference by this Government with a question which peculiarly
and exclusively belonged to" their "respective States, on which they had not sought advice
or solicited aid," throwing doubts upon the Constitutional power of the General Government
to give the financial aid, and undertaking by statistics to prove that it would absolutely
bankrupt the Government to give such aid,--they insultingly declared, in substance, that they
could not "trust anything to the contingencies of future legislation," and that Congress must
"provide sufficient funds" and place those funds in the President's hands for the purpose,
before the Border-States and their people would condescend even to "take this proposition into
careful consideration, for such decision as in their judgment is demanded by their interest,
their honor, and their duty to the whole Country."

Very different in tone, to be sure, was the minority reply, which, after stating that "the
leaders of the Southern Rebellion have offered to abolish Slavery among them as a condition
to Foreign Intervention in favor of their Independence as a Nation," concluded with the terse
and loyal deduction: "If they can give up Slavery to destroy the Union, we can surely ask our
people to consider the question of Emancipation to save the Union."

But those who signed this latter reply were few, among the many. Practically, the Border-State
men were a unit against Mr. Lincoln's proposition, and against its fair consideration by their
people.  He asked for meat, and they gave him a stone.

Only a few days before this interview, President Lincoln--alarmed by the report of McClellan,
that the magnificent Army of the Potomac under his command, which, only three months before,
had boasted 161,000 men, had dwindled down to not more than "50,000 men left with their colors"--had
been to the front, at Harrison's Landing, on the James river, and, although he had not found
things quite so disheartening as he had been led to believe, yet they were bad enough, for
only 86,000 men were found by him on duty, while 75,000 were unaccounted for--of which number
34,4172 were afterward reported as "absent by authority."

This condition of affairs, in connection with the fact that McClellan was always calling for
more troops, undoubtedly had its influence in bringing Mr. Lincoln's mind to the conviction,
hitherto mentioned, of the fast-approaching Military necessity for Freeing and Arming the Slaves.

It was to ward this off, if possible, that he had met and appealed to the Border-State Representatives.
They had answered him with sneers and insults; and nothing was left him but the extreme course
of almost immediate Emancipation.

Long and anxiously he had thought over the matter, but the time for action was at hand.

It may not be amiss to interrupt the President's narration to Mr. Carpenter, at this point,
with a few words touching "the Military Situation."

After McClellan's inexplicable retreat from before the Rebel Capital --when, having gained
a great victory at Malvern Hills, Richmond would undoubtedly have been ours, had he but followed
it up, instead of ordering his victorious troops to retreat like "a whipped Army"--[See General
Hooker's testimony before the Committee on the Conduct of the War.]--his recommendation, in
the extraordinary letter (of July 7th) to the President, for the creation of the office of
General-in-Chief, was adopted, and Halleck, then at Corinth, was ordered East, to fill it.

Pope had previously been called from the West, to take command of the troops covering Washington,
comprising some 40,000 men, known as the Army of Virginia; and, finding cordial cooperation
with McClellan impossible, had made a similar suggestion.

Soon after Halleck's arrival, that General ordered the transfer of the Army of the Potomac,
from Harrison's Landing to Acquia creek--on the Potomac--with a view to a new advance upon
Richmond, from the Rappahannock river.

While this was being slowly accomplished, Lee, relieved from fears for Richmond, decided to
advance upon Washington, and speedily commenced the movement.

On the 8th of August, 1862, Stonewall Jackson, leading the Rebel advance, had crossed the Rapidan;
on the 9th the bloody Battle of Cedar Mountain had been fought with part of Pope's Army; and
on the 11th, Jackson had retreated across the Rapidan again.

Subsequently, Pope having retired across the Rappahannock, Lee's Forces, by flanking Pope's
Army, again resumed their Northern advance.  August 28th and 29th witnessed the bloody Battles
of Groveton and Gainesville, Virginia; the 30th saw the defeat of Pope, by Lee, at the second
great Battle of Bull Run, and the falling back of Pope's Army toward Washington; and the succeeding
Battle of Chantilly took place September 1, 1862.

It is not necessary at this time to even touch upon the causes and agencies which brought such
misfortune to the Union Arms, under Pope. It is sufficient to say here, that the disaster of
the second Bull Run was a dreadful blow to the Union Cause, and correspondingly elated the Rebels.

Jefferson Davis, in transmitting to the Rebel Congress at Richmond, Lee's victorious announcements,
said, in his message: "From these dispatches it will be seen that God has again extended His
shield over our patriotic Army, and has blessed the cause of the Confederacy with a second
signal victory, on the field already memorable by the gallant achievement of our troops."

Flushed with victory, but wisely avoiding the fortifications of the National Capital, Lee's
Forces now swept past Washington; crossed the Potomac, near Point of Rocks, at its rear; and
menaced both the National Capital and Baltimore.

Yielding to the apparent necessity of the moment, the President again placed.  McClellan in
command of the Armies about Washington, to wit: the Army of the Potomac; Burnside's troops
that had come up from North Carolina; what remained of Pope's Army of Virginia; and the large
reinforcements from fresh levies, constantly and rapidly pouring in.

     [This was probably about the time of the occurrence of an amusing
     incident, touching Lincoln, McClellan, and the fortifications
     around Washington, afterward told by General J. G. Barnard, then
     Chief of Engineers on the staff of General George B.  McClellan.
     --See New York Tribune, October 21, 1885.  It seems that the
     fortifications having been completed, McClellan invited Mr. Lincoln
     and his Cabinet to inspect them.  "On the day appointed," said
     Barnard, "the Inspection commenced at Arlington, to the Southwest
     of Washington, and in front of the Enemy.  We followed the line of
     the works southerly, and recrossed the Potomac to the easterly side
     of the river, and continued along the line easterly of Washington
     and into the heaviest of all the fortifications on the northerly
     side of Washington.  When we reached this point the President asked
     General McClellan to explain the necessity of so strong a
     fortification between Washington and the North.

     "General McClellan replied: 'Why, Mr. President, according to
     Military Science it is our duty to guard against every possible or
     supposable contingency that may arise.  For example, if under any
     circumstances, however fortuitous, the Enemy, by any chance or
     freak, should, in a last resort, get in behind Washington, in his
     efforts to capture the city, why, there the fort is to defend it.'

     "'Yes, that's so General,' said the President; 'the precaution is
     doubtless a wise one, and I'm glad to get so clear an explanation,
     for it reminds me of an interesting question once discussed for
     several weeks in our Lyceum, or Moot Court, at Springfield, Ill.,
     soon after I began reading law.'

     "'Ah!' says General McClellan.  'What question was that, Mr.
     President?'

     "'The question,' Mr. Lincoln replied, 'was, "Why does man have
     breasts?"' and he added that after many evenings' debate, the
     question was submitted to the presiding Judge, who wisely decided
     'That if under any circumstances, however fortuitous, or by any
     chance or freak, no matter of what nature or by what cause, a man
     should have a baby, there would be the breasts to nurse it.'"]

Yet, it was not until the 17th of September that the Battle of Antietam was fought, and Lee
defeated--and then only to be allowed to slip back, across the Potomac, on the 18th--McClellan
leisurely following him, across that river, on the 2nd of November!

     [Arnold, in his "Life of Abraham Lincoln," says that President
     Lincoln said of him: "With all his failings as a soldier, McClellan
     is a pleasant and scholarly gentleman.  He is an admirable
     Engineer, but" he added, "he seems to have a special talent for a
     stationary Engine."]

On the 5th, McClellan was relieved,--Burnside taking the command,--and Union men breathed more
freely again.

But to return to the subject of Emancipation.  President Lincoln's own words have already been
given--in conversation with Carpenter--down to the reading of the Proclamation to his Cabinet,
and Seward's suggestion to "wait for a victory" before issuing it, and how, adopting that advice,
he laid the Proclamation aside, waiting for a victory.

It is not uninteresting to note, in this connection, upon the same authority, that at the final
meeting of the Cabinet prior to this issue of the Proclamation, when the third paragraph was
read, and the words of the draft "will recognize the Freedom of such Persons," were reached,
Mr. Seward suggested the insertion of the words "and maintain" after the word "recognize;"
and upon his insistence, the President said, "the words finally went in."

At last, then, had gone forth the Fiat--telegraphed and read throughout the Land, on that memorable
22d of September, 1862--which, with the supplemental Proclamation of January 1, 1863, was to
bring joy and Freedom to the millions of Black Bondsmen of the South.

No one outside of his Cabinet dreamed, at the time he made that answer, that the Proclamation
of Emancipation was already written, and simply awaited a turn in the tide of battle for its issue!

Still less could it have been supposed, when, on the 13th of September --only two days before
Stonewall Jackson had invested, attacked, and captured Harper's Ferry with nearly 12,000 prisoners,
73 cannon, and 13,000 small arms, besides other spoils of War--Mr. Lincoln received the deputation
from the religious bodies of Chicago, bearing a Memorial for the immediate issue of such a
Proclamation.  At all events, it had that effect.

Arnold, in his "Life of Lincoln," says of this time, when General Lee was marching Northward
toward Pennsylvania, that "now, the President, with that tinge of superstition which ran through
his character, 'made,' as he said, 'a solemn vow to God, that, if Lee was driven back, he would
issue the Proclamation;'" and, in the light of that statement, the concluding words of Mr.
Lincoln's reply to the deputation aforesaid:--"I can assure you that the subject is on my mind,
by day and night, more than any other.  Whatever shall appear to be God's will, I will do,"
--have a new meaning.

The Emancipation Proclamation, when issued, was a great surprise, but was none the less generally
well-received by the Union Armies, and throughout the Loyal States of the Union, while, in
some of them, its reception was most enthusiastic.

On the other hand, the loyal Border-States men were dreadfully exercised on the subject; and
those of them in the House of Representatives emphasized their disapproval by their votes,
when, on the 11th and 15th of the following December, Resolutions, respectively denouncing,
and endorsing, "the policy of Emancipation, as indicated in that Proclamation," of September
22, 1862, were offered and voted on.

Of course the Rebels themselves, against whom it was aimed, gnashed their teeth in impotent
rage over the Proclamation.  But they lost no time in declaring that it was only a proof of
what they had always announced: that the War was not for the preservation of the American Union,
but for the destruction of African Slavery, and the spoilation of the Southern States.

Through their friends and emissaries, in the Border and other Loyal States of the Union,--the
"Knights of the Golden Circle,"--

     [The "Knights of the Golden Circle" was the most extensive of these
     Rebel organizations.  It was "an auxiliary force to the Rebel
     Army."  Its members took an obligation of the most binding
     character, the violation of which was punishable by death, which
     obligation, in the language of another, "pledged them to use every
     possible means in their power to aid the Rebels to gain their
     Independence; to aid and assist Rebel prisoners to escape; to vote
     for no one for Office who was not opposed to the further
     prosecution of the War; to encourage desertions from the Union
     Army; to protect the Rebels in all things necessary to carry out
     their designs, even to the burning and destroying of towns and
     cities, if necessary to produce the desired result; to give such
     information as they had, at all times, of the movements of our
     Armies, and of the return of soldiers to their homes; and to try
     and prevent their going back to their regiments at the front."

     In other words the duty of the Organization and of its members, was
     to hamper, oppose, and prevent all things possible that were being
     done at any time for the Union Cause, and to encourage, forward,
     and help all things possible in behalf of the Rebel Cause. 

     Before the League, the latter were only weak single tribes. When Dutch
     firearms were added to the advantage of the league, the Hurons
     finally fell from their power, which was therefore apparently at its
     height about 1560.
     
     Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle France, end of Bk. V., after
     describing the first mass at Ville Marie, in 1642, says: "The evening
of the same day M. de Maisonneuve desired to visit the Mountain which
gave the island its name, and two old Indians who accompanied him
thither, having led him to the top, told him they were of the tribe
who had formerly inhabited this country."

"We were," they added, "very numerous and all the hills (collines) which you see to the south
and east, were peopled. The Hurons drove thence our ancestors, of whom a part took refuge among
the Abénakis, others withdrew into the Iroquois cantons, a few remained with our conquerors." They
promised Maisonneuve to do all they could to bring back their people, "but apparently could not succeed
in reassembling the fragments of this dispersed tribe, which doubtless is that of the Iroquois
of which I have spoken in my Journal."

A proof that this people of Iroquet were not originally Algonquins
is that by their own testimony they had cultivated the ground, one
of them actually took up a handful of the soil and called attention
to its goodness; and they also directly connected themselves in a
positive manner with the Hochelagans by the dates and circumstances
indicated in their remarks as above interpreted.  But ah! should they enter
there?--or must they turn away again into the old wilderness of their Slavery, and this blessed
Liberty, almost within their grasp, mockingly elude them?

They had not long to wait for an answer.  The 1st of January, 1863, arrived, and with it--as
a precious New Year's Gift--came the Supplemental Proclamation, bearing the sacred boon of
Liberty to the Emancipated millions.

At last, at last, no American need blush to stand up and proclaim his land indeed, and in truth,
"the Land of Freedom."

                              CHAPTER XXI.

                            THE ARMED-NEGRO.

Little over five months had passed, since the occurrence of the great event in the history
of the American Nation mentioned in the preceding Chapter, before the Freed Negro, now bearing
arms in defense of the Union and of his own Freedom, demonstrated at the first attack on Port
Hudson the wisdom of emancipating and arming the Slave, as a War measure.  He seemed thoroughly
to appreciate and enter into the spirit of the words; "who would be Free, himself must strike
the blow."

At the attack (of May 27th, 1863), on Port Hudson, where it held the right, the "Black Brigade"
covered itself with glory.

     At Baton Rouge, before starting for Port Hudson, the color-guard of
     the First Louisiana Regiment--of the Black Brigade--received the
     Regimental flags from their white colonel, (Col. Stafford,) then
     under arrest, in a speech which ended with the injunction:
     "Color-guard, protect, defend, die for, but do not surrender these
     flags;" to which Sergeant Planciancois replied: "Colonel, I will
     bring these colors to you in honor, or report to God the reason
     why!"  He fell, mortally wounded, in one of the many desperate
     charges at Port Hudson, with his face to the Enemy, and the colors
     in his hand.  The highest
commendation is bestowed upon them by all the officers in command on the
right."

The New York Times' correspondent said:--"The deeds of heroism performed by these Colored men
were such as the proudest White men might emulate. Their colors are torn to pieces by shot,
and literally bespattered by blood and brains.  The color-sergeant of the 1st Louisiana, on
being mortally wounded (the top of his head taken off by a sixpounder), hugged the colors to
his breast, when a struggle ensued between the two color-corporals on each side of him, as
to who should have the honor of bearing the sacred standard, and during this generous contention
one was seriously wounded."

So again, on Sunday the 6th of June following, at Milliken's Bend, where an African brigade,
with 160 men of the 23rd Iowa, although surprised in camp by a largely superior force of the
Enemy, repulsed him gallantly --of which action General Grant, in his official Report, said:
"In this battle, most of the troops engaged were Africans, who had but little experience in
the use of fire-arms.  Their conduct is said, however, to have been most gallant."

So, also, in the bloody assault of July 18th, on Fort Wagner, which was led by the 54th Massachusetts
(Colored) Regiment with intrepidity, and where they planted, and for some time maintained,
their Country's flag on the parapet, until they "melted away before the Enemy's fire, their
bodies falling down the slope and into the ditch."

And from that time on, through the War--at Wilson's Wharf, in the many bloody charges at Petersburg,
at Deep Bottom, at Chapin's Farm, Fair Oaks, and numerous other battle-fields, in Virginia
and elsewhere, right down to Appomattox--the African soldier fought courageously, fully vindicating
the War-wisdom of Abraham Lincoln in emancipating and arming the Race.

The promulgation of this New Year's Proclamation of Freedom unquestionably had a wonderful
effect in various ways, upon the outcome of the War.

It cleared away the cobwebs which the arguments of the loyal Border-State men, and of the Northern
Copperheads and other Disunion and Pro-Slavery allies of the Rebels were forever weaving for
the discouragement, perplexity and ensnarement, of the thoroughly loyal out-and-out Union men
of the Land.  It largely increased our strength in fighting material.  It brought to us the
moral support of the World, with the active sympathy of philanthropy's various forces.  And
besides, it correspondingly weakened the Rebels.  Every man thus freed from his Bondage, and
mustered into the Union Armies, was not only a gain of one man on the Union side, but a loss
of one man to the Enemy.  It is not, therefore, surprising that the Disunion Conspirators--whether
at the South or at the North--were furious.

He now called the attention of the Rebel Congress to President Lincoln's two Proclamations
of Emancipation, early in January of 1863; and that Body responded by adopting, on the 1st
of May of that year, a Resolution, the character of which was so cold-bloodedly atrocious,
that modern Civilization might well wonder and Christianity shudder at its purport.

     "SEC.

At last it became necessary to adopt some measure by which captured Colored Union soldiers
might be protected equally with captured White Union soldiers from the frequent Rebel violations
of the Laws of War in the cases of the former.

President Lincoln, therefore, issued an Executive Order prescribing retaliatory measures.

     [In the following words:

     "EXECUTIVE MANSION,

     "WASHINGTON, July 30, 1863.

     "By order of the Secretary of War.  ABRAHAM LINCOLN.  E. D.
     TOWNSEND, Assistant Adjutant-General."]

It was hoped that the mere announcement of the decision of our Government to retaliate, would
put an instant stop to the barbarous conduct of the Rebels toward the captured Colored Union
troops, but the hope was vain.  The atrocities continued, and their climax was capped by the
cold-blooded massacres perpetrated by Forrest's 5,000 Cavalry, after capturing Fort Pillow,
a short distance above Memphis, on the Mississippi river.

The garrison of that Fort comprised less than 600 Union soldiers, about one-half of whom were
White, and the balance Black.  These brave fellows gallantly defended the Fort against eight
times their number, from before sunrise until the afternoon, when--having failed to win by
fair means, under the Laws of War,--the Enemy treacherously crept up the ravines on either
side of the Fort, under cover of flags of truce, and then, with a sudden rush, carried it,
butchering both Blacks and Whites --who had thrown away their arms, and were striving to escape--until
night temporarily put an end to the sanguinary tragedy.

On the following morning the massacre was completed by the butchery and torture of wounded
remnants of these brave Union defenders--some being buried alive, and others nailed to boards,
and burned to death.

     [For full account of these hideous atrocities, see testimony of
     survivors before the Committee on Conduct and Expenditures of the
     War.  (H. R.  Report, No. 65, 1st S.  38th Cong.)]

And all this murderous malignity, for what?--Simply, and only, because one-half of the Patriot
victims had Black skins, while the other half had dared to fight by the side of the Blacks!

In the after-days of the War, the cry with which our Union Black regiments went into battle:--"Remember
Fort Pillow!"--inspired them to deeds of valor, and struck with terror the hearts of the Enemy.
On many a bloody field, Fort Pillow was avenged.

It is a common error to suppose that the first arming of the Black man was on the Union side.
The first Black volunteer company was a Rebel one, raised  early in May, 1861, in the city
of Memphis, Tenn.; and at Charleston, S. C., Lynchburg, Va., and Norfolk, Va., large bodies
of Free Negroes volunteered, and were engaged, earlier than that, to do work on the Rebel batteries.

At a review of Rebel troops, at New Orleans, November 23, 1861, "One regiment comprised 1,400
Free Colored men."  Vast numbers of both Free Negroes and Slaves were employed to construct
Rebel fortifications throughout the War, in all the Rebel States.

And this Act of, the Rebel Congress was passed only forty days before the fiendish massacre
of the Union Whites and Blacks who together, at Fort Pillow, were performing for the Union,
"such duties with the Army," and "in connection with the Military defenses of the Country,"
as had been prescribed for them by their Commanding General!

Under any circumstances--and especially under this state of facts --nothing could excuse or
palliate that shocking and disgraceful and barbarous crime against humanity; and the human
mind is incapable of understanding how such savagery can be accounted for, except upon the
theory that "He that nameth Rebellion nameth not a singular, or one only sin, as is theft,
robbery, murder, and such like; but he nameth the whole puddle and sink of all sins against
God and man; against his country, his countrymen, his children, his kinsfolk, his friends,
and against all men universally; all sins against God and all men heaped together, nameth he
that nameth Rebellion."

The inconsistency of the Rebels, in getting insanely and murderously furious over the arming
of Negroes for the defense of the imperiled Union and the newly gained liberties of the Black
Race, when they had themselves already armed some of them and made them fight to uphold the
Slave-holders' Rebellion and the continued Enslavement of their race, is already plain enough. 

     It contained chiefly edge pieces of jars, whose ornamentation
     outside near the top was in lines, and nearly every one of these pieces
     also had the deep finger nail indentation. I spread these out
     on a board. Many had also the small circle ornamentation, made
     perhaps by the end of a hollow bone. This pottery I have always
     called Iroquois. At two sites near Plattsburg this type prevails.
     But otherwise whenever we have found this type we have looked on
it curiously.

                         It is not the type prevailing here.

     I barely hinted to you, my dearest father, my desire to augment the
     Continental forces from an untried source.  I wish I had any
     foundation to ask for an extraordinary addition to those favours
     which I have already received from you.  I would solicit you to
     cede me a number of your able bodied men slaves, instead of leaving
     me a fortune.

     I would bring about a two-fold good; first I would advance those
     who are unjustly deprived of the rights of mankind to a state which
     would be a proper gradation between abject slavery and perfect
     liberty, and besides I would reinforce the defenders of liberty
     with a number of gallant soldiers.  Men, who have the habit of
     subordination almost indelibly impressed on them, would have one
     very essential qualification of soldiers.  I am persuaded that if I
     could obtain authority for the purpose, I would have a corps of
     such men trained, uniformly clad, equip'd and ready in every
     respect to act at the opening of the next campaign.  The ridicule
     that may be thrown on the color, I despise, because I am sure of
     rendering essential service to my country.

     I am tired of the languor with which so sacred a war as this is
     carried on.  My circumstances prevent me from writing so long a
     letter as I expected and wish'd to have done on a subject which I
     have much at heart.  I entreat you to give a favorable answer to
                    Your most affectionate
                                   JOHN LAURENS.

     The Honble Henry Laurens Esq.
     President of Congress.

                         HEAD QUARTERS, 2nd Feb., 1778.

     My Dear Father:

     The more I reflect upon the difficulties and delays which are
     likely to attend the completing our Continental regiments, the more
     anxiously is my mind bent upon the scheme, which I lately
     communicated to you.  The obstacles to the execution of it had
     presented themselves to me, but by no means appeared
     insurmountable.  I was aware of having that monstrous popular
     prejudice, open-mouthed against me, of undertaking to transform
     beings almost irrational, into well disciplined soldiers, of being
     obliged to combat the arguments, and perhaps the intrigues, of
     interested persons.  But zeal for the public service, and an ardent
     desire to assert the rights of humanity, determined me to engage in
     this arduous business, with the sanction of your consent.  My own
     perseverance, aided by the countenance of a few virtuous men, will,
     I hope, enable me to accomplish it.

     You seem to think, my dear father, that men reconciled by long
     habit to the miseries of their condition, would prefer their
     ignominious bonds to the untasted sweets of liberty, especially
     when offer'd upon the terms which I propose.

     I confess, indeed, that the minds of this unhappy species must be
     debased by a servitude, from which they can hope for no relief but
     death, and that every motive to action but fear, must be nearly
     extinguished in them.  But do you think they are so perfectly
     moulded to their state as to be insensible that a better exists?
     Will the galling comparison between themselves and their masters
     leave them unenlightened in this respect?  Can their self love be
     so totally annihilated as not frequently to induce ardent wishes
     for a change?

     You will accuse me, perhaps, my dearest friend, of consulting my
     own feelings too much; but I am tempted to believe that this
     trampled people have so much human left in them, as to be capable
     of aspiring to the rights of men by noble exertions, if some friend
     to mankind would point the road, and give them a prospect of
     success.  If I am mistaken in this, I would avail myself, even of
     their weakness, and, conquering one fear by another, produce equal
     good to the public.  You will ask in this view, how do you consult
     the benefit of the slaves?  I answer, that like other men, they are
     creatures of habit.  Their cowardly ideas will be gradually
     effaced, and they will be modified anew.  Their being rescued from
     a state of perpetual humiliation, and being advanced as it were, in
     the scale of being, will compensate the dangers incident to their
     new state.

     The hope that will spring in each man's mind, respecting his own
     escape, will prevent his being miserable.  Those who fall in battle
     will not lose much; those who survive will obtain their reward.
     Habits of subordination, patience under fatigues, sufferings and
     privations of every kind, are soldierly qualifications, which these
     men possess in an eminent degree. 

     Charlevoix was persuaded by persons who he considered had sufficiently
     studied the subject that their seats before they left for the country
     of the Five Nations were about Montreal. The late Horatio Hale[1]
     put the more recently current and widely accepted form of this view
     as follows: "The clear and positive traditions of all the surviving
tribes, Hurons, Iroquois and Tuscaroras, point to the Lower St. Lawrence
as the earliest known abode of their stock.

       I say, altho' my plan is at once to give freedom to the
     negroes, and gain soldiers to the states; in case of concurrence, I
     should sacrifice the former interest, and therefore we change the
     women and children for able-bodied men.  The more of these I could
     obtain, the better; but forty might be a good foundation to begin
     upon.

     It is a pity that some such plan as I propose could not be more
     extensively executed by public authority.  A well-chosen body of
     5,000 black men, properly officer'd, to act as light troops, in
     addition to our present establishment, might give us decisive
     success in the next campaign.

     I have long deplored the wretched state of these men, and
     considered in their history, the bloody wars excited in Africa, to
     furnish America with slaves--the groans of despairing multitudes,
     toiling for the luxuries of merciless tyrants.

     I have had the pleasure of conversing with you, sometimes, upon the
     means of restoring them to their rights.  When can it be better
     done, than when their enfranchisement may be made conducive to the
     public good, and be modified, as not to overpower their weak minds?

     You ask, what is the general's opinion, upon this subject?  He is
     convinced, that the numerous tribes of blacks in the southern parts
     of the continent, offer a resource to us that should not be
     neglected.  With respect to my particular plan, he only objects to
     it, with the arguments of pity for a man who would be less rich
     than he might be.

     I am obliged, my dearest friend and father, to take my leave for
     the present; you will excuse whatever exceptionable may have
     escaped in the course of my letter, and accept the assurance of
     filial love, and respect of
                         Your
                              JOHN LAURENS]

If, however, it be objected that the arming of Negroes by the Rebels was exceptional and local,
and, that otherwise, the Rebels always used their volunteer or impressed Negro forces in work
upon fortifications and other unarmed Military Works, and never proposed using them in the
clash of arms, as armed soldiers against armed White men, the contrary is easily proven.

So also, while a Bill for the arming of Slaves was pending before the Rebel Congress early
in 1865, General Robert E. Lee wrote, February 18th, from the Headquarters of the Rebel Armies,
to Hon. E. Barksdale, of the Rebel House of Representatives, a communication, in which, after
acknowledging the receipt of a letter from him of February 12th, "with reference to the employment
of Negroes as soldiers," he said: "I think the Measure not only expedient but necessary * *
* in my opinion, the Negroes, under proper circumstances, will make efficient soldiers.  *
* *  I think those who are employed, should be freed.  It would be neither just nor wise, in
my opinion, to require them to remain as Slaves" --thus, not only approving the employment
of Black Slaves as soldiers, to fight White Union men, but justifying their Emancipation as
a reward for Military service.  And, a few days afterward, that Rebel Congress passed a Bill
authorizing Jefferson Davis to take into the Rebel Army as many Negro Slaves "as he may deem
expedient, for and during the War, to perform Military service in whatever capacity he may
direct," and at the same time authorizing General Lee to organize them as other "troops" are
organized.

     [This Negro soldier Bill, according to McPherson's Appendix, p.
     611-612, passed both Houses, and was in these words:

     A Bill to increase the Military Forces of the Confederate States.

     "SEC. 2.--That the General-in-Chief be authorized to organize the
     said Slaves into companies, battalions, regiments, and brigades,
     under such rules and regulations as the Secretary of War may
     prescribe, and to be commanded by such officers as the President
     may appoint.

     "SEC. 3.--That, while employed in the Service, the said troops
     shall receive the same rations, clothing, and compensation as are
     allowed to other troops in the same branch of the Service.

     "SEC. 4.--That if, under the previous sections of this Act, the
     President shall not be able to raise a sufficient number of troops
     to prosecute the War successfully and maintain the Sovereignty of
     the States, and the Independence of the Confederate States, then he
     is hereby authorized to call on each State, whenever he thinks it
     expedient, for her quota of 300,000 troops, in addition to those
     subject to Military service, under existing laws, or so many
     thereof as the President may deem necessary, to be raised from such
     classes of the population, irrespective of color, in each State, as
     the proper authorities thereof may determine: Provided, that not
     more than 25 per cent. of the male Slaves, between the ages of 18
     and 45, in any State, shall be called for under the provisions of
     this Act.

     "SEC. 5.--That nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize
     a change in the relation of said Slaves."]

