Joel writes it now down in all sincerity. His daughter Hena was indeed very beautiful as she
stood erect on the pyre, lighted by the mellow light of the moon and resplendent in her black
tunic, her blonde hair and her green chaplet, while her arms, whiter than ivory, embraced her
gold harp!

The bards ordered silence.

The virgin of the Isle of Sen sang in a voice as pure as her own soul:

"The daughter of Joel and Margarid comes to offer gladly her life as a sacrifice to Hesus!

"Oh, All-Powerful! From the stranger deliver the soil of our father!

"Gauls of Britanny, you have the lance and the sword!

"The daughter of Joel and Margarid has but her blood. She offers it voluntarily to Hesus!

"Oh, Almighty God! Render invincible the Gallic lance and sword! Oh, Hesus, take my blood,
it is yours ... save our sacred fatherland!"

The eldest of the female druids stood all this while on the pyre behind Hena with the sacred
knife in her hand. When Hena's chant was ended, the knife glistened in the air and struck the
virgin of the Isle of Sen.

Her mother and her brothers, all the members of her tribe and her father Joel saw Hena fall
upon her knees, cross her arms, turn her celestial face towards the moon, and cry with a still
sonorous voice:

"Hesus ... Hesus ... by the blood that flows.... Mercy for Gaul!"

"Gauls, by this blood that flows, victory to our arms!"

Thus the sacrifice of Hena was consummated amidst the religious admiration of the tribes. All
repeated the last words of the brave virgin:

"Hesus, mercy for Gaul!... Gauls, victory to our arms!"

Several young men, being fired with enthusiasm by the heroic example and beauty of Hena sought
to kill themselves upon her pyre in order to be re-born with her. The ewaghs held them back.
The flames soon enveloped the pyre and Hena vanished in their dazzling splendor. A few minutes
later there was nothing left of the virgin and her pyre but a heap of ashes. A high wind sat
in from the sea and dispersed the atoms. The virgin of the Isle of Sen, brilliant and pure
as the flame that consumed her, had vanished into space to be re-born and to await beyond for
the arrival of those whom she had loved.

The cymbals and harps resounded anew, and the chief of the bards struck up the chant:

"To arms, ye Gauls, to arms!

"The innocent blood of a virgin flowed for your sakes, and shall not yours flow for the fatherland!
To arms! The Romans are here. Strike, Gauls, strike at their heads! Strike hard! See the enemy's
blood flow like a stream! It rises up to your knees! Courage! Strike hard! Gauls, strike the
Romans! Still harder! Harder still! You see the enemy's blood extend like a lake! It rises
up to your chests! Courage! Strike still harder, Gauls! Strike the Romans! Strike harder still!
You will rest to-morrow.... To-morrow Gaul will be free! Let, to-day, from the Loire to the
ocean, but one cry resound--'To arms!'"

As if carried away by the breath of war, all the tribes dispersed, running to their arms. The
moon had gone down; dark night set in. But from all parts of the woods, from the bottoms of
the valleys, from the tops of the hills where the signal fires were burning, a thousand voices
echoed and re-echoed the chant of the bards:

"To arms! Strike, Gauls! Strike hard at the Romans! To arms!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The above truthful account of all that happened at our poor home on the birthday of my glorious
Hena, a day that also saw her heroic sacrifice--that account has been written by me, Joel,
the brenn of the tribe of Karnak, at the last moon of October of the first year that Julius
Cæsar came to invade Gaul. I wrote it upon the rolls of white skin that my glorious daughter
Hena gave me as a keepsake, and my eldest son, Guilhern has attached to them the keepsake he
received from her--the mystic gold sickle of the virgin druid priestess. Let the two ever remain
together.

After me, my eldest son Guilhern shall carefully preserve both the writing and the emblem,
and after Guilhern, the sons of his sons are charged to transmit them from generation to generation,
to the end that our family may for all time preserve green the memory of Hena, the virgin of
the Isle of Sen.

(The End.)

       *       *       *       *       *

THE INFANT'S SKULL; OR THE END OF THE WORLD.