Library of Little Masterpieces In Forty-four Volumes

AUTOBIOGRAPHY

Edited by GEORGE ILES

VOLUME XXXVI

PREFACE

A good play gives us in miniature a cross-section of life, heightened by plot and characterisation,
by witty and compact dialogue.  Of course we should honour first the playwright, who has given
form to each well knit act and telling scene.  But that worthy man, perhaps at this moment
sipping his coffee at the Authors' Club, gave his drama its form only; its substance is created
by the men and women who, with sympathy, intelligence and grace, embody with convincing power
the hero and heroine, assassin and accomplice, lover and jilt.  For the success of many a play
their writers would be quick to acknowledge a further and initial debt, both in suggestion
and criticism, to the artists who know from experience on the boards that deeds should he done,
not talked about, that action is cardinal, with no other words than naturally spring from action.
Players, too, not seldom remind authors that every incident should not only be interesting
in itself, but take the play a stride forward through the entanglement and unravelling of its
plot.  It is altogether probable that the heights to which Shakespeare rose as a dramatist
were due in a measure to his knowledge of how a comedy, or a tragedy, appears behind as well
as in front of the footlights, all in an atmosphere quite other than that surrounding a poet
at his desk.

This little volume begins with part of the life story of Joseph Jefferson, chief of American
comedians.  Then we are privileged to read a few personal letters from Edwin Booth, the acknowledged
king of the tragic stage.  He is followed by the queen in the same dramatic realm, Charlotte
Cushman.  Next are two chapters by the first emotional actress of her day in America, Clara
Morris.  When she bows her adieu, Sir Henry Irving comes upon the platform instead of the stage,
and in the course of his thoughtful discourse makes it plain how he won renown both as an actor
and a manager.  He is followed by his son, Mr. Henry Brodribb Irving, clearly an heir to his
father's talents in art and in observation.  Miss Ellen Terry, long Sir Henry Irving's leading
lady, now tells us how she came to join his company, and what she thinks of Sir Henry Irving
in his principal roles.  The succeeding word comes from Richard Mansfield, whose untimely death
is mourned by every lover of the drama.  The next pages are from the hand of Tommaso Salvini,
admittedly the greatest Othello and Samson that ever trod the boards.  A few words, in closing,
are from Adelaide Ristori, whose Medea, Myrrha and Phaedra are among the great traditions of
the modern stage.  From first to last this little book sheds light on the severe toil demanded
for excellence on the stage, and reveals that for the highest success of a drama, author and
artist must work hand in hand.

Contents

JOSEPH JEFFERSON How I came to play "Rip Van Winkle." The art of acting. Preparation and inspiration.
Should an actor "feel" his part? Learning to act. Playwrights and actors. The Jefferson face.

EDWIN BOOTH To his daughter when a little girl. To his daughter on her studies and on ease
of manner. On thoroughness of education. On Jefferson's autobiography. On the actor's life.
Lawrence Barrett's death. His theatre in New York in prospect. As to his brother, John Wilkes
Booth, the slayer of Lincoln. Advice to a young actor.

CHARLOTTE CUSHMAN As a child a mimic and singer. First visits to the theatre. Plays Lady Macbeth,
her first part. To a young actress. To a young mother. Early griefs. Art her only spouse. Farewell
to New York.

CLARA MORRIS
Recollections of John Wilkes Booth.
The murder of President Lincoln.
"When, in a hunt for a leading man for Mr. Daly,
     I first saw Coghlan and Irving."

SIR HENRY IRVING The stage as an instructor. Inspiration in acting. Acting as an art: how Irving
began. Feeling as a reality or a semblance. Gesture: listening as an art: team-play on the stage.

HENRY BRODRIBB IRVING The calling of the actor. Requirements for the stage. Temptations of
the stage. Acting is a great art. Relations to "society." The final school is the audience.
Failure and success.

ELLEN TERRY Hamlet--Irving's greatest part. The entrance scene in "Hamlet." The scene with
the players. Irving engages me. Irving's egotism. Irving's simplicity of character.

RICHARD MANSFIELD Man and the Actor. All men are actors. Napoleon as an actor. The gift for
acting is rare. The creation of a character. Copy life! Self criticism. Discipline imperative.
Dramatic vicissitudes. A national theatre. Training the actor.

TOMMASO SALVINI First appearance. A father's advice. How Salvini studied his art. Faults in
acting. The desire to excel in everything. A model for Othello. First visit to the United States.
In Cuba. Appearance in London. Impressions of Irving's Hamlet. The decline of tragedy. Tragedy
in two languages. American critical taste. Impressions of Edwin Booth.

ADELAIDE RISTORI First appearances. Salvini and Rossi. Appears as Lady Macbeth. As manager.
First visit to America. Begins to play in English.

JOSEPH JEFFERSON

[William Winter, the dramatic critic of the New York Tribune, in 1894 wrote the "Life and Art
of Joseph Jefferson," published by the Macmillan Company, London and New York.  He gives an
account of Jefferson's lineage, and then says:

"In Joseph Jefferson, fourth of the line, famous as Rip Van Winkle, and destined to be long
remembered by that name in dramatic history, there is an obvious union of the salient qualities
of his ancestors. The rustic luxuriance, manly vigour, careless and adventurous disposition
of the first Jefferson; the refined intellect, delicate sensibility, dry humour, and gentle
tenderness of the second; and the amiable, philosophic, and drifting temperament of the third,
reappear in this descendant.  But more than any of his ancestors, and more than most of his
contemporaries, the present Jefferson is an originator in the art of acting....  Joseph Jefferson
is as distinct as Lamb among essayists, or George Darley among lyrical poets.  No actor of
the past prefigured him, ... and no name, in the teeming annals of modern art, has shone with
a more tranquil lustre, or can be more confidently committed to the esteem of posterity."

The Autobiography of Joseph Jefferson, copyright, 1889, 1890, by the Century Company, New York,
was published 1891.  From its chapters, by permission, have been taken these pages.--ED.]

HOW I CAME TO PLAY RIP VAN WINKLE

The hope of entering the race for dramatic fame as an individual and single attraction never
came into my head until, in 1858, I acted Asa Trenchard in "Our American Cousin"; but as the
curtain descended the first night on that remarkably successful play, visions of large type,
foreign countries, and increased remuneration floated before me, and I resolved to be a star
if I could.  A resolution to this effect is easily made; its accomplishment is quite another
matter.

Art has always been my sweetheart, and I have loved her for herself alone.  I had fancied that
our affection was mutual, so that when I failed as a star, which I certainly did, I thought
she had jilted me. Not so.  I wronged her.  She only reminded me that I had taken too great
a liberty, and that if I expected to win her I must press my suit with more patience.  Checked,
but undaunted in the resolve, my mind dwelt upon my vision, and I still indulged in day-dreams
of the future.

During these delightful reveries it came up before me that in acting Asa Trenchard I had, for
the first time in my life on the stage, spoken a pathetic speech; and though I did not look
at the audience during the time I was acting--for that is dreadful--I felt that they both laughed
and cried.  I had before this often made my audience smile, but never until now had I moved
them to tears.  This to me novel accomplishment was delightful, and in casting about for a
new character my mind was ever dwelling on reproducing an effect where humour would be so closely
allied to pathos that smiles and tears should mingle with each other.  Where could I get one?
There had been many written, and as I looked back into the dramatic history of the past a long
line of lovely ghosts loomed up before me, passing as in a procession: Job Thornberry, Bob
Tyke, Frank Ostland, Zekiel Homespun, and a host of departed heroes "with martial stalk went
by my watch." Charming fellows all, but not for me, I felt I could not do them justice.  Besides,
they were too human.  I was looking for a myth--something intangible and impossible.  But he
would not come. Time went on, and still with no result,

During the summer of 1859 I arranged to board with my family at a queer old Dutch farmhouse
in Paradise Valley, at the foot of Pocono Mountain, in Pennsylvania.  A ridge of hills covered
with tall hemlocks surrounds the vale, and numerous trout-streams wind through the meadows
and tumble over the rocks.  Stray farms are scattered through the valley, and the few old Dutchmen
and their families who till the soil were born upon it; there and only there they have ever
lived.  The valley harmonised with me and our resources.  The scene was wild, the air was fresh,
and the board was cheap.  What could the light heart and purse of a poor actor ask for more
than this?

On one of those long rainy days that always render the country so dull I had climbed to the
loft of the barn, and lying upon the hay was reading that delightful book "The Life and Letters
of Washington Irving."  I had gotten well into the volume, and was much interested in it, when
to my surprise I came upon a passage which said that he had seen me at Laura Keene's theater
as Goldfinch in Holcroft's comedy of "The Road to Ruin," and that I reminded him of my father
"in look, gesture, size, and make."  Till then I was not aware that he had ever seen me.  I
was comparatively obscure, and to find myself remembered and written of by such a man gave
me a thrill of pleasure I can never forget.  I put down the book, and lay there thinking how
proud I was, and ought to be, at the revelation of this compliment.  What an incentive to a
youngster like me to go on.

And so I thought to myself, "Washington Irving, the author of 'The Sketch-Book,' in which is
the quaint story of Rip Van Winkle."  Rip Van Winkle!  There was to me magic in the sound of
the name as I repeated it.  Why, was not this the very character I wanted?  An Ameri can story
by an American author was surely just the theme suited to an American actor.

In ten minutes I had gone to the house and returned to the barn with "The Sketch-Book."  I
had not read the story since I was a boy.  I was disappointed with it; not as a story, of course,
but the tale was purely a narrative.  The theme was interesting, but not dramatic.  The silver
Hudson stretches out before you as you read, the quaint red roofs and queer gables of the old
Dutch cottages stand out against the mist upon the mountains; but all this is descriptive.
The character of Rip does not speak ten lines.  What could be done dramatically with so simple
a sketch?  How could it he turned into an effective play?

Three or four bad dramatisations of the story had already been acted, but without marked success,
Yates of London had given one in which the hero dies, one had been acted by my father, one
by Hackett, and another by Burke.  Some of these versions I had remembered when I was a boy,
and I should say that Burke's play and performance were the best, but nothing that I remembered
gave me the slightest encouragement that I could get a good play out of any of the existing
materials.  Still I was so bent upon acting the part that I started for the city, and in less
than a week, by industriously ransacking the theatrical wardrobe establishments for old leather
and mildewed cloth and by personally superintending the making of the wigs, each article of
my costume was completed; and all this, too, before I had written a line of the play or studied
a word of the part.

This is working in an opposite direction from all the conventional methods in the study and
elaboration of a dramatic character, and certainly not following the course I would advise
any one to pursue. I merely mention the out-of-the-way, upside-down manner of going to work
as an illustration of the impatience and enthusiasm with which I entered upon the task, I can
only account for my getting the dress ready before I studied the part to the vain desire I
had of witnessing myself in the glass, decked out and equipped as the hero of the Catskills.

I got together the three old printed versions of the drama and the story itself.  The plays
were all in two acts.  I thought it would be an improvement in the drama to arrange it in three,
making the scene with the spectre crew an act by itself.  This would separate the poetical
from the domestic side of the story.  But by far the most important alteration was in the interview
with the spirits.  In the old versions they spoke and sang.  I remembered that the effect of
this ghostly dialogue was dreadfully human, so I arranged that no voice but Rip's should be
heard.  This is the only act on the stage in which but one person speaks while all the others
merely gesticulate, and I was quite sure that the silence of the crew would give a lonely and
desolate character to the scene and add its to supernatural weirdness.  By this means, too,
a strong contrast with the single voice of Rip was obtained by the deathlike stillness of the
"demons" as they glided about the stage in solemn silence.  It required some thought to hit
upon just the best questions that could be answered by a nod and shake of the head, and to
arrange that at times even Rip should propound a query to himself and answer it; but I had
availed myself of so much of the old material that in a few days after I had begun my work
it was finished.

In the seclusion of the barn I studied and rehearsed the part, and by the end of summer I was
prepared to transplant it from the rustic realms of an old farmhouse to a cosmopolitan audience
in the city of Washington, where I opened at Carusi's Hall under the management of John T.
Raymond.  I had gone over the play so thoroughly that each situation was fairly engraved on
my mind.  The rehearsals were therefore not tedious to the actors; no one was delayed that
I might consider how he or she should be disposed in the scene.  I had by repeated experiments
so saturated myself with the action of the play that a few days seemed to perfect the rehearsals.
I acted on these occasions with all the point and feeling that I could muster.  This answered
the double purpose of giving me freedom and of observing the effect of what I was doing on
the actors.  They seemed to be watching me closely, and I could tell by little nods of approval
where and when the points hit.

I became each day more and more interested in the work; there was in the subject and the part
much scope for novel and fanciful treatment. If the sleep of twenty years was merely incongruous,
there would be room for argument pro and con; but as it is an impossibility, I felt that the
audience would accept it at once, not because it was an impossibility, but from a desire to
know in what condition a man's mind would be if such an event could happen.  Would he be thus
changed?  His identity being denied both by strangers, friends, and family, would he at last
almost accept the verdict and exclaim, "Then I am dead, and that is a fact?"  This was the
strange and original attitude of the character that attracted me.

In acting such a part what to do was simple enough, but what not to do was the important and
difficult point to determine.  As the earlier scenes of the play were of a natural and domestic
character, I had only to draw upon my experience for their effect, or employ such conventional
methods as myself and others had used before in characters of that ilk.  But from the moment
Rip meets the spirits of Hendrik Hudson and his crew I felt that all colloquial dialogue and
commonplace pantomime should cease.  It is at this point in the story that the supernatural
element begins, and henceforth the character must be raised from the domestic plane and lifted
into the realms of the ideal.

To be brief, the play was acted with a result that was to me both satisfactory and disappointing.
I was quite sure that the character was what I had been seeking, and I was equally satisfied
that the play was not.  The action had neither the body nor the strength to carry the hero;
the spiritual quality was there, but the human interest was wanting.  The final alterations
and additions were made five years later by Dion Boucicault.

"Rip Van Winkle" was not a sudden success.  It did not burst upon the public like a torrent.
Its flow was gradual, and its source sprang from the Hartz Mountains, an old German legend,
called "Carl the Shepherd," being the name of the original story.  The genius of Washington
Irving transplanted the tale to our own Catskills.  The grace with which he paints the scene,
and, still more, the quaintness of the story, placed it far above the original.  Yates, Hackett,
and Burke had separate dramas written upon this scene and acted the hero, leaving their traditions
one to the other.  I now came forth, and saying, "Give me leave," set to work, using some of
the before-mentioned tradition, mark you.  Added to this, Dion Boucicault brought his dramatic
skill to bear, and by important additions made a better play and a more interesting character
of the hero than had as yet been reached.  This adaptation, in my turn, I interpreted and enlarged
upon.  It is thus evident that while I may have done much to render the character and the play
popular, it has not been the work of one mind, but both as its to narrative and its dramatic
form has been often moulded, and by many skilful hands.  So it would seem that those dramatic
successes that "come like shadows, so depart," and those that are lasting, have ability for
their foundation and industry for their superstructure.  I speak now of the former and the
present condition of the drama.  What the future may bring forth it is difficult to determine.
The histrionic kaleidoscope revolves more rapidly than of yore and the fantastic shapes that
it exhibits are brilliant and confusing; but under all circumstances I should be loath to believe
that any conditions will render the appearance of frivolous novices more potent than the earnest
design of legitimate professors.

THE ART OF ACTING

Acting has been so much a part of my life that my autobiography could scarcely be written without
jotting down my reflections upon it, and I merely make this little preparatory explanation
to apologise for any dogmatic tone that they may possess, and to say that I present them merely
as a seeker after truth in the domain of art.

In admitting the analogy that undoubtedly exists between the arts of painting, poetry, music,
and acting, it should be remembered that the first three are opposed to the last, in at least
the one quality of permanence.  The picture, oratorio, or book must bear the test of calculating
criticism, whereas the work of an actor is fleeting: it not only dies with him, but, through
his different moods, may vary from night to night.  If the performance be indifferent it is
no consolation for the audience to hear that the player acted well last night, or to be told
that he will act better to-morrow night; it is this night that the public has to deal with,
and the impression the actor has made, good or bad, remains as such upon the mind of that particular
audience.

The author, painter, or musician, if he be dissatisfied with his work, may alter and perfect
it before giving it publicity, but an actor cannot rub out; he ought, therefore, in justice
to his audience, to be sure of what he is going to place before it.  Should a picture in an
art gallery be carelessly painted we can pass on to another, or if a book fails to please us
we can put it down.  An escape from this kind of dulness is easily made, but in a theatre the
auditor is imprisoned. If the acting be indifferent, he must endure it, at least for a time.
He cannot withdraw without making himself conspicuous; so he remains, hoping that there may
be some improvement as the play proceeds, or perhaps from consideration for the company he
is in.  It is this helpless condition that renders careless acting so offensive.

PREPARATION AND INSPIRATION

I have seen impulsive actors who were so confident of their power that they left all to chance.
This is a dangerous course, especially when acting a new character.  I will admit that there
are many instances where great effects have been produced that were entirely spontaneous, and
were as much a surprise to the actors who made them as they were to the audience who witnessed
them; but just as individuals who have exuberant spirits are at times dreadfully depressed,
so when an impulsive actor fails to receive his inspiration he is dull indeed, and is the more
disappointing because of his former brilliant achievements.

In the stage management of a play, or in the acting of a part, nothing should be left to chance,
and for the reason that spontaneity, inspiration, or whatever the strange and delightful quality
may be called, is not to be commanded, or we should give it some other name. It is, therefore,
better that a clear and unmistakable outline of a character should be drawn before an actor
undertakes a new part.  If he has a well-ordered and an artistic mind it is likely that he
will give at least a symmetrical and effective performance; but should he make no definite
arrangement, and depend upon our ghostly friends Spontaneity and Inspiration to pay him a visit,
and should they decline to call, the actor will be in a maze and his audience in a muddle.

Besides, why not prepare to receive our mysterious friends whether they come or not?  If they
fail on such an invitation, we can at least entertain our other guests without them, and if
they do appear, our preconceived arrangements will give them a better welcome and put them
more at ease.

Acting under these purely artificial conditions will necessarily be cold, but the care with
which the part is given will at least render it inoffensive; they are, therefore, primary considerations,
and not to be despised.  The exhibition, however, of artistic care does not alone constitute
great acting.  The inspired warmth of passion in tragedy and the sudden glow of humour in comedy
cover the artificial framework with an impenetrable veil: this is the very climax of great
art, for which there seems to be no other name but genius.  It is then, and then only, that
an audience feels that it is in the presence of a reality rather than a fiction.  To an audience
an ounce of genius has more weight than a ton of talent; for though it respects the latter,
it reverences the former.  But the creative power, divine as it may be, should in common gratitude
pay due regard to the reflective; for Art is the handmaid of Genius, and only asks the modest
wages of respectful consideration in payment for her valuable services.  A splendid torrent
of genius ought never to be checked, but it should be wisely guided into the deep channel of
the stream, from whose surface it will then reflect Nature without a ripple.  Genius dyes the
hues that resemble those of the rainbow; Art fixes the colours that they may stand.  In the
race for fame purely artificial actors cannot hope to win against those whose genius is guided
by their art; and, on the other hand, Intuition must not complain if, unbridled or with too
loose a rein, it stumbles on the course, and so allows a well-ridden hack to distance it.

SHOULD AN ACTOR "FEEL" HIS PART

Much has been written upon the question as to whether an actor ought to feel the character
he acts, or be dead to any sensations in this direction.  Excellent artists differ in their
opinions on this important point.  In discussing it I must refer to some words I wrote in one
of my early chapters:

"The methods by which actors arrive at great effects vary according to their own natures; this
renders the teaching of the art by any strictly defined lines a difficult matter."

There has lately been a discussion on the subject, in which many have taken part, and one quite
notable debate between two distinguished actors, one of the English and the other of the French
stage [Henry Irving and Mons. Coquelin].  These gentlemen, though they differ entirely in their
ideas, are, nevertheless, equally right.  The method of one, I have no doubt, is the best he
could possibly devise for himself; and the same may be said of the rules of the other as applied
to himself.  But they must work with their own tools; if they had to adopt each other's they
would be as much confused as if compelled to exchange languages.  One believes that he must
feel the character he plays, even to the shedding of real tears, while the other prefers never
to lose himself for an instant, and there is no doubt that they both act with more effect by
adhering to their own dogmas.

For myself, I know that I act best when the heart is warm and the head is cool.  In observing
the works of great painters I find that they have no conventionalities except their own; hence
they are masters, and each is at the head of his own school.  They are original, and could
not imitate even if they would.

So with acting, no master-hand can prescribe rules for the head of another school.  If, then,
I appear bold in putting forth my suggestions, I desire it to be clearly understood that I
do not present them to original or experienced artists who have formed their school, but to
the student who may have a temperament akin to my own, and who could, therefore, blend my methods
with his preconceived ideas.

Many instructors in the dramatic art fall into the error of teaching too much.  The pupil should
first be allowed to exhibit his quality, and so teach the teacher what to teach.  This course
would answer the double purpose of first revealing how much the pupil is capable of learning,
and, what is still more important, of permitting him to display his powers untrammeled.  Whereas,
if the master begins by pounding his dogmas into the student, the latter becomes environed
by a foreign influence which, if repugnant to his nature, may smother his ability.

It is necessary to be cautious in studying elocution and gesticulation, lest they become our
masters instead of our servants. These necessary but dangerous ingredients must be administered
and taken in homeopathic doses, or the patient may die by being over-stimulated.  But, even
at the risk of being artificial, it is better to have studied these arbitrary rules than to
enter a profession with no knowledge whatever of its mechanism.  Dramatic instinct is so implanted
in humanity that it sometimes misleads us, fostering the idea that because we have the natural
talent within we are equally endowed with the power of bringing it out.  This is the common
error, the rock on which the histrionic aspirant is oftenest wrecked.  Very few actors succeed
who crawl into the service through the "cabin windows"; and if they do it is a lifelong regret
with them that they did not exert their courage and sail at first "before the mast."

Many of the shining lights who now occupy the highest positions on the stage, and whom the
public voice delights to praise, have often appeared in the dreaded character of omnes, marched
in processions, sung out of tune in choruses, and shouted themselves hoarse for Brutus and
Mark Antony.

If necessity is the mother of invention, she is the foster-mother of art, for the greatest
actors that ever lived have drawn their early nourishment from her breast.  We learn our profession
by the mortifications we are compelled to go through in order to get a living.

The sons and daughters of wealthy parents who have money at their command, and can settle their
weekly expenses without the assistance of the box office, indignantly refuse to lower themselves
by assuming some subordinate character for which they are cast, and march home because their
fathers and mothers will take care of them.  Well, they had better stay there!

But whether you are rich or poor, if you would be an actor begin at the beginning.  This is
the old conventional advice, and is as good now in its old age as it was in its youth.  All
actors will agree in this, and as Puff says, in the Critic, "When they do agree on the stage
the unanimity is wonderful."  Enroll yourself as a "super" in some first-class theatre, where
there is a stock Company and likely to be a periodical change of programme, so that even in
your low degree the practice will be varied.  After having posed a month as an innocent English
rustic, you may, in the next play, have an opportunity of being a noble Roman.  Do the little
you have to do as well as you can; if you are in earnest the stage-manager will soon notice
it and your advancement will begin at once.  You have now made the plunge, the ice is broken;
there is no more degradation for you; every step you take is forward.

A great American statesman said, "There is always plenty of room at the top."  So there is,
Mr. Webster, after you get there.  But we must climb, and climb slowly too, so that we can
look back without any unpleasant sensations; for if we are cast suddenly upon the giddy height
our heads will swim and down we shall go.  Look also at the difficulties that will beset you
by beginning "at the top."  In the first place, no manager in his senses will permit it; and
if he did, your failure--which is almost inevitable--not only will mortify you, but your future
course for some time to come will be on the downward path.  Then, in disgust, sore and disheartened,
you will retire from the profession which perhaps your talents might have ornamented if they
had been properly developed.

JOSEPH JEFFERSON IN MONTREAL

PLAYWRIGHTS AND ACTORS

In May, 1886, Mr. Jefferson paid a visit to Montreal, and greatly enjoyed a drive through Mount
Royal Park and to Sault au Recollet. That week he appeared in "Rip Van Winkle" and "The Cricket
on the Hearth."  Speaking of Boucicault, who dramatised Rip, he said to the editor of this
volume: "Yes, he is a consummate retoucher of other men's work.  His experience on the stage
tells him just what points to expand and emphasise with most effect.  No author seated at his
desk all his life, without theatrical training, could ever have rewritten Rip with such success.
Among modern plays I consider 'The Scrap of Paper' by Victorien Sardou to be the most ingenious
of all.  If Sardou only had heart he would be one of the greatest dramatists that ever lived.
Had he written 'The Cricket on the Hearth,' Caleb Plummer instead of being patient, resigned
and lovable would have been filled with the vengeful ire of a revolutionist."

With regard to Shakespeare Mr. Jefferson said:

"'Macbeth' is his greatest play, the deepest in meaning, the best knit from the first scene
to the last.  While 'Othello' centres on jealousy, 'Lear' on madness, 'Romeo and Juliet' on
love, 'Macbeth' turns on fate, on the supernal influences which compel a man with good in him
to a murderous course.  The weird witches who surround the bubbling caldron are Fates."

Recalling his early days on the boards he remarked:  "Then a young actor had to play a varied
round of parts in a single season. To-night it would be farce, to-morrow tragedy, the next
night some such melodrama as 'Ten Nights in a Bar-room.'  This not only taught an actor his
business, it gave him a chance to find out where his strength lay, whether as Dundreary, Hamlet,
or Zeke Homespun."

THE JEFFERSON FACE

One of Mr. Jefferson's company that season was his son, Mr. Thomas Jefferson.  When I spoke
of his remarkable resemblance to the portraits of President Jefferson, I was told:

"If physiognomy counts for anything, all the Jeffersons have sprung from one stock; we look
alike wherever you find us.  The next time you are in Richmond, Virginia, I wish you to notice
the statue of Thomas Jefferson, one of the group surrounding George Washington beside the Capitol.
That statue might serve as a likeness of my father.  When his father was once playing in Washington,
President Jefferson, who warmly admired his talents, sent for him and received him most hospitably.
When they compared genealogies they could come no nearer than that both families had come from
the same county in England."

Montreal has several highly meritorious art collections: these, of Course, were open to Mr.
Jefferson.  He was particularly pleased with the canvases of Corot in the mansion of Sir George
Drummond.  That afternoon another collector showed him his gallery and pointed to a portrait
of his son, for the three years past a student of art in Paris.  Mr. Jefferson asked: "How
can you bear to be parted from him so long?"

He could be witty as well as kind in his remarks.  A kinswoman in his company grumbled that
the Montreal Herald had called her nose a poem.

"No, my dear," was his comment, "it's not a poem, but a stanza, something shorter."

On Dominion Square I showed him the site occupied by the Ice Palace during the recent Winter
Carnival; on the right stood a Methodist Church, on the left the Roman Catholic Cathedral.
He remarked simply: "So there's a coolness between them!"

EDWIN BOOTH

[Mr. William Winter's "Life and Art of Edwin Booth" is indispensable to a student of the American
stage.  Here are two paragraphs chosen from many as illuminating:

"The salient attributes of Booth's art were imagination, insight, grace, intense emotion, and
melancholy refinement.  In Hamlet, Richelieu, Othello, Iago, Lear, Bertuccio, and Lucius Brutus
they were conspicuously manifest.  But the controlling attribute,--that which imparted individual
character, colour and fascination to his acting,--was the thoughtful introspective habit of
a stately mind, abstracted from passion and suffused with mournful dreaminess of temperament.
The moment that charm began to work, his victory was complete.  It was that which made him
the true image of Shakespeare's thought, in the glittering halls of Elsinore, on its midnight
battlements, and in its lonely, wind-beaten place of graves.

"Under the discipline of sorrow, and through years that bring the philosophic mind, Booth drifted
further and further away from things dark and terrible, whether in the possibilities of human
life or in the world of imagination.  That is the direction of true growth.  In all characters
that evoked his essential spirit--in characters which rested on spiritualised intellect, or
on sensibility to fragile loveliness, the joy that is unattainable, the glory that fades, and
the beauty that perishes--he was peerless.  Hamlet, Richelieu, Faust, Manfred, Jacques, Esmond,
Sydney Carton, and Sir Edward Mortimer are all, in different ways, suggestive of the personality
that Booth was fitted to illustrate.  It is the loftiest type that human nature affords, because
it is the embodied supremacy of the soul, and because therein it denotes the only possible
escape from the cares and vanities of a transitory world."

The letters which follow are from "Edwin Booth: Recollections by his daughter, Edwina Booth
Grossman, and Letters to Her and to His Friends."  Copyright, 1894, Century Company, New York.--ED.]

TO HIS DAUGHTER

BOOTH'S THEATER, NEW YORK, November 15, 1871.

MY OWN DEAR DAUGHTER:

I arrived here last night, and found your pretty gift awaiting me. Your letter pleased me very,
very much in every respect, and your little souvenir gave me far more delight than if it were
of real gold. When you are older you will understand how precious little things, seemingly
of no value in themselves, can be loved and prized above all price when they convey the love
and thoughtfulness of a good heart. This little token of your desire to please me, my darling,
is therefore very dear to me, and I will cherish it as long as I live. If God grants me so
many years, I will show it you when you are a woman, and then you will appreciate my preference
for so little a thing, made by you, to anything money might have bought.  God bless you, my
darling!  ...

God bless you again and again!  Your loving father.

TO HIS DAUGHTER

CHICAGO, March  2, 1873.

MY DEAR BIG DAUGHTER:

Your last letter was very jolly, and made me almost happy.  Pip (the dog) is yelping to write
to you, and so is your little brother, St. Valentine, the bird; but I greatly fear they will
have to wait another week, for, you know, I have to hold the pen for them, and I have written
so many letters, and to-day my hand is tired.

Don't you think it jollier to receive silly letters sometimes than to get a repetition of sermons
on good behaviour?  It is because I desire to encourage in you a vein of pleasantry, which
is most desirable in one's correspondence, as well as in conversation, that I put aside the
stern old father, and play papa now and then.

When I was learning to act tragedy, I had frequently to perform comic parts, in order to acquire
a certain ease of manner that my serious parts might not appear too stilted; so you must endeavour
in your letters, in your conversation, and your general deportment, to be easy and natural,
graceful and dignified.  But remember that dignity does not consist of over-becoming pride
and haughtiness; self-respect, politeness and gentleness in all things and to all persons will
give you sufficient dignity.  Well, I declare, I've dropped into a sermon, after all, haven't
I?  I'm afraid I'11 have to let Pip and the bird have a chance, or else I'11 go on preaching
till the end of my letter. You must tell me what you are reading now, and how you progress
in your studies, and how good you are trying to be.  Of that I have no fear.  I doubt if I
shall get to Philadelphia in June; so do not expect me until school breaks up and then--"hey
for Cos Cob" and the fish-poles!  When I was last there the snow was high above our knees;
but still I liked it better than the city ....

Love and kisses from your grim old father.

TO HIS DAUGHTER

April  23, 1876.

MY DARLING DAUGHTER,

...  When I was at Eton (I don't refer now to the dinner-table) my Greek and Latin were of
such a superior quality that had it not been for an unforeseen accident I would have carried
off all the honours. The accident lay in this:  I never went to school there except in dreams.
How often, ah! how often have I imagined the delights of a collegiate education!  What a world
of never-ending interest lies open to the master of languages!

The best translations cannot convey to us the strength and exquisite delicacy of thought in
its native garb, and he to whom such books are shut flounders about in outer darkness.  I have
suffered so much from the lack of that which my father could easily have given me in youth,
and which he himself possessed, that I am all the more anxious you shall escape my punishment
in that respect; that you may not, like me, dream of those advantages which others enjoy through
any lack of opportunity or neglect of mine.  Therefore, learn to love your Latin, your French,
and your English grammar; standing firmly and securely on them, you have a solid foothold in
the field of literature....

Think how interesting it will be hereafter to refer to your journal, and see the rapid development,
not only of your mind, but of your moral growth; only do not fail to record all your shortcomings;
they will not stand as reproaches, but as mere snags in the tortuous river of your life, to
be avoided in succeeding trips farther down the stream.  They beset us all along the route,
from the cradle to the grave, and if we can only see them we can avoid many rough bumps.

God bless my darling!

PAPA.

TO HIS DAUGHTER

CHICAGO, October 9, 1886

...  I am glad to know that baby has begun to crawl; don't put her on her feet too soon; consider
her legs a la bow....  I closed my first week here with two enormous houses.  A hard week's
work has greatly tired me....  Jefferson called and left with me the manuscript of his reminiscences,
which he has been writing.  So far as he has written it, it is intensely interesting and amusing,
and well written in a free and chatty style; it will be the best autobiography of any actor
yet published if he continues it in its present form.  I sent you some book notices from Lawrence
Hutton's clippings for me....  In the article I send to-day you will see that I am gently touched
up on the point of the "old school"; my reference was not to the old style of acting, but the
old stock theatre as a school--where a beginner had the advantage of a great variety of experience
in farces, as well as tragedies and comedies, and a frequent change of programme.  There is
no "school" now; there is a more natural style of acting, perhaps, but the novice can learn
nothing from long runs of a single play ...

TO HIS DAUGHTER

NEW YORK, January 5, 1888,

...  As for God's reward for what I have done, I can hardly appreciate it; it is more like
punishment for misdeeds (of which I've done many) than grace for good ones (if I've done any).
Homelessness is the actor's fate; physical incapacity to attain what is most required and desired
by such a spirit as I am a slave to.  If there be rewards, I am certainly well paid, but hard
schooling in life's thankless lessons has made we somewhat of a philosopher, and I've learned
to take the buffets and rewards of fortune with equal thanks, and in suffering all to suffer--I
won't say nothing, but comparatively little.  Dick Stoddard wrote a poem called "The King's
Bell," which fits my case exactly (you may have read it) .  He dedicated it to Lorimer Graham,
who never knew an unhappy day in his brief life, instead of to me, who never knew a really
happy one.  You mustn't suppose from this that I'm ill in mind or body: on the contrary, I
am well enough in both; nor am I a pessimist.  I merely wanted you to know that the sugar of
my life is bitter-sweet; perhaps not more so than every man's whose experience has been above
and below the surface....  Business has continued large, and increases a little every night;
the play will run two weeks longer.  Sunday, at four o'clock, I start for Baltimore, arriving
there at ten o'clock....

To-morrow, a meeting of actors, managers, and artists at breakfast, to discuss and organise,
if possible, a theatrical club[1] like the Garrick of London....

TO HIS DAUGHTER

DETROIT, April 04, 1890.

...  Yes; it is indeed most gratifying to feel that age has not rendered my work stale and
tiresome, as is usually the case with actors (especially tragedians) at my time.  Your dear
mother's fear was that I would culminate too early, as I seemed then to be advancing so rapidly.
Somehow I can't rid myself of the belief that both she and my father helped me.  But as for
the compensation?  Nothing of fame or fortune can compensate for the spiritual suffering that
one possessing such qualities has to endure.  To pass life in a sort of dream, where "nothing
is but what is not"--a loneliness in the very midst of a constant crowd, as it were--is not
a desirable condition of existence, especially when the body also has to share the "penalty
of greatness," as it is termed.  Bosh!  I'd sooner be an obscure farmer, a hayseed from Wayback,
or a cabinetmaker, as my father advised, than the most distinguished man on earth.  But Nature
cast me for the part she found me best fitted for, and I have had to play it, and must play
it till the curtain falls.  But you must not think me sad about it. No; I am used to it, and
am contented.

I continue well, and act with a vigour which sometimes surprises myself, and all the company
notice it, and comment upon it.  I'm glad the babes had a jolly birthday.  Bless 'em!  Love
for all.

PAPA.

TO HIS DAUGHTER

THE PLAYERS, NEW YORK, March 22, 1891.

DEAR DAUGHTER:

I'm in no mood for letter-writing to-day.  The shock (of Mr. Lawrence Barrett's death) so sudden
and so distressing, and the gloomy, depressing weather, entirely unfit me for the least exertion--even
to think.  Hosts of friends, all eager to assist poor Mrs. Barrett, seem helpless in confusion,
and all the details of the sad business seem to be huddled on her ...

General Sherman's son, "Father Tom," as he is affectionately called by all the family and the
friends of the dear old General, will attend. He was summoned from Europe recently to his father's
deathbed, and he happens to be in time to perform services for his father's friend, poor Lawrence.
After the services to-morrow, the remains and a few friends will go direct to Cohasset for
the burial--Tuesday--where Barrett had only two weeks ago placed his mother, removed from her
New York grave to a family lot which he had recently purchased at Cohasset.  He had also enlarged
his house there, where he intended to pass his old age in privacy.  Doctor Smith was correct
in his assertion that the glandular disease was incurable, and the surgical operation would
prolong life only a year or so; the severe cold produced pneumonia; which Barrett's physicians
say might have been overcome but for the glandular disease still in the blood.  Mrs. Barrett
knew from the first operation that he had at most a year or so to live, and yet by the doctor's
advice kept it secret, and did everything to cheer and humour him.  She's a remarkable woman.
She has been expecting to be suddenly called to him for more than a year past, yet the blow
came with terrible force.  Milly, Mr. Barrett's youngest daughter, and her husband, came last
night....  When I saw Lawrence on Thursday he was in a burning fever and asked me to keep away
for fear his breath might affect me, and it pained him to talk. He pulled through three acts
of "De Mauprat" the night before, and sent for his wife that night.  His death was very peaceful,
with no sign of pain.  A couple of weeks ago he and I were to meet General Sherman at dinner:
death came instead.  To-night Barrett had invited about twenty distinguished men to meet me
at Delmonico's, and again the grim guest attends....

My room is like an office of some state official; letters, telegrams, and callers come every
moment, some on business, many in sympathy. Three hours have elapsed since I finished the last
sentence, and I expect a call from Bromley before I retire.  A world of business matters have
been disturbed by this sudden break of contracts with actors and managers, and everything pertaining
to next season, as well as much concerning the balance of the present one, must be rearranged
or cancelled.  I, of course, am free; but for the sake of the company I shall fulfil my time,
to pay their salaries, this week here; and next week in Brooklyn, as they were engaged by Barrett
for my engagement.  After which they will be out of employment for the balance of the season...

PAPA.

TO MISS EMMA F. CARY SAINT VALENTINE'S DAY, 1864.

MY DEAR FRIEND:

A little lull in the whirl of excitement in which my brain has nearly lost its balance affords
me an opportunity to write to you.  It would be difficult to explain the many little annoyances
I have been subjected to in the production of "Richelieu," but when I tell you that it far
surpasses "Hamlet," and exceeds all my expectations, you may suppose that I have not been very
idle all this while.  I wish you could see it.

Professor Peirce[2] has been here, and he will tell you of it.  It really seems that the dreams
of my past life--so far as my profession is concerned--are being realised.  What Mary and I
used to plan for my future, what Richard and I used laughingly to promise ourselves in "our
model theatre," seems to be realised--in these two plays, at least.  As history says of the
great cardinal, I am "too fortunate a man not to be superstitious," and as I find my hopes
being fulfilled, I cannot help but believe that there is a sufficient importance in my art
to interest them still; that to a higher influence than the world believes I am moved by I
owe the success I have achieved.  Assured that all I do in this advance carries, even beyond
the range of my little world (the theatre), an elevating and refining influence, while in it
the effect is good, I begin to feel really happy in my once uneasy sphere of action.  I dare
say I shall soon be contented with my lot.  I will tell you this much: I have been offered
the means to a speedy and an ample fortune, from all parts of the country, but prefer the limit
I have set, wherein I have the power to carry out my wishes, though "on half pay," as it were....

Ever your friend,

EDWIN BOOTH.

TO MISS EMMA F. CARY [Three weeks after the assassination by his brother, John Wilkes Booth,
of President Lincoln.] Saturday, May 6, 1865.

MY DEAR FRIEND:

I've just received your letter.  I have been in one sense unable to write, but you know, of
course, what my condition is, and need no excuses.

I have been, by the advice of my friends, "cooped up" since I arrived here, going out only
occasionally in the evening.  My health is good, but I suffer from the want of fresh air and
exercise.

Poor mother is in Philadelphia, about crushed by her sorrows, and my sister, Mrs. Clarke, is
ill, and without the least knowledge of her husband, who was taken from her several days ago,
with Junius.

My position is such a delicate one that I am obliged to use the utmost caution.  Hosts of friends
are staunch and true to me.  Here and in Boston I feel safe.  What I am in Philadelphia and
elsewhere I know not.  All I do [know] of the above named city is that there is one great heart
firm and faster bound to me than ever.

Sent in answer to dear Mary's [his wife's] prayers--I faithfully believe it.  She will do what
Mary struggled, suffered, and died in doing.  My baby, too, is there.  Now that the greatest
excitement is over, and a lull is in the storm, I feel the need of that dear angel; but during
the heat of it I was glad she was not here.

When Junius and Mr. Clarke are at liberty, mother will come here and bring Edwina [his daughter]
to me.  I wish I could see with others' eyes; all my friends assure me that my name shall be
free, and that in a little while I may be where I was and what I was; but, alas! it looks dark
to me.

God bless you all for your great assistance in my behalf; even dear Dick aided me in my extremity,
did he not?

Give my love to all and kisses to George.

...  I do not think the feeling is so strong in my favour in Philadelphia as it is here and
in Boston.  I am not known there.  Ever yours.

TO MR. NAHUM CAPEN

[In response to an inquiry regarding his brother, John Wilkes Booth.] WINDSOR HOTEL, NEW YORK,
July 28, 1881.

DEAR SIR:

I can give you very little information regarding my brother John.  I seldom saw him since his
early boyhood in Baltimore.  He was a rattle-pated fellow, filled with quixotic notions.

While at the farm in Maryland he would charge on horseback through the woods, "spouting" heroic
speeches with a lance in his hand--a relic of the Mexican war--given to father by some soldier
who had served under Taylor.  We regarded him as a good-hearted, harmless, though wild-brained,
boy, and used to laugh at his patriotic froth whenever secession was discussed.  That he was
insane on that one point no one who knew him well can doubt.  When I told him that I had voted
for Lincoln's reelection he expressed deep regret, and declared his belief that Lincoln would
be made king of America; and this I believe, drove him beyond the limits of reason.  I asked
him once why he did not join the Confederate army.  To which he replied, "I promised mother
I would keep out of the quarrel, if possible, and I am sorry that I said so." Knowing my sentiments,
he avoided me, rarely visiting my house, except to see his mother, when political topics were
not touched upon--at least in my presence.  He was of a gentle, loving disposition, very boyish
and full of fun--his mother's darling--and his deed and death crushed her spirit.  He possessed
rare dramatic talent, and would have made a brilliant mark in the theatrical world.  This is
positively all that I know about him, having left him a mere school-boy, when I went with my
father to California in 1852.  On my return in 1856 we were separated by professional engagements,
which kept him mostly in the South while I was employed in the Eastern and Northern states.

I do not believe any of the wild, romantic stories published in the papers concerning him;
but of course he may have been engaged in political matters of which I know nothing.  All his
theatrical friends speak of him as a poor crazy boy, and such his family think of him.  I am
sorry I can afford you no further light on the subject.  Very truly yours,

ADVICE TO A YOUNG ACTOR

[TO WALTER THOMAS] NEW YORK, August 28, 1889.

MY DEAR MR. THOMAS:

I was surprised to learn that your engagement with Mr. Barrett is terminated, and am sorry
for the cause, although I believe the result will be to your advantage.  Your chances for promotion
will be better in a company that is not confined to so limited a repertoire as mine, in which
so few opportunities occur for the proper exercise of youthful talent.  A frequent change of
role, and of the lighter sort--especially such as one does not like forcing one's self to use
the very utmost of his ability in the performance of--is the training requisite for a mastery
of the actor's art.

I had seven years' apprenticeship at it, during which most of my labour was in the field of
comedy--"walking gentleman," burlesque, and low comedy parts--the while my soul was yearning
for high tragedy.  I did my best with all that I was cast for, however, and the unpleasant
experience did me a world of good.  Had I followed my own bent, I would have been, long ago,
a "crushed tragedian."

I will, as you request, give you a line to Mr. Palmer, and I hope you may obtain a position
that will afford you the necessary practice. With best wishes.  Truly yours,

EDWIN BOOTH.

CHARLOTTE CUSHMAN

[Charlotte Cushman, a native of Boston, died in that city in 1876.  No actress ever excelled
her as Meg Merrilies, Queen Katherine, and Lady Macbeth.  On the morning following her death,
Mr. William Winter wrote in the New York Tribune:--

...  Charlotte Cushman was not a great actress merely, but she was a great woman.  She did
not possess the dramatic faculty apart from other faculties and conquer by that alone: but
having that faculty in almost unlimited fulness, she poured forth through its channel such
resources of character, intellect, moral strength, soul, and personal magnetism as marked her
for a genius of the first order, while they made her an irresistible force in art.  When she
came upon the stage she filled it with the brilliant vitality of her presence.  Every movement
that she made was winningly characteristic.  Her least gesture was eloquence, Her voice, which
was soft or silvery, or deep or mellow, according as emotion affected it, used now and then
to tremble, and partly to break, with tones that were pathetic beyond description.  These were
denotements of the fiery soul that smouldered beneath her grave exterior, and gave iridescence
to every form of art that she embodied.  Sometimes her whole being seemed to become petrified
in a silent suspense more thrilling than any action, as if her imagination were suddenly inthralled
by the tumult and awe of its own vast perceptions."

Her frlend, Emma Stebbins, the sculptor, edited a memorial volume, "Charlotte Cushman:  Her
Letters and Memories of Her Life," published in 1878.  By permission of the publishers and
owners of the copyright, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Boston, the pages that follow are offered.--ED.]

AS A CHILD A MIMIC AND SINGER

On one occasion [wrote Miss Cushman] when Henry Ware, pastor of the old Boston Meeting House,
was taking tea with my mother, he sat at table talking, with his chin resting in his two hands,
and his elbows on the table.  I was suddenly startled by my mother exclaiming, "Charlotte,
take your elbows off the table and your chin out of your hands; it is not a pretty position
for a young lady!"  I was sitting in exact imitation of the parson, even assuming the expression
of his face.

Besides singing everything, I exercised my imitative powers in all directions, and often found
myself instinctively mimicking the tones, movement, and expression of those about me.  I'm
afraid I was what the French call un enfant terrible--in the vernacular, an awful child! full
of irresistible life and impulsive will; living fully in the present, looking neither before
nor after; as ready to execute as to conceive; full of imagination--a faculty too often thwarted
and warped by the fears of parents and friends that it means insincerity and falsehood, when
it is in reality but the spontaneous exercise of faculties as yet unknown even to the possessor,
and misunderstood by those so-called trainers of infancy.

This imitative faculty in especial I inherited from my grandmother Babbit, born Mary Saunders,
of Gloucester, Cape Ann.  Her faculty of imitation was very remarkable.  I remember sitting
at her feet on a little stool and hearing her sing a song of the period, in which she delighted
me by the most perfect imitation of every creature belonging to the farmyard.

FIRST VISITS TO THE THEATRE

My uncle, Augustus Babbit, who led a seafaring life and was lost at sea, took great interest
in me; he offered me prizes for proficiency in my studies, especially music and writing.  He
first took me to the theatre on one of his return voyages, which was always a holiday time
for me.  My first play was "Coriolanus," with Macready, and my second "The Gamester," with
Cooper and Mrs. Powell as Mr. and Mrs. Beverley. All the English actors and actresses of that
time were of the Siddons and Kemble school, and I cannot but think these early impressions
must have been powerful toward the formation of a style of acting afterward slowly eliminated
through the various stages of my artistic career.

My uncle had great taste and love for the dramatic profession, and became acquainted with Mr.
and Mrs. William Pelby, for whom the original Tremont Theatre was built.  My uncle being one
of the stockholders, through him my mother became acquainted with these people, and thus we
had many opportunities of seeing and knowing something of the fraternity.

About this time I became noted in school as a reader, where before I had only been remarkable
for my arithmetic, the medal for which could never be taken from me.  I remember on one occasion
reading a scene from Howard Payne's tragedy of "Brutus," in which Brutus speaks, and the immediate
result was my elevation to the head of the class to the evident disgust of my competitors,
who grumbled out, "No wonder she can read, she goes to the theatre!"  I had been before this
very shy and reserved, not to say stupid, about reading in school, afraid of the sound of my
own voice, and very unwilling to trust it; but the greater familiarity with the theatre seemed
suddenly to unloose my tongue, and give birth as it were to a faculty which has been the ruling
passion ever since.

PLAYS LADY MACBETH, HER FIRST PART

With the Maeders I went [in 1836, when twenty years of age] to New Orleans, and sang until,
owing perhaps to my youth, to change of climate, or to a too great strain upon the upper register
of my voice, which, as his wife's voice was a contralto, it was more to Mr. Maeder's interest
to use, than the lower one, I found my voice suddenly failing me.  In my unhappiness I went
to ask counsel and advice of Mr. Caldwell, the manager of the chief New Orleans theatre, He
at once said to me, "You ought to be an actress, and not a singer." He advised me to study
some parts, and presented me to Mr. Barton, the tragedian of the theatre, whom he asked to
hear me, and to take an interest in me.

He was very kind, as indeed they both were; and Mr. Barton, after a short time, was sufficiently
impressed with my powers to propose to Mr. Caldwell that I should act Lady Macbeth to his Macbeth,
on the occasion of his (Barton's) benefit.  Upon this is was decided that I should give up
singing and take to acting.  My contract with Mr. Maeder was annulled, it being the end of
the season.  So enraptured was I with the idea of acting this part, and so fearful of anything
preventing me, that I did not tell the manager I had no dresses, until it was too late for
me to be prevented from acting it; and the day before the performance, after rehearsal, I told
him.  He immediately sat down and wrote a note of introduction for me to the tragedienne of
the French Theatre, which then employed some of the best among French artists for its company.
This note was to ask her to help me to costumes for the role of Lady Macbeth, I was a tall,
thin, lanky girl at that time, about five feet six inches in height.  The Frenchwoman, Madame
Closel, was a short, fat person of not more than four feet ten inches, her waist full twice
the size of mine, with a very large bust; but her shape did not prevent her being a very great
actress.  The ludicrousness of her clothes being made to fit me struck her at once. She roared
with laughter; but she was very good-natured, saw my distress, and set to work to see to how
she could help it.  By dint of piecing out the skirt of one dress it was made to answer for
an underskirt, and then another dress was taken in in every direction to do duty as an overdress,
and so make up the costume.  And thus I essayed for the first time the part of Lady Macbeth,
fortunately to the satisfaction of the audience, the manager, and all the members of the company.

TO A YOUNG ACTRESS [PART OF A LETTER]

...  I should advise you to get to work; all ideal study of acting, without the trial or opportunity
of trying our efforts and conceivings upon others, is, in my mind, lost time.  Study while
you act.  Your conception of character can be formed while you read your part, and only practice
can tell you whether you are right.  You would, after a year of study in your own room, come
out unbenefited, save in as far as self-communion ever must make us better and stronger; but
this is not what you want just now.  Action is needed.  Your vitality must in some measure
work itself off.  You must suffer, labour, and wait, before you will be able to grasp the true
and the beautiful.  You dream of it now; the intensity of life that is in you, the spirit of
poetry which makes itself heard by you in indistinct language, needs work to relieve itself
and be made clear.  I feel diffident about giving advice to you, for you know your own nature
better than any one else can, but I should say to you, get to work in the best way you can.

All your country work will be wretched; you will faint by the way; but you must rouse your
great strength and struggle on, bearing patiently your cross on the way to your crown!  God
bless you and prosper your undertakings.  I know the country theatres well enough to know how
utterly alone you will be in such companies; but keep up a good heart; we have only to do well
what is given us to do, to find heaven.

I think if you have to wait for a while it will do you no harm.  You seem to me quite frantic
for immediate work; but teach yourself quiet and repose in the time you are waiting.  With
half your strength I could bear to wait and labour with myself to conquer fretting.  The greatest
power in the world is shown in conquest over self.  More life will be worked out of you by
fretting than all the stage-playing in the world.  God bless you, my poor child.  You have
indeed troubles enough; but you have a strong and earnest spirit, and you have the true religion
of labour in your heart.  Therefore I have no fears for you, let what will come.  Let me hear
from you at your leisure, and be sure you have no warmer friend than I am and wish to be,...

I was exceedingly pleased to hear such an account of your first appearance.  You were quite
right in all that was done, and I am rejoiced at your success.  Go on; persevere.  You will
be sure to do what is right, for your heart is in the right place, your head is sound, your
reading has been good.  Your mind is so much better and stronger than any other person's whom
I have known enter the profession, that your career is plain before you.

But I will advise you to remain in your own native town for a season, or at least the winter.
You say you are afraid of remaining among people who know you.  Don't have this feeling at
all.  You will have to be more particular in what you do, and the very feeling that you cannot
be indifferent to your audience will make you take more pains. Beside this, you will be at
home, which is much better for a time; for then at first you do not have to contend with a
strange home as well as with a strange profession.  I could talk to you a volume upon this
matter, but it is difficult to write.  At all events I hope you will take my counsel and remain
at home this winter.  It is the most wretched thing imaginable to go from home a novice into
such a theatre as any of those in the principal towns.

Only go on and work hard, and you will be sure to make a good position.  With regard to your
faults, what shall I say?  Why, that you will try hard to overcome them.  I don't think they
would be perceived save by those who perhaps imagine that your attachment for me has induced
you to join the profession.  I have no mannerisms, I hope; therefore any imitation of me can
only be in the earnest desire to do what you can do, as well as you can.  Write to me often;
ask of me what you will; my counsel is worth little, but you shall command it if you need it.

TO A YOUNG MOTHER

[FROM A LETTER]

...  All that you say about your finding your own best expression in and through the little
life which is confided to you is good and true, and I am so happy to see how you feel on the
subject.  I think a mother who devotes herself to her child, in watching its culture and keeping
it from baleful influences, is educating and cultivating herself at the same time.  No artist
work is so high, so noble, so grand, so enduring, so important for all time, as the making
of character in a child, You have your own work to do, the largest possible expression.  No
statue, no painting, no acting, can reach it, and it embodies each and all the arts, Clay of
God's fashioning is given into your hands to mould to perfectness.  Is this not something grand
to think of?  No matter about yourself--only make yourself worthy of God's sacred trust, and
you will be doing His work--and that is all that human beings ought to care to live for.  Am
I right?

EARLY GRIEFS.  ART HER ONLY SPOUSE

[FROM A LETTER TO A FRIEND]

There was a time, in my life of girlhood, when I thought I had been called upon to bear the
very hardest thing that can come to a Woman. A very short time served to show me, in the harder
battle of life Which was before me, that this had been but a spring storm, which was simply
to help me to a clearer, better, richer, and more productive summer.  If I had been spared
this early trial, I should never have been so earnest and faithful in my art; I should have
still been casting about for the "counterpart," and not given my entire self to my work, wherein
and alone I have reached any excellence I have ever attained, and through which alone I have
received my reward.  God helped me in my art isolation, and rewarded me for recognising him
and helping myself.  This passed on; and this happened at a period in my life when most women
(or children, rather) are looking to but one end in life--an end no doubt wisest and best for
the largest number, but which would not have been wisest and best for my work, and so for God's
work, for I know he does not fail to set me his work to do, and helps me to do it, and helps
others to help me.  (Do you see this tracing back, and then forward, to an eternity of good,
and do you see how better and better one can become in recognising one's self as a minister
of the Almighty to faithfully carry out our part of His great plan according to our strength
and ability?)  0 believe we cannot live one moment for ourselves, one moment of selfish repining,
and not be failing him at that moment, hiding the God-spark in us, letting the flesh conquer
the spirit, the evil dominate the good.

Then after this first spring storm and hurricane of young disappointment came a lull--during
which I actively pursued what became a passion,--my art.  Then I lost my younger brother, upon
whom I had begun to build most hopefully, as I had reason.  He was by far the cleverest of
my mother's children.  He had been born into greater poverty than the others; he received his
young impressions through a different atmosphere; he was keener, more artistic, more impulsive,
more generous, more full of genius.  I lost him by a cruel accident, and again the world seem
to liquefy beneath my feet, and the waters went over my soul.  It became necessary that I should
suffer bodily to cure my heart-bleed.  I placed myself professionally where I found and knew
all my mortifications in my profession, which seemed for the time to strew ashes over the loss
of my child-brother (for he was my child, and loved me best in all the world), thus conquering
my art, which, God knows, has never failed me--never failed to bring me rich reward--never
failed to bring me comfort.  I conquered my grief and myself.  Labour saved me then and always,
and so I proved the eternal goodness of God.  I digress too much; but you will see how, in
looking back to my own early disappointments, I can recognise all the good which came out of
them, and can ask you to lay away all repinings with our darling, and hope (as we must) in
God's wisdom and goodness, and ask him to help us to a clearer vision and truer knowledge of
his dealings with us; to teach us to believe that we are lifted up to him better through our
losses than our gains.  May it not be that heaven is nearer, the passage from earth less hard,
and life less seductive to us, in consequence of the painless passing of this cherub to its
true home, lent us but for a moment, to show how pure must be our lives to fit us for such
companionship?  And thus, although in one sense it would be well for us to put away the sadness
of this thought if it would be likely to enervate us, in another sense, if we consider it rightly,
if we look upon it worthily, we have an angel in God's house to help us to higher and purer
thinkings, to nobler aspirations, to more sublime sacrifices than we have ever known before.

FAREWELL TO NEW YORK

[In 1874 Miss Cushman bade farewell to New York at Booth's Theatre, after a performance as
Lady Macbeth.  William Cullen Bryant presented an ode in her honour.  In the course of her
response Miss Cushman said:]

Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks, but I thank you. Gentlemen, the heart has no speech;
its only language is a tear or a pressure of the hand, and words very feebly convey or interpret
its emotions.  Yet I would beg you to believe that in the three little words I now speak, 'I
thank you,' there are heart depths which I should fail to express better, though I should use
a thousand other words.  I thank you, gentlemen, for the great honour you have offered me.
I thank you, not only for myself, but for my whole profession, to which, through and by me,
you have paid this very grateful compliment. If the few words I am about to say savour of egotism
or vainglory, you will, I am sure, pardon me, inasmuch as I am here only to speak of myself.
You would seem to compliment me upon an honourable life.  As I look back upon that life, it
seems to me that it would have been impossible for me to have led any other.  In this I have,
perhaps, been mercifully helped more than are many of my more beautiful sisters in art.  I
was, by a press of circumstances, thrown at an early age into a profession for which I had
received no special education or training; but I had already, though so young, been brought
face to face with necessity.  I found life sadly real and intensely earnest, and in my ignorance
of other ways of study, I resolved to take therefrom my text and my watchword.  To be thoroughly
in earnest, intensely in earnest in all my thoughts and in all my actions, whether in my profession
or out of it, became my one single idea.  And I honestly believe herein lies the secret of
my success in life.  I do not believe that any great success in any art can he achieved without
it....

CLARA MORRIS

[Clara Morris, Mrs. Frederick C. Harriott, is a native of Toronto, Canada.  Her remarkable
powers as an emotional actress, early in evidence, gave her for years the foremost place at
Daly's Theatre, and the Union Square Theatre, New York.  Among the parts in which she achieved
distinction were Camille, Alixe, Miss Multon, Corn in "Article 47," and Mercy Merrick in "The
New Magdalen."  Since her retirement from the stage Clara Morris has proved herself to be a
capital writer, shedding the light of experience on the difficulties of dramatic success. 
One of her books, "Life on the Stage," copyright, 1901, by Clara Morris Harriott and the S.
S. McClure Company, New York, by permission, has furnished this episode.--Ed.]

SOME RECOLLECTIONS OF JOHN WILKES BOOTH

In glancing back over two crowded and busy seasons, one figure stands out with clearness and
beauty.  In his case only (so far as my personal knowledge goes), there was nothing derogatory
to dignity or to manhood in being called beautiful, for he was that bud of splendid promise
blasted to the core, before its full triumphant blooming--known to the world as a madman and
an assassin, but to the profession as "that unhappy boy"--John Wilkes Booth.

He was so young, so bright, so gay--so kind.  I could not have known him well; of course, too--there
are two or three different people in every man's skin; yet when we remember that stars are
not generally in the habit of showing their brightest, their best side to the company at rehearsal,
we cannot help feeling both respect and liking for the one who does.

There are not many men who can receive a gash over the eye in a scene at night, without at
least a momentary outburst of temper; but when the combat between Richard and Richmond was
being rehearsed, Mr. Booth had again and again urged Mr. McCollom (that six-foot tall and handsome
leading-man, who entrusted me with the care of his watch during such encounters) to come on
hard! to come on hot! hot, old fellow! harder-faster!   He'd take the chance of a blow--if
only they could make a hot fight of it!

And Mr. McCollom, who was a cold man, at night became nervous in his effort to act like a fiery
one--he forgot he had struck the full number of head blows, and when Booth was pantingly expecting
a thrust, McCollom, wielding his sword with both hands, brought it down with awful force fair
across Booth's forehead; a cry of horror rose, for in one moment his face was masked in blood,
one eyebrow was cleanly cut through--there came simultaneously one deep groan from Richard
and the exclamation:  "Oh, good God! good God!" from Richmond, who stood shaking like a leaf
and staring at his work.  Then Booth, flinging the blood from his eyes with his left hand,
said as genially as man could speak: " That's all right, old man! never mind me--only come
on hard, for God's sake, and save the fight!"

Which be resumed at once, and though he was perceptibly weakened, it required the sharp order
of Mr. Ellsler, to "ring the first curtain bell," to force him to bring the fight to a close
a single blow shorter than usual.  Then there was a running to and fro, with ice and vinegar-paper
and raw steak and raw oysters.  When the doctor had placed a few stitches where they were most
required, he laughingly declared there was provision enough in the room to start a restaurant.
Mr. McCollom came to try to apologise--to explain, but Booth would have none of it; be held
out his hand, crying:  "Why, old fellow, you look as if you had lost the blood.  Don't worry--now
if my eye had gone, that would have been bad!"  And so with light words he tried to set the
unfortunate man at ease, and though he must have suffered much mortification as well as pain
from the eye--that in spite of all endeavours would blacken--he never made a sign.

He was, like his great elder brother, rather lacking in height, but his head and throat, and
the manner of their rising from his shoulders, were truly beautiful, His colouring was unusual--the
ivory pallor of his skin, the inky blackness of his densely thick hair, the heavy lids of his
glowing eyes were all Oriental, and they gave a touch of mystery to his face when it fell into
gravity--but there was generally a flash of white teeth behind his silky moustache, and a laugh
in his eyes.

I played the Player-Queen to my great joy, and in the "Marble Heart" I was one of the group
of three statues in the first act.  We were supposed to represent Lais, Aspasia, and Phryne,
and when we read the cast I glanced at the other girls (we were not strikingly handsome) and
remarked, gravely:  "Well, it's a comfort to know that we look so like the three beautiful
Grecians."

A laugh at our backs brought us around suddenly to face Mr. Booth, who said to me:

"You satirical little wretch, how do you come to know these Grecian ladies?  Perhaps you have
the advantage of them in being all beautiful within?"

"I wish it would strike outward then," I answered.  "You know it's always best to have things
come to the surface!"

"I know some very precious things are hidden from common sight; and I know, too, you caught
my meaning in the first place.  Good night!" and he left us.

We had been told to descend to the stage at night with our white robes hanging free and straight,
that Mr. Booth himself might drape them as we stood upon the pedestal.  It really is a charming
picture--that of the statues in the first act.  Against a backing of black velvet the three
white figures, carefully posed, strongly lighted, stand out so marble-like that when they slowly
turn their faces and point to their chosen master, the effect is uncanny enough to chill the
looker-on.

Well, with white wigs, white tights, and white robes, and half strangled with the powder we
had inhaled in our efforts to make our lips stay white, we cautiously descended the stairs
we dared not talk, we dared not blink our eyes, for fear of disturbing the coat of powder-we
were lifted to the pedestal and took our places as we expected to stand.  Then Mr. Booth came--such
a picture in his Greek garments as made even the men exclaim at him--and began to pose us.
It happened one of us had very good limbs, one medium good, and the third had, apparently,
walked on broom-sticks.  When Mr. Booth slightly raised the drapery of No. 3 his features gave
a twist as though he had suddenly tasted lemon-juice, but quick as a flash he said:

"I believe I'11 advance you to the centre for the stately and wise Aspasia"--the central figure
wore her draperies hanging straight to her feet, hence the "advance" and consequent concealment
of the unlovely limbs.  It was quickly and kindly done, for the girl was not only spared mortification,
but in the word "advance" she saw a compliment and was happy accordingly.  Then my turn came.
My arms were placed about Aspasia, my head bent and turned and twisted--my upon my breast so
that the forefinger touched my chin--I felt I was a personified simper; but I was silent and
patient, until the arrangement of my draperies began--then I squirmed anxiously.

"Take care--take care!" he cautioned.  "You will sway the others if you move!"  But in spite
of the risk of my marble makeup I faintly groaned:  "Oh dear! must it be like that?"

Regardless of the pins in the corner of his mouth he burst into laughter, and, taking a photograph
from the bosom of his Greek shirt, he said:  "I expected a protest from you, Miss, so I came
prepared--don't move your head, but just look at this."

He held the picture of a group of statuary up to me.  "This is you on the right.  It's not
so dreadful; now, is it?"  And I cautiously murmured: "That if I wasn't any worse than that
I wouldn't mind."

And so we were all satisfied, and our statue scene was very successful.  Next morning I saw
Mr. Booth come running out of the theatre on his way to the telegraph office at the corner,
and right in the middle of the walk, staring about him, stood a child--a small roamer of the
stony streets, who had evidently got far enough beyond his native ward to arouse misgivings
as to his personal safety, and at the very moment he stopped to consider matters Mr. Booth
dashed out of the stage-door and added to his bewilderment by capsizing him completely.

"Oh, good lord!  Baby, are you hurt?" exclaimed Mr. Booth, pausing instantly to pick up the
dirty, tousled small heap and stand it on its bandy legs again.

"Don't cry, little chap!"  And the aforesaid little chap not only ceased to cry, but gave him
a damp and grimy smile, at which the actor bent towards him quickly, but paused, took out his
handkerchief, and first carefully wiping the dirty little nose and mouth, stooped and kissed
him heartily, put some change in each freckled paw, and continued his run to the telegraph office.

He knew of no witness to the act.  To kiss a pretty, clean child under the approving eyes of
mamma might mean nothing but politeness, but surely it required the prompting of a warm and
tender heart to make a young and thoughtless man feel for and caress such a dirty, forlorn
bit of babyhood as that.

Of his work I suppose I was too young and too ignorant to judge correctly, but I remember well
hearing the older members of the company express their opinions.  Mr. Ellsler, who had been
on terms of friendship with the elder Booth, was delighted with the promise of his work.  He
greatly admired Edwin's intellectual power, his artistic care; but "John," he cried, "has more
of the old man's power in one performance than Edwin can show in a year.  He has the fire,
the dash, the touch of strangeness.  He often produces unstudied effects at night.  I question
him: 'Did you rehearse that business to-day, John?' He answers:

'No; I didn't rehearse it, it just came to me in the scene and I couldn't help doing it, but
it went all right didn't it?'  Full of impulse just now, like a colt, his heels are in the
air nearly as often as his head, but wait a year or two till he gets used to the harness and
quiets down a bit, and you will see as great an actor as America can produce!"

One morning, going on the stage where a group were talking with John Wilkes, I beard him say:
"No; oh, no:  There's but one Hamlet to my mind--that's my brother Edwin.  You see, between
ourselves, he is Hamlet--melancholy and all!"

THE MURDER OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN

That was an awful time, when the dread news came to us.  We were in Columbus, Ohio.  We had
been horrified by the great crime at Washington.  My room-mate and I had, from our small earnings,
bought some black cotton at a tripled price, as all the black material in the city was not
sufficient to meet the demand; and as we tacked it about our one window, a man passing told
us the assassin had been discovered, and that he was the actor Booth.  Hattie laughed, so she
nearly swallowed the tack that, girl-like, she held between her lips, and I after a laugh,
told him it was a poor subject for a jest, and we went in.  There was no store in Columbus
then where play-books were sold, and as Mr. Ellsler had a very large and complete stage library,
he frequently lent his books to us, and we would hurriedly copy out our lines and return the
book for his own use.  On that occasion he was going to study his part first and then leave
the play with us as he passed, going home.  We heard his knock.  I was busy pressing a bit
of stage finery.  Hattie opened the door, and then I heard her exclaiming: "Why--why--what!"
I turned quickly.  Mr. Ellsler was coming slowly into the room.  He is a very dark man, but
be was perfectly livid then--his lips even were blanched to the whiteness of his cheeks.  His
eyes were dreadful, they were so glassy and seemed so unseeing.  He was devoted to his children,
and all I could think of as likely to bring such a look upon his face was disaster to one of
them, and I cried, as I drew a chair to him:  "What is it?  Oh, what has happened to them?" 

Looking at the faces of these two children sleeping here side by side, the little one with his
hands under the ermine marble, the elder with his small hands folded
piously together, a wave of sympathy passed over us for the unhappy
mother who was in a few months deprived of both her precious babies.

As we stood by the tomb with its two quaint little figures, guarded by kneeling angels at
their heads and feet, beautiful, appropriate, reverent, we wondered why modern sculptors fall
so far behind the ancient in work of this sort. The moderns may know their anatomy better,
but in sweetness and tender poetic expression the work of the old
artists is infinitely superior.

This charming little group was probably made by Michael Colombe, although it has been attributed
to several other sculptors of the time.

After a visit to the archbishop's palace, and a short stop at the museum, which attracted us less
than the outdoor world on this pleasant day, we stopped at the Quai
du Pont Neuf to look at the statues of Descartes and Rabelais, so
picturesquely placed on each side of the Pont de Pierre.

Retracing our steps by the Rue Nationale we strolled into the interesting old church of St. Julian,
where we admired the vast nave of noble proportions and the beautiful stained glass. After wandering
at will through several streets with no especial object in view, we found ourselves in a charming
little park where we were interested in a monument to three good
physicians of Tours, a recognition of valiant service to humanity
that might well be followed by our American cities.

Just here my inveterate American reminded me of the monument in Boston to the discoverer of
ether, and that to Dr. Hahnemann in Washington.

"Both of them monstrosities of bad taste!" exclaimed Miss Cassandra, as we turned into the
Rue Emile Zola, and along the Rue Nationale to the Palais de Justice,
in one of whose gardens is a fine statue of the great novelist who
was born in the Maison de Balzac, near by on the Rue Nationale.

Through the streets George Sand and Victor Hugo, we found our way to the theatre and then back
to the Boulevard Béranger, upon which our pension is situated.

"It is," as Miss Cassandra says, "a liberal education to walk through the streets of these old
French towns, and whatever may be the shortcomings of the French, as a nation, they cannot be
accused of forgetting their great people."

As we stroll through these thoroughfares and parks we are constantly reminded by a name on a street
corner or a statue that this Touraine is the land of Balzac, Rabelais, Descartes, and in a way
of Ronsard and George Sand, as the châteaux of La Poissonnière and Nohant are not far away. Here
they, and many another French writer, walked and dreamed, creating
characters so lifelike that they also walk with us through these quaint
streets and byways or look out from picturesque doorways.

We can fancy the Curé de Tours emerging from the lovely Cloître de la Psallette of St. Gatien
or the still lovelier cloister of old St. Martin's; or we can see poor Félex de Vandenesse
making his way across the park, Emile Zola, with his meagre lunch basket on his arm. We have
not yet tasted the rillons and rillettes so prized by the school children of Tours, and so longed
for by Félex when he beheld them in the baskets of his more fortunate companions. Lydia reminds us
that Balzac was at some pains to explain that this savory preparation
of pork is seldom seen upon the aristocratic tables of Tours, and
as our pension is strictly aristocratic and exclusive, it is doubtful
if we ever see rillons and rillettes upon Madame B----'s table.

September 1st.

We crossed over the bridge this afternoon in a tram to Saint Symphorien, on whose hillside the original
city of Tours was built. Here we saw an interesting Renaissance church, and passing through
the streets of Vieux Calvaire l'Ermitage, Jeanne d'Arc and St. Gatien,
gained the entrance to the Abbey of Marmoutier, where Saint Gatien
dug out his cave in the rocky hillside.

We also saw the ruins of a fine thirteenth century basilica once the glory of Touraine, and
by a spiral staircase ascended to the Chapelle des Sept Dormants, really a cavern cut in the
side of the hill in the shape of a cross, where rest the seven disciples of St. Martin, who
all died on the same day as he had predicted.

Their bodies remained intact for days and many miracles were worked, which you may believe, or not, just
as you choose. When the name of the chapel was revealed to Miss Cassandra she exclaimed: "I have heard
of the Seven Sleepers all my life and have been likened unto them in my youth; but never did
I expect to lay eyes upon their resting place, and very uncomfortable beds they must have
been!"

"So it was St. Gatien who first brought Christianity to France. Some one of us should surely have
known that," said Lydia, looking up from the pages of a small local guidebook, with a face so
dejected over her own ignorance, and that of her companions, that Miss Cassandra said in her
most soothing tones:

     
     "Never mind, dear, you will probably find when we reach the next cathedral
town that some other worthy and adored saint did this good work for
France."

And sure enough, this very night we have been learning, from a short history that we picked
up on a book stall, that, although St. Gatien came here on a mission from Rome in the third
century, to St. Martin is due the spread of Christianity not only
through Touraine but all over France.

Having done our duty in the line of sightseeing and historic associations, we rested from our
labors for a brief season and stopped to call on the Grants from New York, who are staying in
a pleasant pension at St. Symphorien. Here we had an hour with them in the garden where many
flowers are abloom, and exchanged travel experiences and home gossip over brioches, the famous
white wine of Vouvray and glasses of orange-flower water. Orange-flower water is the proper
thing to drink here as it is made in large quantities in the neighborhood of Tours. As a refreshing
and unintoxicating beverage it was highly recommended to our Quaker lady, who does not take kindly
to the wine of the country, which is really guiltless of alcohol
to any extent; but over this rather insipid drink she was not particularly
enthusiastic.

Like the English woman when she made her first acquaintance with terrapin, the most that Miss
Cassandra could be induced to say was that the eau des fleurs d'oranges sucrée was not so very bad.
The English dame, of course, said "it is not so very nasty"; but we have not become sufficiently
Anglicized to say "nasty" in company. There is no knowing what we may come to when Angela joins
us, as she has been visiting and motoring with Dr. McIvor's English and Scotch relations for
the last six weeks and will have become quite a Britisher by the time we see her again. She is
to meet us in Paris later in September, when her M.D. will join us
for his vacation.

We returned home by the suspension bridge, built upon the site of an early bridge of boats. A later
stone bridge was erected by Odo, Count of Blois and Touraine, "in order," as he recorded, "to
make himself agreeable to God, useful to posterity and upon the solicitations of his wife."
These were very good reasons, it must be admitted, for building a
bridge.

The substructure of this old stone bridge, the first of its kind in France, may be seen below
the surface of the water a little farther up the stream.

Royalty seems to have had the good taste to spend much time in Touraine
during the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries, and small
wonder we thought, for this fertile well-watered plain combines the
advantages of north and south, and is hospitable to the fruits and
flowers of many climates.

Louis XI, in his declining years, sought refuge here from the chill winds of Paris, which are tempered in
Touraine by the softer breezes of the Midi, and this ancient city
of the Turones he wished to make the capital of the France that he
had strengthened and unified.

However we may abhor the despicable characteristics of this wily old politician and despot,
we cannot afford to underestimate his constructive ability and his
zeal for the glory of France.

September 2nd.

We drove out this morning through the little village of St. Anne to
the old château of Plessis-les-Tours, which Louis built and fortified
to suit his fancy and his fears, for great and powerful as he was
he seems to have been a most timid mortal.

Of the "hidden pitfalls, snares and gins" with which the old King surrounded his castle we could
not expect to find a trace, but we were disappointed to see nothing
left of the three external battlemented walls or the three gates and
dungeon-keep, which Sir Walter Scott described, the latter rising
"like a black Ethiopian giant high into the air."

With our Quentin Durward in our hands, we read of Plessis-les-Tours as the novelist pictured
it for us in the light of romance.

Of course Sir Walter never saw this château, but like many other places that he was not able to visit,
it was described to him by his friend and neighbor, Mr. James Skene,
Laird of Rubislaw, who while travelling in France kept an accurate
diary, enlivened by a number of clever drawings, all of which he placed
at the novelist's disposal.

From this journal, says Lockhart, Sir Walter took the substance of the original introduction
to Quentin Durward. As Mr. James Skene is said to have given his friend most accurate descriptions
of the buildings and grounds, it is safe to conclude that the château
has been entirely remodelled since the days when the young Scottish
archer listened to the voice of the Countess Isabelle, as she sang
to the accompaniment of her lute while he acted as sentinel in the
"spacious latticed gallery" of the château.

It is needless to say that we failed to discover the spacious gallery
or the maze of stairs, vaults, and galleries above and under ground
which are described as leading to it.

Nor did we see any traces of the fleur-de-lis, ermines, and porcupines
which are said to have adorned the walls at a later date.

Indeed the empty, unfurnished rooms and halls, guiltless of paintings or tapestries, were so dismal
that we hurried through them. As if to add an additional note of discord to the inharmonious interior,
a "vaccination museum" has been established in one of the ancient rooms. We stopped a moment
to look at the numerous caricatures of the new method of preventing
the ravages of smallpox; one, that especially entertained Walter,
represented the medical faculty as a donkey in glasses charged upon
by vaccine in the form of a furious cow.

We hoped to find in the grounds some compensation for the cheerlessness
of the interior of the castle; but here again we were doomed to disappointment.

The vast lawn and extensive parterres, which caused the park of Plessis-les-Tours
to be spoken of as the Garden of France, have long since disappeared,
and all that we could find was a grass-grown yard with some neglected
flower beds, surrounded by a hedge of fusane, a kind of laurel with
a small white flower that grows here in great profusion.

We made an effort to see, or to fancy that we saw, an underground passage that was pointed
out to us as that which once led to the dungeon upon whose stone
foundation was placed the iron cage in which Cardinal la Balue was
confined.

Of the series of fosses which once enclosed the château we found some remains, but of the
solid ramparts flanked by towers, where a band of archers were once
posted by night and day, and of the bristling chevaux-de-frise nothing
was to be seen.

Walter wishes you to tell Allen that the greatest disappointment
of all is that there is no oak forest anywhere near Plessis from whose
boughs the victims of Louis were wont to hang "like so many acorns,"
one of Scott's bits of realism that appealed to his boyish imagination.

We

were glad to turn our backs upon the modern brick building which occupies the site of the ancient
stronghold of Plessis and to drive home by a farm called La Rabatière,
whose fifteenth century building is said to have been the manor house
of Olivier le Daim, familiarly called Olivier le Diable, the barber-minister
of Louis.

Our driver, who is somewhat of an historian, and like a loyal Tournageau
is proud of the associations of his town, good and bad alike, was
delighted to show us this old home of Olivier who was, he informed
us, the executioner of his master's enemies of high degree, while
Tristan l'Hermite attended to those of less distinction, having, as
Louis warned Quentin, "For him whose tongue wagged too freely an amulet
for the throat which never failed to work a certain cure."

The house of Tristan, our cocher told us, we should find in one of
the narrow streets of the old part of Tours, which we have not yet
explored.

VI

LANGEAIS AND AZAY-LE-RIDEAU

PENSION B----, TOURS, September 3rd.

WHEN we started toward Langeais this afternoon we were pleased to
think that our way was much the same as that which Félix took in search
of his "Lily of the Valley."

The Loire lay before us just as he described it,--"a long watery ribbon which glistens in
the sun between two green banks, the rows of poplars which deck this vale of love with moving
tracery, the oak woods reaching forward between the vineyards on the hillsides which are rounded
by the river into constant variety, the soft outlines crossing each other and fading to the horizon."

We
passed by Luynes, whose steep hillside steps we shall mount some day to see the fine view of the
river and valley from the outer walls and terrace of the château,
as its doors are said to be inhospitable to those who wish to inspect
the interior.

This afternoon Langeais and Azay-le-Rideau are beckoning us, although we were tempted to stop
for a nearer view of the strange Pile de Cinq Mars, which is, we
are told, an unsolved architectural puzzle.

The most probable explanation is that this lofty tower was once part of a signalling system, by
beacon fires, which flamed messages along the valley, past Luynes to the Lantern of Rochecorbon
and as far eastward as Amboise.

Although there are the ruins of a castle of the same name quite near
the Pile de Cinq Mars, the home of Henry d'Effiat, Marquis de Cinq
Mars, seems to have been at Chaumont, where Alfred de Vigny placed
the opening scenes of his novel.

To compensate for our disappointing morning at Plessis-les-Tours, we had an entirely satisfactory
afternoon at Langeais, where we beheld a veritable fortress of ancient
times.

At a first glance we were as much interested in the little gray town of Langeais, which is
charmingly situated on the right bank of the Loire, as in the château
itself, whose façade is gloomy and austere, a true mediæval fortress,
"with moat, drawbridge, and portcullis still in working order," as
Walter expresses it.

As we stood on the stone steps at the entrance between the great
frowning towers waiting for the portcullis to be raised, we felt as
if we might be in a Scott or Dumas novel, especially as our Quaker
lady repeated in her own dramatic fashion:

". . . .

Fortunately for us the portcullis rose instead of falling, and so,
with plumes unscathed, we passed through the doorway, and as if to
add to the vraisemblance of the situation and make us feel quite mediæval,
soldiers stood on each side of the entrance, apparently on guard,
and it was not until after we had entered the château that we discovered
them to be visitors like ourselves.

If the façade of Langeais, with its severe simplicity and solidity, its great stone towers,
massive walls, chemin de ronde and machiolated cornices, gave us
an impression of power and majesty, we found that it also had a smiling
face turned toward the hill and the lovely gardens.

Here the windows open upon a lawn with turf as green and velvety
as that of England, and parterres of flowers laid out in all manner
of geometrical figures.

From a court basking in sunshine, two beautiful Renaissance doors lead into the castle. Through
one of them we passed into a small room in which the inevitable postcards
and souvenirs were sold by a pretty little dark-eyed French woman,
who acted as our guide through the castle.

We begged her to stand near the vine-decked doorway to have her photograph taken, which she
did with cheerful alacrity. Some soldiers, who were buying souvenirs, stepped through the
doorway just in time to come into the picture, their red uniforms adding a delightful touch
of color as they stood out against the gray walls of the château. It was a charming scene which
we hoped to be able to send you, but alas! a cloud passed over the
sun, and this, with the dark stone background, made too dull a setting,
and by the time the sun was out again our guide was in request to
take a party of tourists through the château, ourselves among them.

Langeais is so popular during this busy touring season that hours
and turns are strictly observed.

One of the soldiers is evidently the cher ami of our pretty Eloisa, who waved her little hand
to him as she sent a coquettish glance from her fine eyes in his direction, and threw him a kiss, after
which she applied herself to her task as cicerone, conducting us from room to room, enlarging
upon the history and associations of the château, and explaining to us that of the original castle,
built by Foulques Nerra, or "Fulk the Black," in 990, only the ruinous donjon keep is to be
seen beyond the gardens. The present château is of much later date, and was built by Jean Bourré,
comptroller of the finances for Normandy under Louis XI, who was granted letters patent of nobility
and the captaincy of Langeais about 1465. After listening to thrilling tales of the barbarous
cruelty of Fulk the Black, Count of Anjou, who had his first wife
burned at the stake and made himself very disagreeable in other ways,
as our guide naïvely remarked in French of the purest Touraine brand,
Lydia exclaimed, "The more perfect the French, the easier it is to
understand!"

"It is all the same to me, good or bad," groaned Walter in reply to
Lydia's Ollendorf phrase, uttering quite audible animadversions against
foreign languages in general and the French in particular, which our
guide fortunately did not comprehend, especially as he concluded with
a crushing comparison, "Why are not all the guides like that wonderful
little woman at the Castle of Chillon, who told her story in English,
French, and German with equal fluency and facility?"

"Why, indeed!" echoed Miss Cassandra, who being a fellow sufferer
is most sympathetic.

It certainly is exasperating to a degree to have the interesting history
and traditions given forth in a language that one does not understand,
and with such rapidity that if those who are able to grasp the meaning
attempt to translate they quite lose the thread of the discourse and
are left far behind in the story.

As we passed through the great halls and spacious rooms with timbered
ceilings, tapestried walls, and beautifully tiled floors, we were
impressed with the combination of mediæval strength and homelike comfort,
especially in the living rooms and bedrooms.

The graceful mural decorations of flowers and cherries in the Salon
des Fleurs are in strong contrast with the massive woodwork and the
heavy carved furniture, and yet the ensemble is quite harmonious.

In the guard room we noticed a fine frieze in which the arms of Anne
of Brittany are interwoven with her motto, "Potius Mori quam Foedari!"

From this and much more in the line of careful restoration and rich decoration and furnishing,
you may believe that the interior of Langeais has undergone a transformation, at the hands of
several owners of the château, since the days when Mr. Henry James
spoke of its apartments as "not of first-class interest."

M. Christophe Baron and Monsieur and Madame Jacques Siegfried have,
while preserving the distinctive characteristics of an ancient fortress,
made of Langeais an entirely livable château.

Just here we are reminded by our historians that we Anglo-Saxons have
a link far back in our own history with Langeais and the cruel Fulk,
Duke of Anjou, as one of his descendants married Matilda, daughter
of Henry I, of England, and their grandson was Richard Coeur de Lion,
who was Count of Touraine and Lord of Langeais as well as King of
England.

In the beautiful long salon, with its wonderful sixteenth century tapestries and handsomely
carved Spanish choir stalls, our guide became especially eloquent, telling us that this was the
room in which Charles VIII and Anne de Bretagne were married, the
inlaid table in the centre being that upon which the marriage contract
was signed.



"Oh, some are of the figure, some of movement, and some of delivery. A lady told me over there
that he could walk like each and every animal of a Noah's ark; and people lay wagers as to
whether London will force him to abandon his elocutionary freaks, or he will force London to
accept them.  I am inclined to back Mr. Irving, myself."

"What!  What's that you say?  That this fine actor you have described has a marked peculiarity
of delivery--of speech?"

"Marked peculiarities?  Why, they are murderous!  His strange inflections, his many mannerisms
are very trying at first, but be conquers before--"

A cry stopped me--a cry of utter disappointment and anger!  Mr. Daly stood staring at his notes
a moment, then he exclaimed violently: "D--n! d--n! oh, d--n!!!" and savagely tore his scribbled-on
paper into bits and flung them on the floor.

Startled at his vexation, convulsed with suppressed laughter at the infantile quality of his
profanity, I ventured, in a shaking voice, "I think I'd better go?"

"I think you had!" be agreed curtly; but as I reached the door he said in his most managerial
tone:  "Miss Morris, it would be better for you to begin with people's faults next time--"

But with the door already open I made bold to reply:  "Excuse me, Mr. Daly, but there isn't
going to be any next time for me!"

And I turned and fled, wondering all the way home, as I have often wondered since, what was
the plan that went so utterly agley that day? Mr. Coghlan he engaged after failing in his first
effort, but that other, greater plan; what was it?

SIR HENRY IRVING

[On November 24, 1883, Henry Irving closed his first engagement in New York.  William Winter's
review appeared next morning in the Tribune, It is reprinted in his book, "Henry Irving," published
by G. J. Coombes, New York, 1889.  Mr. Winter said:  "Mr. Irving has impersonated here nine
different men, each one distinct from all the others.  Yet in so doing he has never ceased
to exert one and the same personal charm, the charm of genialised intellect.  The soul that
is within the man has suffused his art and made it victorious.  The same forms of expression,
lacking this spirit, would have lacked the triumph.  All of them, indeed, are not equally fine.
Mr. Irving's 'Mathias' and 'Louis XI,' are higher performances than his 'Shylock' and 'Dorincourt,'
higher in imaginative tone and in adequacy of feeling and treatment.  But, throughout all these
forms, the drift of his spirit, setting boldly away from conventions and formalities, has been
manifested with delightful results.  He has always seemed to be alive with the specific vitality
of the person represented.  He has never seemed a wooden puppet of the stage, bound in by formality
and straining after a vague scholastic ideal of technical correctness."

Mr. Irving's addresses, "The Drama," copyright by the United States Book Company, New York,
were published in 1892.  They furnish the pages now presented,--abounding on self-revelation,--ED.)

THE STAGE AS AN INSTRUCTOR

To boast of being able to appreciate Shakespeare more in reading him than in seeing him acted
used to be a common method of affecting special intellectuality.  I hope this delusion--a gross
and pitiful one to most of us--has almost absolutely died out.  It certainly conferred a very
cheap badge of superiority on those who entertained it.  It seemed to each of them an inexpensive
opportunity of worshipping himself on a pedestal.  But what did it amount to?  It was little
more than a conceited and feather-headed assumption that an unprepared reader, whose mind is
usually full of far other things, will see on the instant all that has been developed in hundreds
of years by the members of a studious and enthusiastic profession.  My own conviction is that
there are few characters or passages of our great dramatists which will not repay original
study.  But at least we must recognise the vast advantages with which a practised actor, impregnated
by the associations of his life, and by study--with all the practical and critical skill of
his profession up to the date at which he appears, whether he adopts or rejects tradition--addresses
himself to the interpretation of any great character, even if he have no originality whatever.
There is something still more than this, however, in acting.  Every one who has the smallest
histrionic gift has a natural dramatic fertility; so that as soon as he knows the author's
text, and obtains self-possession, and feels at home in a part without being too familiar with
it, the mere automatic action of rehearsing and playing it at once begins to place the author
in new lights, and to give the personage being played an individuality partly independent of,
and yet consistent with, and rendering more powerfully visible, the dramatist's conception.
It is the vast power a good actor has in this way which has led the French to speak of creating
a part when they mean its first being played, and French authors are as conscious of the extent
and value of this cooperation of actors with them, that they have never objected to the phrase,
but, on the contrary, are uniformly lavish in their homage to the artists who have created
on the boards the parts which they themselves have created on paper.

ACTING AS AN ART.  HOW IRVING BEGAN

The practice of the art of acting is a subject difficult to treat with the necessary brevity.
Beginners are naturally anxious to know what course they should pursue.  In common with other
actors, I receive letters from young people many of whom are very earnest in their ambition
to adopt the dramatic calling, but not sufficiently alive to the fact that success does not
depend on a few lessons in declamation. When I was a boy I had a habit which I think would
be useful to all young students.  Before going to see a play of Shakespeare's I used to form--in
a very juvenile way--a theory as to the working out of the whole drama, so as to correct my
conceptions by those of the actors; and though I was, as a rule, absurdly wrong, there can
be no doubt that any method of independent study is of enormous importance, not only to youngsters,
but also to students of a larger growth.  Without it the mind is apt to take its stamp from
the first forcible impression it receives, and to fall into a servile dependence upon traditions,
which, robbed of the spirit that created them, are apt to be purely mischievous.  What was
natural to the creator is often unnatural and lifeless in the imitator.  No two people form
the same conceptions of character, and therefore it is always advantageous to see an independent
and courageous exposition of an original ideal. There can be no objection to the kind of training
that imparts a knowledge of manners and customs, and the teaching which pertains to simple
deportment on the stage is necessary and most useful; but you cannot possibly be taught any
tradition of character, for that has no permanence.  Nothing is more fleeting than any traditional
method or impersonation.  You may learn where a particular personage used to stand on the stage,
or down which trap the ghost of Hamlet's father vanished; but the soul of interpretation is
lost, and it is this soul which the actor has to re-create for himself.  It is not mere attitude
or tone that has to be studied; you must be moved by the impulse of being; you must impersonate
and not recite.

FEELING AS A REALITY OR A SEMBLANCE

It is necessary to warn you against the theory expounded with brilliant ingenuity by Diderot
that the actor never feels.  When Macready played Virginius, after burying his beloved daughter,
he confessed that his real experience gave a new force to his acting in the most pathetic situations
of the play.  Are we to suppose that this was a delusion, or that the sensibility of the man
was a genuine aid to the actor?  Bannister said of John Kemble that he was never pathetic because
he had no children.  Talma says that when deeply moved he found himself making a rapid and
fugitive observation on the alternation of his voice, and on a certain spasmodic vibration
which it contracted in tears.  Has not the actor who can thus make his feelings a part of his
art an advantage over the actor who never feels, but who makes his observations solely from
the feelings of others?  It is necessary to this art that the mind should have, as it were,
a double consciousness, in which all the emotions proper to the occasion may have full swing,
while the actor is all the time on the alert for every detail of his method.  It may be that
his playing will be more spirited one night than another.  But the actor who combines the electric
force of a strong personality with a mastery of the resources of his art must have a greater
power over his audiences than the passionless actor who gives a most artistic simulation of
the emotions he never experiences.

GESTURE.  LISTENING AS AN ART.  TEAM-PLAY ON THE STAGE

With regard to gesture, Shakespeare's advice is all-embracing.  And here comes the consideration
of a very material part of the actor's business--by-play.  This is of the very essence of true
art.  It is more than anything else significant of the extent to which the actor has identified
himself with the character he represents.  Recall the scenes between Iago and Othello, and
consider how the whole interest of the situation depends on the skill with which the gradual
effect of the poisonous suspicion instilled into the Moor's mind is depicted in look and tone,
slight of themselves, but all contributing to the intensity of the situation.  One of the greatest
tests of an actor is his capacity for listening.  By-play must be unobtrusive; the student
should remember that the most minute expression attracts attention, that nothing is lost, that
by-play is as mischievous when it is injudicious as it is effective when rightly conceived,
and that while trifles make perfection, perfection is no trifle.  This lesson was enjoined
on me when I was a very young man by that remarkable actress, Charlotte Cushman.  I remember
that when she played Meg Merrilies I was cast for Henry Bertram, on the principle, seemingly,
that an actor with no singing voice is admirably fitted for a singing part.  It was my duty
to give Meg Merrilies a piece of money, and I did it after the traditional fashion by handing
her a large purse full of the coin of the realm, in the shape of broken crockery, which was
generally used in financial transactions on the stage, because when the virtuous maid rejected
with scorn the advances of the lordly libertine, and threw his pernicious bribe upon the ground,
the clatter of the broken crockery suggested fabulous wealth.  But after the play Miss Cushman,
in the course of some kindly advice, said to me:  "Instead of giving me that purse, don't you
think it would have been much more natural if you had taken a number of coins from your pocket,
and given me the smallest?  That is the way one gives alms to a beggar, and it would have added
to the realism of the scene."  I have never forgotten that lesson, for simple as it was, it
contained many elements of dramatic truth.  It is most important that an actor should learn
that he is a figure in a picture, and that the least exaggeration destroys the harmony of the
composition.  All the members of the company should work toward a common end, with the nicest
subordination of their individuality to the general purpose.  Without this method a play when
acted is at best a disjoined and incoherent piece of work, instead of being a harmonious whole
like the fine performance of an orchestral symphony.

HENRY BRODRIBB IRVING

[Henry Brodribb Irving, son of the late Sir Henry Irving, was born in London in 1870.  His
first appearance on the stage was at the Garrick Theatre, London, in "School," when twenty-one.
In 1906 he toured with success throughout the United States, appearing in plays made memorable
by his father, "The Lyons Mail," "Charles I.," and "The Bells."  Mr. Irving distinctly inherits
Sir Henry Irving's ability both as an actor and as a thoughtful student of acting as an art.
In 1905 he gave a lecture, largely autobiographical, to the Academy of Dramatic Art in London.
It appeared in the Fortnightly Review, May, 1905, and is republished by Small, Maynard & Co.,
Boston, in "Occasional Papers.  Dramatic and Historical" by Mr. Irving.  By his kindness, and
that of his publishers, its pages are here drawn upon.--ED.]

THE CALLING OF AN ACTOR

I received, not very long ago, in a provincial town, a letter from a young lady, who wished
to adopt the stage as a profession but was troubled in her mind by certain anxieties and uncertainties.
These she desired me to relieve.  The questions asked by my correspondent are rather typical
questions-questions that are generally asked by those who, approaching the stage from the outside,
in the light of prejudice and misrepresentation, believe the calling of the actor to be one
morally dangerous and intellectually contemptible; one in which it is equally easy to succeed
as an artist and degenerate as an individual.  She begins by telling me that she has a "fancy
for the stage," and has "heard a great many things about it."  Now, for any man or woman to
become an actor or actress because they have a "fancy for the stage" is in itself the height
of folly.  There is no calling, I would venture to say, which demands on the part of the aspirant
greater searching of heart, thought, deliberation, real assurance of fitness, reasonable prospect
of success before deciding to follow it, than that of the actor.  And not the least advantage
of a dramatic school lies in the fact that some of its pupils may learn to reconsider their
determination to go on the stage, become convinced of their own unfitness, recognise in time
that they will be wise to abandon a career which must always be hazardous and difficult even
to those who are successful, and cruel to those who fail.  Let it be something far sterner
and stronger than mere fancy that decides you to try your fortunes in the theatre.

My correspondent says she has "heard a great many things about the stage."  If I might presume
to offer a piece of advice, it would be this:  Never believe anything you hear about actors
and actresses from those who are not actually familiar with them.  The amount of nonsense,
untruth, sometimes mischievous, often silly, talked by otherwise rational people about the
theatre, is inconceivable were it not for one's own personal experience.  It is one of the
penalties of the glamour, the illusion of the actor's art, that the public who see men and
women in fictitious but highly exciting and moving situations on the stage, cannot believe
that when they quit the theatre, they leave behind them the emotions, the actions they have
portrayed there. And as there is no class of public servants in whom the public they serve
take so keen an interest as actors and actresses, the wildest inventions about their private
lives and domestic behaviour pass as current, and are eagerly retailed at afternoon teas in
suburban drawing-rooms.

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE STAGE

Now, the first question my correspondent asks me is this: "Does a young woman going on the
stage need a good education and also to know languages?"  To answer the first part of the question
is not, I think, very difficult.  The supremely great actor or actress of natural genius need
have no education or knowledge of languages; it will be immaterial whether he or she has enjoyed
all the advantages of birth and education or has been picked up in the streets; genius, the
highest talent, will assert itself irrespective of antecedents.  But I should say that any
sort of education was of the greatest value to an actor or actress of average ability, and
that the fact that the ranks of the stage are recruited to-day to a certain extent from our
great schools and universities, from among classes of people who fifty years ago would never
have dreamed of entering our calling, is one on which we may congratulate ourselves.  Though
the production of great actors and actresses will not be affected either one way or the other
by these circumstances, at the same time our calling must benefit in the general level of its
excellence, in its fitness to represent all grades of society on the stage, if those who follow
it are picked from all classes, if the stage has ceased to be regarded as a calling unfit for
a man or woman of breeding or education,

The second question this lady asks me is this:

"Does she need to have her voice trained, and about what age do people generally commence to
go on the stage?"  The first part of this question as to voice training touches on the value
of an Academy of Acting.  Of the value--the practical value--of such an institution rightly
conducted there can be no doubt.  That acting cannot be taught is a well-worn maxim and perhaps
a true one; but acting can be disciplined; the ebullient, sometimes eccentric and disordered
manifestations of budding talent may be modified by the art of the teacher; those rudiments,
which many so often acquire painfully in the course of rehearsal, the pupils who leave an academy
should be masters of and so save much time and trouble to those whose business it is to produce
plays.  The want of any means of training the beginner, of coping at all with the floods of
men and women, fit and unfit, who are ever clamouring at the doors of the theatre, has been
a long-crying and much-felt grievance.  The establishment of this academy should go far to
remove what has been by no means an unjust reproach to our theatrical system.  As to the age
at which a person should begin a theatrical career, I do not think there is any actor or actress
who would not say that it is impossible to begin too early--at least, as early as a police
magistrate will allow.  That art is long and life short applies quite as truthfully to the
actor's as to any other art, and as the years go on there must be many who regret that they
did not sooner decide to follow a calling which seems to carry one all too quickly through
the flight of time.

TEMPTATIONS ON THE STAGE

My correspondent also asks me a question which I shall answer very briefly, but which it is
as well should be answered; She writes, "Are there many temptations for a girl on the stage,
and need she necessarily fall into them?"  Of course there are such temptations on the stage,
as there must be in any calling in which men and women are brought into contact on a footing
of equality; perhaps these temptations are somewhat intensified in the theatre.  At the same
time, I would venture to say from my own experience of that branch of theatrical business with
which I have been connected--and in such matters one can only speak from personal experience--that
any woman yielding to these temptations has only herself to blame, that any well-brought-up,
sensible girl will, and can, avoid them altogether, and that I should not make these temptations
a ground for dissuading any young woman in whom I might be interested from joining our calling.
To say, as a writer once said, that it was impossible for a girl to succeed on the stage without
impaired morals, is a statement as untrue as to say that no man can succeed as a lawyer unless
he be a rogue, a doctor unless he be a quack, a parson unless be be a hypocrite.

To all who intend to become actors and actresses, my first word of advice would be--Respect
this calling you have chosen to pursue.  You will often in your experience hear it, see it
in print, slighted and contemned.  There are many reasons for this.  Religious prejudice, fostered
by the traditions of a by no means obsolete Puritanism, is one; the envy of those who, forgetting
the disadvantages, the difficulties, the uncertainty of the actor's life, see only the glare
of popular adulation, the glitter of the comparatively large salaries paid to a few of us--such
unreasoning envy as this is another; and the want of sympathy of some writers with the art
itself, who, unable to pray with Goethe and Voltaire, remain to scoff with Jeremy Collier,
is a third.  There are causes from without that will always keep alive a certain measure of
hostility towards the player.  As long as the public, in Hazlitt's words, feel more respect
for John Kemble in a plain coat than the Lord Chancellor on the Woolsack, so long will this
public regard for the actor provoke the resentment of those whose achievements in art appeal
less immediately, less strikingly, to their audience.  But if they would only pause to consider,
surely they might lay to their souls the unction that the immediate reward of the actor in
his lifetime is merely nature's compensation to him for the comparative oblivion of his achievements
when he has ceased to be. Imagine for one moment Shakespeare and Garrick contemplating at the
present moment from the heights the spectacle of their fame.  Who would grudge the actor the
few years of fervid admiration he was privileged to enjoy, some one hundred and fifty years
ago, as compared with the centuries of living glory that have fallen to the great poet?

Sometimes you may hear your calling sneered at by those who pursue it. There are few professions
that are not similarly girded at by some of their own members, either from disappointment or
some ingrained discontent.  When you hear such detraction, fix your thoughts not on the paltry
accidents of your art, such as the use of cosmetics and other little infirmities of its practice,
things that are obvious marks for the cheap sneer, but look rather to what that art is capable
of in its highest forms, to what is the essence of the actor's achievement, what he can do
and has done to win the genuine admiration and respect of those whose admiration and respect
have been worth the having.

ACTING IS A GREAT ART

You will read and hear, no doubt, in your experience, that acting is in reality no art at all,
that it is mere sedulous copying of nature, demanding neither thought nor originality.  I will
only cite in reply a passage from a letter of the poet Coleridge to the elder Charles Mathews,
which, I venture to think, goes some way to settle the question.  "A great actor," he writes,
"comic or tragic, is not to be a mere copy, a fac-simile, but an imitation of nature; now an
imitation differs from a copy in this, that it of necessity implies and demands a difference,
whereas a copy aims at identity and what a marble peach on the mantelpiece, that you take up
deluded and put down with a pettish disgust, is compared with a fruit-piece of Vanhuysen's,
even such is a mere copy of nature, with a true histrionic imitation. A good actor is Pygmalion's
statue, a work of exquisite art, animated and gifted with motion; but still art, still a species
of poetry."  So writes Coleridge.  Raphael, speaking  of  painting, expresses the same thought,
equally applicable to the art of acting.  "To paint a fair one," he says, "it is necessary
for me to see many fair ones; but because there is so great a scarcity of lovely women, I am
constrained to make use of one certain ideal, which I have formed to myself in my own fancy."
So the actor who has to portray Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth--any great dramatic character--has
to form an ideal of such a character in his own fancy, in fact, to employ an exercise of imagination
similar to that of the painter who seeks to depict an ideal man or woman; the actor certainly
will not meet his types of Hamlet and Othello in the street.

But, whilst in your hearts you should cherish a firm respect for the calling, the art you pursue,
let that respect be a silent and modest regard; it will be all the stronger for that.  I have
known actors and actresses who were always talking about their art with a big A, their "art-life,"
their "life-work," their careers and futures, and so on. Keep these things to yourselves, for
I have observed that eloquence and hyper-earnestness of this kind not infrequently go with
rather disappointing achievement.  Think, act, but don't talk about it.  And, above all, because
you are actors and actresses, for that very reason be sincere and unaffected; avoid rather
than court publicity, for you will have quite enough of it if you get on in your profession;
the successful actor is being constantly tempted to indiscretion.  Do not yield too readily
to the blandishments of the photographer, or the enterprising editor who asks you what are
the love scenes you have most enjoyed playing on the stage, and whether an actor or actress
can be happy though married.  Be natural on the stage, and be just as natural off it; regard
the thing you have to do as work that has to be done to the best of your power; if it be well
done, it will bring its own reward.  It may not be an immediate reward, but have faith, keep
your purpose serious, so serious as to be almost a secret; bear in mind that ordinary people
expect you, just because you are actors and actresses, to be extraordinary, unnatural, peculiar;
do your utmost at all times and seasons to disappoint such expectations.

RELATIONS TO "SOCIETY"

To the successful actor society, if he desire it, offers a warm and cordial welcome.  Its members
do not, it is true, suggest that he should marry with their daughters, but why should they?
An actor has a very unattractive kind of life to offer to any woman who is not herself following
his profession.  What I mean is that the fact of a man being an actor does not debar him from
such gratification as he may find in the pleasures of society.  And I believe that the effect
of such raising of the actor's status as has been witnessed in the last fifty years has been
to elevate the general tone of our calling and bring into it men and women of education and
refinement.

At the same time, remember that social enjoyments should always be a secondary consideration
to the actor, something of a luxury to be sparingly indulged in.  An actor should never let
himself be beguiled into the belief that society, generally speaking, is seriously interested
in what he does, or that popularity in drawing-rooms connotes success in the theatre.  It does
nothing of the kind.  Always remember that you can hope to have but few, very few friends or
admirers of any class who will pay to see you in a failure; you will be lucky if a certain
number do not ask you for free admission to see you in a success.

THE FINAL SCHOOL IS THE AUDIENCE

It is to a public far larger, far more real and genuine than this, that you will one day have
to appeal.  It is in their presence that you will finish your education.  The final school
for the actor is his audience; they are the necessary complement to the exercise of his art,
and it is by the impression he produces on them that he will ultimately stand or fall; on their
verdict, and on their verdict alone, will his success or failure as an artist depend.  But,
if you have followed carefully, assiduously, the course of instruction now open to you, when
the time has arrived for you to face an audience you will start with a very considerable handicap
in your favour.  If you have learnt to move well and to speak well, to be clear in your enunciation
and graceful in your bearing, you are bound to arrest at once the attention of any audience,
no matter where it may be, before whom you appear.  Obvious and necessary as are these two
acquirements of graceful bearing and correct diction, they are not so generally diffused as
to cease to be remarkable.  Consequently, however modest your beginning on the stage, however
short the part you may be called upon to play, you should find immediately the benefit of your
training.  You may have to unlearn a certain amount, or rather to mould and shape what you
have learnt to your new conditions, but if you have been well grounded in the essential elements
of an actor's education, you will stand with an enormous advantage over such of your competitors
as have waited till they go into a theatre to learn what can be acquired just as well, better,
more thoroughly, outside it.

It has been my object to deal generally with the actor's calling, a calling, difficult and
hazardous in character, demanding much patience, self-reliance, determination, and good temper.
This last is not one of its least important demands on your character.  Remember that the actor
is not in one sense of the word an independent artist; it is his misfortune that the practice
of his art is absolutely dependent on the fulfilment of elaborate external conditions.  The
painter, the musician, so long as they can find paint and canvas, ink and paper, can work at
their art, alone, independent of external circumstances.  Not so the actor.  Before he can
act, the theatre, the play, scenery, company, these requisites, not by any means too easy to
find, must be provided.  And then it is in the company of others, his colleagues, that his
work has to be done.  Consequently patience, good temper, fairness, unselfishness are qualities
be will do well to cultivate, and he will lose nothing, rather gain, by the exercise of them.
The selfish actor is not a popular person, and, in my experience, not as a rule a successful
one.  "Give and take," in this little world of the theatre, and you will be no losers by it.

Learn to bear failure and criticism patiently.  They are part of the actor's lot in life. 
Critics are rarely animated by any personal hostility in what they may write about you, though
I confess that when one reads an unfavourable criticism, one is inclined to set it down to
anything but one's own deserving.  I heard a great actor once say that we should never read
criticisms of ourselves till a week after they were written--admirable counsel--but I confess
I have not yet reached that pitch of self-restraint that would enable me to overcome my curiosity
for seven days.  It is, however, a state of equanimity to look forward to.  In the meantime,
content yourself with the recollection that ridicule and damning criticism have been the lot
at some time in their lives of the most famous actors and actresses, that the unfavourable
verdict of to-day may be reversed to-morrow.  It is no good resenting failure; turn it to account
rather; try to understand it, and learn something from it.  The uses of theatrical adversity
may not be sweet, but rightly understood they may be very salutary.

Do not let failure make you despond.  Ours is a calling of ups and downs; it is an advantage
of its uncertainty that you never know what may happen next; the darkest hour may he very near
the dawn.  This is where Bohemianism, in the best sense of the term, will serve the actor.
I do not mean by Bohemianism chronic intemperance and insolvency.  I mean the gay spirit of
daring and enterprise that greets failure as graciously as success; the love of your own calling
and your comrades in that calling, a love that, no matter what your measure of success, will
ever remain constant and enduring; the recognition of the fact that as an actor you but consult
your own dignity in placing your own calling as a thing apart, in leading such a life as the
necessities of that calling may demand; and choosing your friends among those who regard you
for yourself, not those to whom an actor is a social puppet, to be taken up and dropped as
he happens for the moment to be more or less prominent in the public eye. If this kind of Bohemianism
has some root in your character, you will find the changes and chances of your calling the
easier to endure.

FAILURE AND SUCCESS

Do not despond in failure, neither be over-exalted by success. Remember one success is as nothing
in the history of an actor's career; he has to make many before he can lay claim to any measure
of fame; and over-confidence, an inability to estimate rightly the value of a passing triumph,
has before now harmed incalculably many an actor or actress.  You will only cease to learn
your business when you quit it; look on success as but another lesson learnt to be turned to
account in learning the next.  The art of the actor is no less difficult, no less long in comparison
with life, than any other art. In the intoxicating hour of success let this chastening thought
have some place in your recollection.

When you begin work as actors or actresses, play whenever you can and whatever you can.  Remember
that the great thing for the actor is to be seen as often as possible, to be before the public
as much as he can, no matter how modest the part, how insignificant the production. It is only
when an actor has reached a position very secure in the public esteem that he can afford, or
that it may be his duty, to be careful as to what he undertakes.  But before such a time is
reached his one supreme object must be to get himself known to the public, to let them see
his work under all conditions, until they find something to identify as peculiarly his own;
he should think nothing too small or unimportant to do, too tiresome or laborious to undergo.
Work well and conscientiously done must attract attention; there is a great deal of lolling
and idleness among the many thoughtless and indifferent persons who drift on to the stage as
the last refuge of the negligent or incompetent.

The stage will always attract a certain number of worthless recruits because it is so easy
to get into the theatre somehow or other; there is no examination to be passed, no qualification
to be proved before a person is entitled to call himself an actor.  And then the life of an
actor is unfortunately, in these days of long runs, one that lends itself to a good deal of
idleness and waste of time, unless a man or woman be very determined to employ their spare
time profitably.  For this reason, I should advise any actor, or actress, to cultivate some
rational hobby or interest by the side of their work; for until the time comes for an actor
to assume the cares and labours of management, he must have a great deal of time on his hands
that can be better employed than in hanging about clubs or lolling in drawing-rooms.  At any
rate, the actor or actress who thinks no work too small to do, and to do to the utmost of his
or her ability, who neglects no opportunity that may be turned to account--and every line he
or she speaks is an opportunity--must outstrip those young persons who, though they may be
pleased to call themselves actors and actresses, never learn to regard the theatre as anything
but a kind of enlarged back-drawing-room, in which they are invited to amuse themselves at
an altogether inadequate salary.

In regard to salary, when you start in your profession, do not make salary your first consideration;
do not suffer a few shillings or a pound or two to stand between you and work.  This is a consideration
you may keep well in mind, even when you have achieved some measure of success.  Apart from
the natural tendency of the individual to place a higher value on his services than that attached
to them by others, it is often well to take something less than you ask, if the work offered
you is useful.  Remember that the public judge you by your work, they know nothing and care
little about what is being paid you for doing it.  To some people their own affairs are of
such supreme importance that they cannot believe that their personal concerns are unknown to,
and unregarded by, the outside world.  The intensely personal, individual character of the
actor's work is bound to induce a certain temptation to an exaggerated egotism.  We are all
egotists, and it is right that we should be, up to a point.  But I would urge the young actor
or actress to be always on the watch against developing, especially in success, an extreme
egotism which induces a selfishness of outlook, an egregious vanity that in the long run weakens
the character, induces disappointment and discontent, and bores to extinction other persons.

I would not for one moment advise an actor never to talk "shop"; it is a great mistake to think
that men and women should never talk in public or private about the thing to which they devote
their lives; people, as a rule, are most interesting on the subject of their own particular
business in life.  Talk about the affairs of the theatre within reason, and with due regard
to the amenities of polite conversation, but do not confuse the affairs of the theatre, broadly
speaking, with your own.  The one is lasting, general; the other particular and fleeting. 
"Il n'y a pas de l'homme necessaire" [No man is indispensable].  Many persons would be strangely
surprised if they could see how rapidly their place is filled after they are gone, no matter
how considerable their achievement.  It may not be filled in the same way, as well, as fittingly,
but it will be filled, and humanity will content itself very fairly well with the substitute.
This is especially true of the work of the actor.  He can but live as a memory, and memory
is proverbially short.

ELLEN TERRY

[In the autumn of 1883, during Henry Irving's fist engagement in New York, Ellen Terry played
a round of characters as his leading lady. In the Tribune, Mr. William Winter said:  "Miss
Ellen Terry's Portia is delicious.  Her voice is perfect music.  Her clear, bell-like elocution
is more than a refreshment, it is a luxury.  Her simple manner, always large and adequate,
is a great beauty of the art which it so deftly conceals.  Her embodiment of a woman's loveliness,
such as, in Portia, should he at once stately and fascinating and inspire at once respect and
passion, was felicitous beyond the reach of descriptive phrases."  Then, on her appearance
in "Much Ado About Nothing:" "She permeates the raillery of Beatrice with an indescribable
charm of mischievous sweetness.  The silver arrows of her pungent wit have no barb, for evidently
she does not mean that they shall really wound.  Her appearance and carriage are beautiful,
and her tones melt into music.  There is no hint of the virago here, and even the tone of sarcasm
is superficial.  It is archness playing over kindness that is presented here."  On her Ophelia,
Mr. Winter remarks: "Ophelia is an image, or personification of innocent, delirious, feminine
youth and beauty, and she passes before us in the two stages of sanity and delirium.  The embodiment
is fully within Miss Terry's reach, and is one of the few unmistakably perfect creations with
which dramatic art has illumined literature and adorned the stage."

By permission the following pages have been taken from "Ellen Terry's Memoirs," copyright by
the S. S. McClure Company, 1908.  All rights reserved.

THE ENTRANCE SCENE IN "HAMLET"  Henry defined the way he would have the players speak as an
order, an instruction of the merit of which he was regally sure.  He lived in it, he died in
it.  I had learned from Mr. Watts, from Mr. Goodwin, and from other artists, until a sense
of decorative effect had become second nature to me.  I hope this helped him a little.

RICHARD MANSFIELD

[Richard Mansfield, one of the great actors of his time, was born in Heligoland, then a British
Possession, in 1857.  He prepared himself for the East Indian civil service, then studied art,
and opened a studio in Boston.  He was soon attracted to the stage, and began playing minor
parts in comic opera, displaying marked ability from the first.  His versatility took him all
the way from the role of Koko in the "Mikado," to Beau Brummel and Richard III.  His success
soon enabled him to assemble a company of his own; as its manager he produced with memorable
effect "Cyrano de Bergerac," "Henry V.," and "Julius Caesar."  He died in 1907, a few weeks
after a striking creation of "Peer Gynt."  A biography of Mr. Mansfield by Mr. Paul Wilstach
is published by C. Scribner's Sons, New York.

Mr. Mansfield's article on "Man and the Actor," which appeared in the Atlantic Monthly, May,
1906, copyright by Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Boston, is here given almost in full by the kind
permission of the publishers and of Mrs. Richard Mansfield.

Shakespeare does not say "may" play a part, or "can" play a part, but he says must play a part;
and he has expressed the conviction of every intelligent student of humanity then and thereafter,
now and hereafter.  The stage cannot be held in contempt by mankind; because all mankind is
acting, and every human being is playing a part.  The better a man plays his part, the better
he succeeds.  The more a man knows of the art of acting, the greater the man; for, from the
king on his throne to the beggar in the street, every man is acting.  There is no greater comedian
or tragedian in the world than a great king.  The knowledge of the art of acting is indispensable
to a knowledge of mankind, and when you are able to pierce the disguise in which every man
arrays himself, or to read the character which every man assumes, you achieve an intimate knowledge
of your fellow men, and you are able to cope with the man, either as he is, or as he pretends
to be.  It was necessary for Shakespeare to be an actor in order to know men. Without his knowledge
of the stage, Shakespeare could never have been the reader of men that he was.  And yet we
are asked, "Is the stage worth while?"

NAPOLEON AS ACTOR

Napoleon and Alexander were both great actors--Napoleon perhaps the greatest actor the world
has ever seen.  Whether on the bridge of Lodi, or in his camp at Tilsit; whether addressing
his soldiers in the plains of Egypt; whether throwing open his old gray coat and saying, "Children,
will you fire on your general?" whether bidding farewell to them at Fontainebleau; whether
standing on the deck of the Bellerophon, or on the rocks of St. Helena--he was always an actor.
Napoleon had studied the art of acting, and he knew its value.  If the power of the eye, the
power of the voice, the power of that all-commanding gesture of the hand, failed him when he
faced the regiment of veterans on his return from Elba, he was lost.  But he had proved and
compelled his audience too often for his art to fail him then.  The leveled guns fell.  The
audience was his.  Another crown had fallen!  By what?  A trick of the stage!  Was he willing
to die then? to be shot by his old guard?  Not he!  Did he doubt for one moment his ability
as an actor.  Not he!  If he had, he would have been lost.  And that power to control, that
power to command, once it is possessed by a man, means that that man can play his part anywhere,
and under all circumstances and conditions.  Unconsciously or consciously, every great man,
every man who has played a great part, has been an actor.  Each man, every man, who has made
his mark has chosen his character, the character best adapted to himself, and has played it,
and clung to it, and made his impress with it.  I have but to conjure up the figure of Daniel
Webster, who never lost an opportunity to act; or General Grant, who chose for his model William
of Orange, surnamed the Silent.  You will find every one of your most admired heroes choosing
early in life some admired hero of his own to copy.  Who can doubt that Napoleon had selected
Julius Caesar?  For, once he had founded an empire, everything about him was modelled after
the Caesarean regime.  Look at his coronation robes, the women's gowns--the very furniture!
Actors, painters, musicians, politicians, society men and women, and kings and queens, all
play their parts, and all build themselves after some favourite model.  In this woman of society
you trace the influence of the Princess Metternich.  In another we see her admiration (and
a very proper one) for Her Britannic Majesty.  In another we behold George Eliot, or Queen
Louise of Prussia, or the influence of some modern society leader.  But no matter who it is,
from the lowest to the highest, the actor is dominant in the human being, and this trait exhibits
itself early in the youngest child.  Everywhere you see stage-craft in one form or another.
If men loved not costumes and scenery, would the king be escorted by the lifeguards, arrayed
in shining helmets and breastplates, which we know are perfectly useless in these days when
a bullet will go through fifty of them with ease?  The first thing a man thinks of when he
has to face any ordeal, be it a coronation or an execution, is, how am I going to look? how
am I to behave? what manner shall I assume? shall I appear calm and dignified, or happy and
pleased? shall I wear a portentous frown or a beaming smile? how shall I walk? shall I take
short steps or long ones? shall I stoop as if bowed with care, or walk erect with courage and
pride? shall I gaze fearlessly on all about me, or shall I drop my eyes modestly to the ground?
If man were not always acting, he would not think of these things at all, he would not bother
his head about them, but would walk to his coronation or his execution according to his nature.
In the last event this would have to be, in some cases, on all fours.

I stretch my eyes over the wide world, and the people in it, and I can see no one who is not
playing a part; therefore respect the art of which you are all devotees, and, if you must act,
learn to play your parts well.  Study the acting of others, so that you may discover what part
is being played by others.

THE GIFT FOR ACTING IS RARE

It is, therefore, not amazing that everybody is interested in the art of acting, and it is
not amazing that every one thinks he can act. You have only to suggest private theatricals,
when a house party is assembled at some country house, to verify the truth of the statement.
Immediately commences a lively rivalry as to who shall play this part or that.  Each one considers
herself or himself best suited, and I have known private theatricals to lead to lifelong enmities.

It is surprising to discover how very differently people who have played parts all their lives
deport themselves before the footlights. I was acquainted with a lady in London who had been
the wife of a peer of the realm, who had been ambassadress at foreign courts, who at one time
had been a reigning beauty, and who came to me, longing for a new experience, and implored
me to give her an opportunity to appear upon the stage.  In a weak moment I consented, and
as I was producing a play, I cast her for a part which I thought she would admirably suit-that
of a society woman.  What that woman did and did not do on the stage passes all belief.  She
became entangled in her train, she could neither sit down nor stand up, she shouted, she could
not be persuaded to remain at a respectful distance, but insisted upon shrieking into the actor's
ears, and she committed all the gaucheries you would expect from an untrained country wench.
But because everybody is acting in private life, every one thinks he can act upon the stage,
and there is no profession that has so many critics.  Every individual in the audience is a
critic, and knows all about the art of acting.  But acting is a gift.  It cannot be taught.
You can teach people how to act acting--but you can't teach them to act.  Acting is as much
an inspiration as the making of great poetry and great pictures.  What is commonly called acting
is acting acting.  This is what is generally accepted as acting.  A man speaks lines, moves
his arms, wags his head, and does various other things; he may even shout and rant; some pull
down their cuffs and inspect their finger nails; they work hard and perspire, and their skin
acts.  This is all easily comprehended by the masses, and passes for acting, and is applauded,
but the man who is actually the embodiment of the character he is creating will often be misunderstood,
be disliked, and fail to attract.  Mediocrity rouses no opposition, but strong individualities
and forcible opinions make enemies.  It is here that danger lies. Many an actor has set out
with an ideal, but, failing to gain general favour, has abandoned it for the easier method
of winning popular acclaim.  Inspiration only comes to those who permit themselves to be inspired.
It is a form of hypnotism.  Allow yourself to be convinced by the character you are portraying
that you are the character.  If you are to play Napoleon, and you are sincere and determined
to be Napoleon, Napoleon will not permit you to be any one but Napoleon, or Richard III. Richard
III., or Nero Nero, and so on.  He would be a poor, miserable pretence of an actor who in the
representation of any historical personage were otherwise than firmly convinced, after getting
into the man's skin (which means the exhaustive study of all that was ever known about him),
that he is living that very man for a few brief hours.  And so it is, in another form, with
the creation or realisation of the author's, the poet's, fancy.  In this latter case the actor,
the poet actor, sees and creates in the air before him the being he delineates; he makes him,
he builds him during the day, in the long hours of the night; the character gradually takes
being; he is the actor's genius; the slave of the ring, who comes when he calls him, stands
beside him, and envelops him in his ghostly arms; the actor's personality disappears; he is
the character.  You, you, and you, and all of you, have the right to object to the actor's
creation; you may say this is not your conception of Hamlet or Macbeth or Iago or Richard or
Nero or Shylock--but respect his.  And who can tell whether he is right or you are right? 
He has created them with much loving care; therefore don't sneer at them--don't jeer at them--it
hurts!  If you have reared a rosebush in your garden, and seen it bud and bloom, are you pleased
to have some ruthless vandal tear the flowers from their stem and trample them in the mud?
And it is not always our most beautiful children we love the best.  The parent's heart will
surely warm toward its feeblest child.

THE CREATION OF A CHARACTER

It is very evident that any man, be he an actor or no actor, can, with money and with good
taste, make what is technically termed a production.  There is, as an absolute matter of fact,
no particular credit to be attached to the making of a production.  The real work of the stage,
of the actor, does not lie there.  It is easy for us to busy ourselves, to pass pleasantly
our time, designing lovely scenes, charming costumes, and all the paraphernalia and pomp of
mimic grandeur, whether of landscape or of architecture, the panoply of war, or the luxury
of royal courts.  That is fun--pleasure and amusement. No; the real work of the stage lies
in the creation of a character.  A great character will live forever, when paint and canvas
and silks and satins and gold foil and tinsel shall have gone the way of all rags.

But the long, lone hours with our heads in our hands, the toil, the patient study, the rough
carving of the outlines, the dainty, delicate finishing touches, the growing into the soul
of the being we delineate, the picture of his outward semblance, his voice, his gait, his speech,
all amount to a labour of such stress and strain, of such loving anxiety and care, that they
can be compared in my mind only to a mother's pains.  And when the child is born it must grow
in a few hours to completion, and be exhibited and coldly criticised.  How often, how often,
have those long months of infinite toil been in vain!  How often has the actor led the child
of his imagination to the footlights, only to realise that he has brought into the world a
weakling or a deformity which may not live!  And how often he has sat through the long night
brooding over the corpse of this dear figment of his fancy!  It has lately become customary
with many actor-managers to avoid these pangs of childbirth.  They have determinedly declined
the responsibility they owe to the poet and the public, and have instead dazzled the eye with
a succession of such splendid pictures that the beholder forgets in a surfeit of the sight
the feast that should feed the soul.  This is what I am pleased to term talk versus acting.
The representative actors in London are much inclined in this direction.

COPY LIFE

The student may well ask, "What are we to copy, and whom are we to copy?"  Don't copy any one;
don't copy any individual actor, or his methods.  The methods of one actor--the means by which
he arrives--cannot always be successfully employed by another.  The methods and personality
of one actor are no more becoming or suitable or adapted to another than certain gowns worn
by women of fashion simply because these gowns are the fashion.  In the art of acting, like
the art of painting, we must study life--copy life!  You will have before you the work of great
masters, and you will learn very much from them--quite as much what to avoid as what to follow.
No painting is perfect, and no acting is perfect.  No actor ever played a part to absolute
perfection.  It is just as impossible for an actor to simulate nature completely upon the stage
as it is impossible for the painter to portray on canvas the waves of the ocean, the raging
storm clouds, or the horrors of conflagration.

The nearer the artist gets to nature, the greater he is.  We may admire Rubens and Rembrandt
and Vandyke and Gainsborough and Turner, but who will dare to say that any one of their pictures
is faultless? We shall learn much from them all, but quite as much what to avoid as what to
emulate.  But when you discover their faults, do not forget their virtues.  Look, and realise
what it means to be able to do so much, And the actor's art is even more difficult!  For its
execution must be immediate and spontaneous.  The word is delivered, the action is done, and
the picture is painted!  Can I pause and say, "Ladies and gentlemen, that is not the way I
wanted to do this, or to say that; if you will allow me to try again, I think I can improve
upon it?"

SELF-CRITICISM

The most severe critic can never tell me more, or scold me more than I scold myself.  I have
never left the stage satisfied with myself.  And I am convinced that every artist feels as
I do about his work.  It is the undoubted duty of the critic to criticise, and that means to
blame as well as to praise; and it must be confessed that, taking all things into consideration,
the critics of this country are actuated by honesty of purpose and kindliness of spirit, and
very often their work is, in addition, of marked literary value.  Occasionally we will still
meet the man who is anxious to impress his fellow citizens with the fact that he has been abroad,
and tinctures all his views of plays and actors with references to Herr Dinkelspiegel or Frau
Mitterwoorzer; or who, having spent a few hours in Paris, is forced to drag in by the hair
Monsieur Popin or Mademoiselle Fifine.  But as a matter of fact, is not the interpretation
of tragedy and comedy by the American stage superior to the German and French?--for the whole
endeavour in this country has been toward a closer adherence to nature.  In France and in Germany
the ancient method of declamation still prevails, and the great speeches of Goethe and Schiller
and Racine and Corneille are to all intents and purposes intoned.  No doubt this sounds very
fine in German and French, but how would you like it now in English?

The old-time actor had peculiar and primitive views as to elocution and its uses.  I remember
a certain old friend of mine, who, when he recited the opening speech in "Richard III.," and
arrived at the line "In the deep bosom of the ocean buried," suggested the deep bosom of the
ocean by sending his voice down into his boots.  Yet these were fine actors, to whom certain
young gentlemen, who never saw them, constantly refer.  The methods of the stage have completely
changed, and with them the tastes of the people.  The probability is that some of the old actors
of only a few years ago would excite much merriment in their delineation of tragedy.  A very
great tragedian of a past generation was wont, in the tent scene in "Richard III.," to hold
a piece of soap in his mouth, so that, after the appearance of the ghosts, the lather and froth
might dribble down his chin! and he employed, moreover, a trick sword, which rattled hideously;
and, what with his foam-flecked face, his rolling eyes, his inarticulate groans, and his rattling
blade, the small boy in the gallery was scared into a frenzy of vociferous delight!

Yet, whilst we have discarded these somewhat crude methods, we have perhaps allowed ourselves
to wander too far in the other direction, and the critics are quite justified in demanding
in many cases greater virility and force.  The simulation of suppressed power is very useful
and very advisable, but when the fire-bell rings the horses have got to come out, and rattle
and race down the street, and rouse the town!

DISCIPLINE IMPERATIVE

Whilst we are on the subject of these creations of the poets and the actors, do you understand
how important is discipline on the stage? How can an actor be away from this earth, moving
before you in the spirit he has conjured up, only to be dragged back to himself and his actual
surroundings of canvas and paint and tinsel and limelights by some disturbing influence in
the audience or on the stage?  If you want the best, if you love the art, foster it.  It is
worthy of your gentlest care and your kindest, tenderest thought.  Your silence is often more
indicative of appreciation than your applause.  The actor does not need your applause in order
to know when you are in sympathy with him.

He feels very quickly whether you are antagonistic or friendly.  He cares very little for the
money, but a great deal for your affection and esteem.  Discipline on the stage has almost
entirely disappeared, and year after year the exercise of our art becomes more difficult. 
I am sorry to say some newspapers are, unwittingly perhaps, largely responsible for this. 
When an editor discharges a member of his force for any good and sufficient reason--and surely
a man must be permitted to manage and control his own business--no paper will publish a two-column
article, with appropriate cuts, detailing the wrongs of the discharged journalist, and the
hideous crime of the editor!  Even an editor--and an editor is supposed to be able to stand
almost anything--would become weary after a while; discipline would cease, and your newspapers
would be ill-served.  Booth, Jefferson, and other actors soon made up their minds that the
easiest road was the best for them.  Mr. Booth left the stage management entirely to Mr. Lawrence
Barrett and others, and Mr. Jefferson praised everybody and every thing.  But this is not good
for the stage.  My career on the stage is nearly over, and until, shortly, I bid it farewell,
I shall continue to do my best; but we are all doing it under ever-growing difficulties.  Actors
on the stage are scarce, actors off the stage, as I have demonstrated, I hope, are plentiful.
Life insurance presidents--worthy presidents, directors, and trustees--have been so busy acting
their several parts in the past, and are in the present so busy trying to unact them, men are
so occupied from their childhood with the mighty dollar, the race for wealth is so strenuous
and all-entrancing, that imagination is dying out; and imagination is necessary to make a poet
or an actor; the art of acting is the crystallisation of all arts.  It is a diamond in the
facets of which is mirrored every art.  It is, therefore, the most difficult of all arts. 
The education of a king is barely sufficient for the education of the comprehending and comprehensive
actor.  If he is to satisfy every one, he should possess the commanding power of a Caesar,
the wisdom of Solomon, the eloquence of Demosthenes, the patience of Job, the face and form
of Antinous, and the strength and endurance of Hercules.

DRAMATIC VICISSITUDES

The stage is not likely to die of neglect anywhere.  But at this moment it cannot be denied
that the ship of the stage is drifting somewhat hither and thither, Every breath of air and
every current of public opinion impels it first in one direction and then in another, At one
moment we may be said to be in the doldrums of the English society drama, or we are sluggishly
rolling along in a heavy ground swell, propelled by a passing cat's paw of revivals of old
melodramas. Again we catch a very faint northerly breeze from Ibsen, or a southeaster from
Maeterlinck and Hauptmann.  Sometimes we set our sails to woo that ever-clearing breeze of
Shakespeare, only to be forced out of our course by a sputter of rain, an Irish mist, and half
a squall from George Bernard Shaw; but the greater part of the time the ship of the stage is
careering wildly under bare poles, with a man lashed to the helm (and let us hope that, like
Ulysses, he has cotton wool in his ears), before a hurricane of comic opera.  We need a recognised
stage and a recognised school.  America has become too great, and its influence abroad too
large, for us to afford to have recourse to that ancient and easy method of criticism which
decries the American and extols the foreign.  That is one of those last remnants of colonialism
and provincialism which must depart forever.

A NATIONAL THEATRE

What could not be done for the people of this land, were we to have a great and recognised
theatre!  Consider our speech, and our manner of speech!  Consider our voices, and the production
of our voices! Consider the pronunciation of words, and the curious use of vowels! Let us say
we have an established theatre, to which you come not only for your pleasure, but for your
education.  Of what immense advantage this would be if behind its presiding officer there stood
a board of literary directors, composed of such men as William Winter, Howells, Edward Everett
Hale, and Aldrich, and others equally fine, and the presidents of the great universities. 
These men might well decide how the American language should be spoken in the great American
theatre, and we should then have an authority in this country at last for the pronunciation
of certain words.  It would finally be decided whether to say fancy or fahncy--dance or dahnce--advertisement
or advertysement, and so with many other words; whether to call the object of our admiration
"real elegant"--whether we should say "I admire" to do this or that, and whether we should
say "I guess" instead of "I think."  And the voice!  The education of the American speaking
voice is, I am sure all will agree, of immense importance. It is difficult to love, or to continue
to endure, a woman who shrieks at you; a high-pitched, nasal, stringy voice is not calculated
to charm.  This established theatre of which we dream should teach men and women how to talk;
and how splendid it would be for future generations if it should become characteristic of American
men and women to speak in soft and beautifully modulated tones!

These men of whom I have spoken could meet once a year in the great green-room of this theatre
of my imagination, and decide upon the works to be produced--the great classics, the tragedies
and comedies; and living authors should be invited and encouraged.  Here, again, we should
have at last what we so badly need, an encouragement for men and women to write poetry for
the stage.  Nothing by way of the beautiful seems to be written for us to-day, but perhaps
the acknowledgment and the hall-mark of a great theatre might prove an incentive.

TRAINING THE ACTOR

The training of the actor!  To-day there is practically none.  Actors and actresses are not
to be taught by patting them on the shoulders and saying, "Fine!  Splendid!"  It is a hard,
hard school, on the contrary, of unmerciful criticism.  And he is a poor master who seeks cheap
popularity amongst his associates by glossing over and praising what he knows to be condemnable.
No good result is to be obtained by this method, but it is this method which has caused a great
many actors to be beloved, and the public to be very much distressed.

As for the practical side of an established theatre, I am absolutely convinced that the national
theatre could be established in this country on a practical and paying basis; and not only
on a paying basis, but upon a profitable basis.  It would, however, necessitate the investment
of a large amount of capital.  In short, the prime cost would be large, but if the public generally
is interested, there is no reason why an able financier could not float a company for this
purpose.  But under no circumstances must or can a national theatre, in the proper use of the
term, be made an object of personal or commercial profit.  Nor can it be a scheme devised by
a few individuals for the exploitation of a social or literary fad.  The national theatre must
be given by the people to the people, and be governed by the people.  The members of the national
theatre should be elected by the board of directors, and should be chosen from the American
and British stage alike, or from any country where English is the language of the people. 
Every inducement should be offered to secure the services of the best actors; by actors, I
mean actors of both sexes; and those who have served for a certain number of years should be
entitled to a pension upon retirement.

It is not necessary to bother with further details; I only mention this to impress the reader
with the fact that the national theatre is a practical possibility.  From my personal experience
I am convinced that serious effort upon the American stage meets with a hearty endorsement.

TOMMASO SALVINI

[During his American tour of 1882-1883, Salvini played in Boston.  One of his auditors, Henry
James, the distinguished novelist, in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1883, gave a detailed
criticism of the performances.  Of Salvini's Othello he said:

... "What an immense impression--simply as an impression--the actor makes on the spectator
who sees him for the first time as the turbaned and deep-voiced Moor!  He gives us his measure
as a man: he acquaints us with that luxury of perfect confidence in the physical resources
of the actor which is not the most frequent satisfaction of the modern play-goer.  His powerful,
active, manly frame, his noble, serious, vividly expressive face, his splendid smile, his Italian
eye, his superb, voluminous voice, his carriage, his ease, the assurance he instantly gives
that he holds the whole part in his hands and can make of it exactly what he chooses,--all
this descends upon the spectator's mind with a richness which immediately converts attention
into faith, and expectation into sympathy.  He is a magnificent creature, and you are already
on his ride.  His generous temperament is contagious; you find yourself looking at him, not
so much as an actor, but as a hero....  The admirable thing in this nature of Salvini's is
that his intelligence is equal to his material powers, so that if the exhibition is, as it
were, personal, it is not simply physical.  He has a great imagination: there is a noble intention
in all he does.

The pages which now follow, taken from Salvini's Autobiography, are presented with the permission
of his publishers, the Century Company, New York.--ED.]

FIRST APPEARANCE

The Bon and Berlaffa Company, in which my father was engaged, alternated in its repertory between
the comedies of Goldoni and the tragedies of Alfieri.

One evening the "Donne Curiose" by Goldoni was to be given, but the actor who was to take the
harlequin's part, represented in that piece by a stupid slave called Pasquino, fell sick a
few hours before the curtain was to rise.  The company had been together for a few days only,
and it was out of the question to substitute another play.  It had been decided to close the
theatre for that night, when Berlaffa asked:

"Why couldn't your Tom take the part?"  My father said that there was no reason why he shouldn't,
but that Tom had never appeared in public, and he didn't know whether he had the courage.

The proposition was made to me, and I accepted on the spot, influenced to no little extent
by a desire to please the managers, who in my eyes were people of great importance.  Within
three hours, with my iron memory, I had easily mastered my little part of Pasquino, and, putting
on the costume of the actor who had fallen ill, I found myself a full-fledged if a new performer.
I was to speak in the Venetian dialect; that was inconvenient for me rather than difficult,
but at Forte, where we were, any slip of pronunciation would hardly be observed.

It was the first time that I was to go on the stage behind the dazzling footlights, the first
time that I was to speak in an unaccustomed dialect, dressed up in ridiculous clothes which
were not my own; and I confess that I was so much frightened that I was tempted to run back
to my dressing-room, to take off my costume, and to have nothing more to do with the play.
But my father, who was aware of my submissive disposition toward him, with a few words kept
me at my post.

"For shame!" said he; "a man has no right to be afraid."  A man!  I was scarce fourteen, yet
I aspired to that title.

The conscript who is for the first time under fire feels a sense of fear.  Nevertheless, if
he has the pride of his sex, and the dignity of one who appreciates his duty, he stands firm,
though it be against big will.  So it was with me when I began my part.  When I perceived that
some of Pasquino's lines were amusing the audience, I took courage, and, like a little bird
making its first flight, I arrived at the goal, and was eager to try again.  As it turned out,
my actor's malady grew worse, so that he was forced to leave the company, and I was chosen
to take his place.

I must have had considerable aptitude for such comic parts as those of stupid servants, for
everywhere that we went I became the public's Benjamin.  I made the people laugh, and they
asked for nothing better. All were surprised that, young and inexperienced as I was, I should
have so much cleverness of manner and such sureness of delivery.  My father was more surprised
than anybody, for he had expected far less of my immaturity and total lack of practice.  It
is certain that from that time I began to feel that I was somebody.  I had become useful, or
at least I thought I had, and, as a consequence, in my manner and bearing I began to affect
the young man more than was fitting in a mere boy.  I sought to figure in the conversation
of grown people, and many a time I had the pain of seeing my elders smile at my remarks. It
was my great ambition to be allowed to walk alone in the city streets; my father was very loath
to grant this boon, but he let me go sometimes, perhaps to get a sample of my conduct.  I don't
remember ever doing anything at these times which could have displeased him; I was particularly
careful about it, since I saw him sad, pensive, and afflicted owing to the misfortune which
had befallen him, and soon be began to accord me his confidence, which I was most anxious to gain.

A FATHER'S ADVICE

Often he spoke to me of the principles of dramatic art, and of the mission of the artist. 
He told me that to have the right to call one's self an artist one must add honest work to
talent, and he put before me the example of certain actors who had risen to fame, but who were
repulsed by society on account of the triviality of their conduct; of others who were brought
by dissipation to die in a hospital, blamed by all; and of still others who had fallen so low
as to hold out their hands for alms, or to sponge on their comrades and to cozen them out of
their money for unmerited subscriptions--all of which things moved me to horror and deep repugnance.
It was with good reason that my father was called "Honest Beppo" by his fellows on the stage.
The incorruptibility and firmness of principle which he cultivated in me from the time that
I grew old enough to understand have been my spur and guide throughout my career, and it is
through no merit of my own that I can count myself among those who have won the esteem of society;
I attribute all the merit to my father.  He was con scientious and honest to a scruple; so
much so that of his own free will he sacrificed the natural pride of the dramatic artist, and
denounced the well-earned honour of first place in his own company to take second place with
Gustavo Modena, whose artistic merit he recognised as superior to his own, in order that I
might profit by the instruction of that admirable actor and sterling citizen.  My father preferred
his son's advantage to his own personal profit.

HOW SALVINI STUDIED HIS ART

The parts in which I won the most sympathy from the Italian public were those of Oreste in
the tragedy of that name, Egisto in "Merope," Romeo in "Giulietta e Romeo," Paolo in "Francesca
da Rimini," Rinaldo in "Pia di Tolommei," Lord Bonfield in "Pamela," Domingo in the "Suonatrice
d 'Arpa," and Gian Galeazzo in "Lodovico il Moro."  In all these my success was more pronounced
than in other parts, and I received flattering marks of approval.  I did not reflect, at that
time, of how great assistance to me it was to be constantly surrounded by first-rate artists;
but I soon came to feel that an atmosphere untainted by poisonous microbes promotes unoppressed
respiration, and that in such an atmosphere soul and body maintain themselves healthy and vigorous.
I observed frequently in the "scratch" companies, which played in the theatres of second rank
young men and women who showed very notable artistic aptitude, but who, for lack of cultivation
and guidance, ran to extravagance, overemphasis, and exaggeration.  Up to that time, while
I had a clear appreciation of the reasons for recognising defects in others, I did not know
how to correct my own; on the other hand, I recognised that the applause accorded me was intended
as an encouragement more than as a tribute which I had earned.  From a youth of pleasing qualities
(for the moment I quell my modesty), with good features, full of fire and enthusiasm, with
a harmonious and powerful voice, and with good intellectual faculties, the public deemed that
an artist should develop who would distinguish himself, and perhaps attain eminence in the
records of Italian art; and for this reason it sought to encourage me, and to apply the spur
to my pride by manifesting its feeling of sympathy.  By  good fortune I had enough conscience
and good sense to receive this homage at its just value.  I felt the need of studying, not
books alone, but men and things, vice and virtue, love and hate, humility and haughtiness,
gentleness and cruelty, folly and wisdom, poverty and opulence, avarice and lavishness, long-suffering
and vengeance--in short, all the passions for good and evil which have root in human nature.
I needed to study out the manner of rendering these passions in accordance with the race of
the men in whom they were exhibited, in accordance with their special customs, principles,
and education; I needed to form a conception of the movement, the manner, the expressions of
face and voice characteristic of all these cases; I must learn by intuition to grasp the characters
of fiction, and by study to reproduce those of history with semblance of truth, seeking to
give to every one a personality distinct from every other.  In fine, I must become capable
of identifying myself with one or another personage to such an extent as to lead the audience
into the illusion that the real personage, and not a copy, is before them.  It would then remain
to learn the mechanism of my art; that is, to choose the salient points and to bring them out,
to calculate the effects and keep them in proportion with the unfolding of the plot, to avoid
monotony in intonation and repetition in accentuation, to insure precision and distinctness
in pronunciation, the proper distribution of respiration, and incisiveness of delivery.  I
must study; study again; study always.  It was not an easy thing to put these precepts into
practice.  Very often I forgot them, carried away by excitement, or by the superabundance of
my vocal powers; indeed, until I had reached an age of calmer reflection I was never able to
get my artistic chronometer perfectly regulated; it would always gain a few minutes every twenty-four
hours.

FAULTS IN ACTING

In my assiduous reading of the classics, the chief places were held among the Greeks by the
masculine and noble figures of Hector, Achilles, Theseus, Oedipus; among the Scots by Trenmor,
Fingal, Cuchullin; and among the Romans by Caesar, Brutus, Titus, and Cato. These characters
influenced me to incline toward a somewhat bombastic system of gesticulation and a turgid delivery.
My anxiety to enter to the utmost into the conceptions of my authors, and to interpret them
clearly, disposed me to exaggerate the modulations of my voice like some mechanism which responds
to every touch, not reflecting that the abuse of this effort would bring me too near to song.
Precipitation in delivery, too, which when carried too far destroys all distinctness and incisiveness,
was due to my very high impressionability, and to the straining after technical scenic effects.
Thus, extreme vehemence in anger would excite me to the point of forgetting the fiction, and
cause me to commit involuntarily lamentable outbursts.  Hence I applied myself to overcome
the tendency to singsong in my voice, the exuberance of my rendering of passion, the exclamatory
quality of my phrasing, the precipitation of my pronunciation, and the swagger of my motions.

I shall be asked how the public could abide me, with all these defects; and I answer that the
defects, though numerous, were so little prominent that they passed unobserved by the mass
of the public, which always views broadly and could be detected only by the acute and searching
eye of the intelligent critic.  I make no pretence that I was able to correct myself all at
once.  Sometimes my impetuosity would carry me away, and not until I had come to mature age
was I able to free myself to any extent from this failing.  Then I confirmed myself in my opinion
that the applause of the public is not all refined gold, and I became able to separate the
gold from the dross in the crucible of intelligence.  How many on the stage are content with
the dross!

THE DESIRE TO EXCEL IN EVERYTHING

My desire to improve in my art had its origin in my instinctive impulse to rise above mediocrity--an
instinct that must have been born in me, since, when still a little boy, I used to put forth
all my energies to eclipse what I saw accomplished by my companions of like age.  When I was
sixteen, and at Naples, there were in the boarding-house, at two francs and a half a day, two
young men who were studying music and singing, and to surpass them in their own field I practised
the scales until I could take B natural.  Later on, when the tone of my voice; had lowered
to the barytone, impelled always by my desire to accomplish something, I took lessons in music
from the Maestro Terziani, and appeared at a benefit with the famous tenor Boucarde, and Signora
Monti, the soprano, and sang in a duet from "Belisaria," the aria from "Maria di Rohan,"and
"La Settimana d'Amore," by Niccolai; and I venture to say that I was not third best in that
triad.  But I recognised that singing and declamation were incompatible pursuits, since the
method of producing the voice is totally different, and they must therefore be mutually harmful.
Financially, I was not in a condition to be free to choose between the two careers, and I persevered
of necessity in the dramatic profession. Whether my choice was for the best I do not know;
it is certain that if my success had been in proportion to my love of music, and I have reason
to believe that it might have been, I should not have remained in obscurity.

A MODEL FOR OTHELLO

[In 1871, Salvini organised a company for a tour in South America, On his way thither he paused
at Gibraltar, and gainfully.]

At Gibraltar I spent my time studying the Moors.  I was much struck by one very fine figure,
majestic in walk, and Roman in face, except for a slight projection of the lower lip.  The
man's colour was between copper and coffee, not very dark, and he had a slender moustache,
and scanty curled hair on his chin.  Up to that time I had always made up Othello simply with
my moustache, but after seeing that superb Moor I added the hair on the chin, and sought to
copy his gestures, movements, and carriage.  Had I been able I should have imitated his voice
also, so closely did that splendid Moor represent to me the true type of the Shakespearian
hero.  Othello must have been a son of Mauritania, if we can argue from Iago's words to Roderigo:
"He goes into Mauritania"; for what else could the author have intended to imply but that the
Moor was returning to his native land?

FIRST TRIP TO THE UNITED STATES

After a few months of rest [after the South American tour], I resolved to get together a new
company, selecting those actors and actresses who were best suited to my repertory.  The excellent
Isolina Piamonti was my leading lady; and my brother Alessandro, an experienced, conscientious,
and versatile artist, supported me.  An Italian theatrical speculator proposed to me a tour
in North America, to include the chief cities of the United States, and although I hesitated
not a little on account of the ignorance of the Italian language prevailing in that country,
I accepted, influenced somewhat by my desire to visit a region which was wholly unknown to
me. Previous to crossing the ocean I had several months before me, and these served me to get
my company in training.

My first impressions of New York were most favourable.  Whether it was the benefit of a more
vivifying atmosphere, or the comfort of the national life, or whether it was admiration for
that busy, industrious, work-loving people, or the thousands of beautiful women whom I saw
in the streets, free and proud in carriage, and healthy and lively in aspect, or whether it
was the thought that these citizens were the great-grandchildren of those high-souled men who
had known how to win with their blood the independence of their country, I felt as if I had
been born again to a new existence.  My lungs swelled more freely as I breathed the air impregnated
with so much vigour and movement, and so much liberty, and I could fancy that I had come back
to my life of a youth of twenty, and was treading the streets of republican Rome.  With a long
breath of satisfaction I said to myself: "Ah, here is life!"  Within a few days my energy was
redoubled.  A lively desire of movement, not a usual thing with me, had taken possession of
me in spite of myself.  Without asking myself why, I kept going here and there, up and down,
to see everything, to gain information; and when I returned to my rooms in the evening, I could
have set out again to walk still more.  This taught me why Americans are so unwearied and full
of business.  Unfortunately I have never mastered English sufficiently to converse in that
tongue; had I possessed that privilege, perhaps my stay in North America would not have been
so short, and perhaps I might have figured on the English stage.  What an enjoyment it would
have been to me to play Shakespeare in English!  But I have never had the privilege of the
gift of tongues, and I had to content myself with my own Italian, which is understood by but
few in America.  This, however, mattered little; they understood me all the same, or, to put
it better, they caught by intuition my ideas and my sentiments.

My first appearance was in "Othello."  The public received a strong impression, without discussing
whether or not the means which I used to cause it were acceptable, and without forming a clear
conception of my interpretation of that character, or pronouncing openly upon its form.  The
same people who had heard it the first night returned on the second, on the third, and even
on the fourth, to make up their minds whether the emotions they experienced resulted from the
novelty of my interpretation, or whether in fact it was the true sentiment of Othello's passions
which was transmitted to them--in short, whether it was a mystification or a revelation.  By
degrees the public became convinced that those excesses of jealousy and fury were appropriate
to the son of the desert, and that one of Southern blood must be much better qualified to interpret
them than a Northerner.  The judgment was discussed, criticised, disputed; but in the end the
verdict was overwhelmingly in my favour.  When the American has once said "Yes," he never weakens;
he will always preserve for you the same esteem, sympathy, and affection.  After New York I
travelled through a number of American  cities--Philadelphia, Baltimore, Pittsburg, Washington,
and Boston, which is rightly styled the Athens of America, for there artistic taste is most
refined.  In Boston I had the good fortune to become intimately acquainted with the illustrious
poet, Longfellow, who talked to me in the pure Tuscan.  I saw, too, other smaller cities, and
then I appeared again in New York, where the favour of the public was confirmed, not only for
me, but also for the artists of my company, and especially for Isolina Piamonti, who received
no uncertain marks of esteem and consideration.  We then proceeded to Albany, Utica, Syracuse,
Rochester, Buffalo, Toledo, and that pleasant city, Detroit, continuing to Chicago, and finally
to New Orleans.

IN CUBA

From New Orleans we sailed to Havana, but found in Cuba civil war, and a people that had but
small appetite for serious things, and was moreover alarmed by a light outbreak of yellow fever.
One of my company was taken down with the disease, but I had the pleasure of seeing him recover,
Luckily he had himself treated by Havanese physicians, who are accustomed to combat that malady,
which they know only too well.  Perhaps my comrade would have lost his life under the ministrations
of an Italian doctor.  In the city of sugar and tobacco, too, it was "Othello" which carried
off the palm.  Those good manufacturers of cigars presented me on my benefit with boxes of
their wares, which were made expressly for me, and which I dispatched to Italy for the enjoyment
of my friends.  In spite of the many civilities which were tendered to me, in spite of considerable
money profit, and of the ovations of its kind-hearted people, I did not find Cuba to my taste.
Sloth and luxury reign there supreme.

APPEARANCE IN LONDON

In Paris I found a letter from the Impresario Mapleson, who proposed that I should go to London
with an Italian company, and play at Drury Lane on the off-nights of the opera.  I was in doubt
for a considerable time whether to challenge the verdict of the British public; but in two
weeks after reaching Italy, by dint of telegrams I had got together the force of artists necessary,
and I presented myself with arms and baggage in London, in the spring of 1875.

Hardly had I arrived, when I noticed the posting, on the bill-boards of the city, of the announcement
of the seventy-second night of "Hamlet" at the Lyceum Theatre, with Henry Irving in the title-role.
I had contracted with Mapleson to give only three plays in my season, "Othello," "The Gladiator,"
and "Hamlet," the last having been insisted upon by Mapleson himself, who, as a speculator,
well knew that curiosity as to a Comparison would draw the public to Drury Lane.

IMPRESSIONS OF IRVING'S "HAMLET"

I was very anxious to see the illustrious English artist in that part, and I secured a box
and went to the Lyceum.  I was recognised by nobody, and remaining as it were concealed in
my box, I had a good opportunity to satisfy my curiosity.  I arrived at the theatre a little
too late, so that I missed the scene of Hamlet in presence of the ghost of his father, the
scene which in my judgment contains the clue to that strange character, and from which all
the synthetic ideas of Hamlet are developed.  I was in time to hear only the last words of
the oath of secrecy.  I was struck by the perfection of the stage-setting.  There was a perfect
imitation of the effect of moonlight, which at the proper times flooded the stage with its
rays or left it in darkness.  Every detail was excellently and exactly reproduced.  The scene
was shifted, and Hamlet began his allusions, his sallies of sarcasm, his sententious sayings,
his points of satire with the courtiers, who sought to study and to penetrate the sentiments
of the young prince.  In this scene Irving was simply sublime.  His mobile face mirrored his
thoughts.  The subtle penetration of his phrases, so perfect in shading and incisiveness, showed
him to be a master of art.  I do not believe there is an actor who can stand beside him in
this respect, and I was so much impressed by it, that at the end of the second act I said to
myself, "I will not play Hamlet!  Mapleson can say what he likes, but I will not play it";
and I said it with the fullest resolution.  In the monologue, "To be or not to be," Irving
was admirable; in the scene with Ophelia he was deserving of the highest praise; in that of
the Players he was moving, and in all this part of the play he appeared to my eyes to be the
most perfect interpreter of that eccentric character.  But further on it was not so, and for
the sake of art I regretted it.  From the time when the passion assumes a deeper hue, and reasoning
moderates impulses which are forcibly curbed, Irving seemed to me to show mannerism, and to
be lacking in power, and strained, and it is not in him alone that I find this fault, but in
nearly all foreign actors. There seems to be a limit of passion within which they remain true
in their rendering of nature; but beyond that limit they become transformed, and take on conventionality
in their intonations, exaggeration in their gestures, and mannerism in their bearing.  I left
my box saying to myself:  "I too can do Hamlet, and I will try it!"  In some characters Irving
is exceptionally fine.  I am convinced that it would be difficult to interpret Shylock or Mephistopheles
better than he.  He is most skilful in putting his productions on the stage; and in addition
to his intelligence he does not lack the power to communicate his counsels or his teachings.
Withal he is an accomplished gentleman in society, and is loved and respected by his fellow-citizens,
who justly look upon him as a glory to their country. He should, however, for his own sake,
avoid playing such pants as Romeo and Macbeth, which are not adapted to his somewhat scanty
physical and vocal power.

THE DECLINE OF TRAGEDY

The traditions of the English drama are imposing and glorious! Shakespeare alone has gained
the highest pinnacle of fame in dramatic art.  He has had to interpret him such great artists
as Garrick, Kemble, Kean, Macready, Siddons, and Irving; and the literary and dramatic critics
of the whole world have studied and analysed both author and actor.  At present, however, tragedy
is abandoned on almost all the stages of Europe.  Actors who devote themselves to tragedy,
whether classical romantic, or historical, no longer exist. Society-comedy has overflowed the
stage, and the inundation causes the seed to rot which more conscientious and prudent planters
had sown in the fields of art.  It is desirable that the feeling and taste for the works of
the great dramatists should be revived in Europe, and that England, which is for special reasons,
and with justice, proud of enjoying the primacy in dramatic composition, should have also worthy
and famous actors.  I do not understand why the renown and prestige of the great name of Garrick
do not attract modern actors to follow in his footsteps.  Do not tell me that the works of
Shakespeare are out of fashion, and that the public no longer wants them.  Shakespeare is always
new--so new that not even yet is he understood by everybody, and if, as they say, the public
is no longer attracted by his plays, it is because they are superficially presented.  To win
the approval of the audience, a dazzling and conspicuous mise-en-scene does not suffice, as
some seem to imagine, to make up deficiency in interpretation; a more profound study of the
characters represented is indispensable.  If in art you can join the beautiful and the good,
so much the better for you; but if you give the public the alternative, it will always prefer
the good to the beautiful.

TRAGEDY IN TWO LANGUAGES

In 1880 the agent of an impresario and theatre-owner of Boston came to Florence to make me
the proposal that I should go to North America for the second time, to play in Italian supported
by an American company. I thought the man had lost his senses.  But after a time I became convinced
that he was in his right mind, and that no one would undertake a long and costly journey simply
to play a joke, and I took his extraordinary proposition into serious consideration and asked
him for explanations.

"The idea is this," the agent made answer; "it is very simple.  You found favour the last time
with the American public with your Italian company, when not a word that was said was understood,
and the proprietor of the Globe Theatre of Boston thinks that if he puts with you English-speaking
actors, you will yourself be better understood, since all the dialogues of your supporters
will be plain.  The audience will concern itself only with following you with the aid of the
play-books in both languages, and will not have to pay attention to the others, whose words
it will understand."

"But how shall I take my cue, since I do not understand English?  And how will your American
actors know when to speak, since they do not know Italian?"

"Have no anxiety about that," said the agent.  "Our American actors are mathematicians, and
can memorise perfectly the last words of your speeches, and they will work with the precision
of machines."

"I am ready to admit that," said I, "although I do not think it will be so easy; but it will
in any case be much easier for them, who will have to deal with me alone, and will divide the
difficulty among twenty or twenty-four, than for me, who must take care of all."

The persevering agent, however, closed my mouth with the words, "You do not sign yourself 'Salvini'
for nothing!"  He had an answer for everything, he was prepared to convince me at all points,
to persuade me about everything, and to smooth over every difficulty, and he won a consent
which, though almost involuntary on my part, was legalised by a contract in due form, by which
I undertook to be at New York not later than November 05, 1880, and to be ready to open at
Philadelphia with "Othello" on the 29th of the same month.

I was still dominated by my bereavement, and the thought was pleasant to me of going away from
places which constantly brought it back to my mind.  Another sky, other customs, another language,
grave responsibilities, a novel and difficult undertaking of uncertain outcome--I was willing
to risk all simply to distract my attention and to forget.  I have never in my life been a
gambler, but that time I staked my artistic reputation upon a single card.  Failure would have
been a new emotion, severe and grievous, it is true, but still different from that which filled
my mind.  I played, and I won!  The friends whom I had made in the United States in 1873, and
with whom I had kept up my acquaintance, when they learned of the confusion of tongues, wrote
me discouraging letters.  In Italy the thing was not believed, so eccentric did it seem.  I
arrived in New York nervous and feverish, but not discouraged or depressed.

When the day of the first rehearsal came, all the theatres were occupied, and I had to make
the best of a rather large concert-hall to try to get into touch with the actors who were to
support me.  An Italian who was employed in a newspaper office served me as interpreter in
cooperation with the agent of my Boston impresario. The American artists began the rehearsal
without a prompter, and with a sureness to be envied especially by our Italian actors, who
usually must have every word suggested to them.  My turn came, and the few words which Othello
pronounces in the first scene came in smoothly and without difficulty.  When the scene with
the Council of Ten came, of a sudden I could not recall the first line of a paragraph, and
I hesitated; I began a line, but it was not that; I tried another with no better success; a
third, but the interpreter told me that I had gone wrong.  We began again, but the English
was of no assistance to me in recognising which of my speeches corresponded to that addressed
to me, which I did not understand.  I was all at sea, and I told the interpreter to beg the
actors to overlook my momentary confusion, and to say to them that I should be all right in
five minutes.  I went off to a corner of the hall and bowed my head between my hands, saying
to myself, "I have come for this, and I must carry it through."  I set out to number mentally
all the paragraphs of my part, and in a short time I said.  "Let us begin again."

During the remainder of the rehearsal one might have thought that I understood English, and
that the American actors understood Italian, No further mistake was made by either side; there
was not even the smallest hesitation, and when I finished the final scene of the third act
between Othello and Iago, the actors applauded, filled with joy and pleasure.  The exactitude
with which the subsequent rehearsals of "Othello," and those of "Hamlet," proceeded was due
to the memory, the application, and the scrupulous attention to their work of the American
actors, as well as to my own force of will and practical acquaintance with all the parts of
the play, and to the natural intuition which helped me to know without understanding what was
addressed to me, divining it from a motion, a look, or a light inflection of the voice.  Gradually
a few words, a few short phrases, remained in my ear, and in course of time I came to understand
perfectly every word of all the characters; I became so sure of myself that if an actor substituted
one word for another I perceived it.  I understood the words of Shakespeare, but not those
of the spoken language.

In a few days we went to Philadelphia to begin our representations. My old acquaintances were
in despair.  To those who had sought to discourage me by their letters others on the spot joined
their influence, and tried everything to overthrow my courage.  I must admit that the nearer
came the hour of the great experiment, the more my anxiety grew and inclined me to deplore
the moment when I had put myself in that dilemma.  I owe it in a great degree to my cool head
that my discouraging forebodings did not unman me so much as to make me abandon myself wholly
to despair.  Just as I was going on the stage, I said to myself:  "After all, what can happen
to me?  They will not murder me.  I shall have tried, and I shall have failed; that is all
there will be to it, I will pack up my baggage and go back to Italy, convinced that oil and
wine will not mix.   A certain contempt of danger, a firm resolution to succeed, and, I am
bound to add, considerable confidence in myself, enabled me to go before the public calm, bold,
and secure.

The first scene before the palace of Brabantio was received with sepulchral silence.  When
that of the Council of Ten came, and the narration of the vicissitudes of Othello was ended,
the public broke forth in prolonged applause.  Then I said to myself, "A good beginning is
half the work."  At the close of the first act, my adversaries, who were such solely on account
of their love of art, and their belief that the two languages could not be amalgamated, came
on the stage to embrace and congratulate me, surprised, enchanted, enthusiastic, happy, that
they had been mistaken, and throughout the play I was the object of constant demonstrations
of sympathy.

AMERICAN CRITICAL TASTE

From Philadelphia we went to New York where our success was confirmed. It remained for me to
win the suffrages of Boston, and I secured them, first having made stops in Brooklyn, New Haven,
and Hartford.  When in the American Athens I became convinced that that city possesses the
most refined artistic taste.  Its theatrical audiences are serious, attentive to details, analytical--I
might almost say scientific--and one might fancy that such careful critics had never in their
lives done anything but occupy themselves with scenic art.  With reference to a presentation
of Shakespeare, they are profound, acute, subtle, and they know so well how to clothe some
traditional principle in close logic, that if faith in the opposite is not quite unshakable
in an artist, he must feel himself tempted to renounce his own tenets. It is surprising that
in a land where industry and commerce seem to absorb all the intelligence of the people, there
should be in every city and district, indeed in every village, people who are competent to
discuss the arts with such high authority.  The American nation counts only a century of freedom,
yet it has produced a remarkable number of men of high competence in dramatic art.  Those who
think of tempting fortune by displaying their untried artistic gifts on the American stage,
counting on the ignorance or inexperience of their audience, make a very unsafe calculation.
The taste and critical faculty of that public are in their fulness of vigour.  Old Europe is
more bound by traditions, more weary, more blase, in her judgment, not always sincere or disinterested.
In America the national pride is warmly felt, and the national artists enjoy high honour. 
The Americans know how to offer an exquisite hospitality, but woe to the man who seeks to impose
on them!  They profess a cult, a veneration, for those who practise our art, whether of their
own nation or foreign, and their behaviour in the theatre is dignified.  I recall one night
when upon invitation I went to see a new play in which appeared an actor of reputation.  The
play was not liked, and from act to act I noticed that the house grew more and more scanty,
like a faded rose which loses its petals one by one, until at the last scene my box was the
only one which remained occupied.  I was more impressed by this silent demonstration of hostility
than I should have been if the audience had made a tumultuous expression of its disapproval.
The actors were humiliated and confounded, and as the curtain fell an instinctive sentiment
of compassion induced me to applaud.

IMPRESSIONS OF EDWIN BOOTH

The celebrated actor Edwin Booth was at this time in Baltimore, a city distant two hours from
the capital.  I had heard so much about this superior artist that I was anxious to see him,
and on one of my off nights I went to Baltimore with my impresario's agent.  A box had been
reserved for me without my knowledge, and was draped with the Italian colours.  I regretted
to be made so conspicuous, but I could not fail to appreciate the courteous and complimentary
desire to do me honour shown by the American artist.  It was only natural that I should be
most kindly influenced toward him, but without the courtesy which predisposed me in his favour
he would equally have won my sympathy by his attractive and artistic lineaments, and his graceful
and well-proportioned figure.  The play was "Hamlet."  This part brought him great fame, and
justly; for in addition to the high artistic worth with which he adorned it, his elegant personality
was admirably adapted to it, His long and wavy hair, his large and expressive eye, his youthful
and flexible movements, accorded perfectly with the ideal of the young prince of Denmark which
now obtains everywhere.  His splendid delivery, and the penetrating philosophy with which he
informed his phrases, were his most remarkable qualities.  I was so fortunate as to see him
also as Richelieu and Iago, and in all three of these parts, so diverse in their character
I found him absolutely admirable.  I cannot say so much for his Macbeth, which I saw one night
when passing through Philadelphia.  The part seemed to me not adapted to his nature.  Macbeth
was an ambitious man, and Booth was not.  Macbeth had barbarous and ferocious instincts, and
Booth was agreeable, urbane, and courteous.  Macbeth destroyed his enemies traitorously--did
this even to gain possession of their goods--while Booth was noble, lofty-minded, and generous
of his wealth.  It is thus plain that however much art he might expend, his nature rebelled
against his portrayal of that personage, and he could never hope to transform himself into
the ambitious, venal, and sanguinary Scottish king.

I should say, from what I heard in America, that Edwin Forrest was the Modena of America. 
The memory of that actor still lives, for no one has possessed equally the power to give expression
to the passions, and to fruitful and burning imagery, in addition to which he possessed astonishing
power of voice.  Almost contemporaneously a number of most estimable actors have laid claim
to his mantle; but above them all Edwin Booth soared as an eagle.

After a very satisfactory experience in Baltimore, I returned for the third time to New York,
and gave "Othello," "Macbeth," and "The Gladiator," each play twice, and made the last two
appearances of my season in Philadelphia.  After playing ninety-five times in the new fashion,
I felt myself worn out, but fully satisfied with the result of my venturesome undertaking.
When I embarked on the steamer which was to take me to Europe, I was escorted by all the artists
of the company which had cooperated in my happy success, by my friends, and by courteous admirers,
and I felt that if I were not an Italian I should wish to be an American.

ADELAIDE RISTORI

[George Henry Lewes, in his book on "Actors and the Art of Acting," published by Henry Holt
& Co., New York, 1878, says:

"I must repeat the expression of my admiration for Ristori as a distinguished actress; if not
of the highest rank, she is very high, in virtue of her personal gifts, and the trained skill
with which these gifts are applied.  The question naturally arises, why is her success so great
in certain plays and so dubious in others?  It is of little use to say that Lady Macbeth and
Adrienne Lecouvreur are beyond her powers; that is only restating the fact.  Can we not trace
both success and failure to one source?  In what is called the ideal drama, constructed after
the Greek type, she would be generally successful, because the simplicity of its motives and
the artificiality of its structure, removing it from beyond the region of ordinary experience,
demand from the actor a corresponding artificiality.  Attitudes, draperies, gestures, tones,
and elocution which would be incongruous in a drama approaching more closely to the evolutions
of ordinary experience, become, in the ideal drama, artistic modes of expression; and it is
in these that Ristori displays a fine selective instinct, and a rare felicity of organisation."

"Memoirs and Artistic Studies of Adelaide Ristori," rendered into English by G. Mantellini,
with a biographical appendix by L. D. Ventura, was published and copyrighted by Doubleday,
Page & Co., New York, 1907.  The chapters of that volume afford the pages which follow.  The
Artistic Studies comprise detailed histrionic interpretations of the chief roles of Ristori:
Mary Stuart, Queen Elizabeth, Lady Macbeth, Medea, Myrrha and Phedra.--ED.]

FIRST APPEARANCES

WHEN twelve years old, I was booked with the famous actor and manager, Giuseppe Moncalvo, for
the roles of a child.  Soon after, owing to my slender figure, they made me up as a little
woman, giving me small parts as maid.  But they soon made up their minds that I was not fitted
for such parts.  Having reached the age of thirteen and developed in my figure, I was assigned
several parts as second lady. In those days they could not be too particular in small companies.
At the age of fourteen, I had to recite the first part among the young girls and that of the
leading lady alternately, like an experienced actress.  It was about this time, in the city
of Novara (Piedmont) that I recited for the first time the "Francesca da Rimini" of Silvio
Pellico.  Though I was only fifteen my success was such that soon afterward they offered me
the parts of leading lady with encouragement of advancement.

My good father, who was gifted with a great deal of sense, did not allow his head to be turned
by such offers.  Reflecting that my health might suffer from being thrown so early into the
difficulties of stage life he refused these offers and accepted a more modest place, as ingenue,
in the Royal Company, under the auspices of the King of Sardinia and stationed during several
months of the year at Turin.  It was managed by the leading man, the most intelligent and capable
among the stage managers of the time.  The advice of this cultured, though severe man, rendered
his management noteworthy and sought after as essential to the making of a good actor.

Among the members of the company shone the foremost beacon-lights of Italian art, such as Vestri,
Madame Marchionni, Romagnoli, Righetti, and many others who were quoted as examples of dramatic
art, as well as Pasta, Malibran, Rubini, and Tamburini in the lyric art,

My engagement for the part of ingenue was to have lasted three years, but, after the year,
I was promoted to the parts of the first lady, and in the third year, to the absolute leading lady.

To such unhoped-for and flattering results I was able to attain, by ascending step by step
through the encouragement and admonition of my excellent teacher, Madame Carlotta Marchionni,
a distinguished actress, and the interest of Gaetano Bazzi who also had great affection for
me.  It was really then that my artistic education began.  It was then that I acquired the
knowledge and the rules which placed me in a position to discern the characteristics of a true
artist.  I learned to distinguish and to delineate the comic and the dramatic passions.  My
temperament caused me to incline greatly toward the tender and the gentle.

However, in the tragic parts, my vigour increased.  I learned to portray transitions for the
sake of fusing the different contrasts; a capital but difficult study of detail, tedious at
times, but of the greatest importance.  The lamentations in a part where two extreme and opposing
passions are at play, are like those which in painting are called "chiaro-oscuro," a blending
of the tones, which thus portrays truth devoid of artifice.

In order to succeed in this intent, it is necessary to take as model the great culture of art,
and also to be gifted with a well-tempered and artistic nature.  And these are not to be confined
to sterile imitation, but are for the purpose of accumulating the rich material of dramatic
erudition, so that one may present oneself before the audiences as an original and artistic
individuality.

Some people think that distinction of birth and a perfect education will render them capable
of appearing upon the stage with the same facility and nonchalance with which one enters a
ball-room, and they are not at all timid about walking upon the boards, presuming that they
can do it as well as an actor who has been raised upon them.  A great error!

One of the greatest difficulties that they meet is in not knowing how to walk upon a stage,
which, owing to the slight inclination in con struction, easily causes the feet to totter,
particularly if one is a beginner, and especially at the entrances and exits.  I myself encountered
this difficulty.  Though I had dedicated myself to the art from my infancy and had been instructed
with the greatest care every day of my life by my grandmother, at the age of fifteen my movements
had not yet acquired all the ease and naturalness necessary to make me feel at home upon the
stage, and certain sudden turns always frightened me.

When I began my artistic apprenticeship, the use of diction was given great importance, as
a means of judging an actor.  At that time the audience was critical and severe.

In our days, the same audience has become less exacting, less critical, and does not aim to
improve the artist, by counting his defects.  According to my opinion, the old system was best,
as it is not in excessive indulgence and solely by considering the good qualities, without
correcting the bad ones, that real artists are made.

It is also my conviction that a person who wishes to dedicate himself to the stage should not
begin his career with parts of great importance, either comic, dramatic, or tragic.  The interpretation
becomes too difficult for a beginner and may harm his future career: first, the discouragement
over the difficulties that he meets; secondly, an excessive vanity caused by the appreciation
with which the public apparently honours him.  Both these sentiments will lead the actor, in
a short time, to neglect his study.  On the other hand, by taking several parts, he becomes
familiar with the means of rendering his part natural, thus convincing himself that by representing
correctly characters of little importance, he will be given more important ones later on. 
Thus it will come about that his study will be more careful.

SALVINI AND ROSSI

One of the greatest of the living examples of the school of realism is my illustrious fellow
artist, Signor Tommaso Salvini, with whom, for a number of years, I had the fortune to share
the fatigues and the honours of the profession which I also shared with Ernesto Rossi.  The
former was and is still admired.  His rare dramatic merits have nothing of the conventional,
but owe their power to that spontaneity which is the most convincing revelation of art.  The
wealth of plasticity which Salvini possesses, is in him, a natural gift. Salvini is the true
exponent of the Italian dramatic art

APPEARS AS LADY MACBETH

In the month of June, 1857, we began to rerehearse "Macbeth," at Covent  Garden, London, It
had been arranged for our company by Mr. Clarke, and translated into most beautiful Italian
verse by Giulio Carcano.  The renowned Mr. Harris put it on the stage according to English
traditions.  The representation of the part of Lady Macbeth, which afterward became one of
my favourite roles, preoccupied me greatly, as I knew only too well what kind of comparisons
would be made.  The remembrance of the marvellous creation of that character as given by the
famous Mrs. Siddons and the traditional criticisms of the press, might have rendered the public
very severe and difficult to please.

I used all my ability of interpretation to reveal and transmit the most minute intentions of
the author.  To the English audience it seemed that I had really incarnated that perfidious
but great character of Lady Macbeth, in a way that surpassed all expectations.

We had to repeat the drama for several evenings, always producing a most profound impression
upon the minds of the audience, particularly in the grand sleep-walking scene.  So thoroughly
had I entered into the nature of Lady Macbeth, that during the entire scene my pupils were
motionless in their orbit, causing me to shed tears.  To this enforced immobility of the eye
I owe the weakening of my eyesight. From the analytical study which I shall give of this diabolical
character [at the close of her Memoirs] the reader can form for himself an idea of how much
its interpretation cost me (particularly in the final culminating scene), in my endeavour to
get the right intonation of the voice and the true expression of the physiognomy.

AS MANAGER

My exceptionally good health never abandoned me through my long and tiresome journeys, though
unfortunately I never was able to accustom myself to voyaging by sea.  All through those rapid
changes I acquired a marvellous store of endurance.  That sort of life infused in me sufficient
energy to lead me through every kind of hardship with the resolution and authority of a commanding
general.  All obeyed me. None questioned my authority owing to my absolute impartiality, being
always ready, as I was, either to blame or correct him who did not fulfil his obligations,
also to praise without any distinction of class those who deserved it.  I almost always met
with courtesy among the actors under my direction, and if any one of them dared to trouble
our harmony, he was instantly put to his proper place by the firmness of my discipline.

The artistic management of the plays was left to me in all its details.  Every order and every
disposition came from me directly.  I looked after all matters large and small, the things
that every actor understands contribute to making the success of a play.

Concerning my own personal interests, they were in charge of a private manager.

I am proud to say that my husband was the soul of all my undertakings. As I speak of him, my
heart impels me to say that he ever exercised upon me and my professional career the kindest
and most benevolent influence.  It was he who upheld my courage, whenever I hesitated before
some difficulty; it was he who foretold the glory I should acquire, he who pointed out to me
the goal, and anticipated everything in order that I should secure it.  Without his assistance
I never should have been able to put into effect the daring attempt of carrying the flag of
Italian dramatic art all over the globe.

FIRST VISIT TO AMERICA

During the month of September, 1866, for the first time in my life, I crossed the ocean on
my way to the United States, where I remained until May 17th of the following year.  It was
in the elegant Lyceum Theatre of New York that I made my debut, on the 20th of September, with
"Medea."  I could not anticipate a more enthusiastic reception than the one I was honoured
with.  I felt anxious to make myself known in that new part of the world, and let the Americans
hear me recite for the first time, in the soft and melodic Italian language.  I knew that in
spite of the prevailing characteristics of the inhabitants of the free country of George Washington,
always busy as they are in their feverish pursuit of wealth, that the love for the beautiful
and admiration for dramatic art were not neglected.  During my first season in New York I met
with an increasing success, and formed such friendly relations with many distinguished and
cultured people that time and distance have never caused me to forget them.  While writing
these lines I send an affectionate salutation to all those who in America still honour me with
their remembrance.

BEGINS TO PLAY IN ENGLISH

I made my fourth trip to London in 1873.  Not having any new drama to present and being tired
of repeating the same productions, I felt the necessity of reanimating my mind with some strong
emotion, of discovering something, in a word, the execution of which had never been attempted
by others.

At last I believed I had found something to satisfy my desire.  The admiration I had for the
Shakespearean dramas, and particularly for the character of Lady Macbeth, inspired me with
the idea of playing in English the sleeping scene from "Macbeth," which I think is the greatest
conception of the Titanic poet.  I was also induced to make this bold attempt, partly as a
tribute of gratitude to the English audiences of the great metropolis, who had shown me so
much deference. But how was I going to succeed? Miss Cassandra, who has an optimistic faith in a
spark of the divine in the most world-hardened saint or sinner, reminds me of Carlo Borromeo's
heroic devotion to the sufferers from famine and the plague at Milan
in 1570 and 1576.

I still had some remembrance of my study of English when I was a girl, and there is no language
more difficult to pronounce and enunciate correctly, for an Italian.  I was frightened only
to think of that, still I drew sufficient courage even from its difficulties to grapple with
my task.  After a fortnight of constant study, I found myself ready to make an attempt at my
recitation.  However, not wishing to compromise my reputation by risking a failure, I acted
very cautiously.

I invited to my house the most competent among the dramatic critics of the London papers, without
forewarning them of the object and asked them kindly to hear me and express frankly their opinion,
assuring them that if it should not be a favourable one, I would not feel badly over it.

I then recited the scene in English, and my judges seemed to be very much pleased.  They corrected
my pronunciation of two words only, and encouraged me to announce publicly my bold project.
The evening of the performance, at the approach of that important scene, I was trembling! 
...  The enthusiastic reception granted me by the audience awakened in me all vigour, and the
happy success of my effort compensated me a thousandfold for all the anxieties I had gone through.
This success still increased my ambitious aspirations, and I wished to try myself in even a
greater task.

I aimed at no less a project than the impersonation of the entire role of Lady Macbeth in English,
but such an arduous undertaking seemed so bold to me that I finally gave up the idea and drove
away from my mind forever the temptation to try it.

THE ACTOR VALEDICTORY STANZAS TO J. P. KEMBLE, JUNE, 1817, BY THOMAS CAMPBELL.

His was the spell o'er hearts Which only Acting lends-- The youngest of the sister arts, Which
all their beauty blends: For ill can Poetry express Full many a tone of thought sublime, And
Painting, mute and motionless, Steals but a glance of time, But by the mighty actor brought,
Illusion's perfect triumphs come-- Verse ceases to be airy thought, And Sculpture to be dumb.

Endnotes: [1]  This took the form as "The Players"; its home, 16 Grammercy Park, New  York,
was a gift from Mr. Booth.  It had long been his residence, and there he passed away. [2] 
The late Professor Peirce, professor of mathematics in Harvard University, father of Professor
James Mills Peirce.

