When the failure of the Land and Freedom methods became evident, and the government became
more and more oppressive, desperate individuals and groups resorted to acts of terrorism. It
was thus that Vera Zasulich attempted the assassination of the infamous Chief of Police Trepov.
The movement to temper Czarism by assassination systematically pursued was beginning. In 1879
the Land and Freedom Society held a conference for the purpose of discussing its program. A
majority favored resorting to terroristic tactics; Plechanov and a few other well-known revolutionists
were opposed--favoring the old methods. The society split, the majority becoming known as the
Will of the People and adopting a terroristic program. This organization sentenced Czar Alexander
II to death and several unsuccessful attempts were made to carry out the sentence. The leaders
believed that the assassination of the Czar would give rise to a general revolution throughout
the whole of Russia. In February, 1880, occurred the famous attempt to blow up the Winter Palace.
For a time it seemed that the Czar had learned the lesson the Will of the People sought to
teach him, and that he would institute far-reaching reforms. Pursuing a policy of vacillation
and fear, however, Alexander II soon fell back into the old attitude. On March 1, 1881, a group
of revolutionists, among them Sophia Perovskaya, made another attempt upon his life, succeeding,
at first, only in damaging the bottom of the Czar's carriage and wounding a number of Cossack
soldiers. "Thank God, I am untouched," said the Czar, in response to the inquiry of an officer
of his guard. "It's too soon to thank God!" cried N.I. Grinevitsky, hurling a bomb at the Czar.
Within a short time Alexander II and his assailant were both dead.

The assassination of Alexander II was a tragic event for Russia. On the very morning of his
death the ill-fated monarch had approved a plan for extensive reforms presented by the liberal
Minister, Loris-Melikoff. It had been decided to call a conference three days later and to
invite a number of well-known public men to co-operate in introducing the reforms. These reforms
would not have been far-reaching enough to satisfy the revolutionists, but they would certainly
have improved the situation and given Russia a new hope. That hope died with Alexander II. It is also noted the mother when she just turned
the large pancakes on the table that she baked, "Yes, Thisli, now we want to be together and be
happy and cheerful for tomorrow. And every day we give thanks to God for being up just at the
right time in the vicinity of Franz Anton when added, though no one understands what you come up
are."

Now began the happy meal and never in his whole life had so many of these good things in a table
have ever seen together. Because of the pancake, a fresh white bread laid next to butter and white
cheese. In the middle of the table is a large can of milk. Now he put all the big nuts in thick
pieces from the back, and when he is finished, there was like twice as much. Towards the evening,
the mother is ready to go home and she said, "Franz Anton, I have
changed my mind.

This must remain the top with you until you are completely healthy. It can help you in necessary.
I will soon tell everything to the wife of Haelmmli-Sepp. That was
quite the herdsmen and for this is the greatest happiness he could
achieve.

Now, he was really at home when Franz Anton no longer hide under
the Tannenbaemchen today.

He heard the night blessing, he stood under the stars next to the mountain as his hands folded
and said, "Come, we now pray the evening prayer." Reverently even folded his hands and at the
end of Senn said, "You give God a good night," there was the luck of the heart so great that
he likes to tell loudly all the people of the whole world to say, 'You give God a good night!' In
that same evening in the mountain, mother went to the wife of Haelmli-Sepp
with their three boys and Lisi standing before the house and would like
to understand what their children all told at once

.

 That was the foundation stone. To uphold orthodoxy was the next logical necessity,
for autocracy and orthodoxy were, in Russia, closely related. Hence the non-orthodox sects--such
as the Finnish Protestants, German Lutherans, Polish Roman Catholics, the Jews, and the Mohammedans--were
increasingly restricted in the observance of their religion. They might not build new places
of worship; their children could not be educated in the faith of their parents. In many cases
children were taken away from their parents in order to be sent to schools where they would
be inculcated with the orthodox faith. 

"I will tell you everything now, mother, one by one," he said, as he leaned against a hay bale.
"Look down there first time the small, skinny little boy, it's not a good piece of clothing
has on the body, says none of the good word and each mentions only the stupid This." The mother
was looking at the This, the hinaufspaehte like a hawk after the
Mountain, about whether he would fall down again.

"And now?" the mother asked curious. "He saved my life, mother, When
this little boy would not have been so if I were still outside on
the ground in a deadly fever, or perhaps it would already be over
with me."

And now told Franz Anton everything that had happened since yesterday
afternoon.

This left him as the all night and had not revived him and cared for can, like the smartest person
in the world would have done it any better.

The mother had to repeatedly wipe the tears. She imagined, when you leave and Franz Anton alone
in his thirst as located outside and would have been perhaps the fever would be wholly consumed,
and no one could have known anything about him.

And now joined you and a joy in their hearts that they had to call out loud: "God be praised and thanked
God be praised!" But such a love for the poor This she overcame that she said quite eagerly: "Franz
Anton, This I can not get to the wife of back-Sepp Haelmli Certainly the poor boy suffered hunger,
and has in dirt and rags! they let him go. I can still take it with me tomorrow and I do him
a garment that one can not look at him. He must not have bad in us, we will not forget how
he helped you. "

"Now this is just what I wished, mother, but I had to first know what you think of that. And
now you have the same project, and it all made up, as it could not be better. It does not become
a mother!"

And the Franz Anton she looked so full of happiness and love that she felt good at heart and
she thought to herself: it is also nothing like a well-turned-son. Then she said. "Now you have
something to eat, Franz Anton, that you come back to strength I have taken fresh eggs and white bread,
and now I want to make a fire, take your time for coming down." This
had the Franz Anton do, for he hesitated a little.
 When Alexander III died, at the end of 1894, both movements
had developed considerable strength. Working in secret and subject to terrible measures of
repression, their leaders being constantly imprisoned and exiled, these two wings of the Russian
revolutionary movement were gathering strength in preparation for an uprising more extensive
and serious than anything that had hitherto been attempted.

Whenever a new Czar ascended the throne in Russia it was the fashion to hope for some measure
of reform and for a degree of liberality. Frequently, as in the case of Alexander III, all
such hopes were speedily killed, but repeated experiences of the kind did not prevent the birth
of new hopes with the death of successive Czars. When, therefore, Alexander III was succeeded
by his son, Nicholas II, liberal Russia expectantly awaited the promulgation of constitutional
reforms. In this they were doomed to disappointment, just as they had been on the occasion
of the accession of the new Czar's immediate predecessor. Nicholas II was evidently going to
be quite as reactionary as his father was. This was made manifest in a number of ways. When
a deputation from one of the zemstvos, which congratulated him upon his ascension to the throne,
expressed the hope that he would listen to "the voice of the people and the expression of its
desires," the reply of the new Czar was a grim warning of what was to come. Nicholas II told
the zemstvos that he intended to follow the example of his father and uphold the principles
of Absolutism, and that any thought of participation by the zemstvos or other organizations
of the people in state affairs was a senseless dream. More significant still, perhaps, was
the fact that the hated Pobiedonostzev was retained in power.

The revolutionists were roused as they had not been for a decade or more. Some of the leaders
believed that the new reign of reaction would prove to be the occasion and the opportunity
for bringing about a union of all the revolutionary forces, Anarchists and Socialists alike,
peasants and industrial workers. This hope was destined to fail, but there was an unmistakable
revolutionary awakening. In the latter part of January, 1895, an open letter to Nicholas II
was smuggled into the country from Switzerland and widely distributed. It informed the Czar
that the Socialists would fight to the bitter end the hateful order of things which he was
responsible for creating, and menacingly said, "It will not be long before you find yourself
entangled by it."

IV

In one respect Nicholas II differed from Alexander III--he was by nature more humane and sentimental.
Like his father, he was thoroughly dominated by Pobiedonostzev's theory that Russia, in order
to be secure and stable, must be based upon Nationality, Orthodoxy, and Autocracy. He wanted
to see Holy Russia homogeneous and free from revolutionary disturbances. But his sensitive
nature shrank from the systematic persecution of the non-orthodox sects and the Jews, and he
quietly intimated to the officials that he would not approve its continuance. "And I'll show you how to buttert and make cheese, and as soon as you are big
enough, you put the arms in the boiler and are my assistant."

"Here in the glut Brook sennhuette?" asked this, the prospect of this
Bliss was very incredible.
Cowardice and weakness of the will characterized his reign from the very beginning.

