Lady Louisa omits a character who was probably as essential to Scott's scheme as any--Douce
Davie Deans, the old Cameronian. He had almost been annoyed by the criticism of his Covenanters
in "Old Mortality," "the heavy artillery out of the Christian Instructor or some such obscure
field work," and was determined to "tickle off" another. There are signs of a war between literary
Cavaliers and literary Covenanters at this time, after the discharge of Dr. McCrie's "heavy
artillery." Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe was presented by Surtees of Mainsforth with a manuscript
of Kirkton's unprinted "History of the Church of Scotland." This he set forth to edite, with
the determination not to "let the Whig dogs have the best of it." Every Covenanting scandal
and absurdity, such as the old story of Mess David Williamson--"Dainty Davie"--and his remarkable
prowess, and presence of mind at Cherrytrees, was raked up, and inserted in notes to Kirkton.
Scott was Sharpe's ally in this enterprise. "I had in the persons of my forbears a full share,
you see, of religious persecution . . . for all my greatgrandfathers were under the ban, and
I think there were hardly two of them out of jail at once." "I think it would be most scandalous
to let the godly carry it oft thus." "It" seems to have been the editing of Kirkton. "It is
very odd the volume of Wodrow, containing the memoir of Russell concerning the murder, is positively
vanished from the library" (the Advocates' Library). "Neither book nor receipt is to be found:
surely they have stolen it in the fear of the Lord." The truth seems to have been that Cavaliers
and Covenanters were racing for the manuscripts wherein they found smooth stones of the brook
to pelt their opponents withal. Soon after Scott writes: "It was not without exertion and trouble
that I this day detected Russell's manuscript (the account of the murder of Sharpe by one of
the murderers), also Kirkton and one or two others, which Mr. McCrie had removed from their
place in the library and deposited in a snug and secret corner." The Covenanters had made a
raid on the ammunition of the Cavaliers. "I have given," adds Sir Walter, "an infernal row
on the subject of hiding books in this manner." Sharpe replies that the "villainous biographer
of John Knox" (Dr. McCrie), "that canting rogue," is about to edite Kirkton. Sharpe therefore
advertised his own edition at once, and edited Kirkton by forced marches as it were. Scott
reviewed the book in the Quarterly (Jan. 1818). He remarked that Sharpe "had not escaped the
censure of these industrious literary gentlemen of opposite principles, who have suffered a
work always relied upon as one of their chief authorities to lie dormant for a hundred and
forty years." Their "querulous outcries" (probably from the field-work of the Christian Instructor)
he disregards. Among the passions of this literary "bicker," which Scott allowed to amuse him,
was Davie Deans conceived. Scott was not going to be driven by querulous outcries off the Covenanting
field, where he erected another trophy. This time he was more friendly to the "True Blue Presbyterians."
His Scotch patriotism was one of his most earnest feelings, the Covenanters, at worst, were
essentially Scotch, and he introduced a new Cameronian, with all the sterling honesty, the
Puritanism, the impracticable ideas of the Covenant, in contact with changed times, and compelled
to compromise.

He possessed a curious pamphlet, Haldane's "Active Testimony of the true blue Presbyterians"
(12mo, 1749). It is a most impartial work, "containing a declaration and testimony against
the late unjust invasion of Scotland by Charles, Pretended Prince of Wales, and William, Pretended
Duke of Cumberland." Everything and everybody not Covenanted, the House of Stuart, the House
of Brunswick, the House of Hapsburg, Papists, Prelatists and Turks, are cursed up hill and
down dale, by these worthy survivors of the Auld Leaven. Everybody except the authors, Haldane
and Leslie, "has broken the everlasting Covenant." The very Confession of Westminster is arraigned
for its laxity. "The whole Civil and Judicial Law of God," as given to the Jews (except the
ritual, polygamy, divorce, slavery, and so forth), is to be maintained in the law of Scotland.
Sins are acknowledged, and since the Covenant every political step--Cromwell's Protectorate,
the Restoration, the Revolution, the accession of the "Dukes of Hanover"--has been a sin. A
Court of Elders is to be established to put in execution the Law of Moses. All offenders against
the Kirk are to be "capitally punished." Stage plays are to be suppressed by the successors
of the famous convention at Lanark, Anno 1682. Toleration of all religions is "sinful," and
"contrary to the word of God." Charles Edward and the Duke of Cumberland are cursed. "Also
we reckon it a great vice in Charles, his foolish Pity and Lenity, in sparing these profane,
blasphemous Redcoats, that Providence delivered into his hand, when, by putting them to death,
this poor land might have been eased of the heavy burden of these vermin of Hell." The Auld
Leaven swore terribly in Scotland. The atrocious cruelties of Cumberland after Culloden are
stated with much frankness and power. The German soldiers are said to have carried off "a vast
deal of Spoil and Plunder into Germany," and the Redcoats had Plays and Diversions (cricket,
probably) on the Inch of Perth, on a Sabbath. "The Hellish, Pagan, Juggler plays are set up
and frequented with more impudence and audacity than ever." Only the Jews, "our elder Brethren,"
are exempted from the curses of Haldane and Leslie, who promise to recover for them the Holy
Land. "The Massacre in Edinburgh" in 1736, by wicked Porteous, calls for vengeance upon the
authors and abettors thereof. The army and navy are "the most wicked and flagitious in the
Universe." In fact, the True Blue Testimony is very active indeed, and could be delivered,
thanks to hellish Toleration, with perfect safety, by Leslie and Haldane. The candour of their
eloquence assuredly proves that Davie Deans is not overdrawn; indeed, he is much less truculent
than those who actually were testifying even after his decease.

In "The Heart of Mid-Lothian" Scott set himself to draw his own people at their best. He had
a heroine to his hand in Helen Walker, "a character so distinguished for her undaunted love
of virtue," who, unlike Jeanie Deans, "lived and died in poverty, if not want." In 1831 he
erected a pillar over her grave in the old Covenanting stronghold of Irongray.

The sweetness, the courage, the spirit, the integrity of Jeanie Deans have made her, of all
Scott's characters, the dearest to her countrymen, and the name of Jeanie was given to many
children, in pious memory of the blameless heroine. The foil to her, in the person of Effie,
is not less admirable. Among Scott's qualities was one rare among modern authors: he had an
affectionate toleration for his characters. If we compare Effie with Hetty in "Adam Bede,"
this charming and genial quality of Scott's becomes especially striking. Hetty and Dinah are
in very much the same situation and condition as Effie and Jeanie Deans. But Hetty is a frivolous
little animal, in whom vanity and silliness do duty for passion: she has no heart: she is only
a butterfly broken on the wheel of the world. Doubtless there are such women in plenty, yet
we feel that her creator persecutes her, and has a kind of spite against her. This was impossible
to Scott. Effie has heart, sincerity, passion, loyalty, despite her flightiness, and her readiness,
when her chance comes, to play the fine lady. It was distasteful to Scott to create a character
not human and sympathetic on one side or another. Thus his robber "of milder mood," on Jeanie's
journey to England, is comparatively a good fellow, and the scoundrel Ratcliffe is not a scoundrel
utterly. "'To make a Lang tale short, I canna undertake the job. It gangs against my conscience.'
'Your conscience, Rat?' said Sharpitlaw, with a sneer, which the reader will probably think
very natural upon the occasion. 'Ou ay, sir,' answered Ratcliffe, calmly, 'just my conscience;
a body has a conscience, though it may be ill wunnin at it. I think mine's as weel out o' the
gate as maist folk's are; and yet it's just like the noop of my elbow, it whiles gets a bit
dirl on a corner.'" Scott insists on leaving his worst people in possession of something likeable,
just as he cannot dismiss even Captain Craigengelt without assuring us that Bucklaw made a
provision for his necessities. This is certainly a more humane way of writing fiction than
that to which we are accustomed in an age of humanitarianism. Nor does Scott's art suffer from
his kindliness, and Effie in prison, with a heart to be broken, is not less pathetic than the
heartless Hetty, in the same condemnation.

As to her lover, Robertson, or Sir George Staunton, he certainly verges on the melodramatic.
Perhaps we know too much about the real George Robertson, who was no heir to a title in disguise,
but merely a "stabler in Bristol" accused "at the instance of Duncan Forbes, Esq. of Culloden,
his Majesty's advocate, for the crimes of Stouthrieff, Housebreaking, and Robbery." Robertson
"kept an inn in Bristo, at Edinburgh, where the Newcastle carrier commonly did put up," and
is believed to have been a married man. It is not very clear that the novel gains much by the
elevation of the Bristo innkeeper to a baronetcy, except in so far as Effie's appearance in
the character of a great lady is entertaining and characteristic, and Jeanie's conquest of
her own envy is exemplary. The change in social rank calls for the tragic conclusion, about
which almost every reader agrees with the criticism of Lady Louisa Stuart and her friends.
Thus the novel "filled more pages" than Mr. Jedediah Cleishbotham had "opined," and hence comes
a languor which does not beset the story of "Old Mortality." Scott's own love of adventure
and of stirring incidents at any cost is an excellent quality in a novelist, but it does, in
this instance, cause him somewhat to dilute those immortal studies of Scotch character which
are the strength of his genius. The reader feels a lack of reality in the conclusion, the fatal
encounter of the father and the lost son, an incident as old as the legend of Odysseus. But
this is more than atoned for by the admirable part of Madge Wildfire, flitting like a feu follet
up and down among the douce Scotch, and the dour rioters. Madge Wildfire is no repetition of
Meg Merrilies, though both are unrestrained natural things, rebels against the settled life,
musical voices out of the past, singing forgotten songs of nameless minstrels. Nowhere but
in Shakspeare can we find such a distraught woman as Madge Wildfire, so near akin to nature
and to the moods of "the bonny lady Moon." Only he who created Ophelia could have conceived
or rivalled the scene where Madge accompanies the hunters of Staunton on the moonlit hill and
sings her warnings to the fugitive.

                When the glede's in the blue cloud,
                      The lavrock lies still;
                When the hound's in the green-wood,
                      The hind keeps the hill.
                There's a bloodhound ranging Tinwald wood,
                      There's harness glancing sheen;
                There's a maiden sits on Tinwald brae,
                      And she sings loud between.
                O sleep ye sound, Sir James, she said,
                      When ye suld rise and ride?
                There's twenty men, wi' bow and blade,
                       Are seeking where ye hide.

The madness of Madge Wildfire has its parallel in the wildness of Goethe's Marguerite, both
of them lamenting the lost child, which, to Madge's fancy, is now dead, now living in a dream.
But the gloom that hangs about Muschat's Cairn, the ghastly vision of "crying up Ailie Muschat,
and she and I will hae a grand bouking-washing, and bleach our claise in the beams of the bonny
Lady Moon," have a terror beyond the German, and are unexcelled by Webster or by Ford. "But
the moon, and the dew, and the night-wind, they are just like a caller kail-blade laid on my
brow; and whiles I think the moon just shines on purpose to pleasure me, when naebody sees
her but mysell." Scott did not deal much in the facile pathos of the death-bed, but that of
Madge Wildfire has a grace of poetry, and her latest song is the sweetest and wildest of his
lyrics, the most appropriate in its setting. When we think of the contrasts to her--the honest,
dull good-nature of Dumbiedikes; the common-sense and humour of Mrs. Saddletree; the pragmatic
pedantry of her husband; the Highland pride, courage, and absurdity of the Captain of Knockdander--when
we consider all these so various and perfect creations, we need not wonder that Scott was "in
high glee" over "The Heart of Mid-Lothian," "felt himself very strong," and thought that these
would be "the best volumes that have appeared." The difficulty, as usual, is to understand
how, in all this strength, he permitted himself to be so careless over what is really by far
the easiest part of the novelist's task--the construction. But so it was; about "The Monastery"
he said, "it was written with as much care as the rest, that is, with no care at all." His
genius flowed free in its own unconscious abundance: where conscious deliberate workmanship
was needed, "the forthright craftsman's hand," there alone he was lax and irresponsible. In
Shakspeare's case we can often account for similar incongruities by the constraint of the old
plot which he was using; but Scott was making his own plots, or letting them make themselves.

In fact, Sir Walter was like the Magician who can raise spirits that, once raised, dominate
him. Probably this must ever be the case, when an author's characters are not puppets but real
creations. They then have a will and a way of their own; a free-will which their creator cannot
predetermine and correct. Something like this appears to have been Scott's own theory of his
lack of constructive power. No one was so assured of its absence, no one criticised it more
severely than he did himself. The Edinburgh Review about this time counselled the "Author of
Waverley" to attempt a drama, doubting only his powers of compression. Possibly work at a drama
might have been of advantage to the genius of Scott. He was unskilled in selection and rejection,
which the drama especially demands. But he detested the idea of writing for actors, whom he
regarded as ignorant, dull, and conceited. "I shall not fine and renew a lease of popularity
upon the theatre. To write for low, ill-informed, and conceited actors, whom you must please,
for your success is necessarily at their mercy, I cannot away with," he wrote to Southey. "Avowedly,
I will never write for the stage; if I do, 'call me horse,'" he remarks to Terry. He wanted
"neither the profit nor the shame of it." "I do not think that the character of the audience
in London is such that one could have the least pleasure in pleasing them." He liked helping
Terry to "Terryfy" "The Heart of Mid-Lothian," and his other novels, but he had no more desire
than a senator of Rome would have had to see his name become famous by the Theatre. This confirmed
repulsion in one so learned in the dramatic poets is a curious trait in Scott's character.
He could not accommodate his genius to the needs of the stage, and that crown which has most
potently allured most men of genius he would have thrust away, had it been offered to him,
with none of Caesar's reluctance. At the bottom of all this lay probably the secret conviction
that his genius was his master, that it must take him where it would, on paths where he was
compelled to follow. Terse and concentrated, of set purpose, he could not be. A notable instance
of this inability occurs in the Introductory Chapter to "The Heart of Mid-Lothian," which has
probably frightened away many modern readers. The Advocate and the Writer to the Signet and
the poor Client are persons quite uncalled for, and their little adventure at Gandercleugh
is unreal. Oddly enough, part of their conversation is absolutely in the manner of Dickens.

"'I think,' said I, . . . 'the metropolitan county may, in that case, be said to have a sad heart.'

"'Right as my glove, Mr. Pattieson,' added Mr. Hardie; 'and a close heart, and a hard heart--Keep
it up, Jack.'

"'And a wicked heart, and a poor heart,' answered Halkit, doing his best.

"'And yet it may be called in some sort a strong heart, and a high heart,' rejoined the advocate.
'You see I can put you both out of heart.'"

Fortunately we have no more of this easy writing, which makes such very melancholy reading.

The narrative of the Porteous mob, as given by the novelist, is not, it seems, entirely accurate.
Like most artists, Sir Walter took the liberty of "composing" his picture. In his "Illustrations
of the Author of Waverley" (1825) Mr. Robert Chambers records the changes in facts made by
Scott. In the first place, Wilson did not attack his guard, and enable Robertson to escape,
after the sermon, but as soon as the criminals took their seats in the pew. When fleeing out,
Robertson tripped over "the plate," set on a stand to receive alms and oblations, whereby he
hurt himself, and was seen to stagger and fall in running down the stairs leading to the Cowgate.
Mr. McQueen, Minister of the New Kirk, was coming up the stairs. He conceived it to be his
duty to set Robertson on his feet again, "and covered his retreat as much as possible from
the pursuit of the guard." Robertson ran up the Horse Wynd, out at Potter Row Port, got into
the King's Park, and headed for the village of Duddingston, beside the loch on the south-east
of Arthur's Seat. He fainted after jumping a dyke, but was picked up and given some refreshment.
He lay in hiding till he could escape to Holland.

The conspiracy to hang Porteous did not, in fact, develop in a few hours, after his failure
to appear on the scaffold. The Queen's pardon (or a reprieve) reached Edinburgh on Thursday,
Sept. 2; the Riot occurred on the night of Sept. 7. The council had been informed that lynching
was intended, thirty-six hours before the fatal evening, but pronounced the reports to be "caddies'
clatters." Their negligence, of course, must have increased the indignation of the Queen. The
riot, according to a very old man, consulted by Mr. Chambers, was headed by two butchers, named
Cumming, "tall, strong, and exceedingly handsome men, who dressed in women's clothes as a disguise."
The rope was tossed out of a window in a "small wares shop" by a woman, who received a piece
of gold in exchange. This extravagance is one of the very few points which suggest that people
of some wealth may have been concerned in the affair. Tradition, according to Charles Kirkpatrick
Sharpe, believed in noble leaders of the riot. It is certain that several witnesses of good
birth and position testified very strongly against Porteous, at his trial.

