The Milagrosa, with her consort the Hidalga rolling after her, steered a south by westerly
course, then veered to the southeast round Cape Tiburon, and thereafter, standing well out
to sea, with the land no more than a cloudy outline to larboard, she headed directly east,
and so ran straight into the arms of Captain Blood, who was making for the Windward Passage,
as we know. That happened early on the following morning. After having systematically hunted
his enemy in vain for a year, Don Miguel chanced upon him in this unexpected and entirely fortuitous
fashion. But that is the ironic way of Fortune. It was also the way of Fortune that Don Miguel
should thus come upon the Arabella at a time when, separated from the rest of the fleet, she
was alone and at a disadvantage. It looked to Don Miguel as if the luck which so long had been
on Blood's side had at last veered in his own favour.

Miss Bishop, newly risen, had come out to take the air on the quarter-deck with his lordship
in attendance--as you would expect of so gallant a gentleman--when she beheld the big red ship
that had once been the Cinco Llagas out of Cadiz. The vessel was bearing down upon them, her
mountains of snowy canvas bellying forward, the long pennon with the cross of St. George fluttering
from her main truck in the morning breeze, the gilded portholes in her red hull and the gilded
beak-head aflash in the morning sun.

Miss Bishop was not to recognize this for that same Cinco Llagas which she had seen once before--on
a tragic day in Barbados three years ago. To her it was just a great ship that was heading
resolutely, majestically, towards them, and an Englishman to judge by the pennon she was flying.
The sight thrilled her curiously; it awoke in her an uplifting sense of pride that took no
account of the danger to herself in the encounter that must now be inevitable.

Beside her on the poop, whither they had climbed to obtain a better view, and equally arrested
and at gaze, stood Lord Julian. But he shared none of her exultation. He had been in his first
sea-fight yesterday, and he felt that the experience would suffice him for a very considerable
time. This, I insist, is no reflection upon his courage.

"Look," said Miss Bishop, pointing; and to his infinite amazement he observed that her eyes
were sparkling. Did she realize, he wondered, what was afoot? Her next sentence resolved his
doubt. "She is English, and she comes resolutely on. She means to fight."

"God help her, then," said his lordship gloomily. "Her captain must be mad. What can he hope
to do against two such heavy hulks as these? If they could so easily blow the Royal Mary out
of the water, what will they do to this vessel? Look at that devil Don Miguel. He's utterly
disgusting in his glee."

From the quarter-deck, where he moved amid the frenzy of preparation, the Admiral had turned
to flash a backward glance at his prisoners. His eyes were alight, his face transfigured. He
flung out an arm to point to the advancing ship, and bawled something in Spanish that was lost
to them in the noise of the labouring crew.

