To this interrogation he made no reply; but throwing aside his nightgown, discovered that his
waist-coat would not meet upon his belly by five good inches at least. 'Heaven protect us all!
(cried Sir Thomas) what a melancholy spectacle! -- never did I see a man so suddenly swelled,
but when he was either just dead, or just dying. -- Doctor, can'st thou do nothing for this
poor object?' 'I don't think the case is quite desperate (said the surgeon), but I would advise
Mr Frogmore to settle his affairs with all expedition; the parson may come and pray by him,
while I prepare a glyster and an emetic draught.' The justice, rolling his languid eyes, ejaculated
with great fervency, 'Lord, have mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us!' -- Then he begged
the surgeon, in the name of God, to dispatch -- 'As for my worldly affairs (said he), they
are all settled but one mortgage, which must be left to my heirs -- but my poor soul! my poor
soul! what will become of my poor soul? miserable sinner that I am!' 'Nay, pr'ythee, my dear
boy, compose thyself (resumed the knight); consider the mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st
not have any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience, or the devil's in't.' 'Name not the
devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I have more sins to answer for than the world dreams
of. -- Ah! friend, I have been sly -- sly damn'd sly! -- Send for the parson without loss of
time, and put me to bed, for I am posting to eternity.' -- He was accordingly raised from the
couch, and supported by two servants, who led him back to his room; but before he quitted the
parlour, he intreated the good company to assist him with their prayers. -- He added, 'Take
warning by me, who am suddenly cut off in my prime, like a flower of the field; and God forgive
you, Sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous trash to be eaten at your table.'

He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than the baronet abandoned himself to a violent fit
of laughing, in which he was joined by the greatest part of the company; but we could hardly
prevent the good lady from going to undeceive the patient, by discovering, that while he slept
his waistcoat had been straitened by the contrivance of the surgeon; and that the disorder
in his stomach and bowels was occasioned by some antimonial wine, which he had taken over night,
under the denomination of plague-water. She seemed to think that his apprehension might put
an end to his life: the knight swore he was no such chicken, but a tough old rogue, that would
live long enough to plague all his neighbours. -- Upon enquiry, we found his character did
not intitle him to much compassion or respect, and therefore we let our landlord's humour take
its course. -- A glyster was actually administered by an old woman of the family, who had been
Sir Thomas's nurse, and the patient took a draught made with oxymel of squills to forward the
operation of the antimonial wine, which had been retarded by the opiate of the preceding night.
He was visited by the vicar, who read prayers, and began to take an account of the state of
his soul, when those medicines produced their effect; so that the parson was obliged to hold
his nose while he poured forth spiritual consolation from his mouth. The same expedient was
used by the knight and me, who, with the doctor, entered the chamber at this juncture, and
found Frogmore enthroned on an easing-chair, under the pressure of a double evacuation. The
short intervals betwixt every heave he employed in crying for mercy, confessing his sins, or
asking the vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered, in a solemn snuffling tone,
that heightened the ridicule of the scene. The emetic having done its office, the doctor interfered,
and ordered the patient to be put in bed again. When he examined the egesta, and felt his pulse,
he declared that much of the virus was discharged, and, giving him a composing draught, assured
him he had good hopes of his recovery. -- This welcome hint he received with the tears of joy
in his eyes, protesting, that if he should recover, he would always think himself indebted
for his life to the great skill and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he squeezed with great
fervour; and thus he was left to his repose.

We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be witnesses of his resuscitation; but my uncle
insisted upon our departing before noon, that we might reach this town before it should be
dark. -- In the mean-time, lady Bullford conducted us into the garden to see a fishpond just
finished, which Mr Bramble censured as being too near the parlour, where the knight now sat
by himself, dozing in an elbow-chair after the fatigues of his morning atchievement. -- In
this situation he reclined, with his feet wrapped in flannel, and supported in a line with
his body, when the door flying open with a violent shock, lieutenant Lismahago rushed into
the room with horror in his looks, exclaiming, 'A mad dog! a mad dog!' and throwing up the
window sash, leaped into the garden -- Sir Thomas, waked by this tremendous exclamation, started
up, and forgetting his gout, followed the lieutenant's example by a kind of instinctive impulse.
He not only bolted thro' the window like an arrow from a bow, but ran up to his middle in the
pond before he gave the least sign of recollection. Then the captain began to bawl, 'Lord have
mercy upon us! -- pray, take care of the gentleman! -- for God's sake, mind your footing, my
dear boy! -- get warm blankets -- comfort his poor carcase -- warm the bed in the green room.'

Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phaenomenon, and the rest of the company gazed in
silent astonishment, while the servants hastened to assist their master, who suffered himself
to be carried back into the parlour without speaking a word. -- Being instantly accommodated
with dry clothes and flannels, comforted with a cordial, and replaced in statu quo, one of
the maids was ordered to chafe his lower extremities, an operation in consequence of which
his senses seemed to return and his good humour to revive. -- As we had followed him into the
room, he looked at every individual in his turn, with a certain ludicrous expression in his
countenance, but fixed his eyes in particular upon Lismahago, who presented him with a pinch
of snuff, and when he took it in silence, 'Sir Thomas Bullford (said he), I am much obliged
to you for all your favours, and some of them I have endeavoured to repay in your own coin.'
'Give me thy hand (cried the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot and lot; and even left
a balance in my hands, for which, in presence of this company, I promise to be accountable.'
-- So saying, he laughed very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation which had
been exacted at his own expence; but lady Bullford looked very grave; and in all probability
thought the lieutenant had carried his resentment too far, considering that her husband was
valetudinary -- but, according to the proverb, he that will play at bowls must expect to meet
with rubbers. I have seen a tame bear, very diverting when properly managed, become a very
dangerous wild beast when teized for the entertainment of the spectators. -- As for Lismahago,
he seemed to think the fright and the cold bath would have a good effect upon his patient's
constitution: but the doctor hinted some apprehension that the gouty matter might, by such
a sudden shock, be repelled from the extremities and thrown upon some of the more vital parts
of the machine. -- I should be very sorry to see this prognostic verified upon our facetious
landlord, who told Mrs Tabitha at parting, that he hoped she would remember him in the distribution
of the bride's favours, as he had taken so much pains to put the captain's parts and mettle
to the proof. -- After all, I am afraid our squire will appear to be the greatest sufferer
by the baronet's wit; for his constitution is by no means calculated for night-alarms. He has
yawned and shivered all day, and gone to bed without supper; so that, as we have got into good
quarters, I imagine we shall make a halt to-morrow; in which case, you will have at least one
day's respite from the persecution of

J. MELFORD Oct. 3.

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this match will go forewood; for things are come
to a creesus; and I have seen with my own bays, such smuggling -- But I scorn for to exclose
the secrets of the family; and if it wance comes to marrying, who nose but the frolick may
go round -- I believes as how, Miss Liddy would have no reversion if her swan would appear;
and you would be surprised, Molly, to receive a bride's fever from your humble sarvant -- but
this is all suppository, dear girl; and I have sullenly promised to Mr Clinker, that neither
man, woman, nor child shall no that arrow said a civil thing to me in the way of infection.
I hope to drink your health at Brambleton-hall, in a horn of October, before the month be out
-- Pray let my bed be turned once a-day, and the windore opened, while the weather is dry;
and burn a few billets with some brush in the footman's garret, and see their mattrash be dry
as a bone: for both our gentlemen have got a sad could by lying in damp shits at sir Tummas
Ballfart's. No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and the rest of our fellow-sarvents, being,

Dear Mary Jones, Always yours, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 4.

To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

This method of writing to you from time to time, without any hopes of an answer, affords me,
I own, some ease and satisfaction in the 'midst of my disquiet, as it in some degree lightens
the burthen of affliction: but it is at best a very imperfect enjoyment of friendship, because
it admits of no return of confidence and good counsel -- I would give the whole world to have
your company for a single day -- I am heartily tired of this itinerant way of life. I am quite
dizzy with a perpetual succession of objects -- Besides it is impossible to travel such a length
of way, without being exposed to inconveniencies, dangers, and disagreeable accidents, which
prove very grievous to a poor creature of weak nerves like me, and make me pay very dear for
the gratification of my curiosity.

Nature never intended me for the busy world -- I long for repose and solitude, where I can
enjoy that disinterested friendship which is not to be found among crouds, and indulge those
pleasing reveries that shun the hurry and tumult of fashionable society -- Unexperienced as
I am in the commerce of life, I have seen enough to give me a disgust to the generality of
those who carry it on -- There is such malice, treachery, and dissimulation, even among professed
friends and intimate companions, as cannot fail to strike a virtuous mind with horror; and
when Vice quits the stage for a moment, her place is immediately occupied by Folly, which is
often too serious to excite any thing but compassion. Perhaps I ought to be silent on the foibles
of my poor aunt; but with you, my dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her weaknesses
are such as cannot be concealed. Since the first moment we arrived at Bath, she has been employed
constantly in spreading nets for the other sex; and, at length, she has caught a superannuated
lieutenant, who is in a fair way to make her change her name -- My uncle and my brother seem
to have no objection to this extraordinary match, which, I make no doubt, will afford abundance
of matter for conversation and mirth; for my part, I am too sensible of my own weaknesses,
to be diverted with those of other people -- At present, I have something at heart that employs
my whole attention, and keeps my mind in the utmost terror and suspence.

Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my brother at the parlour window of an inn, where
we had lodged, a person passed a horseback, whom (gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered
to be Wilson! He wore a white riding-coat, with the cape buttoned up to his chin; looking remarkably
pale, and passed at a round trot, without seeming to observe us -- Indeed, he could not see
us; for there was a blind that concealed us from the view. You may guess how I was affected
at this apparition. The light forsook my eyes; and I was seized with such a palpitation and
trembling, that I could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and strove to compose myself, that
my brother might not perceive my agitation; but it was impossible to escape his prying eyes
-- He had observed the object that alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew him at the first glance
-- He now looked at me with a stern countenance; then he ran out into the street, to see what
road the unfortunate horseman had taken -- He afterwards dispatched his man for further intelligence,
and seemed to meditate some violent design. My uncle, being out of order, we remained another
night at the inn; and all day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable spy upon my conduct
-- He watched my very looks with such eagerness of attention, as if he would have penetrated
into the utmost recesses of my heart -- This may be owing to his regard for my honour, if it
is not the effect of his own pride; but he is so hot, and violent, and unrelenting, that the
sight of him alone throws me into a flutter; and really it will not be in my power to afford
him any share of my affection, if he persists in persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he
has formed some scheme of vengeance, which will make me completely wretched! I am afraid he
suspects some collusion from this appearance of Wilson. -- Good God! did he really appear?
or was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to apprise me of his death.

O Letty, what shall I do? -- where shall I turn for advice and consolation? shall I implore
the protection of my uncle, who has been always kind and compassionate. -- This must be my
last resource. -- I dread the thoughts of making him uneasy; and would rather suffer a thousand
deaths than live the cause of dissension in the family. -- I cannot conceive the meaning of
Wilson's coming hither: -- perhaps, it was in quest of us, in order to disclose his real name
and situation: -- but wherefore pass without staying to make the least enquiry? -- My dear
Willis, I am lost in conjecture. I have not closed an eye since I saw him. -- All night long
have I been tossed about from one imagination to another. The reflection finds no resting place.
-- I have prayed, and sighed, and wept plentifully. -- If this terrible suspence continues
much longer, I shall have another fit of illness, and then the whole family will be in confusion
-- If it was consistent with the wise purposes of Providence, would I were in my grave -- But
it is my duty to be resigned. -- My dearest Letty, excuse my weakness -- excuse these blots
-- my tears fall so fast that I cannot keep the paper dry -- yet I ought to consider that I
have as yet no cause to despair but I am such a faint-hearted timorous creature!

Thank God, my uncle is much better than he was yesterday. He is resolved to pursue our journey
strait to Wales. -- I hope we shall take Gloucester in our way -- that hope chears my poor
heart I shall once more embrace my best beloved Willis, and pour all my griefs into her friendly
bosom. -- 0 heaven! is it possible that such happiness is reserved for

The dejected and forlorn LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 4. I was equally astonished and incensed at his
appearance, which I could not but interpret into an insult, or something worse. I ran out at
the gate, and, seeing him turn the corner of the street, I dispatched my servant to observe
his motions, but the fellow was too late to bring me that satisfaction. He told me, however,
that there was an inn, called the Red Lion, at that end of the town, where he supposed the
horseman had alighted, but that he would not enquire without further orders. I sent him back
immediately to know what strangers were in the house, and he returned with a report that there
was one Mr Wilson lately arrived. In consequence of this information I charged him with a note
directed to that gentleman, desiring him to meet me in half an hour in a certain field at the
town's end, with a case of pistols, in order to decide the difference which could not be determined
at our last rencounter: but I did not think proper to subscribe the billet. My man assured
me he had delivered it into his own hand; and, that having read it, he declared he would wait
upon the gentleman at the place and time appointed.

M'Alpine being an old soldier, and luckily sober at the time, I entrusted him with my secret.
I ordered him to be within call, and, having given him a letter to be delivered to my uncle
in case of accident, I repaired to the rendezvous, which was an inclosed field at a little
distance from the highway. I found my antagonist had already taken his ground, wrapped in a
dark horseman's coat, with a laced hat flapped over his eyes; but what was my astonishment,
when, throwing off this wrapper, he appeared to be a person whom I had never seen before! He
had one pistol stuck in a leather belt, and another in his hand ready for action, and, advancing
a few steps, called to know if I was ready -- I answered, 'No,' and desired a parley; upon
which he turned the muzzle of his piece towards the earth; then replaced it in his belt, and
met me half way -- When I assured him he was not the man I expected to meet, he said it might
be so: that he had received a slip of paper directed to Mr Wilson, requesting him to come hither;
and that as there was no other in the place of that name, he naturally concluded the note was
intended for him, and him only -- I then gave him to understand, that I had been injured by
a person who assumed that name, which person I had actually seen within the hour, passing through
the street on horseback; that hearing there was a Mr Wilson at the Red Lion, I took it for
granted he was the man, and in that belief had writ the billet; and I expressed my surprize,
that he, who was a stranger to me and my concerns, should give me such a rendezvous, without
taking the trouble to demand a previous explanation. He replied, that there was no other of
his name in the whole country; that no such horseman had alighted at the Red Lion since nine
o'clock, when he arrived -- that having had the honour to serve his majesty, he thought he
could not decently decline any invitation of this kind, from what quarter soever it might come,
and that if any explanation was necessary, it did not belong to him to demand it, but to the
gentleman who summoned him into the field. Vexed as I was at this adventure, I could not help
admiring the coolness of this officer, whose open countenance prepossessed me in his favour.
He seemed to be turned of forty; wore his own short black hair, which curled naturally about
his ears, and was very plain in his apparel -- When I begged pardon for the trouble I had given
him, he received my apology with great good humour. -- He told me that he lived about ten miles
off, at a small farm-house, which would afford me tolerable lodging, if I would come and take
diversion of hunting with him for a few weeks; in which case we might, perhaps, find out the
man who had given me offence -- I thanked him very sincerely for his courteous offer, which,
I told him, I was not at liberty to accept at present, on account of my being engaged in a
family party; and so we parted, with mutual professions of good will and esteem.

Now tell me, dear knight, what am I to make of this singular adventure? Am I to suppose that
the horseman I saw was really a thing of flesh and blood, or a bubble that vanished into air?
-- or must I imagine Liddy knows more of the matter than she chuses to disclose? -- If I thought
her capable of carrying on any clandestine correspondence with such a fellow, I should at once
discard all tenderness, and forget that she was connected with me by the ties of blood -- But
how is it possible that a girl of her simplicity and inexperience, should maintain such an
intercourse, surrounded, as she is, with so many eyes, destitute of all opportunity, and shifting
quarters every day of her life! -- Besides, she has solemnly promised. No -- I can't think
the girl so base -- so insensible to the honour of her family. -- What disturbs me chiefly,
is the impression which these occurrences seem to make upon her spirits -- These are the symptoms
from which I conclude that the rascal has still a hold on her affection, surely I have a right
to call him a rascal, and to conclude that his designs are infamous. But it shall be my fault
if he does not one day repent his presumption -- I confess I cannot think, much less write
on this subject, with any degree of temper or patience; I shall therefore conclude with telling
you, that we hope to be in Wales by the latter end of the month: but before that period you
will probably hear again from

your affectionate J. MELFORD Oct. 4. He endeavoured more than once to get up, and even to disentangle
himself from her embrace, but she hung about his neck like a mill-stone (no bad emblem of matrimony),
and if my man had not proved a stanch auxiliary, those two lovers would in all probability
have gone hand in hand to the shades below -- For my part, I was too much engaged to take any
cognizance of their distress. -- I snatched out my sister by the hair of the head, and, dragging
her to the bank, recollected that my uncle had, not yet appeared -- Rushing again into the
stream, I met Clinker hauling ashore Mrs Jenkins, who looked like a mermaid with her hair dishevelled
about her ears; but, when I asked if his master was safe, he forthwith shook her from him,
and she must have gone to pot, if a miller had not seasonably come to her relief. -- As for
Humphry, he flew like lightning, to the coach, that was by this time filled with water, and,
diving into it, brought up the poor 'squire, to all appearance, deprived of life -- It is not
in my power to describe what I felt at this melancholy spectacle -- it was such an agony as
baffles all description! The faithful Clinker, taking him up in his arms, as if he had been
an infant of six months, carried him ashore, howling most piteously all the way, and I followed
him in a transport of grief and consternation -- When he was laid upon the grass and turned
from side to side, a great quantity of water ran out at his mouth, then he opened his eyes,
and fetched a deep sigh. Clinker perceiving these signs of life, immediately tied up his arm
with a garter, and, pulling out a horse-fleam, let him blood in the farrier stile. -- At first
a few drops only issued from the orifice, but the limb being chafed, in a little time the blood
began to flow in a continued stream, and he uttered some incoherent words, which were the most
welcome sounds that ever saluted my ear. There was a country inn hard by, the landlord of which
had by this time come with his people to give their assistance. -- Thither my uncle being carried,
was undressed and put to bed, wrapped in warm blankets; but having been moved too soon, he
fainted away, and once more lay without sense or motion, notwithstanding all the efforts of
Clinker and the landlord, who bathed his temples with Hungary water, and held a smelling-bottle
to his nose. As I had heard of the efficacy of salt in such cases, I ordered all that was in
the house to be laid under his head and body; and whether this application had the desired
effect, or nature of herself prevailed, he, in less than a quarter of an hour, began to breathe
regularly, and soon retrieved his recollection, to the unspeakable joy of all the by-standers.
As for Clinker, his brain seemed to be affected. -- He laughed, and wept, and danced about
in such a distracted manner, that the landlord very judiciously conveyed him out of the room.
My uncle, seeing me dropping wet, comprehended the whole of what had happened, and asked if
all the company was safe? -- Being answered in the affirmative, he insisted upon my putting
on dry clothes; and, having swallowed a little warm wine, desired he might be left to his repose.
Before I went to shift myself, I inquired about the rest of the family -- I found Mrs Tabitha
still delirious from her fright, discharging very copiously the water she had swallowed. She
was supported by the captain, distilling drops from his uncurled periwig, so lank and so dank,
that he looked like Father Thames without his sedges, embracing Isis, while she cascaded in
his urn. Mrs Jenkins was present also, in a loose bed gown, without either cap or handkerchief;
but she seemed to be as little compos mentis as her mistress, and acted so many cross purposes
in the course of her attendance, that, between the two, Lismahago had occasion for all his
philosophy. As for Liddy, I thought the poor girl would have actually lost her senses. The
good woman of the house had shifted her linen, and put her into bed; but she was seized with
the idea that her uncle had perished, and in this persuasion made a dismal out-cry; nor did
she pay the least regard to what I said, when I solemnly assured her he was safe. Mr Bramble
hearing the noise, and being informed of her apprehension, desired she might be brought into
his chamber; and she no sooner received this intimation, than she ran thither half naked, with
the wildest expression of eagerness in her countenance -- Seeing the 'squire sitting up in
the bed, she sprung forwards and throwing her arms about his neck, exclaimed in a most pathetic
tone, 'Are you -- Are you indeed my uncle -- My dear uncle! -- My best friend! My father! --
Are you really living? or is it an illusion of my poor brain!' Honest Matthew was so much affected,
that he could not help shedding tears, while he kissed her forehead, saying, 'My dear Liddy,
I hope I shall live long enough to shew how sensible I am of your affection -- But your spirits
are fluttered, child -- You want rest -- Go to bed and compose yourself' -- 'Well, I will (she
replied) but still methinks this cannot be real -- The coach was full of water -- My uncle
was under us all -- Gracious God! -- You was under water -- How did you get out; -- tell me
that? or I shall think this is all a deception' -- 'In what manner I was brought out, I know
as little as you do, my dear (said the 'squire); and, truly, that is a circumstance of which
I want to be informed.' I would have given him a detail of the whole adventure, but he would
not hear me until I should change my clothes; so that I had only time to tell him, that he
owed his life to the courage and fidelity of Clinker: and having given him this hint, I conducted
my sister to her own chamber.

This accident happened about three o'clock in the afternoon, and in little more than an hour
the hurricane was all over; but as the carriage was found to be so much damaged, that it could
not proceed without considerable repairs, a blacksmith and wheelwright were immediately sent
for to the next market-town, and we congratulated ourselves upon being housed at an inn, which,
though remote from the post-road, afforded exceeding good lodging. The women being pretty well
composed, and the men all a-foot, my uncle sent for his servant, and, in the presence of Lismahago
and me, accosted him in these words -- 'So, Clinker, I find you are resolved I shan't die by
water -- As you have fished me up from the bottom at your own risque, you are at least entitled
to all the money that was in my pocket, and there it is' -- So saying, he presented him with
a purse containing thirty guineas, and a ring nearly of the same value -- 'God forbid! (cried
Clinker), your honour shall excuse me -- I am a poor fellow, but I have a heart O! if your
honour did but know how I rejoice to see -- Blessed be his holy name, that made me the humble
instrument -- But as for the lucre of gain, I renounce it -- I have done no more than my duty
-- No more than I would have done for the most worthless of my fellow-creatures -- No more
than I would have done for captain Lismahago, or Archy Macalpine, or any sinner upon earth
-- But for your worship, I would go through fire as well as water' -- 'I do believe it, Humphry
(said the 'squire); but as you think it was your duty to save my life at the hazard of your
own, I think it is mine to express the sense I have of your extraordinary fidelity and attachment
-- I insist upon your receiving this small token of my gratitude; but don't imagine that I
look upon this as an adequate recompence for the service you have done me -- I have determined
to settle thirty pounds a-year upon you for life; and I desire these gentlemen will bear witness
to this my intention, of which I have a memorandum in my pocketbook.' 'Lord make me thankful
for all these mercies! (cried Clinker, sobbing), I have been a poor bankrupt from the beginning
-- your honour's goodness found me, when I was -- naked when I was -- sick and forlorn -- I
understand your honour's looks -- I would not give offence -- but my heart is very full --
and if your worship won't give me leave to speak, -- I must vent it in prayers to heaven for
my benefactor.' When he quitted the room, Lismahago said, he should have a much better opinion
of his honesty, if he did not whine and cant so abominably; but that he had always observed
those weeping and praying fellows were hypocrites at bottom. Mr Bramble made no reply to this
sarcastic remark, proceeding from the lieutenant's resentment of Clinker having, in pure simplicity
of heart, ranked him with M'Alpine and the sinners of the earth -- The landlord being called
to receive some orders about the beds, told the 'squire that his house was very much at his
service, but he was sure he should not have the honour to lodge him and his company. He gave
us to understand that his master who lived hard by, would not suffer us to be at a public house,
when there was accommodation for us at his own; and that, if he had not dined abroad in the
neighbourhood he would have undoubtedly come to offer his services at our first arrival. He
then launched out in praise of that gentleman, whom he had served as butler, representing him
as a perfect miracle of goodness and generosity. He said he was a person of great learning,
and allowed to be the best farmer in the country: -- that he had a lady who was as much beloved
as himself, and an only son, a very hopeful young gentleman, just recovered from a dangerous
fever, which had like to have proved fatal to the whole family; for, if the son had died, he
was sure the parents would not have survived their loss -- He had not yet finished the encomium
of Mr Dennison, when this gentleman arrived in a post-chaise, and his appearance seemed to
justify all that had been said in his favour. He is pretty well advanced in years, but hale,
robust, and florid, with an ingenuous countenance, expressive of good sense and humanity. Having
condoled with us on the accident which had happened, he said he was come to conduct us to his
habitation, where we should be less incommoded than at such a paultry inn, and expressed his
hope that the ladies would not be the worse for going thither in his carriage, as the distance
was not above a quarter of a mile. My uncle having made a proper return to this courteous exhibition,
eyed him attentively, and then asked if he had not been at Oxford, a commoner of Queen's college?
When Mr Dennison answered, 'Yes,' with some marks of surprise -- 'Look at me then (said our
squire) and let us see if you can recollect the features of an old friend, whom you have not
seen these forty years.' -- The gentleman, taking him by the hand, and gazing at him earnestly,
-- 'I protest (cried he), I do think I recall the idea of Matthew Loyd of Glamorganshire, who
was student of Jesus.' 'Well remembered, my dear friend, Charles Dennison (exclaimed my uncle,
pressing him to his breast), I am that very identical Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan.' Clinker,
who had just entered the room with some coals for the fire, no sooner heard these words, than
throwing down the scuttle on the toes of Lismahago, he began to caper as if he was mad, crying
-- 'Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan! -- O Providence! -- Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan!' -- Then, clasping
my uncle's knees, he went on in this manner -- 'Your worship must forgive me -- Matthew Loyd
of Glamorgan! -- O Lord, Sir! I can't contain myself! -- I shall lose my senses' -- 'Nay, thou
hast lost them already, I believe (said the 'squire, peevishly), prithee, Clinker, be quiet
-- What is the matter?' -- Humphry, fumbling in his bosom, pulled out an old wooden snuff-box,
which he presented in great trepidation to his master, who, opening it immediately, perceived
a small cornelian seal, and two scraps of paper -- At sight of these articles he started, and
changed colour, and casting his eye upon the inscriptions -- 'Ha! -- how! -- what! where (cried
he) is the person here named?' Clinker, knocking his own breast, could hardly pronounce these
words -- 'Here -- here -- here is Matthew Loyd, as the certificate sheweth -- Humphry Clinker
was the name of the farrier that took me 'prentice' -- 'And who gave you these tokens?' said
my uncle hastily -- 'My poor mother on her death-bed' -- replied the other -- 'And who was
your mother?' 'Dorothy Twyford, an please your honour, heretofore bar-keeper at the Angel at
Chippenham.' -- 'And why were not these tokens produced before?' 'My mother told me she had
wrote to Glamorganshire, at the time of my birth, but had no answer; and that afterwards, when
she made enquiry, there was no such person in that county.' 'And so in consequence of my changing
my name and going abroad at that very time, thy poor mother and thou have been left to want
and misery -- I am really shocked at the consequence of my own folly.' -- Then, laying his
hand on Clinker's head, he added, 'Stand forth, Matthew Loyd -- You see, gentlemen, how the
sins of my youth rise up in judgment against me -- Here is my direction written with my own
hand, and a seal which I left at the woman's request; and this is a certificate of the child's
baptism, signed by the curate of the parish.' The company were not a little surprised at this
discovery, upon which Mr Dennison facetiously congratulated both the father and the son: for
my part, I shook my new-found cousin heartily by the hand, and Lismahago complimented him with
the tears in his eyes, for he had been hopping about the room, swearing in broad Scotch, and
bellowing with the pain occasioned by the fall of the coalscuttle upon his foot. He had even
vowed to drive the saul out of the body of that mad rascal: but, perceiving the unexpected
turn which things had taken, he wished him joy of his good fortune, observing that it went
very near his heart, as he was like to be a great toe out of pocket by the discovery -- Mr
Dennison now desired to know for what reason my uncle had changed the name by which he knew
him at Oxford, and our 'squire satisfied him, by answering to this effect -- 'I took my mother's
name, which was Loyd, as heir to her lands in Glamorganshire; but when I came of age, I sold
that property, in order to clear my paternal estate, and resumed my real name; so that I am
now Matthew Bramble of Brambleton-hall in Monmouthshire, at your service; and this is my nephew,
Jeremy Melford of Belfield, in the county of Glamorgan.' At that instant the ladies entering
the room, he presented Mrs Tabitha as his sister, and Liddy as his niece. The old gentleman
saluted them very cordially, and seemed struck with the appearance of my sister, whom he could
not help surveying with a mixture of complacency and surprize -- 'Sister (said my uncle), there
is a poor relation that recommends himself to your good graces -- The quondam Humphry Clinker
is metamorphosed into Matthew Loyd; and claims the honour of being your carnal kinsman -- in
short, the rogue proves to be a crab of my own planting in the days of hot blood and unrestrained
libertinism.' Clinker had by this time dropt upon one knee, by the side of Mrs Tabitha, who,
eyeing him askance, and flirting her fan with marks of agitation, thought proper, after some
conflict, to hold out her hand for him to kiss, saying, with a demure aspect, 'Brother, you
have been very wicked: but I hope you'll live to see the folly of your ways -- I am very sorry
to say the young man, whom you have this day acknowledged, has more grace and religion, by
the gift of God, than you with all your profane learning, and repeated opportunity -- I do
think he has got the trick of the eye, and the tip of the nose of my uncle Loyd of Flluydwellyn;
and as for the long chin, it is the very moral of the governor's -- Brother, as you have changed
his name pray change his dress also; that livery doth not become any person that hath got our
blood in his veins.' -- Liddy seemed much pleased with this acquisition to the family. -- She
took him by the hand, declaring she should always be proud to own her connexion with a virtuous
young man, who had given so many proofs of his gratitude and affection to her uncle. -- Mrs.
Winifred Jenkins, extremely fluttered between her surprize at this discovery, and the apprehension
of losing her sweet-heart, exclaimed in a giggling tone, -- 'I wish you joy Mr Clinker -- Floyd
-- I would say -- hi, hi, hi! -- you'll be so proud you won't look at your poor fellow servants,
oh, oh, oh!' Honest Clinker owned he was overjoyed at his good fortune, which was greater than
he deserved -- 'But wherefore should I be proud? (said he) a poor object conceived in sin,
and brought forth in iniquity, nursed in a parish workhouse, and bred in a smithy. Whenever
I seem proud, Mrs Jenkins, I beg of you to put me in mind of the condition I was in, when I
first saw you between Chippenham and Marlborough.'

When this momentous affair was discussed to the satisfaction of all parties concerned, the
weather being dry, the ladies declined the carriage; so that we walked all together to Mr Dennison's
house, where we found the tea ready prepared by his lady, an amiable matron, who received us
with all the benevolence of hospitality. The house is old fashioned and irregular, but lodgeable
and commodious. To the south it has the river in front, at the distance of a hundred paces;
and on the north, there is a rising ground covered with an agreeable plantation; the greens
and walks are kept in the nicest order, and all is rural and romantic. I have not yet seen
the young gentleman, who is on a visit to a friend in the neighbourhood, from whose house he
is not expected 'till to-morrow.

DEAR DICK,

Since the last trouble I gave you, I have met with a variety of incidents, some of them of
a singular nature, which I reserve as a fund for conversation; but there are others so interesting,
that they will not keep in petto till meeting.

Know then, it was a thousand pounds to a sixpence, that you should now be executing my will,
instead of perusing my letter! Two days ago, our coach was overturned in the midst of a rapid
river, where my life was saved with the utmost difficulty, by the courage, activity, and presence
of mind of my servant Humphry Clinker -- But this is not the most surprising circumstance of
the adventure -- The said Humphry Clinker proves to be Matthew Loyd, natural son of one Matthew
Loyd of Glamorgan, if you know any such person -- You see, Doctor, that notwithstanding all
your philosophy, it is not without some reason that the Welchmen ascribe such energy to the
force of blood -- But we shall discuss this point on some future occasion.

This is not the only discovery which I made in consequence of our disaster -- We happened to
be wrecked upon a friendly shore -- The lord of the manor is no other than Charles Dennison,
our fellow-rake at Oxford -- We are now happily housed with that gentleman, who has really
attained to that pitch of rural felicity, at which I have been aspiring these twenty years
in vain. He is blessed with a consort, whose disposition is suited to his own in all respects;
tender, generous, and benevolent -- She, moreover, possesses an uncommon share of understanding,
fortitude, and discretion, and is admirably qualified to be his companion, confidant, counsellor,
and coadjutrix. These excellent persons have an only son, about nineteen years of age, just
such a youth as they could have wished that Heaven would bestow to fill up the measure of their
enjoyment -- In a word, they know no other allay to their happiness, but their apprehension
and anxiety about the life and concerns of this beloved object.

Our old friend, who had the misfortune to be a second brother, was bred to the law, and even
called to the bar; but he did not find himself qualified to shine in that province, and had
very little inclination for his profession -- He disobliged his father, by marrying for love,
without any consideration of fortune; so that he had little or nothing to depend upon for some
years but his practice, which afforded him a bare subsistence; and the prospect of an increasing
family, began to give him disturbance and disquiet. In the mean time, his father dying, was
succeeded by his elder brother, a fox-hunter and a sot, who neglected his affairs, insulted
and oppressed his servants, and in a few years had well nigh ruined the estate, when he was
happily carried off by a fever, the immediate consequence of a debauch. Charles, with the approbation
of his wife, immediately determined to quit business, and retire into the country, although
this resolution was strenuously and zealously opposed by every individual, whom he consulted
on the subject. Those who had tried the experiment, assured him that he could not pretend to
breathe in the country for less than the double of what his estate produced; that, in order
to be upon the footing of a gentleman, he would be obliged to keep horses, hounds, carriages,
with a suitable number of servants, and maintain an elegant table for the entertainment of
his neighbours; that farming was a mystery, known only to those who had been bred up to it
from the cradle, the success of it depending not only upon skill and industry, but also upon
such attention and oeconomy as no gentleman could be supposed to give or practise; accordingly,
every attempt made by gentlemen miscarried, and not a few had been ruined by their prosecution
of agriculture -- Nay, they affirmed that he would find it cheaper to buy hay and oats for
his cattle, and to go to market for poultry, eggs, kitchen herbs, and roots, and every the
most inconsiderable article of house-keeping, than to have those articles produced on his own
ground.

These objections did not deter Mr Dennison, because they were chiefly founded on the supposition,
that he would be obliged to lead a life of extravagance and dissipation, which he and his consort
equally detested, despised, and determined to avoid -- The objects he had in view, were health
of body, peace of mind, and the private satisfaction of domestic quiet, unallayed by actual
want, and uninterrupted by the fears of indigence -- He was very moderate in his estimate of
the necessaries, and even of the comforts of life -- He required nothing but wholesome air,
pure water, agreeable exercise, plain diet, convenient lodging, and decent apparel. He reflected,
that if a peasant without education, or any great share of natural sagacity, could maintain
a large family, and even become opulent upon a farm, for which he payed an annual rent of two
or three hundred pounds to the landlord, surely he himself might hope for some success from
his industry, having no rent to pay, but, on the contrary, three or four hundred pounds a year
to receive. He considered, that the earth was an indulgent mother, that yielded her fruits
to all her children without distinction. He had studied the theory of agriculture with a degree
of eagerness and delight; and he could not conceive there was any mystery in the practice,
but what he should be able to disclose by dint of care and application. With respect to houshold
expence, he entered into a minute detail and investigation, by which he perceived the assertions
of his friends were altogether erroneous -- He found he should save sixty pounds a year in
the single article of house-rent, and as much more in pocket-money and contingencies; that
even butcher's-meat was twenty per cent cheaper in the country than in London; but that poultry,
and almost every other circumstance of house-keeping, might be had for less than one-half of
what they cost in town; besides, a considerable saving on the side of dress, in being delivered
from the oppressive imposition of ridiculous modes, invented by ignorance, and adopted by folly.

As to the danger of vying with the rich in pomp and equipage, it never gave him the least disturbance.
He was now turned of forty, and, having lived half that time in the busy scenes of life, was
well skilled in the science of mankind. There cannot be in nature a more contemptible figure
than that of a man, who, with five hundred a year, presumes to rival in expence a neighbour
who possesses five times that income -- His ostentation, far from concealing, serves only to
discover his indigence, and render his vanity the more shocking; for it attracts the eyes of
censure, and excites the spirit of inquiry. There is not a family in the county nor a servant
in his own house, nor a farmer in the parish, but what knows the utmost farthing that his lands
produce, and all these behold him with scorn or compassion. I am surprised that these reflections
do not occur to persons in this unhappy dilemma, and produce a salutary effect; but the truth
is, of all the passions incident to human nature, vanity is that which most effectually perverts
the faculties of the understanding; nay, it sometimes becomes so incredibly depraved, as to
aspire at infamy, and find pleasure in bearing the stigmas of reproach.

I have now given you a sketch of the character and situation of Mr Dennison, when he came down
to take possession of this estate; but as the messenger, who carries the letters to the next
town, is just setting off, I shall reserve what further I have to say on this subject, till
the next post, when you shall certainly hear from

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 8.

To Dr LEWIS.

Once more, dear doctor, I resume the pen for your amusement. It was on the morning after our
arrival that, walking out with my friend, Mr Dennison, I could not help breaking forth into
the warmest expressions of applause at the beauty of the scene, which is really inchanting;
and I signified, in particular, how much I was pleased with the disposition of some detached
groves, that afforded at once shelter and ornament to his habitation.

'When I took possession of these lands, about two and twenty years ago (said he), there was
not a tree standing within a mile of the house, except those of an old neglected orchard, which
produced nothing but leaves and moss. -- It was in the gloomy month of November, when I arrived,
and found the house in such a condition, that it might have been justly stiled the tower of
desolation. -- The court-yard was covered with nettles and docks , and the garden exhibited
such a rank plantation of weeds as I had never seen before; -- the window-shutters were falling
in pieces, -- the sashes broken; -- and owls and jack-daws had taken possession of the chimnies.
-- The prospect within was still more dreary -- All was dark, and damp, and dirty beyond description;
-- the rain penetrated in several parts of the roof; -- in some apartments the very floors
had given way; -- the hangings were parted from the walls, and shaking in mouldy remnants;
the glasses were dropping out of their frames; -- the family-pictures were covered with dust.
and all the chairs and tables worm-eaten and crazy. -- There was not a bed in the house that
could be used, except one old-fashioned machine, with a high gilt tester and fringed curtains
of yellow mohair, which had been, for aught I know, two centuries in the family. -- In short,
there was no furniture but the utensils of the kitchen; and the cellar afforded nothing but
a few empty butts and barrels, that stunk so abominably, that I would not suffer any body to
enter it until I had flashed a considerable quantity of gunpowder to qualify the foul air within.

'An old cottager and his wife, who were hired to lie in the house, had left it with precipitation,
alledging, among other causes of retreat, that they could not sleep for frightful noises, and
that my poor brother certainly walked after his death. -- In a word, the house appeared uninhabitable;
the barn, stable, and outhouses were in ruins; all the fences broken down, and the fields lying
waste.

'The farmer who kept the key never dreamed I had any intention to live upon the spot -- He
rented a farm of sixty pounds, and his lease was just expiring. -- He had formed a scheme of
being appointed bailiff to the estate, and of converting the house and the adjacent grounds
to his own use. --A hint of his intention I received from the curate at my first arrival; I
therefore did not pay much regard to what he said by way of discouraging me from coming to
settle in the country; but I was a little startled when he gave me warning that he should quit
the farm at the expiration of his lease, unless I could abate considerably in the rent.

'At this period I accidentally became acquainted with a person, whose friendship laid the foundation
of all my prosperity. In the next market-town I chanced to dine at an inn with a Mr Wilson,
who was lately come to settle in the neighbourhood. -- He had been lieutenant of a man of war,
but quitted the sea in some disgust, and married the only daughter of farmer Bland, who lives
in this parish, and has acquired a good fortune in the way of husbandry. -- Wilson is one of
the best natured men I ever knew; brave, frank, obliging, and ingenuous -- He liked my conversation,
I was charmed with his liberal manner; and acquaintance immediately commenced, and this was
soon improved into a friendship without reserve. -- There are characters which, like similar
particles of matter, strongly attract each other. -- He forthwith introduced me to his father-in-law,
farmer Bland, who was well acquainted with every acre of my estate, of consequence well qualified
to advise me on this occasion. -- Finding I was inclined to embrace a country life, and even
to amuse myself with the occupation of farming, he approved of my design -- He gave me to understand
that all my farms were underlett; that the estate was capable of great improvement; that there
was plenty of chalk in the neighbourhood; and that my own ground produced excellent marle for
manure. -- With respect to the farm, which was like to fall into my hands, he said he would
willingly take it at the present rent; but at the same time owned, that if I would expend two
hundred pounds in enclosure, it would be worth more than double the sum.

'Thus encouraged, I began the execution of my scheme without further delay, and plunged into
a sea of expence, though I had no fund in reserve, and the whole produce of the estate did
not exceed three hundred pounds a year -- In one week, my house was made weather-tight, and
thoroughly cleansed from top to bottom; then it was well ventilated by throwing all the doors
and windows open, and making blazing fires of wood in every chimney from the kitchen to the
garrets. =Old Tiles.=--In the Founder's Chapel (1397) are some tiles containing the arms of Fitz-Hamon
(a lion rampant), impaled with the arms of the Abbey, a cross engrailed, and showing the head
of a crosier above the shield in the centre. In the Warwick chantry there is to be seen a set
of tiles with the arms of Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester, in whose honour the chapel was built.
The arms are a fess between four crosslets with a crescent for difference. There are also some
in the Trinity Chapel, showing the arms of the Despensers, impaled with those of Burghersh. Other
tiles found in the church at different times give the arms of De
Clare, Despenser, Berkeley, De Warrenne, De Bohun, Corbet, and De
la Zouch.

ABBOTS OF TEWKESBURY.

=Giraldus= (1102-1109), previously Abbot of Cranbourn, was the first Abbot of the Benedictine
foundation. Deprived by Henry I. in 1109.

=Robert I.= (1110-1124). In his time the greater part of the Abbey as it stands was finished,
and dedicated in 1123.

=Benedict= (1124-1137).

=Roger= (1137-1161).

=Fromundus= (1162-1178). No new Abbot was instituted till--

=Robert II.= (1182-1183).

=Alan= (1187-1202). His tomb is in the south ambulatory of the choir. He was a friend of Thomas à
Becket, having previously been Prior of St. Saviour's, Canterbury.

=Walter= (1202-1213), previously Sacrist of the monastery. He was succeeded by--

=Hugh= (1214), who had been the Prior.

Dying in a year, his successor was Bernard, but the latter was never instituted.

=Peter= (1216-1231) was a monk from Worcester.

=Robert Forthington= (1232-1254), or =Robert III.= had previously been Prior. A tomb ascribed to him
is in the south ambulatory.

=Thomas de Stokes= (1254-1275) had been Prior of St. James, Bristol.

=Richard de Norton= (1276-1282).

=Thomas Kempsey= (1282-1328).

=John Cotes= ( -1347).

=Thomas de Legh= (1347-1361).

=Thomas Chesterton= (1361-1389).

=Thomas Parker, or Pakare= (1389-1421).

=William Bristow, or de Bristol= (1421-1442).

=John de Abingdon= (1442- ), who was probably identical with

=John de Salis, or Galys=.

=John Strensham, or Streynsham= ( -1481). He was Abbot at the time of the Battle of Tewkesbury.

=Richard
Cheltenham= (1481-1509).

=Henry Beoly, or Bealy= (1509- ), was Abbot in 1526.

=John Walker= (d. 1531).

=John Wich, Wyche, or Wakeman= (1531-1539). This ecclesiastic was the last Abbot of Tewkesbury.
He, unlike the Abbot of Gloucester, seems to have been in no wise unwilling to surrender his Abbey.
In return he obtained a pension of £266 13s. 4d., and also the house and park at Forthampton.
When, later, Gloucester was made a bishopric, he was the first bishop. He was buried at Forthampton.

FOOTNOTES:

[7]
In point of actual size the Tewkesbury piers are 30 feet 8 inches high, and 6 feet 3 inches
in diameter; while the piers at Gloucester are 30 feet by 6 feet. Those at Malvern are considerably
less in height.

[8] This boss represents the Virgin as being present at the Table.

[9] The ball-flower here as well as that in the vestry differs from that in the neighbourhood, as
there is a curious little side-twist or kink in it.

[10] Mr. W.H. St. John Hope's description of this quoted in extenso in "Gloucester" (Cathedral
Series) is most interesting, and should be carefully studied.

[11] Letters in brackets refer to the plan at the end.

[12] This Transept was used from 1813-17 as a temporary National School.

[13] The columns are, with the exception of one which is round, roughly hexagonal.

[14] In some plans this chapel is ascribed to St. Nicholas.

[15] The arch of this chamber shows distinct traces of fire, not mentioned in any records, and the
staircase to the tower, which then communicated with this chamber, shows traces for a short distance
on the stonework.

[16] The same moulding is found at Durham in the doorway from the nave into the cloisters, but there
it is much mutilated; it is also found at St. Joseph's Chapel, Glastonbury, and in various forms
in the West of England.

[17] It is not quite certain whether Sir Guy is actually buried here.

[18] It is generally considered to be that dedicated to St. John the Baptist. The other altar
in this chapel may have been dedicated to St. George, though the
chapel of the latter was probably one of those in the nave.

[19] The dedication of this Norman chapel, like that of several others here, is not known.

[20] The choir at Gloucester is 140 feet long and 33 feet wide.

[21] The sun was a favourite badge of Edward IV., and is said to have been adopted in consequence
of the appearance of three suns before the battle of Mortimer's Cross. It appears upon some
of his coins.

[22] The altar-stone at Gloucester was at one time used to pave the south porch, and is now in
the crypt.

[23] The safety of the old glass has been ensured by a protective external window of rolled glass
let in the mullions from the outside. This was done in 1889.

[24] This Gilbert de Clare is said to have had a copy of Magna Charta and the Charta de Foresta
made and deposited in the Abbey.

[25] The floor of the upper part was never flat, and was in all probability never intended for
use.

[26] Heraldically speaking.

[27] Henry VII. left instructions in his will that a kneeling effigy of himself should be placed
on the top of the Confessor's shrine at Westminster.

[28] The western pinnacle was carved locally in 1825-8, and is a very careful piece of work.

DEERHURST.

DEERHURST.

Deerhurst,
or Deorhurst--the wood or grove of wild beasts, as its etymology implies--lies close to Tewkesbury,
and the visitor to the latter must on no account omit to pay a visit to the older building.
It may be reached by a pleasant walk through meadows on the left bank of the Severn, by the
road or by a path across the fields.

The Priory church of Deerhurst is one of the oldest buildings of any importance that yet remain
in use in England.

Its exact date is more or less a matter of conjecture, but it seems certain from documentary evidence,
which is still accessible, that in the ninth century the Abbey or Priory was in a prosperous
condition--the document referred to above being a grant of lands in Gloucestershire and Worcestershire
to the Abbey in 804. No earlier authentic evidence than this exists, though a lapsus calami
of Leland (who credits the Venerable Bede with an acquaintance with Deerhurst about the year
700) would seem to give it an earlier date. From the earliest time Deerhurst--situated where
it is, so near that great highway the Severn, and occupying a position on the direct line of
traffic by road between Worcester and Gloucester, must have had an important part to play.
Legend has it that Edmund Ironside and Canute, intent on fighting a duel after Essendune, met at Olney
in 1016, but settled matters without coming to blows, and later tradition affirms that this
meeting took place in the meadow--once an island or eyot, hence its present name--called the
Naight.

Tradition, again, has it that the Abbey suffered from the Danes, and this seems likely enough,
seeing that they were encamped at Cirencester for fully a year. Werstan, one of the monks who
escaped from the Danes, is said by Leland to have founded a cell at Malvern, and was later
murdered by the Danes in his own chapel there. In the windows of Malvern Priory he is described as
"Sanctus Werstanus Martir," but little else is known about him.

The Abbey, though small, was richly endowed with land, and is said to have been possessed of
nearly forty thousand acres. Its wealth in landed property was the cause of its being transferred
by Edward the Confessor in 1054-56 to the great French Abbey of St. Denis; and what was not
so transferred was mostly given by the King, together with the Manor of Pershore and other possessions,
to his Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster, which was then building.

The Abbey lost its importance when it became an alien priory, and its landed possessions, which had
once surpassed those of the abbeys at Gloucester and at Winchcombe, were dwarfed to very scanty dimensions.
It suffered, too, in prestige, having become a priory, and was constantly
being harried by successive monarchs.

We find that the Conqueror confirmed the grant of the Abbey of Deerhurst
to St. Denis, but that King John confiscated its revenues.

In 1225 Pope Honorius III. by a Bull approved that the Priory should be perpetual and conventual.
In virtue of this the Prior could claim not to come into the King's hands, but it was many years
before this claim was barely recognised. In this same year the Prior was again in possession
of the Priory and its lands; but in 1250 (temp. Henry II.), the Priory was sold to Richard,
Duke of Cornwall, who seems to have driven out the monks and destroyed the greater part of their
buildings. Later in the same reign, 1260, the Abbot of St. Denis again got possession of the
Priory.

In 1295 Edward I. took possession of all the existing alien priories for the sake of the revenue
they would bring into his exchequer. Edward III.[29] again despoiled the monks of what was
theirs, and his grandson, Richard II., followed in his steps.

The Priory had a respite from such continued harryings with the accession of Henry IV. (1399).
This king took possession of it as an alien Priory, but immediately handed it over to William Forester,
the then Prior, with the stipulation that in the event of a war with France the King should receive
a sum of money equal to that which in time of peace would be paid to the Abbey of St. Denis.
With halcyon days like these the Priory set about rebuilding what had been destroyed, and
works were undertaken--much of which is standing at the present time.

Henry V. by charter in 1419 confirmed the policy of Henry IV. in giving the Prior all the rights
and privileges enjoyed by William Forester, and Henry V. acknowledged the claim of the Priory
to be conventual and perpetual, and as such, not to come into the King's hands. However, one
king proposes, another disposes. Henry VI. in 1463, while confirming all existing rights, made
the Priory a denizen priory with the same status as all other similar English foundations. But this
change was followed by yet another in four years' time. Henry VI. being the founder of Eton
College, and King's College, Cambridge, was in want of funds, and he relieved the pressure
on his exchequer by appropriating the possessions of the Priory, and handing part of them
to his royal College at Eton, and part (in 1422) to the already rich Abbey at Tewkesbury. Much
litigation followed with Eton, and in 1469 the Priory was united and annexed by Carpenter, Bishop
of Worcester, to the monastery at Tewkesbury, with the stipulation
that the "Abbot of Tewkesbury was to find and maintain there one monk
in priest's orders, to be called Prior or Warden, four other monks,
and one secular priest daily to perform divine service in that priory."

The

independence of Deerhurst was now at an end, and little is heard of it again. At the Dissolution,
like many of the Tewkesbury possessions, it became private property, the site, the buildings and
the tithes being conveyed to George Throgmorton, a local personage, who became the lay impropriator.
The tithes passed later into the hands of the family of Cassey, of Wightfield Court; but the
lands became the property of the Coventry family, and at the end of the seventeenth century gave
the title to Viscount Deerhurst, the fifth Baron. At the Dissolution Deerhurst became a curacy,
and remained so till 1682, the advowson then being transferred from
lay hands to those of the Bishop of Worcester.

EXTERIOR.

Of the exterior of the church there is not much to be said. The chief feature is the =Tower=.
It has been reduced in height, probably at the time that the steeple was blown down in 1666,
but no churchwardens' accounts of that date remain. It is 70 feet high, 21 feet 8 inches from
east to west, and 14 feet 4 inches from north to south, with a slight
batter to the walls, which at the base are 32 inches in thickness.

For about 35 feet or so the masonry is Saxon work, but has been subsequently
severely handled, especially on the west side. The east side contains
a wall-plate of early date, and more of the interesting early work.
The upper part is later work, having ashlar quoins at the four angles.

The
entrance door is a Pointed arch of the fourteenth century date inserted
within the earlier round-headed arch, of which the outer edges have
considerably crumbled away. Above the arch is a piece of stonework,
similar to one above the long, narrow window, considered by some to
be a mutilated carved head, but with more real likeness to a broken
mechanical contrivance for hoisting up weighty goods into the upper
part of the tower. On the right of the entrance door is the door which
now gives entrance to the belfry. In many parts of the exterior there
are traces of the coarse herring-bone work so prevalent in Saxon masonry.
At the north-west and south-west angles of the aisles are gargoyles,
that at the north-west corner being the better preserved.

The church
was rough-cast all over in the early part of this century, but was
restored in 1861-62 to practically its present appearance. Part of
the tower, that to the west, has a battlement, while the rest has
a low gabled roof. The windows in the belfry are decorated in character,
but much of the masonry near them seems to be re-used stone from other
parts.

By obtaining entrance to the farmyard upon which the east
end abuts, traces of the original apsidal termination may be seen.
It is much to be regretted that the church precincts are so built
upon that examination is difficult.

INTERIOR.

The western entrance
is situate in the tower front, and by three doorways gives access
to the nave.

=The Nave.=--The nave of the present church measures
60 feet by 21 feet, including what was the original choir, which was
under the central tower, and which, from the plan, must have been
20 feet in length. The nave proper would be 38 feet by 21 feet, making
allowance for the thickness of the choir arch wall. It is more than
probable that the wall which separated the choir from the nave was
in character like the present eastern wall, with a spacious and lofty
arch spanning the opening, which gave access to the apsidal eastern
end. Traces of such an arch were found at the restoration of the church
in 1861-62. As was the case at Tewkesbury, Gloucester, and elsewhere,
the nave was the parish church, and the choir and the rest of the
building eastwards the private chapel of the Priory. Small though
the original nave was--for the present aisles are later additions--it
was, if the walls are of the original height, unusually lofty for
a church of its date. The original nave had transepts, as shown in
plan on page 118, with a room, probably a sacristy, to the east of
the north transept and a similar room or a chapel at the east of the
south transept.

On either side of the nave the original walls have
been pierced, and an arcade of three good Early English arches was
inserted in the thirteenth century. It will be noted that the easternmost
of the three arches on each side is slightly wider in span than the
other two. All the capitals differ in their details. Over these arches
on either side is a triangular opening about 18 feet from the floor
level, similar to the opening in the west end of the nave. The edges
of these openings are left quite square, i.e., there is no splaying.

The
clerestory windows are, for the most part, early fifteenth century,
and replaced the early windows, which may have been of circular form.

At
the west end of the nave there are several very curious features.
The arch of the doorway is a plain, round-headed arch with its edges
left quite square, and the impost is plain with the exception of a
hollow immediately below the abacus. In height the doorway is 10 feet,
and in width 5-½ feet, and it leans slightly to the north. Above this
doorway, in the corners of the west wall, are two impost members or
brackets, similar to those in the chancel, which may have been intended
to support the floor joists of a chamber or gallery at this end of
the nave. Not far above these brackets is a triangular opening similar
to those in the north and south walls of the nave, and through which,
from the room in the tower, a view is obtained of the nave generally.
It is on the same level as those in the nave. To the right of this
is a blocked-up round-headed doorway, which once gave access from
the room in the tower on this level to a gallery at the east end of
the nave. The jambs are each of two similar blocks of stone.

Above
this, in the centre of the upper part of the west wall of the nave,
is perhaps the most curious architectural feature of the church. It
is a two-light window, each light having a head formed of an isosceles
triangle. The outer jambs, as also the broad central massive pier,
are slightly fluted, and in some of these flutings is a bar in relief.
On the church side the bars are inserted in the upper part of the
hollow; on the tower side they are in some cases at the top, in others
in the lower half.

The following dimensions show how massive is this
piece of primitive work. The sill on which the window is built is
of stone concealed by plaster. Each light in its widest part is 18
inches, 13 inches between the plinths on the sill. The plinths are
14 inches in thickness, and that of the central pier is 21 inches.
The central pier itself is a trifle shorter than the jambs, 1 foot
8 inches, but this difference is made up by a much more massive impost,
the central impost being 9 inches thick as compared with 8 inches
in the case of the others. Each impost is, as it were, in square-edged
layers, each layer overhanging the one below it. The head of each
opening is formed of two single stones so cut that they meet at an
angle of about 30 degrees. These stones are 11-¼ inches in thickness,
and 3 feet 6 inches long on the outside edges. In the angle between
the two portions of the window they measure 3 feet 1-½ inches. They
are carried right through the wall, with a plain label almost square
in section.

Above the window, resting on the label points is an oblong
block of stone which is thought at one time to have been painted,
as no inscription can be traced.

Near the tower end is a portion
of the Perpendicular timbered roof, and the rest of the roofing of
the nave and chancel is modern work designed upon the basis of the
older example.

The =South Aisle= was added in the twelfth century.
The south wall of the south transept was continued to the west, the
greater part of the west wall of this transept being removed, a segmental
arch being inserted exactly where the oak-screen is now. The wall
from the original south-east corner of the tower was carried southwards
to meet the new wall mentioned above. Next, the solid walls of the
nave were pierced with three unequal openings, and, from the piers
thus left, arches were carried across the new south aisle to the new
south wall of the church, and the walls of the inner porch seem to
have been pierced with arches about the same time, one being also
made to span the space from the extreme end of the original wall of
the nave to the new south-east corner of the tower. Even the severity of Lismahago relaxes, and the vinegar of
Mrs Tabby is remarkably dulcified, ever since it was agreed that she should take precedency
of her niece in being first noosed: for, you must know, the day is fixed for Liddy's marriage;
and the banns for both couples have been already once published in the parish church. The Captain
earnestly begged that one trouble might serve for all, and Tabitha assented with a vile affectation
of reluctance. Her inamorato, who came hither very slenderly equipt, has sent for his baggage
to London, which, in all probability, will not arrive in time for the wedding; but it is of
no great consequence, as every thing is to be transacted with the utmost privacy -- Meanwhile,
directions are given for making out the contracts of marriage, which are very favourable for
both females; Liddy will be secured in a good jointure; and her aunt will remain mistress of
her own fortune, except one half of the interest, which her husband shall have a right to enjoy
for his natural life: I think this is as little in conscience as can be done for a man who
yokes with such a partner for life.

These expectants seem to be so happy, that if Mr Dennison had an agreeable daughter, I believe
I should be for making the third couple in this country dance. The humour seems to be infectious;
for Clinker, alias Loyd, has a month's mind to play the fool, in the same fashion, with Mrs
Winifred Jenkins. He has even sounded me on the subject; but I have given him no encouragement
to prosecute this scheme -- I told him I thought he might do better, as there was no engagement
nor promise subsisting; that I did not know what designs my uncle might have formed for his
advantage; but I was of opinion, that he should not, at present, run the risque of disobliging
him by any premature application of this nature -- Honest Humphry protested he would suffer
death sooner than do or say any thing that should give offence to the 'squire: but he owned
he had a kindness for the young woman, and had reason to think she looked upon him with a favourable
eye; that he considered this mutual manifestation of good will, as an engagement understood,
which ought to be binding to the conscience of an honest man; and he hoped the 'squire and
I would be of the same opinion, when we should be at leisure to bestow any thought about the
matter -- I believe he is in the right; and we shall find time to take his case into consideration
-- You see we are fixed for some weeks at least, and as you have had a long respite, I hope
you will begin immediately to discharge the arrears due to

Your affectionate, J. MELFORD Oct. 14.

To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR, DEAR LETTY,

Never did I sit down to write in such agitation as I now feel -- In the course of a few days,
we have met with a number of incidents so wonderful and interesting, that all my ideas are
thrown into confusion and perplexity -- You must not expect either method or coherence in what
I am going to relate -- my dearest Willis. Since my last, the aspect of affairs is totally
changed! -- and so changed! but I would fain give you a regular detail -- In passing a river
about eight days ago, our coach was overturned, and some of us narrowly escaped with life --
My uncle had well nigh perished. O Heaven, I cannot reflect upon that circumstance without
horror -- I should have lost my best friend, my father and protector, but for the resolution
and activity of his servant Humphry Clinker, whom Providence really seems to have placed near
him for the necessity of this occasion. -- I would not be thought superstitious; but surely
he acted from a stronger impulse than common fidelity. Was it not the voice of nature that
loudly called upon him to save the life of his own father? for, 0 Letty, it was discovered
that Humphry Clinker was my uncle's natural son.

Almost at the same instant, a gentleman, who came to offer us his assistance, and invite us
to his house, turned out to be a very old friend of Mr Bramble. -- His name is Mr Dennison,
one of the worthiest men living; and his lady is a perfect saint upon earth. They have an only
son -- who do you think is this only son? -- O Letty! -- O gracious heaven! how my heart palpitates,
when I tell you that this only son of Mr Dennison's, is that very identical youth who, under
the name of Wilson, has made such ravage in my heart! -- Yes, my dear friend! Wilson and I
are now lodged in the same house, and converse together freely -- His father approves of his
sentiments in my favour; his mother loves me with all the tenderness of a parent; my uncle,
my aunt and my brother, no longer oppose my inclinations -- On the contrary, they have agreed
to make us happy without delay; and in three weeks or a month, if no unforeseen accident intervenes,
your friend Lydia Melford, will have changed her name and condition -- I say, if no accident
intervenes, because such a torrent of success makes me tremble! -- I wish there may not be
something treacherous in this sudden reconciliation of fortune -- I have no merit -- I have
no title to such felicity. Far from enjoying the prospect that lies before me, my mind is harrassed
with a continued tumult, made up of hopes and wishes, doubts and apprehensions -- I can neither
eat nor sleep, and my spirits are in perpetual flutter. -- I more than ever feel that  vacancy
in my heart, which your presence alone can fill. -- The mind, in every disquiet, seeks to repose
itself on the bosom of a friend; and this is such a trial as I really know not how to support
without your company and counsel -- I must, therefore, dear Letty, put your friendship to the
test -- I must beg you will come and do the last offices of maidenhood to your companion Lydia
Melford.

This letter goes inclosed in one to our worthy governess, from Mrs Dennison, entreating her
to interpose with your mamma, that you may be allowed to favour us with your company on this
occasion; and I flatter myself that no material objection can be made to our request. The distance
from hence to Gloucester, does not exceed one hundred miles, and the roads are good. -- Mr
Clinker, alias Loyd, shall be sent over to attend your motions -- If you step into the post-chaise,
with your maid Betty Barker, at seven in the morning, you will arrive by four in the afternoon
at the half-way house, where there is good accommodation. There you shall be met by my brother
and myself, who will next day conduct you to this place, where, I am sure, you will find yourself
perfectly at your case in the midst of an agreeable society. -- Dear Letty, I will take no
refusal -- if you have any friendship -- any humanity -- you will come. -- I desire that immediate
application may be made to your mamma; and that the moment her permission is obtained, you
will apprise

Your ever faithful, LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 14.

To Mrs JERMYN, at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Though I was not so fortunate as to be favoured with an answer to the letter with which I troubled
you in the spring, I still flatter myself that you retain some regard for me and my concerns.
I am sure the care and tenderness with which I was treated, under your roof and tuition, demand
the warmest returns of gratitude and affection on my part, and these sentiments, I hope, I
shall cherish to my dying day -- At present, I think it my duty to make you acquainted with
the happy issue of that indiscretion by which I incurred your displeasure. - Ah! madam, the
slighted Wilson is metamorphosed into George Dennison, only son and heir of a gentleman, whose
character is second to none in England, as you may understand upon inquiry. My guardian, my
brother and I, are now in his house; and an immediate union of the two families is to take
place in the persons of the young gentleman and your poor Lydia Melford. -- You will easily
conceive how embarrassing this situation must be to a young inexperienced creature like me,
of weak nerves and strong apprehensions; and how much the presence of a friend and confidant
would encourage and support me on this occasion. You know, that of all the young ladies, Miss
Willis was she that possessed the greatest share of my confidence and affection; and, therefore,
I fervently wish to have the happiness of her company at this interesting crisis.

Mrs Dennison, who is the object of universal love and esteem, has, at my request, written to
you on this subject, and I now beg leave to reinforce her sollicitations. -- My dear Mrs Jermyn!
my ever honoured governess! let me conjure you by that fondness which once distinguished your
favourite Lydia! by that benevolence of heart, which disposes you to promote the happiness
of your fellow-creatures in general! lend a favourable ear to my petition, and use your influence
with Letty's mamma, that my most earnest desire may be gratified. In the central boss in the ceiling
the Coronation of the Virgin is represented, and surrounding it are heads of lions and of men.

An
aumbry, lavabo, and piscina are all worthy of study.

=St. Edmund's Chapel.=--The ground-plan of this chapel is curious,
as it is apparently divided into two by a kind of re-entrant pier
of masonry, and the easternmost part is screened off from the ambulatory
by the curious tomb known by the name of the Wakeman Cenotaph, or
the tomb of the starved monk (vide p. 94).

 Last week I was dragged out of a river like
a drowned rat, and lost a bran-new night-cap, with a sulfer stayhook, that cost me a good half-a-crown,
and an odd shoe of green gallow monkey; besides wetting my cloaths and taring my smuck, and
an ugly gash made in the back part of my thy, by the stump of a tree -- To be sure Mr Clinker
tuck me out of the cox; but he left me on my back in the water, to go to the 'squire; and I
mought have had a watry grave, if a millar had not brought me to the dry land -- But, O! what
choppings and changes girl -- The player man that came after Miss Liddy, and frightened me
with a beard at Bristol Well, is now matthew-murphy'd into a fine young gentleman, son and
hare of 'squire Dollison -- We are all together in the same house, and all parties have agreed
to the match, and in a fortnite the surrymony will be performed.

But this is not the only wedding we are to have -- Mistriss is resolved to have the same frolick,
in the naam of God! Last Sunday in the parish crutch, if my own ars may be trusted, the clerk
called the banes of marridge betwixt Opaniah Lashmeheygo, and Tapitha Brample, spinster; he
mought as well have called her inkle-weaver, for she never spun and hank of yarn in her life
-- Young 'squire Dollison and Miss Liddy make the second kipple; and there might have been
a turd, but times are changed with Mr Clinker -- O Molly! what do'st think? Mr Clinker is found
to be a pye-blow of our own 'squire, and his rite naam is Mr Matthew Loyd (thof God he nose
how that can be); and he is now out of livery, and wares ruffles -- but I new him when he was
out at elbows, and had not a rag to kiver his pistereroes; so he need not hold his head so
high -- He is for sartin very umble and compleasant, and purtests as how he has the same regard
as before; but that he is no longer his own master, and cannot portend to marry without the
'squire's consent -- He says he must wait with patience, and trust to Providence, and such
nonsense -- But if so be as how his regard be the same, why stand shilly shally? Why not strike
while the iron is hot, and speak to the 'squire without loss of time? What subjection can the
'squire make to our coming together -- Thof my father wan't a gentleman, my mother was an honest
woman -- I didn't come on the wrong side of the blanket, girl -- My parents were marred according
to the right of holy mother crutch, in the face of men and angles -- Mark that, Mary Jones.

Mr Clinker (Loyd I would say) had best look to his tackle. There be other chaps in the market,
as the saying is -- What would he say if I should except the soot and sarvice of the young
squire's valley? Mr Machappy is a gentleman born, and has been abroad in the wars -- He has
a world of buck larning, and speaks French, and Ditch, and Scotch, and all manner of outlandish
lingos; to be sure he's a little the worse for the ware, and is much given to drink; but then
he's good-tempered in his liquor, and a prudent woman mought wind him about her finger -- But
I have no thoughts of him, I'll assure you -- I scorn for to do, or to say, or to think any
thing that mought give unbreech to Mr Loyd, without furder occasion -- But then I have such
vapours, Molly I sit and cry by myself, and take ass of etida, and smill to burnt fathers,
and kindal-snuffs; and I pray constantly for grease, that I may have a glimpse of the new-light,
to shew me the way through this wretched veil of tares. And yet, I want for nothing in this
family of love, where every sole is so kind and so courteous, that wan would think they are
so many saints in haven. Dear Molly, I recommend myself to your prayers, being, with my sarvice
to Saul,

your ever loving, and discounselled friend, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 14.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

You cannot imagine what pleasure I have in seeing your hand-writing, after such a long cessation
on your side of our correspondence -- Yet, Heaven knows, I have often seen your hand-writing
with disgust -- I mean, when it appeared in abbreviations of apothecary's Latin -- I like your
hint of making interest for the reversion of the collector's place, for Mr Lismahago, who is
much pleased with the scheme, and presents you with his compliments and best thanks for thinking
so kindly of his concerns -- The man seems to mend, upon further acquaintance. That harsh reserve,
which formed a disagreeable husk about his character, begins to peel off in the course of our
communication -- I have great hopes that he and Tabby will be as happily paired as any two
draught animals in the kingdom; and I make no doubt but that he will prove a valuable acquisition
to our little society, in the article of conversation, by the fire-side in winter.

Your objection to my passing this season of the year at such a distance from home, would have
more weight if I did not find myself perfectly at my ease where I am; and my health so much
improved, that I am disposed to bid defiance to gout and rheumatism -- I begin to think I have
put myself on the superannuated list too soon, and absurdly sought for health in the retreats
of laziness -- I am persuaded that all valetudinarians are too sedentary, too regular, and
too cautious -- We should sometimes increase the motion of the machine, to unclog the wheels
of life; and now and then take a plunge amidst the waves of excess, in order to caseharden
the constitution. I have even found a change of company as necessary as a change of air, to
promote a vigorous circulation of the spirits, which is the very essence and criterion of good
health.

Since my last, I have been performing the duties of friendship, that required a great deal
of exercise, from which I hope to derive some benefit -- Understanding, by the greatest accident
in the world, that Mr Baynard's wife was dangerously ill of a pleuritic fever, I borrowed Dennison's
post-chaise, and went across the country to his habitation, attended only by Loyd (quondam
Clinker) on horseback. -- As the distance is not above thirty miles, I arrived about four in
the afternoon, and meeting the physician at the door, was informed that his patient had just
expired. -- I was instantly seized with a violent emotion, but it was not grief. -- The family
being in confusion, I ran up stairs into the chamber, where, indeed, they were all assembled.
-- The aunt stood wringing her hands in a kind of stupefaction of sorrow, but my friend acted
all the extravagancies of affliction -- He held the body in his arms, and poured forth such
a lamentation, that one would have thought he had lost the most amiable consort and valuable
companion upon earth.

Affection may certainly exist independent of esteem; nay, the same object may be lovely in
one respect, and detestable in another -- The mind has a surprising faculty of accommodating,
and even attaching itself, in such a manner, by dint of use, to things that are in their own
nature disagreeable, and even pernicious, that it cannot bear to be delivered from them without
reluctance and regret. Baynard was so absorbed in his delirium, that he did not perceive me
when I entered, and desired one of the women to conduct the aunt into her own chamber. -- At
the same time I begged the tutor to withdraw the boy, who stood gaping in a corner, very little
affected with the distress of the scene. -- These steps being taken, I waited till the first
violence of my friend's transport was abated, then disengaged him gently from the melancholy
object, and led him by the hand into another apartment; though he struggled so hard, that I
was obliged to have recourse to the assistance of his valet de chambre -- In a few minutes,
however, he recollected himself, and folding me in his arms, 'This (cried he), is a friendly
office, indeed! -- I know not how you came hither; but, I think, Heaven sent you to prevent
my going distracted -- O Matthew! I have lost my dear Harriet! -- my poor, gentle, tender creature,
that loved me with such warmth and purity of affection -- my constant companion of twenty years!
She's gone -- she's gone for ever! -- Heaven and earth! where is she? -- Death shall not part us!'

So saying, he started up, and could hardly be with-held from returning to the scene we had
quitted -- You will perceive it would have been very absurd for me to argue with a man that
talked so madly. -- On all such occasions, the first torrent of passion must be allowed to
subside gradually. -- I endeavoured to beguile his attention by starting little hints and insinuating
other objects of discourse imperceptibly; and being exceedingly pleased in my own mind at this
event, I exerted myself with such an extraordinary flow of spirits as was attended with success.
-- In a few hours, he was calm enough to hear reason, and even to own that Heaven could not
have interposed more effectually to rescue him from disgrace and ruin. -- That he might not,
however, relapse into weaknesses for want of company, I passed the night in his chamber, in
a little tent bed brought thither on purpose; and well it was I took this precaution, for he
started up in bed several times, and would have played the fool, if I had not been present.

Next day he was in a condition to talk of business, and vested me with full authority over
his household, which I began to exercise without loss of time, tho' not before he knew and
approved of the scheme I had projected for his advantage. -- He would have quitted the house
immediately; but this retreat I opposed. -- Far from encouraging a temporary disgust, which
might degenerate into an habitual aversion, I resolved, if possible, to attach him more than
ever to his Houshold Gods. -- I gave directions for the funeral to be as private as was consistant
with decency; I wrote to London, that an inventory and estimate might be made of the furniture
and effects in his town-house, and gave notice to the landlord, that Mr Baynard should quit
the premises at Lady-day; I set a person at work to take account of every thing in the country-house,
including horses, carriages, and harness; I settled the young gentleman at a boarding-school,
kept by a clergyman in the neighbourhood, and thither he went without reluctance, as soon as
he knew that he was to be troubled no more with his tutor, whom we dismissed. The aunt continued
very sullen, and never appeared at table, though Mr Baynard payed his respects to her every
day in her own chamber; there also she held conferences with the waiting-women and other servants
of the family: but, the moment her niece was interred, she went away in a post-chaise prepared
for that purpose: she did not leave the house, however, without giving Mr Baynard to understand,
that the wardrobe of her niece was the perquisite of her woman; accordingly that worthless
drab received all the clothes, laces, and linen of her deceased mistress, to the value of five
hundred pounds, at a moderate computation.

The next step I took was to disband that legion of supernumerary domestics, who had preyed
so long upon the vitals of my friend:, a parcel of idle drones, so intolerably insolent, that
they even treated their own master with the most contemptuous neglect. They had been generally
hired by his wife, according to the recommendation of her woman, and these were the only patrons
to whom they payed the least deference. I have learned that all my power--and more too, as it sometimes
seemed,--was needed to bear bravely the dreadful trials that God has sent to me."

Helen paled slightly; she felt his hand trembling upon hers, and she remembered his illness
at her aunt's, about which she had never had the courage to speak to him. "And so, dear heart,"
he went on slowly, "let us only be sure that we are keeping our lives pure and strong, that we
are living in the presence of high thoughts and keeping the mastery of ourselves, and saying
and really meaning that we live for something unselfish; so that if duty and danger come, we
shall not prove cowards, and if suffering comes we should not give way and lose our faith. Does
that please you, dear Helen?"

The girl pressed his hand silently in hers.

After a while he went on still more solemnly: "Some time," he said, "I meant to talk to you about
just that, dearest, to tell you how stern and how watchful we ought to be. It is very sad to me
to see what happens when the great and fearful realities of life disclose themselves to good and
kind people who have been living without any thought of such things. I feel that it is very
wrong to live so, that if we wished to be right we would hold the high truths before us, no matter
how much labor it cost."

"What truths do you mean?" asked Helen earnestly; and he answered her: "For one, the very fearful
fact of which I have just been talking--that you and I are two bubbles that meet for an instant
upon the whirling stream of time. Suppose, sweetheart, that I were to tell you that I do not think
you and I would be living our lives truly, until we were quite sure that we could bear to be parted
forever without losing our faith in God's righteousness?"

Helen turned quite white, and clutched the other's hands in hers; she had not once thought of
actually applying what he had said to her. "David! David!" she cried, "No!"

The man smiled gently as he brushed back the hair from her forehead
and gazed into her eyes.

"And when you asked for sternness, dear," he said, "was it that you did not know what the word
meant? Life is real, dear Helen, and the effort it demands is real effort."

The girl did not half hear these last words; she was still staring at her husband. "Listen to
me, David," she said at last, still holding his hand tightly in hers, her voice almost a whisper; "I
could bear anything for you, David, I know that I could bear anything; I could really die for you,
I say that with all my soul,--that was what I was thinking of when you spoke of death. But
David, if you were to be taken from me,--if you were to be taken from me--" and she stopped, unable
to find a word more.

"Perhaps it will be just as well not to tell
me, dear heart," he said to her, gently.

"David," she went on more
strenuously yet, "listen to me--you must not ever ask me to think
of that! Do you hear me? For, oh, it cannot be true, it cannot be
true, David, that you could be taken from me forever! What would I
have left to live for?"

"Would you not have the great wonderful God?"
asked the other gently--"the God who made me and all that was lovable
in me, and made you, and would demand that you worship him?" But Helen
only shook her head once more and answered, "It could not be true,
David,--no, no!" Then she added in a faint voice, "What would be the
use of my having lived?" All these works being actually begun, and
the house and auction left to the care and management of a reputable attorney, I brought Baynard
along with me in the chaise, and made him acquainted with Dennison, whose goodness of heart
would not fail to engage his esteem and affection. -- He is indeed charmed with our society
in general, and declares that he never saw the theory of true pleasure reduced to practice
before. I really believe it would not be an easy task to find such a number of individuals
assembled under one roof, more happy than we are at present.

