"You must put such a thought out of your mind for ever and never mention it to a soul," said
Harlenden firmly.  "That man committed suicide because his only son had been killed by accident
in Amsterdam. He left a vast fortune and a number of jewels which had been taken from their
settings to De Beers, by way of conscience-money for several thousand pounds' worth of diamonds
in the rough which he had stolen from them.  There is absolutely no evidence to connect any
other person with his crime, except a letter asking the company to deal lightly with a native
boy called Hiangeli, who had been a tool of his."

"Then you think it could have nothing possibly to do with my poor child?"

"Certainly not," said Denis Harlenden, without flinching.

"Not that I think that she would have done it in her right senses, but, oh, Sir Denis, she
has been under a spell all her life, an evil spell, which, please God, will be broken when
that woman dies!  You do not think me mad, I hope?"

"I do not," he answered gravely.  "I am as sure of what you say as you yourself.  What you
do not know, Mrs. Ozanne, is that love has already broken that spell.  Rosanne is already free
from it."

She looked at him questioningly, longingly.

"I cannot tell you more," he said gently. I look upon this case as a warnin' to all foaks who gambel in law
to hold a good hand and play it well.

High jestice and patriotism are winning trumps.
My next case was about steelin' a hog. Larseny from the woods, I
think they call it. A crimson-silk wrapper swathed about her shoulders,
and the clouds of night-black hair, flung in a tangled mass above her pillows, threw into violent
contrast the deadly pallor of her face.  Her eyes, dark and wide with suffering, looked unseeingly
at Harlenden at first, but gradually a ray of recognition dawned in them and she put out her
hand with a faint cry.

"Denis!"

He took her hand and held it safe, while, with all the strength in him, he willed peace and
calmness into her troubled mind.

"Denis, I think I am going to die."

"Dearest, I know you are going to live--for me."

"No, no; I am not worthy of life--or of you.  I have been too wicked!"

"I want you to rest now," he said.

"I cannot rest till I have told you everything.  I wanted to tell you the other night, you
know, but I was too exhausted.  Denis, I am a criminal--a thief!  I have stolen diamonds under
cover of the friendship of another woman.  I have received them from another thief in the mines,
and taken them to a man, whose son, a merchant in Amsterdam, sent me my share of the robbery
in cut stones set as jewels. The rough stolen stones meant nothing to me, but the finished
ones dazzled and maddened me.  I cannot describe to you what they did to my senses, but I was
mad at the sight and touch of them.  They had power to benumb every decent feeling in me. 
For them, I forgot duty.  My poor mother, how she has suffered!  I betrayed friendship; I debased
love!  Yes, Denis, I debased our love!  I meant just to take the joy of it for a little while,
then cast it away when it came to choosing between you and the stones."

"But you did not."

"No, thank God, I could not!  It was stronger than my base passion, stronger than myself. 
Oh, Denis, I thank you for your love!  It has saved me from a hell in life, and a hell hereafter,
for I think God will not further punish one so deeply repentant as I."

"You are not going to die, Rosanne," he repeated firmly.

"Do you think I would live and let you link your clean, upright life with my dark one?" she
said sadly. The Prince called to the postillions to drive on, while he caught the Queen's hands
and asked if the fright had not shaken her, but the brave royal heart only made light of his
alarm. He looked again, and saw the same man still standing in a theatrical attitude, a pistol
in each hand. The next instant the fellow pointed the second pistol and fired once more. Both
the Queen and the Prince saw the aim, as well as heard the shot, on this occasion, and she stooped,
he pulling her down that the ball might pass over her head.  "I have even tried to undo the harm I wished would come to the two people who
tempted me into stealing, Denis.  But, somehow, I feel that it is too late for them.  That
something in here"--she touched her heart--"which hurts me so much, tells me I cannot help
those two wretched ones."

Her voice broke off; she was shaken like a reed with a terrible spasm of suffering.  It was
as though she were in the clutches of some brutal giant.

"Denis," she cried faintly, "I feel I am being rent asunder!  Part of me is being torn away.
Surely, even death cannot be so terrible!"

A clock on the table struck eight.  Instantly she raised herself in bed, fell back again, gave
a deep sigh, and lay still.

A few hours later, she woke with a gentle flush in her cheeks and a wonderful harmony in all
her features.  Her first glance fell upon her mother leaning over the foot of the bed, and
she gave a happy smile.

"Oh, mother, I have had such a lovely dream!  I dreamed Dick was well and coming back soon
to Rosalie."

"And so he is, my darling.  She has had a wire to say that Doctor Raymond has discovered that
the throat trouble is not malignant but quite curable.  He will be well in a few weeks."

"Then it may come true, my dream," she said softly and shyly.  "My dream that she and I were
being married on the same day, she to Dick, and I to--oh, Denis, how strange that you should
be here when I was dreaming of you!  What brought you here?  Have you come to tell mother that
we love each other?"

They began to realize dimly then, as they realized fully later on, that, by a merciful gift
of Providence her mind was a blank concerning all the dark things of the past.

Memory of them had died with the dying of the Malay woman at eight o'clock on a summer evening,
and no shadow of them ever came back to dim the harmony of her life with Denis Harlenden.

She is one of the happiest as well as one of the loveliest women in London today.  Wrapped
up in her home life and children, she still finds time to be seen about everywhere with her
husband, and they are looked upon as one of the few ideally happy couples in society.

It has often been remarked, as a curious fact, that she never wears jewels of any kind, save
an emerald ring and some exquisite pearls.

April Folly

PART I

Waterloo Station, greasy underfoot and full of the murky, greenish gloom of a November day,
was the scene of a jostling crowd.  The mail-boat train for South Africa stretched far down
the long platform, every carriage door blocked by people bidding farewell, handing in bouquets
of flowers, parcels of books, boxes of chocolates; bartering jests and scattering laughter;
sending their love to the veld, to Table Mountain, to Rhodesia, to the Victoria Falls. 

The necessary reforms were made to proceed from the officers of State themselves, and the enforcement
of the new regulations was carried out by a Master of the Household, who resided permanently in
the palace which the Queen occupied. Eventually each royal establishment was brought to a high average
of order and efficiency.

If possible, still greater caution had to be practised in the Prince's
dealing with political affairs, for here the jealousy of foreign influence
was national, and among the most deeply rooted of insular prejudices.

  "I've had enough.  You're not
coming with me, and that's that.  I'm not a child any longer never to stir about the world alone."

"Shure, and your aunt, Lady Grizel, will turn in her grave at it," keened poor Marney.  An
expression of scampish glee crossed the girl's face.

"Yes, old Grizzly will do some turning," she murmured.  "Thank goodness that's all she can do now."

