The articulate wing can be removed from the nut and can be replaced without injury. An ineffective
form of this wing is seen in the Gerardianae and in P. pinea, where the blade is very short
and the base has no effective grasp on the nut.

The base of the effective articulate wing contains hygroscopic tissue which acts with the hygroscopic
tissue of the cone-scales. The dry conditions that open the cone and release the seeds cause
the bifurcate base of the wing to grasp the nut more firmly.

This articulate wing is found in P. aristata and in all Hard Pines except P. pinea, longifolia
and canariensis. The wing-blade is usually membranous throughout, but in some species there
is a thickening of the base of the blade that meets the membranous apical part in an oblique
line along which the wing is easily broken apart. This last condition attains in P. Coulteri
and its associates a remarkable development.

Plate VI, fig. 72 shows the wingless seed of P. cembroides; fig. 73 represents the seed of
P. flexilis, with a rudimentary wing; fig. 74 shows two seeds of P. strobus, intact and with
the wing broken away; fig. 75 represents the articulate wing, whose bifurcate base when wet
(fig. 76) tends to open and release the nut. When dry (fig. 77) the forks of the base, in the
absence of the nut, close together and cross their tips; figs. 78, 79 show the peculiar reinforced
articulate wing of P. Coulteri.

Such wide variation in so important an organ suggests generic difference. But here we are met
by the association of the different forms in species evidently closely allied. The two Foxtail
Pines are so similar in most characters that they have been considered, with good reason, to
be specifically identical; yet the seed-wing of P. Balfouriana is adnate, that of P. aristata
articulate. P. Ayacahuite produces not only the characteristic wing of the Strobi, adnate,
long and effective, but also, in the northern variety, a seed with a rudimentary wing, the
exact counterpart of the seed of P. flexilis. In both sections of the genus are found the effective
adnate wing (Strobi and Longifoliae) and the inefficient articulate wing (Gerardianae and Pineae).
A little examination of all forms of the seed will show that they blend gradually one into another.

The color of the wing is occasionally peculiar, as in the group Longifoliae. There is usually
no constancy in this character, for the wing may be uniform in color or variously striated
in seeds of the same species. The length and breadth of the seed-wing, being dependent on the
varying sizes of the cone-scale, differ in the same cone. They are also inconstant in different
cones of the same species, and of this inconstancy the seed of P. ayacahuite furnishes the
most notable example.

THE WOOD. Plate VII.

With the exception of the medullary rays, a very small proportion of the whole, the wood of
Pinus, as seen in cross-section (fig. 82), is a homogeneous tissue of wood-tracheids with interspersed
resin-ducts. In tangential section the medullary rays appear in two forms, linear, without
a resin-duct, and fusiform, with a central resin-duct. In radial section the cells of the linear
rays are of two kinds, ray-tracheids, forming the upper and lower limits of the ray, characterized
by small bordered pits, and ray-cells, between the tracheids, characterized by simple pits.

The walls of the ray-tracheids may be smooth or dentate; the pits of the ray-cells may be large
or small. These conditions admit of four combinations, all of which appear in the medullary
rays of Pinus, and of which a schematic representation is given in Plate VII. These combinations
are

    Ray-tracheids with smooth walls. Soft Pines.
      Ray-cells with large pits    Subsection Cembra        fig. 80.
      Ray-cells with small pits    Subsection Paracembra    fig. 81.

    Ray-tracheids with dentate walls. Hard Pines.
      Ray-cells with large pits    Group Lariciones         fig. 83.
      Ray-cells with small pits    Other Hard Pines         fig. 84.

This, the simplest classification of Pine-wood, is not without exceptions. P. pinea of the
Hard Pines resembles, in its wood-characters, P. Gerardiana and P. Bungeana of the Soft Pines.
The dentate ray-tracheids of P. longifolia are not always obvious. The tracheids of P. luchuensis,
according to Bergerstein (Wiesner Festschr. 112), have smooth walls. My specimen shows dentate
tracheids. There is also evidence of transition from small to large pits (I. W. Bailey in Am.
Nat. xliv. 292). Both large and small pits appear in my specimen of P. Merkusii.

Of other wood-characters, the presence or absence of tangential pits in the tracheids of the
late wood establishes a distinction between Soft and Hard Pines. These pits, however, while
always present in Soft Pines, are not always absent in Hard Pines. The single and multiple
rows of resin-ducts in the wood of the first year may prove to be a reliable sectional distinction,
but this character has not been sufficiently investigated to test its constancy. The wood-characters,
therefore, however decisive they may be for establishing the phylogenetic relations of different
genera, must be employed in the classification of the Pines with the same reservations that
apply to external characters.

Ray-tracheids with dentate walls and ray-cells with large pits are peculiar to Pinus. Therefore
the presence of these characters, alone or in combination, is sufficient evidence for the recognition
of Pine-wood. But the combination of smooth tracheids with small pits (subsection Paracembra)
Pinus shares with Picea, Larix and Pseudotsuga.

Among Hard Pines the size of the pits has a certain geographical significance. The large pits
are found in all species of the Old World except P. halepensis and P. pinaster; the small pits
in all species of the New World except P. resinosa and P. tropicalis. The Asiatic P. Merkusii
with both large and small pits is not strictly an exception to this geographical distinction.
The four exceptional species by this and by other characters unite the Hard Pines of the two
hemispheres.

THE BARK.

Bark is the outer part of the cortex that has perished, having been cut off from nourishment
by the thin hard plates of the bark-scales. In the late and early bark-formation is found a
general but by no means an exact distinction between Soft and Hard Pines. In the Soft Pines
the cortex remains alive for many years, adjusting itself by growth to the increasing thickness
of the wood. The trunks of young trees remain smooth and without rifts. In the Hard Pines the
bark-formation begins early and the trunks of young trees are covered with a scaly or rifted
bark. The smooth upper trunk of older trees is invariable in Soft Pines, but in Hard Pines
there are several exceptions to early bark-formation. These exceptions are easily recognized
in the field, and the character is of decisive specific importance (glabra, halepensis, etc.).

Among species with early bark-formation are two forms of bark: 1, cumulative, sufficiently
persistent to acquire thickness and the familiar dark gray and fuscous-brown shades of bark
long exposed to the weather; 2, deciduous, constantly falling away in thin scales and exposing
fresh red inner surfaces. The latter are commonly known as Red Pines, as distinguished from
Black Pines with dark cumulative bark. Deciduous bark changes after some years to cumulative
bark, and the upper trunk only of mature trees is red. Red Pines, although usually recognizable
by their bark, are by no means constant in this character. Oecological or pathological influences
may check the fall of the bark-scales, and then the distinction between the upper and lower
parts of the trunk becomes lost.

SUMMARY

The various characters that have been considered in the previous pages may be classified under
different heads, some of them applicable to the whole genus, others to larger or smaller groups
of species.

GENERIC CHARACTERS

Several characters, quite distinct from those of other genera, are common to all the species.

    1. The primary leaf--appearing as a scale or bract throughout the
         life of the tree.
    2. The bud--its constant position at the nodes.
    3. The internode--its three distinct divisions.
    4. The secondary leaves--in cylindrical fascicles with a basal
         sheath.
    5. The pistillate flower--its constant nodal position and its
         verticillate clusters.
    6. The staminate flower--its constant basal position on the
         internode and its compact clusters.
    7. The cone--its clearly defined annual growths.

Pinus is also peculiar in the dimorphism of shoots and leaves and in their constant interrelations
with the diclinous flowers. Evolutionary processes develop features peculiar to Pinus alone
(the oblique cone, etc.), but confined to a limited number of species.

SECTIONAL CHARACTERS

There are several characters that actually or potentially divide the genus into two distinct
sections, popularly known as Soft and Hard Pines.

    1. The fibro-vascular bundle of the leaf, single or double.
    2. The base of the bract subtending the leaf-fascicle, non-decurrent
         or decurrent
    3. The phyllotaxis of the cone, simple or complex.
    4. The flower-bud, its less or greater development.

Some characters indicate the same distinction but are subject each to a few exceptions.

    5. The fascicle-sheath, deciduous or persistent.
    6. The walls of the ray-tracheids, smooth or dentate.
    7. The connective of the pollen-sacs, large or small.
    8. The formation of bark, late or early.

SUBSECTIONAL CHARACTERS

An exact subdivision of the Soft Pines is possible on the following characters.

    1. The umbo of the cone-scales, terminal or dorsal.
    2. The scales of the conelet, mutic or armed.
    3. The pits of the ray-cells, large or small.

EVOLUTIONAL CHARACTERS

The progressive evolution of the fruit of Pinus, from a symmetrical cone of weak tissues, bearing
a wingless seed, to an indurated oblique cone with an elaborate form of winged seed and an
intermittent dissemination, appears among the species in various degrees of development as
follows--

    The seed

      1. wingless.
      2. with a rudimentary wing.
      3. with an effective adnate wing.
      4. with an ineffective articulate wing.
      5. with an effective articulate wing.
      6. with an articulate wing, thickened at the base of the blade.

    The cone

      1. indehiscent.
      2. dehiscent and deciduous.
      3. dehiscent and persistent.
      4. persistent and serotinous.

                    and as to its form

      5. symmetrical.
      6. subsymmetrical.
      7. oblique.

These different forms of the seed and, to some extent, of the cone, are available for segregating
the species into groups of closely related members; while the gradual progression of the fruit,
from a primitive to a highly specialized form of cone and method of dissemination, points to
a veritable taxonomic evolution which is here utilized as the fundamental motive of the systematic
classification of the species.

SPECIFIC CHARACTERS

All aspects of vegetative and reproductive organs may contribute toward a determination of
species, but the importance of each character is often relative, being conclusive with one
group of species, useless with another. Characters considered by earlier authors to be invariable
with species, such as the dimensions of leaf or cone, the number of leaves in the fascicle,
the position of the resin-ducts, the presence of pruinose branchlets, etc., prove to be inconstant
in some species. In fact, as the botanical horizon enlarges, the varietal limits of the species
broaden and many restrictions imposed by earlier systems are gradually disappearing.

Variation is the preliminary step toward the creation of species, which come into being with
the elimination of intermediate forms. Variation in a species may be the result of its participation
in the evolutionary processes culminating in the serotinous Pines, or it may result from the
ability of the species to adapt itself to various environments by sympathetic modifications
of growth, or it may arise from some peculiarity of the individual tree.

Evolutionary variation is associated with the gradual appearance of the persistent, the oblique
and the serotinous cone, and of the multinodal spring-shoot. For these conditions appear in
less or greater prevalence among the species of the genus.

Variation induced by environment finds familiar illustrations among the species that can survive
at the limits of vegetation and can meet these inhospitable conditions by a radical change
of all growing parts. Such variations are mainly of dimensions, but, with some species, the
number of fascicle-leaves is affected and the shorter growing-season may modify the cone-tissues.
In Mexico and Central America are found extremes of climate within small areas and easily within
the range of dissemination from a single tree. The cause of the bewildering host of varietal
forms, connecting widely contrasted extremes, seems to lie in the facile adaptability of those
Pines, which are able to spread from the tropical base of a mountain to a less or greater distance
toward its snow-capped summit.

The peculiarities of individual trees that induce abnormally short or long growths, the dwarf
or other monstrous forms, the variegations in leaf-coloring, etc., etc., are not available
for classification, for they may appear in any species, in fact in any genus of Conifers. These
variations are artificially multiplied for commercial and decorative purposes. But inasmuch
as they are repeated in all species and genera of the Coniferae that have been long under the
observation of skillful gardeners, their significance has a broader scope than that imposed
by the study of a single genus.

PART II

CLASSIFICATION OF THE SPECIES

The following classification is based on the gradual evolution of the fruit from a cone symmetrical
in form, parenchymatous in tissue, indehiscent and deciduous at maturity, releasing its wingless
seed by disintegration--to a cone oblique in form, very strong and durable in tissue, persistent
on the tree, intermittently dehiscent, releasing its winged seeds partly at maturity, partly
at indefinite intervals during several years. This evolution embraces two extreme forms of
fruit, one the most primitive, the other the most elaborate, among Conifers.

Two sections of the genus, Soft and Hard Pines, are distinguished by several correlated characters,
and moreover are distinct by obvious differences in the tissues of their cones as well as in
the quality and appearance of their wood.

With the Soft Pines the species group naturally under two subsections on the position of the
umbo, the anatomy of the wood and the armature of the conelet. In one subsection (Cembra) are
found three species, P. cembra and its allies, with the cone-tissues so completely parenchymatous
that the cones cannot release the seeds except by disintegration. In both subsections there
is a gradual evolution from a wingless nut to one with an effective wing, adnate in one subsection,
adnate and articulate in the other. The different stages of this evolution are so distinct
that the Soft Pines are easily separated into definite groups.

Among the Hard Pines a few species show characters that are peculiar to the Soft Pines. These
exceptional species form a subsection (Parapinaster) by themselves.

With the remaining species, the majority of the Pines, the distinctions that obtain among Soft
Pines have disappeared. The dorsal umbo, the articulate seed-wing, the persistent fascicle-sheath,
the dorsal and ventral stomata of the leaf and its serrate margins, the dentate walls of the
ray-tracheids have become fixed and constant. But a new form of seed-wing appears, with a thickened
blade, assuming such proportions in P. Sabiniana and its two allies that these three constitute
a distinct group, remarkable also for the size of its cones.

Here also appear a new form of fruit, the oblique cone, and a new method of dissemination,
the serotinous cone. Associated with the latter are the persistent cone and the multinodal
spring-shoot. These characters do not develop in such perfect sequence and regularity that
they can be employed for grouping the species without forcing some of them into unnatural association.
The oblique cone first appears sporadically here and there and without obvious reason. The
persistent cone, the first stage of the serotinous cone, is equally sporadic in the earlier
stages of evolution. The same may be said of the multinodal shoot.

Nevertheless these characters show an obvious progression toward a definite goal, where they
are all united in a small group of species remarkable for the form and texture of their cones,
for a peculiar seed-release and for the vigor and rapidity of their growth. It is possible,
with the assistance of other characters, to segregate these species in three groups in which
the affinities are respected and the general trend of their evolution is preserved.

The first group, the Lariciones, contains species with large ray-pits, cones dehiscent at maturity,
and uninodal spring-shoots. They are, with two exceptions, P. resinosa and P. tropicalis, Old
World species.

The second group, the Australes, contains species with small ray-pits, cones dehiscent at maturity
and spring-shoots gradually changing, among the species, from a uninodal to a multinodal form.
They are, without exception, species of the New World.

The third group, the Insignes, contains the serotinous species. The ray-pits are small and
the spring-shoots are, with two exceptions, multinodal. With two exceptions, P. halepensis
and P. pinaster, they are New World species.

These three groups, being the progressive sequence of a lineal evolution, are not absolutely
circumscribed, but are more or less connected through a few intermediate species of each group.
The systematic position of these intermediate species is determined by their obvious affinities.
It cannot be expected that the variations, which take an important part in the evolution of
the species, progress with equal step or in perfect correlation with each other.

As to specific determinations, a little experience in the field discloses an amount of variation
in species that does not always appear in the descriptions of authors; and species that are
under the closest scrutiny of botanists, foresters or horticulturalists, attest by their multiple
synonymy their wide variation. The possibilities of variation are indefinite and, with adaptable
Pines, the range of variation is somewhat proportionate to change of climate. In mountainous
countries, where there are warm sheltered valleys with rich soil below cold barren ledges,
the most variable Pines are found. The western species of North America, for instance, are
much more variable than the eastern species, while in Mexico, a tropical country with snow-capped
mountains, the variation is greatest.

