When Edith awoke it was dark, and she started up in dismay, for she had meant to sleep but
an hour or two. Having hastily smoothed her hair, she went to the sick-room, and found Laura
reclining on the sofa, and talking in the most friendly manner to Mrs. Lacey. Her mother's
delirium continued, though it was more quiet, with snatches of sleep intervening, but she noticed
no one as yet. Mrs. Lacey sat calmly in her chair, her sad, patient face making the very ideal
of a watcher, and yet in spite of her plain exterior there was a refinement, an air of self-respect,
that would impress the most casual observer. As soon as Laura saw Edith she rose as quickly
as her feebleness permitted, and threw her arms around her sister, and there was an embrace
whose warmth and meaning none but themselves, and the pitying eye of Him who saved, could understand.
Then Edith turned and said, earnestly:

"Truly, Mrs. Lacey, I did not intend to trespass on your kindness in this manner. I hope you
will forgive me."

Nature knew what was best for you, Miss Allen, and have not incommoded me at all. I made my
plans to stay till nine o'clock, and then Arden will come for me."

"Miss Edie," said Hannibal, in his loud whisper, "I'se got some supper for you down here."

Why did Edith go to her room and make a little better toilet before going down? She hardly
thought herself. It was probably a feminine instinct. As she took her last sip of tea there
was a timid knock at the door. "I will see him a moment," she decided.

Hannibal, with a gravity that made poor Edith smile in her thoughts, admitted Arden Lacey.
He was diffident but not awkward, and the color deepened in his face, then left it very pale,
as he saw Edith was present. Her pale cheek also took the faintest tinge of pink, but she rose
quietly, and said:

"Please be seated, Mr. Lacey. I will tell your mother you are here." Then, as Hannibal disappeared,
she added earnestly, "I do appreciate your mother's kindness, and--yours also. At the same
time, too deep a sense of obligation is painful; you must not do so much for us. Please do
not misunderstand me."

Arden had something of his mother's quiet dignity, as he rose and held out to Edith a letter,
saying:

"Will you please read that--you need not answer it--and then perhaps you will understand me
better."

Edith hesitated, and was reluctant.

"I may be doing wrong," continued he, earnestly and with rising color. "I am not versed in
the world's ways; but is it not my right to explain the rash words I uttered this morning?
My good name is dear to me also. Few care for it, but I would not have it utterly blurred in
your eyes. We may be strangers after you have read it, if you choose, but I entreat you to
read it."

"You will not feel hurt if I afterward return it to you?" asked Edith, timidly.

"You may do with it what you please."

She then took the letter, and a moment later Mrs. Lacey appeared, and said:

"I will sit up to-morrow night, with your permission."

Edith took her hand, and replied, "Mrs. Lacey, you burden me with kindness."

"It is not my wish to burden, but to relieve you, Miss Allen. I think I can safely say, from
our slight acquaintance, that in the case of sickness or trouble at a neighbor's, you would
not spare yourself. We cease to be human when we leave the too heavily burdened to struggle alone."

Edith's eyes grew moist, and she said, simply, "I cannot refuse kindness offered in that spirit,
and may God bless you for it. Good- night."

Arden's only parting was a grave, silent bow.

Edith was soon alone again, watching by her mother. With some natural curiosity, she opened
the letter that was written by one so different from any man that she had ever known before.
Its opening, at least, was reassuring.

"MISS EDITH ALLEN--You need not fear that I shall offend again by either writing or speaking
such rash words as those which so deeply pained you this morning. They would not have been
spoken then, perhaps never, had I not been startled out of my self-control--had I not seen
that you suspected me of evil. I was very unwise, and I sincerely ask your pardon. But I meant
no wrong, and as you referred to my sister, I can say, before God, that I would shield you
as I would shield her.

"I know little of the conventionalities of the world. I live but a hermit's life in it, and
my letter may seem to you very foolish and romantic, still I know that my motives are not ignoble,
and with this consciousness I venture.

"Reverencing and honoring you as I do, I cannot bear that you should think too meanly of me.
The world regards me as a sullen, stolid, bearish creature, but I have almost ceased to care
for its opinion. I have received from it nothing but coldness and scorn, and I pay my debt
in like coin. But perhaps you can imagine why I cannot endure that you should regard me in
like manner. I would not have you think my nature a stony, sterile place, when something tells
me that it is like a garden that needs only sunlight of some kind. My life has been blighted
by the wrong of another, who should have been my best helper. The knowledge and university
culture for which I thirsted were denied me. And yet, believe me, only my mother's need--only
the absolute necessity that she and my sister should have a daily protector--kept me from pushing
out into the word, and trying to work my way unaided to better things. Sacred duty has chained
me down to a life that was outwardly most sordid and unhappy. My best solace has been my mother's
love. But from varied, somewhat extensive, though perhaps not the wisest kind of reading, I
came to dwell in a brave, beautiful, but shadowy world that I created out of books. I was becoming
satisfied with it, not knowing any other. The real world mocked and hurt me on every side.
It is so harsh and unjust that I hate it. I hate it infinitely more as I see its disposition
to wound you, who have been so noble and heroic. In this dream of the past--in this unreal
world of my own fancy--I was living when you came that rainy night. As I learned to know you
somewhat, you seemed a beautiful revelation to me. I did not think there was such a woman in
existence. My shadows vanished before you. With you living in the present, my dreams of the
past ceased. I could not prevent your image from entering my lonely, empty heart, and taking
its vacant throne, as if by divine right. How could I? How can I drive you forth now, when
my whole being is enslaved?

"But forgive me. Though thought and feeling are beyond control, outward action is not. I hope
never to lose a mastering grasp on the rein of deeds and words; and though I cannot understand
how the feeling I have frankly avowed can ever change, I will try never, by look or sign, to
pain you with it again.

"And yet, with a diffidence and fear equalled only by my sincerity and earnestness, I would
venture to ask one great favor. You said this morning that you already had too much to struggle
against. The future has its possibilities of further trouble and danger.

"Will you not let me be your humble, faithful friend, serving you loyally, devotedly, yet unobtrusively,
and with all the delicate regard for your position which I am capable of showing, assured that
I will gratefully accept any hints when I am wrong or presumptuous? I would gladly serve you
with your knowledge and consent. But serve you I must. I vowed it the night I lifted your unconscious
form from the wharf, and gave you into Mrs. Groody's care. There need be no reply. You have
only to treat me not as an utter stranger when we next meet. You have only to give me the joy
of doing something for you when opportunity offers.

"ARDEN LACEY."

Edith's eyes filled with tears before she finished this most unexpected epistle. Though rather
quaint and stately in its diction, the passion of a true, strong nature so permeated it all,
that the coldest and shallowest would have been moved. And yet a half-smile played upon her
face at the same time, like sunlight on drops of rain.

"Thank heaven!" she said, "I know of one more true man in the world, if he is a strange one.
How different he is from what I thought! I don't believe there's another in this place who
could have written such a letter. What would a New York society man, whose compliments are
as extravagant as meaningless, think of it? Truly he doesn't know the world, and isn't like
it. I supposed him an awkward, eccentric young countryman, that, from his very verdancy, would
be difficult to manage, and he writes to me like a knight of olden time, only such language
seems Quixotic in our day. The foolish fellow, to idealize poor, despised, faulty Edith Allen
into one of the grand heroines of his interminable romances, and that after seeing me hoe my
garden like a Dutch woman. If I wasn't so sad and he so earnest, I could laugh till my sides
ached. There never was a more matter-of-fact creature than I am, and yet here am I enveloped
in a halo of impossible virtues and graces. If I were what he thinks me, I shouldn't know myself.
Well, well, I must treat him somewhat like a boy, for such he really is, ignorant of himself
and all the world. When he comes to know me better, the Edith of his imagination will vanish
like his other shadows, and he will have another revelation that I am an ordinary, flesh-and-blood
girl."

With deepening color she continued: "So it was he who lifted me up that night. Well, I am glad
it was one who pitied me, and not some coarse, unfeeling man. It seems strange how circumstances
have brought him who shuns and is shunned by all, into such a queer relationship to me. But
heaven forbid that I should give him lessons as to the selfish, matter-of-fact world. He will
outgrow his morbidness and romantic chivalry with the certainty of years, and seeing more of
me will banish his absurd delusions in regard to me. I need his friendship and help--indeed
it seems as if they were sent to me. It can do him no harm, and it may give me a chance to
do him good. If any man ever needed a sensible friend, he does."

Therefore Edith wrote him--

"It is very kind of you to offer friendship and help to one situated like myself, and I gratefully
grant what you rather oddly call 'a favor.' At the same time, if you ever find such friendliness
a pain or trouble to you in any way, I shall in no degree blame you for withdrawing it."

The "friendship" and "friendliness" were underscored, thus delicately hinting that this must
be the only relation.

"There," she said, "all his chains will now be of his own forging, and I shall soon demolish
the paragon he is dreaming over."

She laid both letters aside, and took down her Bible with a little sigh of satisfaction.

"His lonely, empty heart," she murmured; "ah, that is the trouble with all. He thinks to fill
his with a vain dream of me, as others do with as vain a dream of something else. I trust I
have learned of One here who can fill and satisfy mine;" and soon she was again deep in the
wondrous story, so old, so new, so all-absorbing to those from whose spiritual eyes the scales
of doubt and indifference have fallen. As she read she saw, not truths about Jesus, but Him,
and at His feet her heart bowed in stronger faith and deeper love every moment.

She had not even thought whether she was a Christian or not. She had not even once put her
finger on her spiritual pulse, to gauge the evidences of her faith. A system of theology would
have been unintelligible to her. She could not have defined one doctrine so as to have satisfied
a sound divine. She had not even read the greater part of the Bible, but, in her bitter extremity,
the Spirit of God, employing the inspired guide, had brought her to Jesus, as the troubled
and sinful were brought to Him of old. He had given her rest. He had helped her save her sister,
and with childlike confidence she was just looking, lovingly and trustingly, into His divine
face, and He was smiling away all her fear and pain. She seemed to feel sure that her mother
would get well, that Laura would grow stronger, that they would all learn to know Him, and
would be taken care of.

As she read this evening she came to that passage of exquisite pathos, where the purest, holiest
manhood said to "a woman of the city, which was a sinner,"

"Thy sins are forgiven. Go in peace."

Instantly her thoughts reverted to Zell, and she was deeply moved. Could she be forgiven? Could
she be saved? Was the God of the Bible-- stern, afar off, as she had once imagined--more tender
toward the erring than even their own human kindred? Could it be possible that, while she had
been condemning, and almost hating Zell, Jesus had been loving her?

The feeling overpowered her. Closing the book, she leaned her head upon it, and, for the first
time, sobbed and mourned for Zell with a great, yearning pity.

Every such pitiful tear, the world over, is a prayer to God. It mingles with those that flowed
from His eyes as He wept over the doomed city that would not receive Him. It mingles with that
crimson tide which flowed from His hands and feet when He prayed--

"Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

CHAPTER XXVIII

EDITH TELLS THE OLD, OLD STORY

Mrs. Allen seemed better the next day, and Laura was able to watch while Edith slept. After
tea Mrs. Lacey appeared, with the same subdued air of quiet self-respect and patient sorrow.
She seemed to have settled down into that mournful calm which hopes little and fears little.
She seemed to expect nothing better than to go forward, with, such endurance as she might,
into the deeper shadows of age, sickness, and death. She vaguely hoped that God would have
mercy upon her at last, but how to love and trust Him she did not know. She hardly knew that
it was expected, or possible. She associated religion with going to church, outward profession,
and doing much good. The neighbors spoke of her and the family as "very irreligious," and she
had about come to the conclusion that they were right. She never thought of taking credit to
herself for her devotion to her children and patience with her husband. She loved the former,
especially her son, with an intensity that one could hardly reconcile with her grave and silent
ways. In regard to her husband, she tried to remember her first young girlish dream--the manly
ideal of character that her fond heart had associated with the handsome young fellow who had
singled her out among the many envious maidens in her native village.

"I will try to be true to what I thought he was," she said, with woman's pathetic constancy,
"and be patient with what he is."

But the disappointment, as it slowly assumed dread certainty, broke her heart.

Edith began to have a fellow-feeling for her. "We both have not only our own burdens to carry,
but the heavier burden of another," she thought. "I wonder if she has ever gone to Him for
the 'rest.' I fear not, or she would not look so sad and hopeless."

Before they could go upstairs a hack from the hotel stopped at the door, and Mrs. Groody bustled
cheerily in. Laura at the same time came down, saying that Mrs. Allen was asleep.

"Hannibal," said Edith, "you may sit on the stairs, and if she wakes, or makes any sound, let
me know," and she took a seat near the door in order to hear.

"I've been worryin' about you every minute ever since I called, and you was too sick to see
me," said Mrs. Groody, "but I've been so busy I couldn't get away. It takes an awful lot of
work to get such a big house to rights, and the women cleanin', and the servants are so aggravating
that I am just run off my legs lookin' after them. I don't see why people can't do what they're
told, when they're told."

"I wish I were able to help you," said Edith. "Your promise of work has kept me up wonderfully.
But before I half got my strength back mother became very ill, and, had it not been for Mrs.
Lacey, I don't know what I should have done. It did seem as if she were sent here yesterday,
for I could not have kept up another hour."

"You poor child," said Mrs. Groody, in a tone and manner overflowing with motherly kindness.
"I just heard about it today from Arden, who was bringin' something up to the hotel, so I said,
'I'll drop everything to-night, and run down for a while.' So here I am, and now what can I
do for you?" concluded the warm-hearted woman, whose invariable instinct was to put her sympathy
into deeds.

"I told you that night," said Edith. "I think I could do a little sewing or mending even now
if I had it here at home. But your kindness and remembrance do me more good than any words
of mine can tell you. I thought no one would ever speak to us again," she continued in a low
tone, and with rising color, "and I have had kind, helpful friends sent to me already."

Wistful mother-love shone in Mrs. Lacey's large blue eyes, but Mrs. Groody blew her nose like
a trumpet, and said:

"Not speak to you, poor child! Though I ain't on very good terms with the Lord, I ain't a Pharisee,
and after what I saw of you that night, I am proud to speak to you and do anything I can for
you. It does seem too bad that poor young things like you two should be so burdened. I should
think you had enough before without your mother gettin' sick. I don't understand the Lord,
nohow. Seems to me He might scatter His afflictions as well as His favors a little more evenly,
I've thought a good deal about what you said that night, 'We're dealt with in masses,' and
poor bodies like you and me, and Mrs. Lacey there, that is, 'the human atoms,' as you called
'em, are lost sight of."

Tears sprang into Edith's eyes, and she said, earnestly, "I am sorry I ever said those words.
They are not true. I should grieve very much if my rash, desperate words did you harm after
all your kindness to me. I have learned better since I saw you, Mrs. Groody. We are not lost
sight of. It seems to me the trouble is we lose sight of Him."

"Well, well, child, I'm glad to hear you talk in that way," said Mrs. Groody, despondently.
"I'm dreadfully discouraged about it all. I know I fell from grace, though, one awfully hot
summer, when everything went wrong, and I got on a regular rampage, and that's the reason perhaps.
A she-bear that had lost her cubs wasn't nothin' to me. But I straightened things out at the
hotel, though I came mighty near bein' sick, but I never could get straight myself after it.
I knowed I ought to be more patient-I knowed it all the time. But human natur is human natur,
and woman natur is worse yet sometimes. And when you've got on one hand a score to two of drinkin,'
quarrelsome, thievin', and abominably lazy servants to manage, and on the other two or three
hundred fastidious people to please, and elegantly dressed ladies who can't manage their three
or four servants at home, dawdlin' up to you every hour in the day, say in' about the same
as, Mrs. Groody, everything ain't done in a minute--everything ain't just right. I'd like to
know where 'tis in this jumbled-up world--not where they're housekeepers, I warrant you.

"Well, as I was telling you," continued Mrs. Groody, with a weary sigh, "that summer was too
much for me. I got to be a very dragon. I hadn't time to read my Bible, or pray, or go to church,
or scarcely eat or sleep. I worked Sundays and week days alike, and I got to be a sort of heathen,
and I've been one ever since," and a gloom seemed to gather on her naturally open, cheery face,
as if she feared she might never be anything else.

Mrs. Lacey gave a deep, responsive sigh, showing that her heavy heart was akin to all other
burdened souls. But direct, practical Edith said simply and gently:

"In other words, you were laboring and heavy laden."

"Couldn't have been more so, and lived," was Mrs. Groody's emphatic answer.

"And the memory of it seems to have been a heavy burden on your conscience ever since, though
I think you judge yourself harshly," continued Edith.

"Not a bit," said Mrs. Groody sturdily, "I knowed better all the time."

"Well, be that as it may, I feel that I know very little about these things yet. I'm sure I
want to be guided rightly. But what did our Lord mean when He said, 'Come unto Me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest'?"

Mrs. Groody gave Edith a sort of surprised and startled look. After a moment she said, "Bless
you, child, how plain you do put it! It's a very plain text when you think of it, now, ain't
it? I always tho't it meant kind o' good, as all the Bible does."

"No, but He said them," urged Edith, earnestly. "It is a distinct, plain invitation, and it
must have a distinct, plain meaning. I have learned to know that when you or Mrs. Lacey say
a thing, you mean what you say, and so it is with all who are sincere and true. Was He not
sincere and true? If so, these plain words must have a plain meaning. He surely couldn't have
meant them only for the few people who heard His voice at that time."

"Of course not," said Mrs. Groody, musingly, while poor Mrs. Lacey leaned forward with such
an eager, hungry look in her poor, worn face, that Edith's heart yearned over her. Laura came
and sat on the floor by her sister's chair, and leaning her elbow on Edith's knee, and her
face on her hand, looked up with the wistful, trustful, child-like expression that had taken
the place of her former stateliness and subsequent apathy. Edith lost all thought of herself
in her eagerness to tell the others of the Friend and Helper she had come to know.

"He must be God, or else He had no right to say to a great, troubled, sinning world, 'Come
unto me.' The idea of a million people going at once, with their sorrows and burdens, to one
mere man, or an angel, or any finite creature! And just think how many millions there are!
If the Bible is for all, this invitation is for all. He couldn't have changed since then, could
He? He can't be different in heaven from what He was on earth?"

"No," said Mrs. Groody, quickly, "for the Bible says He is the same yesterday, to-day, and
forever.'"

"I never read in that place," said Edith, simply. "That makes it clearer and stronger than
ever. Please, don't think I am setting myself up as a religious teacher. I know very little
yet myself. I am only seeking the light. But one thing is settled in my mind, and I like to
have one thing settled before I go on to anything else. This one thing seems the foundation
of everything else, and it appears as if I could go on from it and learn all the rest. I am
satisfied that this Jesus is God, and that He said, 'Come unto me,' to poor, weak, overburdened
Edith Allen. I went to Him, just as people in trouble used to, when He first spoke these words.
And oh, how He has helped me!" continued Edith, with tears in her eyes, but with the glad light
of a great hope again shining through them. "The world can never know all that He has done
for us, and I can't even think of Him without my heart quivering with gratitude."

Laura had now buried her face in her sister's lap, and was trembling like a leaf. Edith's words
had a meaning to her that they could not have for the others. 

He wanted to win it back, and himself proposed the visit for the third night. He became excited
by the game, and lost seventy dollars.

Still his eyes were not open; he did not dream that he was in the hands of a professed gambler,
and, hoping to get back what he had lost, and what he felt he really could not spare from his small
amount of funds, he went again.

"There!" said he, after they had been about an hour at the table, "there is my last fifty-dollar
bill; change that, and I'll try once more."

"Well," said Sharpe, "here is the change; but the luck seems against you. We had better stop
for to-night."

But Warren insisted upon continuing, and he won thirty dollars in addition to the fifty which Sharpe
had changed for him. The gambler then rose, and told him that he would give him a chance to win
all back another time, as fortune seemed to be again propitious to him.

Warren never saw him after that night. The next morning he determined to seek a more private
boarding house, and economize his remaining funds, and seek more
assiduously some business situation.

He stepped to the bar to pay his board, handing the clerk one of the notes he had received
in change for his last fifty-dollar bill. The clerk examined it a moment, and passed it back,
saying, "That is a counterfeit note, sir." He took it back, amazed, and offered another.

"This is worse still," said the clerk. "I think we had better take care of you, sir. You will
please go with me before a magistrate."

"But I did not know----!"

"You can tell that to the squire."

"You have no right to take me," said Warren; "you have no warrant."

"No; but I can keep you here till I send for one, which I shall certainly
do, unless you consent to go willingly."

And Warren, conscious of his own innocence in this respect, and never thinking of the difficulty
of proving it, went to a magistrate's office with the clerk at once.

The clerk entered his complaint, and, besides swearing to the offer of the notes, swore that
he had seen him, for several days past, in the company of a notorious gambler.

Warren was stunned, overwhelmed, by this declaration. No representation that he made was believed.
His pockets were searched, and all the money he had, except some
small change, was found to be counterfeit.

A commitment was at once made out against him, and he was sent to
jail, to await his trial on the charge of passing counterfeit money.

This is one of the methods by which professional gamblers "pluck young pigeons." No young man is
safe who allows himself to play with cards, or to handle dice.

Rodney believed that Warren had told him the truth, and fellowship
in misfortune drew the hearts of the duped man and the wronged boy
towards each other; for though both had been very much to blame, yet
duped and wronged they had been by knaves more cunning and wicked
than themselves.

They had many serious conversations together, for both had been piously instructed, and Warren,
who seemed truly penitent for his wanderings, as he sat by the bed-side of the sick boy, encouraged
him in his resolutions to lead a different life,--to seek the forgiveness and grace of God
through a merciful Redeemer. Seldom has a poor prisoner received
sweeter sympathy, or more salutary counsel, than was given to Rodney
within the walls of that old Arch-street jail, by his fellow-prisoner.

"Rodney,"
said Warren to him one day,--it was the first day that he had left
his cot,--"I shall soon leave this place; I have written to my father,
and he will be here at the trial with such evidences in my favor,
from the whole course of my life, as cannot fail to secure me an acquittal.
I feel no doubt that this stain upon my character will be wiped away.
And I believe that I shall have reason to thank God, as long as I
live, for having permitted this trouble. It is a very hard lesson,
but I trust it will be a salutary one. Since I have been here, I have
prayed earnestly to God for the pardon of my sins. I have resolved,
in sincerity of soul, to consecrate my affections and my life to his
service. I have had a severe struggle; but I believe, I feel, that
God has heard my prayers, forgiven my iniquities, and the last few
days in this jail have been the happiest of my life. I feel that I
hate the sins of which my heart has been so full, and that I love
God even for the severe providences that have checked my course of
impenitence. I feel like a new man; and if I am not deceiving myself,--and
I pray that I may not be,--I have experienced that regeneration of
heart of which I have so often heard, but which I could never before
comprehend.

"I hope that you, too, will try and seek the Saviour,
pray to him for forgiveness, and beg the guidance of His Holy Spirit
for your future life.

Two great tears gathered in Mrs. Lacey's eyes, and she bowed her head for a moment on Edith's
shoulder, and murmured, "I'll try--I think I may venture to Him."

Hannibal now appeared at the door, saying, rather huskily and brokenly, considering his message:

"Miss Edie, you'se mudder's awake, an' 'd like some water."

"That's what we all have been wanting, 'water'--'the water of life,'" said Mrs. Groody, wiping
her eyes, "and never was my parched old heart so refreshed before. I don't care how hot this
summer is, or how aggravatin' things are, I feel as if I'd be helped through it. And, my dear,
good-night. I come here to try to do you good, and you've done me more good than I ever thought
could happen again. I'm goin' to kiss you--I can't help it. Good-by, and may the good Lord
bless your sweet face;" and Mrs. Groody, like one of old, climbed up into her chariot, and
"went on her way rejoicing."

In their close good-night embrace, Laura whispered, "I begin to understand it a little now,
Edie, but I think I see everything only through your eyes, not my own."

"As old Malcom said to me the other day, so now I say to you, 'Ye'll learn it a' soon.'"

Edith soon retired to rest also, and Mrs. Lacey sat at Mrs. Allen's side, returning the sick
woman's slights and scorn, somewhat as the patient God returns ours, by watching over her.

Her eyes, no longer cast down with the pathetic discouragement of the past, seemed looking
far away upon some distant scene. She was following in her thoughts the steps of the Magi from
the East to where, as yet far distant, the "Star of Bethlehem" glimmered with promise and hope.

CHAPTER XXIX

HANNIBAL LEARNS HOW HIS HEART CAN BE WHITE

When Edith rose the next morning she found Laura only at her mother's bedside. Mrs. Lacey had
gone home quite early, saying that she would soon come again. Mrs. Allen's delirium had passed
away, leaving her exceedingly weak, but the doctor said, at his morning call:

"With quiet and good nursing she will slowly regain her usual health."

After he was gone, Laura said: "Taking care of mother will now be my work, Edie. I feel a good
deal stronger. I'll doze in a chair during the day, and I am a light sleeper at night, so I
don't think we shall need any more watchers. Poor Mrs. Lacey works hard at home, I am sure,
and I don't want to trespass on her kindness any longer. So if Mrs. Groody sends you work you
may give all your time to it."

And early after breakfast quite a bundle did come from the hotel, with a scrawl from the housekeeper:
"You may mend this linen, my dear, and I'll send for it to-morrow night."

Edith's eyes sparkled at the sight of the work as they never had over the costliest gifts of
jewelry. Sitting down in the airy parlor, no longer kept in state for possible callers, she
put on her thimble, and, with a courage and heroism greater than those of many a knight drawing
for the first time his ancestral sword, she took her needle and joined the vast army of sewing-women.
Lowly was the position and work first assigned to her--only mending coarse linen. And yet it
was with a thrill of gratitude and joy, and a stronger hope than she had yet experienced, that
she sat down to the first real work for which she would be paid, and in her exultation she
brandished her little needle at the spectres want and fear, as a soldier might his weapon.

Hannibal stood in the kitchen regarding her with moist eyes and features that twitched nervously.

"Oh, Miss Edie, I neber tho't you'd come to dat."

"It's one of the best things I've come to yet," said Edith, cheerily. "We shall be taken care
of, Hannibal. Cheer up your faithful old heart. Brighter days are coming."

But, for some reason, Hannibal didn't cheer up, and he stood looking very wistfully at Edith.
At last he commenced:

"It does my ole black heart good to hear you talk so, Miss Edie--"

"Why do you persist in calling your heart black? It's no such thing," interrupted Edith.

"Yes, 'tis, Miss Edie," said Hannibal, despondently, "I'se know 'tis. I'se black outside, and
I allers kinder feel dat I'se more black inside. Neber felt jes right here yet, Miss Edie,"
said the old man, laying his hand on his breast. "I come de nighest to't de toder day when
you said you lubbed me. Dat seemed to go down deep, but not quite to whar de trouble stays
all de time.

"But, Miss Edie," continued he in a whisper, "I'se hope you'll forgive me, but I couldn't help
listenin' to you last night. I neber heerd such talk afore. It seemed to broke my ole black
heart all up, and made it feel like de big ribers down souf in de spring, when dey jes oberflow
eberyting. I says to myself, dat's de Friend Miss Edie say she's gwine to tell me 'bout. And
now, Miss Edie, would you mind tellin' me little 'bout Him? Cause if He's your Friend, I'd
t'ink a heap of Him, too. Not dat I specs He's gwine to bodder wid dis ole niggah, but den
I'd jes like to hear 'bout Him a little."

Edith laid down her work, and turned her glorious dark eyes, brimming over with sympathy, on
the poor old fellow, as he stood in the doorway fairly trembling with the excess of his feeling.

"Come and sit down here by me," she said.

"Oh, Miss Edie, I'se isn't--"

"No words--come."

Hannibal crouched down on a divan near.

"What makes you think He wouldn't bother with you?"

"Well, I'se don't know 'zactly, Miss Edie. I'se only Hannibal."

"Hannibal," said Edith, earnestly, "you are the best man I know in all the world."

"Oh, Lor bless you, Miss Edie, how you talk! you'se jes done gone crazy."

"No I haven't. I never spoke in more sober earnest. You are faithful and true, unselfish and
patient, and abound in the best material of which men are made. I admit," she added, with a
twinkle in her eye, "that one very common element of manhood, as I have observed it, is dreadfully
lacking, that is conceit. I wish I were as good as you are, Hannibal."

"Oh, Miss Edie, don't talk dat way, you jes done discourages me. If you'd only say, Hannibal,
you'se sick, but I'se got a mighty powerful medicine for you; if you'd only say, I know you
isn't good; I know your ole heart is black, but I know a way to make it white, I'd stoop down
and kiss de ground you walks on. Dere's sumpen wrong here, Miss Edie," said he, laying his
hand on his breast again, and shaking his head, with a tear in the corner of each eye--"I tells
you dere's sumpen wrong. I don't know jes what 'tis. My heart's like a baby a- cryin' for it
doesn't know what. Den it gits jes like a stun, as hard and as heavy. I don't understan' my
ole heart; I guess it's kinder sick and wants a doctor, 'cause it don't work right. But dere's
one ting I does understan'. It 'pears dat it would be a good heaven 'nuff if I'se could allers
be waitin' on you alls. But Massa Allen's gone; Miss Zell, poor chile, is gone; and I'se growin'
ole, Miss Edie, I'se growin' ole. De wool is white, de jints are stiff, and de feet tired.
Dey can't tote dis ole body roun' much longer. Where am I gwine, Miss Edie? What's gwine to
become of ole Hannibal? I'se was allers afeard of de dark. If I could only find you in de toder
world and wait on you, dat's all I ask, but I'se afeard I'll get lost, it seems such a big,
empty place."

"Poor old Hannibal! Then you are 'heavy laden' too," said Edith, gently.

"Indeed I is, Miss Edie; 'pears as if I couldn't stan' it anoder minute. And when I heerd you
talkin' about dat Friend last night, and tellin' how good He was to people, and He seemed to
do you such a heap of good, I thought dat I would jes like to hear little 'bout Him." "Wait
till I get my Bible," said Edith.

"Bless you, Miss Edie, you'se needn't stop your work. You can jes tell me any ting dat come
into you'se head."

"Then I wouldn't be like Him, Hannibal. He used to stop and give the kindest and most patient
attention to every one that came to Him, and, as far as I can make out, the poorer they were,
the more sinful and despised they seemed, the more attention He gave to them."

"Dat's mighty quar," said Hannibal, musingly; "not a bit like de big folks dat I'se seen."

"I don't understand it all myself yet, Hannibal. But the Bible tells me that He was God come
down to earth to save the world. He says to the lost and sinful--to all who are poor and needy--in
brief, to the heavy laden, 'Come unto me.' So I went to Him, Hannibal, and you can go just
as well."

The old man's eyes glistened, but he said, doubtfully, "Yes, but den you'se Miss Edie, and
I'se only black Hannibal. I wish we'd all lived when He was here. I might have shine His boots,
and done little tings for Him, so He'd say, 'Poor ole Hannibal, you does as well as you knows
how. I'll 'member you, and you shan't go away in de dark.'"

Edith smiled and cried at the same time over the quaint pathos of the simple creature's words,
but she said, earnestly, "You need not go away in the dark, for He said, 'I am the light of
the world,' and if you go to Him you will always be in the light."

"I'd go in a minute," said Hannibal, eagerly, "if I only know'd how, and wasn't afeard." Then,
as if a sudden thought struck him, he asked, "Miss Edie, did He eber hab any ting to do wid
a black man?"

Edith was so unfamiliar with the Bible that she could not recall any distinct case, but she
said, with the earnestness of such full belief on her part, that it satisfied his child-like
mind, "I am sure He did, for all kinds of people--people that no one else would touch or look
at--came to Him, or He went to them, and spoke so kindly to them and forgave all their sins."

"Bress Him, Miss Edie, dat kinder sounds like what I wants."

Edith thought a moment, and, with her quick, logical mind, sought to construct a simple chain
of truth that would bring to the trusting nature she was trying to guide the perfect assurance
that Jesus' love and mercy embraced him as truly as herself.

They made a beautiful picture that moment; she with her hands, that had dropped all earthly
tasks for the sake of this divine work, clasped in her lap, her lustrous eyes dewy with sympathy
and feeling, looking far away into the deep blue of the June sky, as if seeking some heavenly
inspiration; and quaint old Hannibal, leaning forward in his eagerness, and gazing upon her,
as if his life depended upon her next utterances.

It was a picture of the Divine Artist's own creation. He had inspired the faith in one and
the questioning unrest in the other. He, with Edith's lips, as ever by human lips, was teaching
the way of life. Glorious privilege, that our weak voices should be as the voice of God, telling
the lost and wandering where lies the way to life and home! The angels leaned over the golden
walls to watch that scene, while many a proud pageant passed unheeded.

"Hannibal," said Edith, after her momentary abstraction, "God made everything, didn't He?"

"Sartin."

"Then He made you, and you are one of His creatures, are you not?"

"Sartin I is, Miss Edie."

"Then see here what is in the Bible. Almost the last thing He said to His followers before
He went up into heaven, was, 'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.'
Gospel means 'good news,' and the good news was, that God had come down from heaven and become
a man, so we wouldn't be afraid of Him, and that He would take away their sins and save all
who would let Him. Now, remember, He didn't send His preachers to the white people, nor to
the black people, but to all the world, to every creature alike, and so He meant you and me,
Hannibal, and you as much as me. I am just as sure He will receive you as that He received me."

"Dat's 'nuff, Miss Edie. Ole Hannibal can go too. And I'se a-gwine, Miss Edie, I'se a-gwine
right to Him. Dere's only one ting dat troubles me yet. What is I gwine to do wid my ole black
heart? I know dere's sumpen wrong wid it. It's boddered me all my life."

"Oh, Hannibal," said Edith, eagerly, "I was reading something last night that I think will
just suit you, I thought I would read a little in the Old Testament, and I turned to a place
that I didn't understand very well, but I came to these words, and they made me think of you,
for you are always talking about your 'old black heart.'"

To Hannibal the words seemed a revelation from heaven. Standing before her, with streaming
eyes, he said:

"Oh, Miss Edie, you'se been an angel of light to me. Dat was jes de berry message I wanted.
I knowed my ole heart was nothin' but a black stun. De Lord couldn't do nothin' wid it but
trow it away. But tanks be to His name, He says He'll give me a new one--a heart of flesh.
Now I sees dat my heart can be white like yours, Miss Edie. Bress de Lord, I'se a-gwine, I'se
a-comin'," and Hannibal vanished into the kitchen, feeling that he must be alone in the glad
tumult of his emotions.

CHAPTER XXX

EDITH'S AND ARDEN'S FRIENDSHIP

As Edith laid aside her work for a frugal dinner at one o'clock, she heard the sound of a hoe
in her garden. The thought of Arden at once recurred to her, but looking out she saw old Malcom.
Throwing a handkerchief over her head, she ran out to him, exclaiming:

"How good you are, Mr. McTrump, to come and help me when I know you are so very busy at home!"

"Weel, nothin' to boast on," replied Malcom; "I tho't that if ye had na one a-lookin' after
the garden save Hannibal's 'spook,' ye'd have but a ghaistly crop. But I'm a-thinkin' there's
mair than a ghaist been here."

"It was Arden Lacey," said Edith, frankly, but with deepening color. Malcom, in telling his
wife about it, said, "She looked like the rose- bush, a' in bloom, that she was a-stonnin' beside."

Edith, seeing the mischievous twinkle in her little friend's eye, added hastily, "Both Mrs.
Lacey and her son have been very kind to us in our sickness and trouble, as well as yourself.
But, Mr. McTrump," she continued, anxious to change the subject, also eager to speak on the
topic uppermost in her thoughts, "I think I am beginning to 'learn it a',' as you said, about
that good Friend who suffered for us that we might not suffer. What you and your wife said
to me the other day led me to read the 'Gude Book' after I got home. I don't feel as I did
then. I think I can trust Him now."

Malcom dropped his hoe and came over into the path beside her.

"God be praised!" he said. "I gie je the right hond o' fellowship an' welcome ye into the kirk
o' the Lord. Ye noo belong to the household o' faith, an' God's true Israel, an' may His gude
Spirit guide ye into all truth."

The little man spoke very earnestly, and with a certain dignity and authority that his small
stature and rude working-dress could not diminish. A sudden feeling of solemnity and awe came
over Edith, and she felt as if she were crossing the mystic threshold and entering the one
true church consisting of all believers in Christ.

For a moment she reverently bowed her head, and a sweeter sense of security came over her,
as if she were no longer an outsider, but had been received into the household.

Malcom, "a priest unto God" through his faith, officiated at the simple ceremony. The birds
sang the choral service. The wind-shaken roses, blooming around her, with their sweet ordos,
were the censers and incense, and the sunlighted garden, the earliest sacred place of Bible
history, where the first fair woman worshipped, was the hallowed ground of the initiatory rite.

"Why, Mr. McTrump, I feel almost as if I had joined the church," said Edith, after a moment.

"An' sae ye ha' afore God, an' I hope ere long ye'll openly profess yer faith before men."

"Do you think I ought?" said Edith, thoughtfully.

"Of coorse I do, but the Gude Book'll teach a' aboot it. Ye canna gang far astray wi' that
to guide ye."

"I would like to join the church that you belong to, Mr. McTrump, as soon as I feel that I
am ready, for it was you and your good wife that turned my thoughts in the right direction.
I was almost desperate with trouble and shame when I came to you that afternoon, and it was
your speaking of the Bible and Jesus, and especially your kindness, that made me feel that
there might be some hope and help in God."

The old man's eyes became so moist that he turned away for a moment, but recovering himself
after a little, he said:

"See, noo, our homely deeds and words can be like the seeds we drop into the mould. Look aroon
once and see how green and grand the garden is, and a' from the wee brown seeds we planted
the spring. Sae would the garden o' the Lord bloom and floorish if a' were droppin' a 'word
in season' and a bit o' kindness here and there. But if I stay here an' preach to ye that need
na preachin', these sins o' the garden, the weeds, will grow apace. Go you an' look in yer
strawberry-bed."

With an exclamation of delight, Edith pounced upon a fair-sized red berry, the first she had
picked from her own vines. Then glancing around, she saw one and another showing its red cheek
through the green leaves, till with a little cry of exultation she said:

"Oh, Mr. McTrump, I'll get enough for mother and Laura."

"Aye, and enoof to moisten yer own red lips wi' too, I'm a-thinkin'. There'll be na crop the
year wourth speakin' of; but next June 'twill puzzle ye to gither them. But ye a' can ha' a
dainty saucer yoursels the season, when ye're a mind to stoop for them."

Edith soon had the pleasure of seeing her mother and Laura enjoying some, and, as Malcom said,
there were plenty for her, and they tasted like the ambrosia of the gods. Varied experiences
had so thoroughly engrossed her thoughts and time the past few days, that she had scarcely
looked toward her garden. But with the delicious flavor of the strawberries lingering in her
mouth, and with the consciousness that she enjoyed picking them much more than sewing, the
thought of winning her bread by the culture of the ground grew in her favor.

"Oh, how much rather would I be out there with Malcom!" she sighed.

Glancing up from her work during the afternoon, she saw Arden Lacey on his way to the village.
There was a strange mingling of hope and fear in his mind. His mother's manner had been such
as to lead him to say when alone with her after breakfast:

"I think your watching has done you good, mother, in stead of wearying you too much, as I feared."

She had suddenly turned and placed both her hands on his shoulders, saying:

"Arden, I hardly dare speak of it yet. It seems too good to be true, but a hope is coming into
my heart like the dawn after night. She's worthy of your love, however it may result, and if
I find true what she told me last night I shall have reason to bless her name forever; but
I see only a glimmer of light yet, and I rejoice with fear and trembling." And she told him
what had occurred.

He was deeply moved, but not for the same cause as his mother. His desire and devotion went
no further than Edith. "Can she have read my letter?" he thought, and he was consumed with
anxiety for some expression of her feeling toward him. Therefore he was glad that business
called him to the village that afternoon, but his steps were slow as he approached the little
cottage, and his eyes were upon it as a pilgrim gazes at a shrine he long has sought. He envied
Malcom working in the garden, and felt that if he could work there every day, it would be Adam's
life before he fell. Then he caught a glimpse of Edith sewing at the window, and he dropped
his eyes instantly. He would not be so afraid of a battery of a hundred guns as of that poor
sewing-girl (for such Edith now was), stitching away on Mrs. Groody's coarse hotel linen. But
Edith had noted his timid, wistful looks, and calling Hannibal, said:

"Please give that note to Mr. Lacey. He is just passing toward the village."

Hannibal, with the impressive dignity he had learned in olden times, handed the missive to
Arden, saying, "Miss Edie telled me to guv you dis 'scription."

If Hannibal had been Hebe he could not have been a more welcome messenger.

Arden could not help his hand trembling as he took the letter, but he managed to say, "I hope
Miss Allen is well."

"Her health am berry much disproved," and Hannibal retired with a stately bow.

Arden quickened his steps, holding the missive in his hand. As soon as he was out of sight,
he opened and devoured Edith's words. The light of a great joy dawned in his face, and made
it look noble and beautiful, as indeed almost every human face appears when the light of a
pure love falls upon it. Where most men would have murmured at the meagre return for their
affection, he felt himself immeasurably rewarded and enriched, and it seemed as if he were
walking on air the rest of the day. With a face set like a flint, he resolved to be true to
the condition implied in the underscored word "friendship," and never to whisper of love to
her again. But a richer experience was still in store for him. For, on his return, in the cool
of the evening, Edith was in the garden picking currants. She saw him coming, and thought,
"If he is ever to be a friend worth the name, I must break the ice of his absurd diffidence
and formality. And the sooner he comes to know me as I am, the sooner he will find out that
I am like other people, and he will have a new 'revelation' that will cure him of his infatuation.
I would like him for a friend very much, not only because I need his help, but because one
likes a little society now and then, and he seems so well educated, if he is 'quar,' as Hannibal
says." So she startled poor Arden almost as much as if one of his Shakespearean heroines had
called him in audible voice, by saying, as he came opposite her:

"Mr. Lacey, won't you come in a moment and tell me if it is time to pick my currants, and whether
you think I could sell them in the village, or at the hotel?"

This address, so matter-of-fact in tone and character, seemed to him like the June twilight,
containing, in some subtle manner, the essence of all that was beautiful and full of promise
in his heart-history. He bowed and went toward the little gate to comply with her request,
as Adam might if he had been created outside of Eden and Eve inside, and she had looked over
a flowering hedge in the purple twilight and told him to come in. He was not going merely to
look at currants and consider their marketable condition; he was entering openly upon the knightly
service to which he had devoted himself. He was approaching his idol, which was not a heathen
stock or stone, but a sweet little woman. In regard to the currants, he ventured dubiously--

"They might do for pies."

In regard to herself, his eyes said, in spite of his purpose to be merely friendly, that she
was too good for the gods of Mount Olympus. He both amused and interested Edith, whose long
familiarity with society and lack of any such feeling as swayed him made her quite at ease.
With a twinkle in her eyes, she said:

"I have thought that perhaps Mrs. Groody could help me find sale for them at the hotel."

"I am going there to-morrow, and I will ask her for you, if you wish," said Arden, timidly.

"Thank you," replied Edith. "I shall be very much obliged to you if you will. You see, I wish
to sell everything out of the garden that I can find a market for."

She was rather astonished at the effect of this mercenary speech, for there was a wonderful
blending of sympathy and admiration in his face as he said:

"I am frequently going to the hotel and village, and if you will let me know what you have
to dispose of, I can find out whether it is in demand, and carry it to market for you." He
could not help adding, with a voice trembling with feeling, "Miss Allen, I am so glad you permit
me to be of some help to you."

"Oh, dear!" thought Edith, "how can I make him understand what I really am?" She turned to
him with an expression that was both perplexed and quizzical, and said:

"Mr. Lacey, I very frankly and gratefully accept your delicately offered friendship (emphasizing
the last word), not only because of my need, but of yours also. If any one needs a sensible
friend, I think you do. You truly must have lived a 'hermit's life in the world' to have such
strange ideas of people. Let me tell you as a perfect certainty, that no such person exists
as the Edith Allen that you have imagined. She is no more a reality than your other shadows,
and the more you know of me, the sooner you will find it out. I am not in the least like a
heroine in a romance. I live on the most substantial food rather than moonlight, and usually
have an excellent appetite. I am the most practical matter-of-fact creature in existence, and
you will find no one in this place more sharp on the question of dollars and cents. Indeed,
I am continually in a most mercenary frame of mind, and this very moment here, in the romantic
June twilight, if you ransacked history, poetry, and all the fine arts, you could not tell
me anything half so beautiful, half so welcome, as how to make money in a fair, honorable way."

"There," thought she, "that will be another 'revelation' to him. If he don't jump over the
garden fence in his haste to escape such a monster, I shall be glad."

But Arden's face only grew more grave and gentle as he looked down upon her, and he asked:

"Is it because you love the money itself, Miss Allen?"

"Well, no," said Edith, somewhat taken aback. "I can never earn enough to make it worth while
to do that. Misers love to count their money," she added, with a little pathetic accent in
her voice, "and I fear mine will go before I can count it."

"You wish me to think less of you, then, because you are bravely, and without thought of sparing
yourself, trying to earn money to provide home-shelter and comfort for your feeble mother and
sister. You wish me to think you commonplace because you have the heroism to do any kind of
work, rather than be helpless and dependent. Pardon me, but for such a 'practical, matter-of-fact'
lady, I do not think your logic is good."

Edith's vexation and perplexity only increased, and she said, earnestly, "But I wish you to
understand that I am only Edith Allen, and as poor as poverty, nothing but a sewing girl, and
only hoping to arrive at the dignity of a gardener. The majority of the world thinks I am not
even fit to speak to," she added, in a low tone.

Arden bowed his head, as if in reverence before her, and then said, firmly:

"And I wish you to understand that I am only Arden Lacey, with a sot for a father, and the
scorn, contempt, and hatred of all the world as my heritage. I am a slipshod farmer. Our place
is heavily mortgaged, and will eventually be sold away from us. It grows more weeds now than
anything else; and it seems that nettles have been the principal crop that I have reaped all
my life. Thus, you see, I am poorer than poverty, and am rich only in my mother, and, eventually,
I hope," he added timidly, "in the possession of your friendship, Miss Allen; I shall try so
sincerely and hard to deserve it."

With a frown, a laugh, and a shy look of sympathy at him, Edith said, "I don't see but you
have got to find out your mistake for yourself. Time and facts cure many follies." But she
found little encouragement in his incredulous smile.

The next moment she turned upon him so sharply that he was startled.

"I am a business woman," she said, "and conduct my affairs on business principles. You said,
I think, you would help me find a market for the produce of my place?"

"Certainly," he replied.

"As certainly you must take fifteen per cent commission on all sales."

"Oh, Miss Allen," commenced Arden, "I couldn't--"

"There," said she, decisively, "you haven't the first idea of business. Not a thing can you
touch unless you comply with my conditions. There is no sentiment, I assure you, connected
with currants and cabbages."

"You may be certain, Miss Allen, that I would comply with any condition," said Arden, with
the air of one who is cornered, "but let me suggest, since we are arranging this matter so
strictly on business grounds, that ten per cent is all I should take. That is the regular commission,
and is all I pay in sending produce to New York."

"Oh, I didn't know that," said the experienced and uncompromising woman of business, innocently.
"Do you think that would pay you for your trouble?"

"I think it would," he replied, so demurely and yet with such a twinkle in his blue eyes, that
now looked very different with the light of hope and happiness in them, that Edith turned away
with a laugh.

But she said, with assumed sharpness, "See that you keep your accounts straight. I shall be
a very dragon over your account-book."

Thus the ice was broken, and Edith and Arden became friends.

The future has now been quite clearly indicated to the reader, and, lest my story should grow
wearisome as a "twice-told tale," we pass over several subsequent months with but a few words.

It was not a good fruit year, and Edith's place had been sadly neglected previous to her possession.
Therefore, though Arden surprised himself in the sharp business traits he developed as Edith's
salesman, the results were not very large. But still they greatly assisted her, and amounted
to more than the earnings of her unskilled hands from other sources. She insisted on doing
everything on business principles, and made Arden take his ten per cent, which was of real
help to him in this way: he gave all the money to his mother, saying, "I couldn't spend it
to save my life." Mrs. Lacey had many uses for every penny she could obtain.

Then Edith paid old Malcom by making up bouquets for sale at the hotel, and arranging baskets
of flowers for parties there and elsewhere, and other lighter labors. Mrs. Groody continued
to send her work; and thus during the summer and early fall she managed to make her garden
and her labor provide for all family expenses, saving what was left of the four hundred, after
paying all debts, for winter need. Moreover, she stored away in cellar and attic enough of
the products of the garden to be of great help also.

Mrs. Allen did recover her usual health, and also her usual modes of thought and feeling. The
mental and moral habits of a lifetime are not readily changed. Often and earnestly did Edith
talk with her mother, but with few evidences of the result she longed to see.

Mrs. Allen's condition, in view of the truth, was the most hopeless one of all. She saw only
her preconceived ideas, and not the truth itself. One day she said, with some irritation, to
Edith, who was pleading with her:

"Do you think I am a heathen? Of course, I believe the Bible. Of course, I believe in Jesus
Christ. I have been a member of the church ever since I was sixteen."

Edith sighed, and thought, "Only He who can satisfy her need can reveal it to her."

Poor Mrs. Allen! With the strange infatuation of a worldly mind, she was turning to the world,
and it alone, for hope and solace. Untaught by the wretched experience of the past, she was
led to enter upon a new and similar scheme for the aggrandizement of her family, as will be
explained in another chapter.

Laura regained her strength somewhat, and was able to relieve Edith of the care of her mother
and the lighter duties of the house. Her faith developed like that shy, delicate blossom called
the "wind-flower," easily shaken, and yet with a certain hardiness and power to live and thrive
in sterile places.

Edith and Mrs. Lacey were eventually received into the church that Malcom attended, and, after
the simple service, they took dinner with the old Scotchman and his wife. Malcom seemed hardly
"in the body" all day.

"My heart's a-bloom," he said, "wi' a' the sweet posies that God ever made blush when he looked
at them the first time, an' ye seem the sweetest o' them a', Miss Edith. Ah, but the Crude
Husbandman gathered a fair blossom the day."

"Now, Mr. McTrump," said Edith, reproachfully, but with a face like Malcom's posies, "you shouldn't
give compliments on Sunday." For Arden and Rose were present also, and Edith thought, "Such
foolish words will only increase his infatuation."

"Weel," said Malcom, scratching his head, in his perplexed effort at apology, "I wud na mak
ye vain, nor hurt yer conscience, but it kind o' slippit out afore I could stop it."

In the laugh that followed Malcom's explanation Edith felt that matters had not been helped
much, and she adroitly turned the conversation.

Public opinion, from being at first very bitter and scornful against the Allens, gradually
began to soften. One after another, as they recognized Edith's patient, determined effort to
do right, began to give her the credit and the respect to which she was entitled. Little acts
and tokens of kindly feeling became more frequent, and were like glints of sunlight on her
shadowed path. But the great majority felt that they could have no associations with such as
the Allens, and completely ignored them.

In their relations with the church, Edith and Mrs. Lacey found increasing satisfaction. Many
of its humble, and some of its more influential, members treated them with much kindness and
sympathy, and they realized more and more that there are good, kind people in the world, if
you look in the right way and right places for them. The Rev. Mr. Knox was a faithful preacher
and pastor, and if his sermons were a little dry and doctrinal at times, they were as sound
and sweet as a nut. Moreover, both Edith and Mrs. Lacey were sadly deficient in the doctrines,
neither having ever had any religious instruction, and they listened with the grave, earnest
interest of those desiring to be taught.

Mrs. Groody reconnected herself with her old church "I want to go where I can shout 'Glory!'"
she said.

Rose but faintly sympathized with her mother's feelings. Her restless, ambitious spirit turned
longingly toward the world. Its attractions she could understand, but not those of faith. Through
her father's evil habits, and Arden's poor farming, the pressure of poverty rested heavier
and heavier on the family, and she had about resolved to go to New York and find employment
in some store.

Arden rarely went to church, but read at home. He was somewhat sceptical in regard to the Bible,
not that he had ever carefully examined either it or its evidences, but he had read much of
the prevalent semi-infidelity, and was a little conceited over his independent thinking. Then,
in a harsh, sweeping cynicism, he utterly detested church people, calling them the "holy sect
of the Pharisees."

"Bat they are not all such," his mother would say.

"Oh, no," he would reply; "there are some sincere ones, of course; but I think they would be
better out than in such a company of hypocrites."

But as he saw Edith's sincerity, and learned of her purpose to unite with the church, he kept
these views more and more in the background; but he had too much respect for her and his mother's
faith to go with them to what they regarded as a sacred place, from merely the personal motive
of being near Edith.

One day Mrs. Lacey and Edith walked down to the evening prayer- meeting. Arden, who had business
in the village, was to call for them at its close; as they were walking home, Edith suddenly
asked him:

"Why don't you go to church?"

"I don't like the people I meet there."

"What have you against them?"

"Well, there is Mr. Hard. He is one of the 'lights and pillars'; and he would have sold the
house over your head if you had not paid him. He can 'devour a widow's house' as well as they
of olden time."

"That is not the question," said the practical Edith, earnestly. "What have you to do with
Mr. Hard, or he with you? Does he propose--is he able to save you? The true question is, What
have you got against Jesus Christ?"

"Well, really, Miss Edith, I can have nothing against Him. Both history and legend unite in
presenting Him as one of the purest and noblest of men. But pardon me if I say in all honesty
that I cannot quite accept your belief in regard to Him and the Bible in general. A man can
hardly be a man without exercising the right of independent thought. I cannot take a book called
the Bible for granted."

"But," asked, Edith keenly, "are you not taking other books for granted? Answer me truly, Mr.
Lacey, have you carefully and patiently investigated this subject, not only on the side of
your sceptical writers, but on God's side also? He has plenty of facts, as well as the infidels,
and my rich, lasting, rational, spiritual experience is as much a fact as that stone there,
and a good deal higher and better one, I think." 

Radhi-billah appears to have been fond of books of travel and of natural history, and of the
society of men of letters and of science, and liked listening to
recitals on the history, politics, and glory of the old Persian kings.

[Footnote 4: Nerd.--This game is mentioned as early as the Shah-Namah, the author of which,
Firdausi, was of opinion that it is of genuine Persian, and not of
Indian origin, like chess, but this assertion is not necessarily correct.


"I think you are wrong," said Edith, gently but firmly. "Granting the premise you admitted
a moment ago, that Christ was one of the purest and noblest of men, you surely, with your chivalric
instincts, would say that such a man ought to be imitated."

"Yes," said Arden, "and He denounced the Pharisees."

"And He worshipped with them also," said Edith, quickly. "He went to the temple with the others.
What was there to interest Him in the dreary forlorn little synagogue at Nazareth? and yet
He was there with the regularity of the Sabbath. It was the best form of faith and worship
then existing, and He sustained it by every means in His power, till He could give the people
something better. Suppose all the churches in this place were closed, not one in a hundred
would or could read the books you refer to. If your example were followed they would be closed.
As far as your example goes it tends to close them. I have heard Mr. Knox say, that wherever
Christian worship and the Christian Sabbath are not observed, society rapidly deteriorates.
Is it not true?"

They had stopped at Edith's gate. Arden averted his face for a moment, then turning toward
Edith he gave her his hand, saying:

"Yes, it is true, and a true, faithful friend you have been to me to- night. I admit myself
vanquished."

Edith gave his hand a cordial pressure, saying earnestly, "You are not vanquished by the young
ignorant girl, Edith Allen, but by the truth that will yet vanquish the world."

After that Arden went regularly with them to church, and tried to give sincere attention to
the service, but his uncurbed fancy was wandering to the ends of the earth most of the time;
or his thoughts were dwelling in rapt attention on Edith. She, after all, was the only object
of his faith and worship, though he had a growing intellectual conviction that her faith was true.

And so the months passed into autumn, but with the nicest sense of honor he refrained from
word or deed that would remind Edith that he was her lover. She became greatly attached to
him, and he seemed almost like a brother to her. She found increasing pleasure in his society,
for Arden, after the restraint of his diffidence was banished, could talk well, and he opened
to her the rich treasures of his reading, and with almost a poet's fancy and power pictured
to her the storied past.

To both herself and Mrs. Lacey, life grew sunnier and sweeter. But they each had a heavy burden
on their hearts, which they daily brought to the feet of the Compassionate One. They united
in praying for Mrs. Lacey's husband, and for Zell; and their strong faith and love would take
no denial. But, as Laura had said, the silence of the grave seemed to have swallowed lost Zell.

CHAPTER XXXI

ZELL

"And the silence of the grave ought to swallow such as poor Zell had become," is, perhaps,
the thought of some. All reference to her and her class should be suppressed.

We firmly say, No! If so, the New Testament must be suppressed. The Divine Teacher spoke plainly
both of the sin and the sinner. He had scathing denunciation for the one, and compassion and
mercy for the other. Shall we enforce His teachings against all other forms of evil, and not
against this deadliest one of all--and that, too, in the laxity and wide demoralization of
our age, when temptation lurks on every hand, and parents are often sleepless with just anxiety?

Evil is active, alluring, suggesting, insinuating itself when least expected, and many influences
are at work, with the full approval of society, to poison forever all pure thoughts. And temptation
is sure to come at first as an angel of light.

There is no safety save in solemn words of warning, the wholesome terror which knowledge inspires,
the bracing of principle, and the ennobling of Christian faith. There are too many incarnate
fiends who will take advantage of the innocence of ignorance.

Zell is not in her grave. She is sinning, but more sinned against. He who said to one like
her, of old, "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven," loves her still, and Edith is praying
for her. The grave cannot close over her yet.

But as we look upon this long-lost one, as she reclines on a sofa in Van Dam's luxurious apartments,
as we see her temples throbbing with pain, and that her cheeks are flushed and feverish, it
would seem that the grave might soon hide her from a contemptuous and vindictive world.

Her head does ache sadly--it seems bursting with pain; but her heart aches with a bitterer
anguish. Zell had too fine a nature to sin brutally and unfeelingly. Her betrayer's treachery
wounded her more deeply than he could understand. Even her first strong love for him could
not bridge the chasm of guilt to which he led her, and her passionate nature and remorse often
caused her to turn upon, him with such scathing reproaches that even he, in his hardihood,
trembled.

Knowing how proud and high-strung she was, he feared to reveal his treachery in New York, a
locality with which she was familiar; so he said that very important business called him at
once to Boston, a city where he had few acquaintances. Zell reluctantly acquiesced in this
further journey. 

The carol of wild birds rung out sweetly around him; but the music saddened his heart yet more, for
there was no inward response of gratitude and joy.

The bright green of the Spring foliage and of the waving grass seemed dark and gloomy, as he
gazed upon it through tearful eyes. His mourning spirit gave its own sombre interpretation to all
the lovely scenes of nature. He deeply felt that he was a wretched sinner against God, and
he could not see how God could be merciful to one who had so grievously transgressed.


But retribution for both was near. The smallpox was almost epidemic in the city: Zell's silk
had swept against a beggar's infected rags, and fourteen days later appeared the fatal symptoms.

And truly she is weary and heart-sick this afternoon. She never remembered feeling so ill.
The thought of death appalled her. She felt, as never before, that she wanted some one to love
and take care of her.

Van Dam entered, and said, rather roughly:

"What's the matter?"

"I'm sick," said Zell, faintly.

He muttered an oath.

She arose from the sofa and tottered to his easy-chair, knelt, and clasped his knees.

"Guilliam," she pleaded, "I am very sick. I have a feeling that I shall die. Won't you marry
me? Won't you take care of your poor little Zell, that loved you so well as to leave all for
you? Perhaps I sha'n't burden you much longer, but, if I do get well, I will be your patient
slave, if you will only marry me;" and the tears poured over the hot, feverish cheeks, that
they could not cool.

His only reply was to ask, with some irritation:

"How do you feel?"

"Oh, my head aches, my bones ache, every part of my body aches, but my heart aches worst of
all. You can ease that, Guilliam. In the name of God's mercy, won't you?"

A sudden thought caused the coward's face to grow white with fear. "I must have a doctor see
you," was his only reply to her appeal, and he passed hastily out.

Zell felt that a blow would have been better than his indifference, and she crawled back to
her couch. A little later, she was conscious that a physician was feeling her pulse, and examining
her symptoms. After he was gone she had strength enough to take off her jewelry and rings--all,
save one solitaire diamond, that her father had given her. The rest seemed to oppress her with
their weight. She then threw herself on the bed.

She was next conscious that some one was lifting her up. She roused for a moment, and stared
around. There were several strange faces.

"What do you want? What are you going to do with me?" she asked, in a thick voice, and in vague
terror.

"I am sorry, miss," said one of the men, in an official tone; "but you have the smallpox, and
we must take you to the hospital."

She gave one shriek of horror. A hand was placed over her mouth. She murmured faintly:

"Guilliam--help!" and then, under the effects of disease and fear, became partially unconscious;
but her hand clenched, and with some instinct hard to understand, remained so, over the diamond
ring that was her father's gift.

She was conscious of riding in something hard over the stony street, for the jolting hurt her
cruelly. She was conscious of the sound of water, for she tried to throw herself into it, that
it might cool her fever. She was conscious of reaching some place, and then she felt as if
she had no rest for many days, and yet was not awake. But through it all she kept her hand
closed on her father's gift. At times it seemed to her that some one was trying to take it
off, but she instinctively struggled and cried out, and the hand was withdrawn.

At last one night she seemed to wake and come to herself. She opened her eyes and looked timidly
around the dim ward. All was strange and unaccountable. She feared that she was in another
world. But as she raised her hand to her head, as if to clear away the mist of uncertainty,
a sparkle from the diamond caught her eye. For a long time she stared vacantly at it, with
the weak, vague feeling that in some sense it might be a clew. Its faint lustre was like the
glimmer of a star through a rift in the clouds to a lost traveller. Its familiar light and
position remind him of home, and by its ray he guesses in what direction to move; so the crystallized
light upon her finger threw its faint glimmer into the past, and by its help Zell's weak mind
groped its way down from the hour it was given to the moment when she became partially unconscious
in Van Dam's apartments. But the word smallpox was burned into her brain, and she surmised
that she was in a hospital.

At last a woman passed. Zell feebly called her.

"What do you want?" said a rather gruff voice.

"I want to write a letter."

"You can't. It's against the rules."

"I must," pleaded Zell. "Oh, as you are a woman, and hope in God's mercy, don't refuse me."

"Can't break the rules," said the woman, and she was about to pass on.

"Stop!" said Zell, in a whisper. "See there," and she flashed the diamond upon her. "I'll give
you that if you'll promise before God to send a letter for me. It would take you many months
to earn the value of that."

The woman was a part of the city government, so she acted characteristically. She brought Zell
writing materials and a bit of candle, saying:

"Be quick!"

With her poor, stiff, diseased hand, Zell wrote:

"Guilliam--You cannot know where I am. You cannot know what has
happened. You could not be such a fiend as to cast me off and send me
here to die--and die I shall. The edge of the grave seems crumbling
under me as I write. If you have a spark of love for me, come and see
me before I die. Oh, Guilliam, Guilliam! what a heaven of a home I
would have made you, if you had only married me! It would have been my
whole life to make you happy. I said bitter words to you--forgive
them. We both have sinned--can God forgive us? I will not believe you
know what has happened. You are grieving for me--looking for me. They
took me away while you were gone. Come and see me before I die. Good-
by, I'm writing in the dark--I'm dying in the dark--my soul is in the
dark--I'm going away in the dark--where, O God, where?
      "Your poor little Zell.
      "Smallpox Hospital (I don't know date)."

Poor, poor Zell! As in the case of a tempest-tossed one of old, "sun, moon, and stars" had
long been hidden.

Almost fainting with weakness, she sealed and directed the letter, drew off the ring, pressed
it to her lips, and then turned her eyes, unnaturally large and bright, on the woman waiting
at her side, and said:

"Look at me! Promise me you will see that this letter is delivered. Remember, I am going to
die. If you ever hope for an hour's peace, promise!"

"I promise," said the woman solemnly, for she was as superstitious as avaricious, and though
she had no hesitancy in breaking the rules and taking a bribe, she would not have dared for
her life to have risked treachery to a girl whom she believed dying.

Zell gave her the ring and the letter, and sank back for the time unconscious.

The woman had her means of communication with the city, and before many hours elapsed the letter
was on its way.

Van Dam was in a state of nervous fear till the fourteen days passed, and then he felt that
he was safe. He had his rooms thoroughly fumigated, and was reassured by his physicians saying
daily: "There was not much danger of her giving you the disease in its first stage. She is
probably dead by this time."

But the wheels of life seemed to grow heavier and more clogged every day. He was fast getting
down to the dregs, and now almost every pleasure palled upon his jaded taste. At one time it
seemed that Zell might so infuse her vigorous young life and vivacity into his waning years
that his last days would be his best. And this might have been the case, if he had reformed
his evil life and dealt with her as a true man. In her strong and exceptional love, considering
their difference in age, there were great possibilities of good for both. But he had foully
perverted the last best gift of his life, and even his blunted moral sense was awakening to
the truth.

"Curse it all," he muttered, late one morning, "perhaps I had better have married her. I hoped
so much from her, and she has been nothing but a source of trouble and danger. I wonder if
she is dead."

He had been out very late the night before, and had played heavily, but not with his usual
skill. He had kept muttering grim oaths against his luck, and drinking deeper and deeper till
a friend had half forced him away. And now, much shaken by the night's debauch, depressed by
his heavy losses, conscience, that crouches like a tiger in every bad man's soul, and waits
to rush from its lair and rend, in the long hours--the long eternity of weakness and memory--already
had its fangs in his guilty heart.

Long and bitterly he thought, with a frown resting like night on his heavy brow. The servant
brought him a dainty breakfast, but he sullenly motioned it away. CHAPTER XI.

THE TRIAL.

Justice was now to be administered, and Rodney was brought into the crowded court-room for trial.
The officer led him to the prisoner's narrow dock, an enclosed bench,
at each end of which sat a constable, with a long staff in his hand.

There were five or six other prisoners sitting in the dock with him.
Next to him was a woman, her garments ragged, her hair matted, and
her face red and bloated. Next to her sat a squalid negro, who seemed
totally indifferent to the scenes that were passing around him.

It was; and from one whom he owed a reparation he could never make, though he paid with his life.

With his eyes closed, he still leaned back in a dull, painful lethargy. A faint, disagreeable
odor gradually pervaded the room, and at last attracted his attention. The luxurious sybarite
could not help the stings of conscience, the odor he might. He grew restless, and looked around.

Zell's letter caught his attention. "Might as well see who it's from," he muttered. Weakness,
pain, and emotion had so changed Zell's familiar hand, that he did not recognize it.

But, as he opened and read, his eyes dilated with horror. It seemed like a dead hand grasping
him out of the darkness. But a dreadful fascination compelled him to read every line, and re-read
them, till they seemed burned into his memory. At last, by a desperate effort, he broke the
strong spell her words had placed upon him, and, starting up, exclaimed:

"Go to her, in that pest-house! I would see her dead a thousand times first. I hope she is
dead, for she is the torment of my life. What is it that smells so queer?"

His eyes again rested on the letter. A suspicion crossed his mind. He carried the letter to
his nose, and then started violently, uttering awful oaths.

"She has sent the contagion directly to me," he groaned, and he threw poor Zell's appeal on
the grate. It burned with a faint, sickly odor. Then, as the day was raw and windy, a sudden
gust down the chimney blew it all out into the room, and scattered it in ashes, like Zell's
hopes, around his feet.

A superstitious horror that made his flesh creep and hair rise took possession of him, and
hastily gathering a few necessary things, he rushed out into the chill air, and made his way
to a large hotel. He wanted to be in a crowd. He wanted the hard, material world's noise and
bustle around him. He wanted to hear men talking about gold and stocks, and the gossip of the
town-anything that would make living on seem a natural, possible matter of course.

But men's voices sounded strange and unfamiliar, and the real world seemed like that which
mocks us in our dreams. Mingling with all he saw and heard were Zell's despairing looks and
Zell's despairing words. The Khalif appointed the scholars Al-Hajjaj, Ibn Máttar, Ibn ul-Batrik,
and Selma, to superintend the work, while the three brothers, Muhammad, Ahmed, and Hasan, sons
of the astronomer Shakir, were directed to search for and to buy manuscripts.
 But he would not give up. He dared not stay alone in his room,
and so crept down to the public haunts of the hotel. But his flushed cheeks and strange manner
attracted attention. As the days passed, he grew worse, and the proprietor of the house said:

"You are ill, you must go to bed."

But he would not. There was nothing that he seemed to dread so much as being alone. But the
guests began to grow afraid of him. There was general and widespread fear of the smallpox in
the city, and for some reason it began to be associated with his illness. As the suspicion
was whispered around, all shrank from him. The proprietor had him examined at once by a physician.
It was the fatal fourteenth day, and the dreaded symptoms were apparent.

"Have you no friends, no home to which you can go?" he was asked.

"No," he groaned, while the thought pierced his soul. "She would have made me one and taken
care of me in it." But he pleaded, "For God's sake, don't send me away."

"I must," said the proprietor, frightened himself. "The law requires it, and your presence
here would empty my house in an hour."

So, in the dusk, like poor Zell, he was smuggled down a back stairway, and sent to the "pest-house"
also, he groaning and crying with terror all the way.

Zell did not die. Her vigorous constitution rallied, and she rapidly regained strength. But
with strength and power of thought came the certainty to her mind of Van Barn's utter and final
abandonment of her. She felt that all the world would now be against her, and that she would
be driven from every safe and pleasant path. The thought of taking her shame to her home was
a horror to her, and she felt sure that Edith would spurn her from the door. At first she wept
bitterly and despairingly, and wished she had died. But gradually she grew hard, reckless,
and cruel under her wrong, and her every thought of Van Bam was a curse.

The woman who helped her to write the letter greatly startled her one day by saying:

"There's a man in the men's ward who in his ravin' speaks of you."

"Could he, in just retribution, have been sent here also?" she thought. Pleading relationship,
she was admitted to see him. He shuddered as he saw her advancing, with stony face and eyes
in which glared relentless hate.

"Curse you!" he muttered, feebly, with his parched lips. "Go away, living or dead, I know not
which you are; but I know it was through you I came here!"

Her only answer was a mocking smile.

The doctor came and examined his symptoms.

"Will he get well?" she asked, following him away a short distance.

"No," said the physician. "He will die."

Her cheek blanched for a moment; but from her eyes glowed a deadly gleam of satisfaction.

"What did he say?" whispered Van Dam.

"He says you will die," she answered, in a stony voice. "You see, I am better than you were.
You would not come to me for even one poor moment. You left me to die alone; but I will stay
and watch with you."

"Oh, go away!" groaned Van Dam.

