Self-knowledge--and the new science is full of self-knowledge--is a great liberator: if perhaps
it imposes some retrenchment, essentially it revives courage. Then at last we see what we are
and what we can do. The spirit can abandon its vain commitments and false pretensions, like
a young man free at last to throw off his clothes and run naked along the sands. Intelligence
is never gayer, never surer, than when it is strictly formal, satisfied with the evidence of
its materials, as with the lights of jewels, and filled with mounting speculations, as with
a sort of laughter. If all the arts aspire to the condition of music, all the sciences aspire
to the condition of mathematics. Their logic is their spontaneous and intelligible side: and
while they differ from mathematics and from one another in being directed in the first instance
upon various unintelligible existing objects, yet as they advance, they unite: because they
are everywhere striving to discover in those miscellaneous objects some intelligible order
and method. And as the emotion of the pure artist, whatever may be his materials, lies in finding
in them some formal harmony or imposing it upon them, so the interest of the scientific mind,
in so far as it is free and purely intellectual, lies in tracing their formal pattern. The
mathematician can afford to leave to his clients, the engineers, or perhaps the popular philosophers,
the emotion of belief: for himself he keeps the lyrical pleasure of metre and of evolving equations:
and it is a pleasant surprise to him, and an added problem, if he finds that the arts can use
his calculations, or that the senses can verify them; much as if a composer found that the
sailors could heave better when singing his songs.

Yet such independence, however glorious inwardly, cannot help diminishing the prestige of the
arts in the world. If science misled us before, when it was full of clearness and confidence,
how shall we trust it now that it is all mystery and paradox? If classical physics needed this
fundamental revision, near to experience and fruitful as it was, what revision will not romantic
physics require? Nor is the future alone insecure: even now the prophets hardly understand
one another, or perhaps themselves; and some of them interlard their science with the most
dubious metaphysics. Naturally the enemies of science have not been slow to seize this opportunity:
the soft-hearted, the muddle-headed, the superstitious are all raising their voices, no longer
in desperate resistance to science, but hopefully, and in its name. Science, they tell us,
is no longer hostile to religion, or to divination of any sort. Indeed, divination is a science
too. Physics is no longer materialistic since space is now curved, and filled with an ether
through which light travels at 300,000 kilometres per second--an immaterial rate: because if
anything material ventured to move at that forbidden speed, it would be so flattened that it
would cease to exist. Indeed, matter is now hardly needed at all; its place has been taken
by radio-activity, and by electrons which dart and whirl with such miraculous swiftness, that
occasionally, for no known reason, they can skip from orbit to orbit without traversing the
intervening positions--an evident proof of free-will in them. Or if solids should still seem
to be material, there are astral bodies as well which are immaterial although physical; and
as to ether and electricity, they are the very substance of spirit. All this I find announced
in newspapers and even in books as the breakdown of scientific materialism: and yet, when was
materialism more arrant and barbarous than in these announcements? Something no doubt has broken
down: but I am afraid it is rather the habit of thinking clearly and the power to discern the
difference between material and spiritual things.

The latest revolution in science will probably not be the last. I do not know what internal
difficulties, contradictions, or ominous obscurities may exist in the new theories, or what
logical seeds of change, perhaps of radical change, might be discovered there by a competent
critic. I base my expectation on two circumstances somewhat more external and visible to the
lay mind. One circumstance is that the new theories seem to be affected, and partly inspired,
by a particular philosophy, itself utterly insecure. This philosophy regards the point of view
as controlling or even creating the object seen; in other words, it identifies the object with
the experience or the knowledge of it: it is essentially a subjective, psychological, Protestant
philosophy. The study of perspectives, which a severer critic might call illusions, is one
of the most interesting and enlightening of studies, and for my own part I should be content
to dwell almost exclusively in that poetic and moral atmosphere, in the realm of literature
and of humanism. Yet I cannot help seeing that neither in logic nor in natural genesis can
perspectives be the ultimate object of science, since a plurality of points of view, somehow
comparable, must be assumed in the beginning, as well as common principles of projection, and
ulterior points of contact or coincidence. Such assumptions, which must persist throughout,
seem to presuppose an absolute system of nature behind all the relative systems of science.

The other circumstance which points to further revolutions is social. The new science is unintelligible
to almost all of us; it can be tested only by very delicate observations and very difficult
reasoning. We accept it on the authority of a few professors who themselves have accepted it
with a contagious alacrity, as if caught in a whirlwind. It has sprung up mysteriously and
mightily, like mysticism in a cloister or theology in a council: a Soviet of learned men has
proclaimed it. Moreover, it is not merely a system among systems, but a movement among movements.
A system, even when it has serious rivals, may be maintained for centuries as religions are
maintained, institutionally; but a movement comes to an end; it is followed presently by a
period of assimilation which transforms it, or by a movement in some other direction. I ask
myself accordingly whether the condition of the world in the coming years will be favourable
to refined and paradoxical science. The extension of education will have enabled the uneducated
to pronounce upon everything. Will the patronage of capital and enterprise subsist, to encourage
discovery and reward invention? Will a jealous and dogmatic democracy respect the unintelligible
insight of the few? Will a perhaps starving democracy support materially its Soviet of seers?
But let us suppose that no utilitarian fanaticism supervenes, and no intellectual surfeit or
discouragement. May not the very profundity of the new science and its metaphysical affinities
lead it to bolder developments, inscrutable to the public and incompatible with one another,
like the gnostic sects of declining antiquity? Then perhaps that luminous modern thing which
until recently was called science, in contrast to all personal philosophies, may cease to exist
altogether, being petrified into routine in the practitioners, and fading in the professors
into abstruse speculations.

IV

A LONG WAY ROUND TO NIRVANA

That the end of life is death may be called a truism, since the various kinds of immortality
that might perhaps supervene would none of them abolish death, but at best would weave life
and death together into the texture of a more comprehensive destiny. The end of one life might
be the beginning of another, if the Creator had composed his great work like a dramatic poet,
assigning successive lines to different characters. Death would then be merely the cue at the
end of each speech, summoning the next personage to break in and keep the ball rolling. They
would occasionally snatch a blanket from the tent poles, or knock a boy down at the Creek and take
his silver watch from him; but this was all. Abundant opportunities for securing richer swag came
to them with the advent of the Plymouth Pilgrims. As had been before stated, these boys brought
in with them a large portion of their first instalment of veteran bounty--aggregating in amount,
according to varying estimates, between twenty-five thousand and one hundred thousand dollars.


The relapse of created things into nothing is no violent fatality, but something naturally
quite smooth and proper. This has been set forth recently, in a novel way, by a philosopher
from whom we hardly expected such a lesson, namely Professor Sigmund Freud. He has now broadened
his conception of sexual craving or libido into a general principle of attraction or concretion
in matter, like the Eros of the ancient poets Hesiod and Empedocles. The windows of that stuffy
clinic have been thrown open; that smell of acrid disinfectants, those hysterical shrieks,
have escaped into the cold night. The troubles of the sick soul, we are given to understand,
as well as their cure, after all flow from the stars.

I am glad that Freud has resisted the tendency to represent this principle of Love as the only
principle in nature. Unity somehow exercises an evil spell over metaphysicians. It is admitted
that in real life it is not well for One to be alone, and I think pure unity is no less barren
and graceless in metaphysics. You must have plurality to start with, or trinity, or at least
duality, if you wish to get anywhere, even if you wish to get effectively into the bosom of
the One, abandoning your separate existence. Freud, like Empedocles, has prudently introduced
a prior principle for Love to play with; not Strife, however (which is only an incident in
Love), but Inertia, or the tendency towards peace and death. Let us suppose that matter was
originally dead, and perfectly content to be so, and that it still relapses, when it can, into
its old equilibrium. But the homogeneous (as Spencer would say) when it is finite is unstable:
and matter, presumably not being co-extensive with space, necessarily forms aggregates which
have an inside and an outside. The parts of such bodies are accordingly differently exposed
to external influences and differently related to one another. This inequality, even in what
seems most quiescent, is big with changes, destined to produce in time a wonderful complexity.
It is the source of all uneasiness, of life, and of love.

     "Let us imagine [writes Freud][11] an undifferentiated vesicle of
     sensitive substance: then its surface, exposed as it is to the
     outer world, is by its very position differentiated, and serves as
     an organ for receiving stimuli.... This morsel of living substance
     floats about in an outer world which is charged with the most
     potent energies, and it would be destroyed ... if it were not
     furnished with protection against stimulation. [On the other hand]
     the sensitive cortical layer has no protective barrier against
     excitations emanating from within.... The most prolific sources of
     such excitations are the so-called instincts of the organism....
     The child never gets tired of demanding the repetition of a game
     ... he wants always to hear the same story instead of a new one,
     insists inexorably on exact repetition, and corrects each deviation
     which the narrator lets slip by mistake.... According to this, an
     instinct would be a tendency in living organic matter impelling it
     towards reinstatement of an earlier condition, one which it had
     abandoned under the influence of external disturbing forces--a kind
     of organic elasticity, or, to put it another way, the manifestation
     of inertia in organic life.

     "If, then, all organic instincts are conservative, historically
     acquired, and directed towards regression, towards reinstatement of
     something earlier, we are obliged to place all the results of
     organic development to the credit of external, disturbing, and
     distracting influences. The rudimentary creature would from its
     very beginning not have wanted to change, would, if circumstances
     had remained the same, have always merely repeated the same course
     of existence.... It would be counter to the conservative nature of
     instinct if the goal of life were a state never hitherto reached.
     It must be rather an ancient starting point, which the living being
     left long ago, and to which it harks back again by all the
     circuitous paths of development.... The goal of all life is
     death....

     "Through a long period of time the living substance may have ...
     had death within easy reach ... until decisive external influences
     altered in such a way as to compel [it] to ever greater deviations
     from the original path of life, and to ever more complicated and
     circuitous routes to the attainment of the goal of death. These
     circuitous ways to death, faithfully retained by the conservative
     instincts, would be neither more nor less than the phenomena of
     life as we know it."

Freud puts forth these interesting suggestions with much modesty, admitting that they are vague
and uncertain and (what it is even more important to notice) mythical in their terms; but it
seems to me that, for all that, they are an admirable counterblast to prevalent follies. When
we hear that there is, animating the whole universe, an Élan vital, or general impulse toward
some unknown but single ideal, the terms used are no less uncertain, mythical, and vague, but
the suggestion conveyed is false--false, I mean, to the organic source of life and aspiration,
to the simple naturalness of nature: whereas the suggestion conveyed by Freud's speculations
is true. In what sense can myths and metaphors be true or false? In the sense that, in terms
drawn from moral predicaments or from literary psychology, they may report the general movement
and the pertinent issue of material facts, and may inspire us with a wise sentiment in their
presence. In this sense I should say that Greek mythology was true and Calvinist theology was
false. The chief terms employed in psycho-analysis have always been metaphorical: "unconscious
wishes", "the pleasure-principle", "the Oedipus complex", "Narcissism", "the censor"; nevertheless,
interesting and profound vistas may be opened up, in such terms, into the tangle of events
in a man's life, and a fresh start may be made with fewer encumbrances and less morbid inhibition.
"The shortcomings of our description", Freud says, "would probably disappear if for psychological
terms we could substitute physiological or chemical ones. These too only constitute a metaphorical
language, but one familiar to us for a much longer time, and perhaps also simpler." All human
discourse is metaphorical, in that our perceptions and thoughts are adventitious signs for
their objects, as names are, and by no means copies of what is going on materially in the depths
of nature; but just as the sportsman's eye, which yields but a summary graphic image, can trace
the flight of a bird through the air quite well enough to shoot it and bring it down, so the
myths of a wise philosopher about the origin of life or of dreams, though expressed symbolically,
may reveal the pertinent movement of nature to us, and may kindle in us just sentiments and
true expectations in respect to our fate--for his own soul is the bird this sportsman is shooting.

Now I think these new myths of Freud's about life, like his old ones about dreams, are calculated
to enlighten and to chasten us enormously about ourselves. The human spirit, when it awakes,
finds itself in trouble; it is burdened, for no reason it can assign, with all sorts of anxieties
about food, pressures, pricks, noises, and pains. It is born, as another wise myth has it,
in original sin. And the passions and ambitions of life, as they come on, only complicate this
burden and make it heavier, without rendering it less incessant or gratuitous. Whence this
fatality, and whither does it lead? It comes from heredity, and it leads to propagation. When
we ask how heredity could be started or transmitted, our ignorance of nature and of past time
reduces us to silence or to wild conjectures. Something--let us call it matter--must always
have existed, and some of its parts, under pressure of the others, must have got tied up into
knots, like the mainspring of a watch, in such a violent and unhappy manner that when the pressure
is relaxed they fly open as fast as they can, and unravel themselves with a vast sense of relief. I
doubt if they would have interfered had one-half of us killed and eaten the other half. They
rather took a delight in such atrocities as came to their notice. It was an ocular demonstration
of the total depravity of the Yankees. Moreover,
from time to time, when circumstances change, these external agencies may encrust that primary
organ with minor organs attached to it. Every impression, every adventure, leaves a trace or
rather a seed behind it. It produces a further complication in the structure of the body, a
fresh charge, which tends to repeat the impressed motion in season and out of season. Hence
that perpetual docility or ductility in living substance which enables it to learn tricks,
to remember facts, and (when the seeds of past experiences marry and cross in the brain) to
imagine new experiences, pleasing or horrible. Every act initiates a new habit and may implant
a new instinct. We see people even late in life carried away by political or religious contagions
or developing strange vices; there would be no peace in old age, but rather a greater and greater
obsession by all sorts of cares, were it not that time, in exposing us to many adventitious
influences, weakens or discharges our primitive passions; we are less greedy, less lusty, less
hopeful, less generous. But these weakened primitive impulses are naturally by far the strongest
and most deeply rooted in the organism: so that although an old man may be converted or may
take up some hobby, there is usually something thin in his elderly zeal, compared with the
heartiness of youth; nor is it edifying to see a soul in which the plainer human passions are
extinct becoming a hotbed of chance delusions.

