"RESOLVED, That Maryland implores the President, in the name of God, to cease this unholy war,
at least until Congress assembles"-- a period of above six months.  "That Maryland desires
and consents to the recognition of the independence of the Confederate States. The military
occupation of Maryland is unconstitutional, and she protests against it, though the violent
interference with the transit of the Federal troops is discountenanced.  That the vindication
of her rights be left to time and reason, and that a convention under existing circumstances
is inexpedient."  From which it is plain that Maryland would have seceded as effectually as
Georgia seceded, had she not been prevented by the interposition of Washington between her
and the Confederate States--the happy intervention, seeing that she has thus been saved from
becoming the battle-ground of the contest.  But the legislature had to pay for its rashness.
On the 13th of September thirteen of its members were arrested, as were also two editors of
newspapers presumed to be secessionists.  A member of Congress was also arrested at the same
time, and a candidate for Governor Hicks's place, who belonged to the secessionist party. 
Previously, in the last days of June and beginning of July, the chief of the police at Baltimore
and the members of the Board of Police had been arrested by General Banks, who then held Baltimore
in his power.

I should be sorry to be construed as saying that republican institutions, or what may more
properly be called democratic institutions, have been broken down in the States of America.
I am far from thinking that they have broken down.  Taking them and their work as a whole,
I think that they have shown and still show vitality of the best order.  But the written Constitution
of the United States and of the several States, as bearing upon each other, are not equal to
the requirements made upon them.  That, I think, is the conclusion to which a spectator should
come.  It is in that doctrine of finality that our friends have broken down--a doctrine not
expressed in their constitutions, and indeed expressly denied in the Constitution of the United
States, which provides the mode in which amendments shall be made--but appearing plainly enough
in every word of self-gratulation which comes from them. Political finality has ever proved
a delusion--as has the idea of finality in all human institutions.  I do not doubt but that
the republican form of government will remain and make progress in North America, but such
prolonged existence and progress must be based on an acknowledgment of the necessity for change,
and must much depend on the facilities for change which shall be afforded. 

Half-fare tickets for adults should also be abolished. The pauper ticket is given to the minister
of the gospel to secure for the railroads the influence of the pulpit, though offered under
the pretense of charity or support of the church. The State should not permit the railroad companies
to practice this or any other kind of charity at the expense of the general public. The railroad
is a highway, and the company operating it is entitled to rates sufficient to pay operating
expenses and a fair interest on the value of the property. It can therefore easily be seen that
the so-called gifts show no liberality on the part of the railroad company, but are made at the
expense of other people.  He did me the honor
to take me to the top of Federal Hill, a suburb of the city, on which he had raised great earthworks
and planted mighty cannons, and built tents and barracks for his soldiery, and to show me how
instantaneously he could destroy the town from his exalted position.  "This hill was made for
the very purpose," said General Dix; and no doubt he thought so.  Generals, when they have
fine positions and big guns and prostrate people lying under their thumbs, are inclined to
think that God's providence has specially ordained them and their points of vantage. It is
a good thing in the mind of a general so circumstanced that 200,000 men should be made subject
to a dozen big guns.  I confess that to me, having had no military education, the matter appeared
in a different light, and I could not work up my enthusiasm to a pitch which would have been
suitable to the general's courtesy. That hill, on which many of the poor of Baltimore had lived,
was desecrated in my eyes by those columbiads.  The neat earth-works were ugly, as looked upon
by me; and though I regarded General Dix as energetic, and no doubt skillful in the work assigned
to him, I could not sympathize with his exultation.

Previously to the days of secession Baltimore had been guarded by Fort McHenry, which lies
on a spit of land running out into the bay just below the town.  Hither I went with General
Dix, and he explained to me how the cannon had heretofore been pointed solely toward the sea;
that, however, now was all changed, and the mouths of his bombs and great artillery were turned
all the other way. The commandant of the fort was with us, and other officers, and they all
spoke of this martial tenure as a great blessing.  Hearing them, one could hardly fail to suppose
that they had lived their forty, fifty, or sixty years of life in full reliance on the powers
of a military despotism. Other direct grants of territorial lands soon followed. The Northern Pacific
received, just before the close of the war, a grant of forty-seven million acres of land. In
the Southwest public lands were also freely given to new Pacific lines. The various grants made
to railroads comprise no less than 300,000 square miles, equal to four and a half times the area
of New England, or six times that of the State of New York, or equal
to the total area of Iowa, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan
and Ohio.

  I am inclined to think that cakes and ale prevail most freely
in times that are perilous, and when sources of sorrow abound.  I have seen more reckless joviality
in a town stricken by pestilence than I ever encountered elsewhere.  There was General Dix
seated on Federal Hill with his cannon; and there, beneath his artillery, were gentlemen hotly
professing themselves to be secessionists, men whose sons and brothers were in the Southern
army, and women, alas! whose brothers would be in one army, and their sons in another. That
was the part of it which was most heartrending in this border land.  In New England and New
York men's minds at any rate were bent all in the same direction--as doubtless they were also
in Georgia and Alabama.  But here fathers were divided from sons, and mothers from daughters.
Terrible tales were told of threats uttered by one member of a family against another.  Old
ties of friendship were broken up.  Society had so divided itself that one side could hold
no terms of courtesy with the other.  "When this is over," one gentleman said to me, "every
man in Baltimore will have a quarrel to the death on his hands with some friend whom he used
to love."  The complaints made on both sides were eager and open- mouthed against the other.

