A TRAMP ABROAD, Part 3.
     75.  LIFE ON A RAFT
     76.  LADY GERTRUDE
     77.  MOUTH OF THE CAVERN
     78.  A FATAL MISTAKE
     79.  TAIL PIECE
     80.  RAFTING ON THE NECKAR
     81.  THE LORELEI
     82.  THE LOVER's FATE
     84.  THE UNKNOWN KNIGHT
     85.  THE EMBRACE
     86.  PERILOUS POSTTION
     87.  THE RAFT IN A STORM
     88.  ALL SAFE ON SHORE
     89.  "IT WAS THE CAT"
     90.  TAILPIECE
     91.  BREAKFAST IN THE GARDEN 162
     92.  EASILY UNDERSTOOD
     93.  EXPERIMENTING THROUGH HARRIS
     94.  AT THE BALL ROOM DOOR
     95.  THE TOWN OF DILSBERG
     96.  OUR ADVANCE ON DILSBERG
     97.  INSIDE THE TOWN
     95.  THE OLD WELL
     99.  SEND HITHER THE LORD ULRICH
     100.  LEAD ME TO HER GRAVE
     102.  AN EXCELLENT PILOT, ONCE
     103.  SCATTERATION
     104.  THE RIVER BATH
     101.  ETRUSCAN TEAR JUG
     106.  HENRI II. PLATE
     l07.  OLD BLUE CHINA
     108.  A REAL ANTIQUE
     109.  BRIC-A-BRAC SHOP
     110.  "PUT IT THERE"
     111.  THE PARSON CAPTURED
     112.  TAIL PIECE
     113.  A COMPREHENSIVE YAWN
     114.  TESTING THE COIN
     115.  BEAUTY AT THE BATH
     116.  IN THE BATH
     117.  JERSEY INDIANS
     118.  NOT PARTICULARLY SOCIABLE

CONTENTS:

CHAPTER XV Down the River--German Women's Duties--Bathing as We Went--A Handsome Picture: Girls
in the Willows--We Sight a Tug--Steamers on the Neckar--Dinner on Board--Legend "Cave of the
Spectre "--Lady Gertrude the Heiress--The Crusader--The Lady in the Cave--A Tragedy

CHAPTER XVI An Ancient Legend of the Rhine--"The Lorelei"--Count Hermann--Falling in Love--A
Sight of the Enchantress--Sad Effect on Count Hermann--An Evening visit--A Sad Mistake--Count
Hermann Drowned--The Song and Music--Different Trans lations--Curiosities in Titles

CHAPTER XVII Another Legend--The Unconquered Monster--The Unknown Knight --His Queer Shaped
Knapsack--The Knight Pitied and Advised--He Attacks the Monster--Victory for the Fire Extinguisher--The
Knight rewarded--His Strange Request----Spectacles Made Popular--Danger to the Raft--Blasting
Rocks--An Inglorious Death in View--Escaped--A Storm Overtakes us--GreatDanger--Man Overboard--Breakers
Ahead--Springing a Leak--Ashore Safe--A General Embracing--A Tramp in the Dark--The Naturalist
Tavern--A Night's Troubles--"It is the Cat"

CHAPTER XVIII Breakfast in a Garden--The Old Raven--Castle of Hirschhorn--Attempt to Hire a
Boat--High Dutch--What You Can Find out by Enquiring--What I Found out about the Students--A
good German Custom--Harris Practices It--AnEmbarrassing Position--A Nice Party--At a Ball--Stopped
at the Door--Assistance at Hand and Rendered--Worthy to be an Empress

CHAPTER XIX Arrive at Neckarsteinach--Castle of Dilsberg--A Walled Town--On a Hill--Exclusiveness
of the People--A Queer Old Place--An Ancient Well--An Outlet Proved--Legend of Dilsberg Castle--The
Haunted Chamber--The Betrothed's request--The Knight's Slumbers and Awakening--Horror of the
Lover--The Wicked Jest--The Lover a Maniac--Under the Linden--Turning Pilot--Accident to the
Raft--Fearful Disaster

CHAPTER XX Good News--"Slow Freight"--Keramics--My Collection of Bric-a- brac--My Tear Jug--Henri
II. Plate--Specimen of Blue China--Indifference to the Laugh of the World--I Discover an Antique
En-route to Baden--Baden--Meeting an Old Acquaintance--A young American--Embryo Horse Doctor--An
American, Sure--A Minister Captured

CHAPTER XXI Baden--Baden--Energetic Girls--A Comprehensive Yawn--A Beggar's Trick--Cool Impudence--The
Bath Woman--Insolence of Shop Keepers--Taking a Bath--Early and Late Hours--Popular Belief
Regarding Indians--An Old Cemetery--A Pious Hag--Curious Table Companions

CHAPTER XV

[Charming Waterside Pictures]

Men and women and cattle were at work in the dewy fields by this time. The people often stepped
aboard the raft, as we glided along the grassy shores, and gossiped with us and with the crew
for a hundred yards or so, then stepped ashore again, refreshed by the ride.

Only the men did this; the women were too busy. The women do all kinds of work on the continent.
They dig, they hoe, they reap, they sow, they bear monstrous burdens on their backs, they shove
similar ones long distances on wheelbarrows, they drag the cart when there is no dog or lean
cow to drag it--and when there is, they assist the dog or cow. Age is no matter--the older
the woman the stronger she is, apparently. On the farm a woman's duties are not defined--she
does a little of everything; but in the towns it is different, there she only does certain
things, the men do the rest. For instance, a hotel chambermaid has nothing to do but make beds
and fires in fifty or sixty rooms, bring towels and candles, and fetch several tons of water
up several flights of stairs, a hundred pounds at a time, in prodigious metal pitchers. She
does not have to work more than eighteen or twenty hours a day, and she can always get down
on her knees and scrub the floors of halls and closets when she is tired and needs a rest.

As the morning advanced and the weather grew hot, we took off our outside clothing and sat
in a row along the edge of the raft and enjoyed the scenery, with our sun-umbrellas over our
heads and our legs dangling in the water.

Every now and then we plunged in and had a swim. Every projecting grassy cape had its joyous
group of naked children, the boys to themselves and the girls to themselves, the latter usually
in care of some motherly dame who sat in the shade of a tree with her knitting. The little
boys swam out to us, sometimes, but the little maids stood knee-deep in the water and stopped
their splashing and frolicking to inspect the raft with their innocent eyes as it drifted by.
Once we turned a corner suddenly and surprised a slender girl of twelve years or upward, just
stepping into the water. She had not time to run, but she did what answered just as well; she
promptly drew a lithe young willow bough athwart her white body with one hand, and then contemplated
us with a simple and untroubled interest. Thus she stood while we glided by. She was a pretty
creature, and she and her willow bough made a very pretty picture, and one which could not
offend the modesty of the most fastidious spectator. Her white skin had a low bank of fresh
green willows for background and effective contrast--for she stood against them--and above
and out of them projected the eager faces and white shoulders of two smaller girls.

Toward noon we heard the inspiriting cry,--

"Sail ho!"

"Where away?" shouted the captain.

"Three points off the weather bow!"

We ran forward to see the vessel. It proved to be a steamboat--for they had begun to run a
steamer up the Neckar, for the first time in May. She was a tug, and one of a very peculiar
build and aspect. I had often watched her from the hotel, and wondered how she propelled herself,
for apparently she had no propeller or paddles. She came churning along, now, making a deal
of noise of one kind or another, and aggravating it every now and then by blowing a hoarse
whistle. She had nine keel-boats hitched on behind and following after her in a long, slender
rank. We met her in a narrow place, between dikes, and there was hardly room for us both in
the cramped passage. As she went grinding and groaning by, we perceived the secret of her moving
impulse. She did not drive herself up the river with paddles or propeller, she pulled herself
by hauling on a great chain. This chain is laid in the bed of the river and is only fastened
at the two ends. It is seventy miles long. It comes in over the boat's bow, passes around a
drum, and is payed out astern. She pulls on that chain, and so drags herself up the river or
down it. She has neither bow or stern, strictly speaking, for she has a long-bladed rudder
on each end and she never turns around. She uses both rudders all the time, and they are powerful
enough to enable her to turn to the right or the left and steer around curves, in spite of
the strong resistance of the chain. I would not have believed that that impossible thing could
be done; but I saw it done, and therefore I know that there is one impossible thing which CAN
be done. What miracle will man attempt next?

We met many big keel-boats on their way up, using sails, mule power, and profanity--a tedious
and laborious business. A wire rope led from the foretopmast to the file of mules on the tow-path
a hundred yards ahead, and by dint of much banging and swearing and urging, the detachment
of drivers managed to get a speed of two or three miles an hour out of the mules against the
stiff current. The Neckar has always been used as a canal, and thus has given employment to
a great many men and animals; but now that this steamboat is able, with a small crew and a
bushel or so of coal, to take nine keel-boats farther up the river in one hour than thirty
men and thirty mules can do it in two, it is believed that the old-fashioned towing industry
is on its death-bed. A second steamboat began work in the Neckar three months after the first
one was put in service. [Figure 4]

At noon we stepped ashore and bought some bottled beer and got some chickens cooked, while
the raft waited; then we immediately put to sea again, and had our dinner while the beer was
cold and the chickens hot. There is no pleasanter place for such a meal than a raft that is
gliding down the winding Neckar past green meadows and wooded hills, and slumbering villages,
and craggy heights graced with crumbling towers and battlements.

In one place we saw a nicely dressed German gentleman without any spectacles. Before I could
come to anchor he had got underway. It was a great pity. I so wanted to make a sketch of him.
The captain comforted me for my loss, however, by saying that the man was without any doubt
a fraud who had spectacles, but kept them in his pocket in order to make himself conspicuous.

Below Hassmersheim we passed Hornberg, Goetz von Berlichingen's old castle. It stands on a
bold elevation two hundred feet above the surface of the river; it has high vine-clad walls
enclosing trees, and a peaked tower about seventy-five feet high. The steep hillside, from
the castle clear down to the water's edge, is terraced, and clothed thick with grape vines.
This is like farming a mansard roof. All the steeps along that part of the river which furnish
the proper exposure, are given up to the grape. That region is a great producer of Rhine wines.
The Germans are exceedingly fond of Rhine wines; they are put up in tall, slender bottles,
and are considered a pleasant beverage. One tells them from vinegar by the label.

The Hornberg hill is to be tunneled, and the new railway will pass under the castle. THE CAVE
OF THE SPECTER Two miles below Hornberg castle is a cave in a low cliff, which the captain
of the raft said had once been occupied by a beautiful heiress of Hornberg--the Lady Gertrude--in
the old times. It was seven hundred years ago. She had a number of rich and noble lovers and
one poor and obscure one, Sir Wendel Lobenfeld. With the native chuckleheadedness of the heroine
of romance, she preferred the poor and obscure lover.

With the native sound judgment of the father of a heroine of romance, the von Berlichingen
of that day shut his daughter up in his donjon keep, or his oubliette, or his culverin, or
some such place, and resolved that she should stay there until she selected a husband from
among her rich and noble lovers. The latter visited her and persecuted her with their supplications,
but without effect, for her heart was true to her poor despised Crusader, who was fighting
in the Holy Land. Finally, she resolved that she would endure the attentions of the rich lovers
no longer; so one stormy night she escaped and went down the river and hid herself in the cave
on the other side. Her father ransacked the country for her, but found not a trace of her.
As the days went by, and still no tidings of her came, his conscience began to torture him,
and he caused proclamation to be made that if she were yet living and would return, he would
oppose her no longer, she might marry whom she would. The months dragged on, all hope forsook
the old man, he ceased from his customary pursuits and pleasures, he devoted himself to pious
works, and longed for the deliverance of death.

Now just at midnight, every night, the lost heiress stood in the mouth of her cave, arrayed
in white robes, and sang a little love ballad which her Crusader had made for her. She judged
that if he came home alive the superstitious peasants would tell him about the ghost that sang
in the cave, and that as soon as they described the ballad he would know that none but he and
she knew that song, therefore he would suspect that she was alive, and would come and find
her. As time went on, the people of the region became sorely distressed about the Specter of
the Haunted Cave. It was said that ill luck of one kind or another always overtook any one
who had the misfortune to hear that song. Eventually, every calamity that happened thereabouts
was laid at the door of that music. Consequently, no boatmen would consent to pass the cave
at night; the peasants shunned the place, even in the daytime.

But the faithful girl sang on, night after night, month after month, and patiently waited;
her reward must come at last. Five years dragged by, and still, every night at midnight, the
plaintive tones floated out over the silent land, while the distant boatmen and peasants thrust
their fingers into their ears and shuddered out a prayer.

And now came the Crusader home, bronzed and battle-scarred, but bringing a great and splendid
fame to lay at the feet of his bride. The old lord of Hornberg received him as his son, and
wanted him to stay by him and be the comfort and blessing of his age; but the tale of that
young girl's devotion to him and its pathetic consequences made a changed man of the knight.
He could not enjoy his well-earned rest. He said his heart was broken, he would give the remnant
of his life to high deeds in the cause of humanity, and so find a worthy death and a blessed
reunion with the brave true heart whose love had more honored him than all his victories in war.

When the people heard this resolve of his, they came and told him there was a pitiless dragon
in human disguise in the Haunted Cave, a dread creature which no knight had yet been bold enough
to face, and begged him to rid the land of its desolating presence. He said he would do it.
They told him about the song, and when he asked what song it was, they said the memory of it
was gone, for nobody had been hardy enough to listen to it for the past four years and more.

Toward midnight the Crusader came floating down the river in a boat, with his trusty cross-bow
in his hands. He drifted silently through the dim reflections of the crags and trees, with
his intent eyes fixed upon the low cliff which he was approaching. As he drew nearer, he discerned
the black mouth of the cave. Now--is that a white figure? Yes. The plaintive song begins to
well forth and float away over meadow and river--the cross-bow is slowly raised to position,
a steady aim is taken, the bolt flies straight to the mark--the figure sinks down, still singing,
the knight takes the wool out of his ears, and recognizes the old ballad--too late! Ah, if
he had only not put the wool in his ears!

The Crusader went away to the wars again, and presently fell in battle, fighting for the Cross.
Tradition says that during several centuries the spirit of the unfortunate girl sang nightly
from the cave at midnight, but the music carried no curse with it; and although many listened
for the mysterious sounds, few were favored, since only those could hear them who had never
failed in a trust. It is believed that the singing still continues, but it is known that nobody
has heard it during the present century.

CHAPTER XVI

An Ancient Legend of the Rhine [The Lorelei]

The last legend reminds one of the "Lorelei"--a legend of the Rhine. There is a song called
"The Lorelei."

Germany is rich in folk-songs, and the words and airs of several of them are peculiarly beautiful--but
"The Lorelei" is the people's favorite. I could not endure it at first, but by and by it began
to take hold of me, and now there is no tune which I like so well.

It is not possible that it is much known in America, else I should have heard it there. The
fact that I never heard it there, is evidence that there are others in my country who have
fared likewise; therefore, for the sake of these, I mean to print the words and music in this
chapter. And I will refresh the reader's memory by printing the legend of the Lorelei, too.
I have it by me in the LEGENDS OF THE RHINE, done into English by the wildly gifted Garnham,
Bachelor of Arts. I print the legend partly to refresh my own memory, too, for I have never
read it before. THE LEGEND Lore (two syllables) was a water nymph who used to sit on a high
rock called the Ley or Lei (pronounced like our word LIE) in the Rhine, and lure boatmen to
destruction in a furious rapid which marred the channel at that spot. She so bewitched them
with her plaintive songs and her wonderful beauty that they forgot everything else to gaze
up at her, and so they presently drifted among the broken reefs and were lost.

In those old, old times, the Count Bruno lived in a great castle near there with his son, the
Count Hermann, a youth of twenty. Hermann had heard a great deal about the beautiful Lore,
and had finally fallen very deeply in love with her without having seen her. So he used to
wander to the neighborhood of the Lei, evenings, with his Zither and "Express his Longing in
low Singing," as Garnham says. On one of these occasions, "suddenly there hovered around the
top of the rock a brightness of unequaled clearness and color, which, in increasingly smaller
circles thickened, was the enchanting figure of the beautiful Lore.

"An unintentional cry of Joy escaped the Youth, he let his Zither fall, and with extended arms
he called out the name of the enigmatical Being, who seemed to stoop lovingly to him and beckon
to him in a friendly manner; indeed, if his ear did not deceive him, she called his name with
unutterable sweet Whispers, proper to love. Beside himself with delight the youth lost his
Senses and sank senseless to the earth."

After that he was a changed person. He went dreaming about, thinking only of his fairy and
caring for naught else in the world. "The old count saw with affliction this changement in
his son," whose cause he could not divine, and tried to divert his mind into cheerful channels,
but to no purpose. Then the old count used authority. He commanded the youth to betake himself
to the camp. Obedience was promised. Garnham says:

"It was on the evening before his departure, as he wished still once to visit the Lei and offer
to the Nymph of the Rhine his Sighs, the tones of his Zither, and his Songs. He went, in his
boat, this time accompanied by a faithful squire, down the stream. The moon shed her silvery
light over the whole country; the steep bank mountains appeared in the most fantastical shapes,
and the high oaks on either side bowed their Branches on Hermann's passing. As soon as he approached
the Lei, and was aware of the surf-waves, his attendant was seized with an inexpressible Anxiety
and he begged permission to land; but the Knight swept the strings of his Guitar and sang:

     "Once I saw thee in dark night,
     In supernatural Beauty bright;
     Of Light-rays, was the Figure wove,
     To share its light, locked-hair strove.

     "Thy Garment color wave-dove
     By thy hand the sign of love,
     Thy eyes sweet enchantment,
     Raying to me, oh! enchantment.

     "O, wert thou but my sweetheart,
     How willingly thy love to part!
     With delight I should be bound
     To thy rocky house in deep ground."

That Hermann should have gone to that place at all, was not wise; that he should have gone
with such a song as that in his mouth was a most serious mistake. The Lorelei did not "call
his name in unutterable sweet Whispers" this time. No, that song naturally worked an instant
and thorough "changement" in her; and not only that, but it stirred the bowels of the whole
afflicted region around about there--for--

"Scarcely had these tones sounded, everywhere there began tumult and sound, as if voices above
and below the water. On the Lei rose flames, the Fairy stood above, at that time, and beckoned
with her right hand clearly and urgently to the infatuated Knight, while with a staff in her
left hand she called the waves to her service. They began to mount heavenward; the boat was
upset, mocking every exertion; the waves rose to the gunwale, and splitting on the hard stones,
the Boat broke into Pieces. The youth sank into the depths, but the squire was thrown on shore
by a powerful wave."

The bitterest things have been said about the Lorelei during many centuries, but surely her
conduct upon this occasion entitles her to our respect. One feels drawn tenderly toward her
and is moved to forget her many crimes and remember only the good deed that crowned and closed
her career.

"The Fairy was never more seen; but her enchanting tones have often been heard. In the beautiful,
refreshing, still nights of spring, when the moon pours her silver light over the Country,
the listening shipper hears from the rushing of the waves, the echoing Clang of a wonderfully
charming voice, which sings a song from the crystal castle, and with sorrow and fear he thinks
on the young Count Hermann, seduced by the Nymph."

Here is the music, and the German words by Heinrich Heine. This song has been a favorite in
Germany for forty years, and will remain a favorite always, maybe. [Figure 5]

I have a prejudice against people who print things in a foreign language and add no translation.
When I am the reader, and the author considers me able to do the translating myself, he pays
me quite a nice compliment--but if he would do the translating for me I would try to get along
without the compliment.

If I were at home, no doubt I could get a translation of this poem, but I am abroad and can't;
therefore I will make a translation myself. It may not be a good one, for poetry is out of
my line, but it will serve my purpose--which is, to give the unGerman young girl a jingle of
words to hang the tune on until she can get hold of a good version, made by some one who is
a poet and knows how to convey a poetical thought from one language to another.

     THE LORELEI

     I cannot divine what it meaneth,
     This haunting nameless pain:
     A tale of the bygone ages
     Keeps brooding through my brain:

     The faint air cools in the glooming,
     And peaceful flows the Rhine,
     The thirsty summits are drinking
     The sunset's flooding wine;

     The loveliest maiden is sitting
     High-throned in yon blue air,
     Her golden jewels are shining,
     She combs her golden hair;

     She combs with a comb that is golden,
     And sings a weird refrain
     That steeps in a deadly enchantment
     The list'ner's ravished brain:

     The doomed in his drifting shallop,
     Is tranced with the sad sweet tone,
     He sees not the yawning breakers,
     He sees but the maid alone:

     The pitiless billows engulf him!--
     So perish sailor and bark;
     And this, with her baleful singing,
     Is the Lorelei's gruesome work.

I have a translation by Garnham, Bachelor of Arts, in the LEGENDS OF THE RHINE, but it would
not answer the purpose I mentioned above, because the measure is too nobly irregular; it don't
fit the tune snugly enough; in places it hangs over at the ends too far, and in other places
one runs out of words before he gets to the end of a bar. Still, Garnham's translation has
high merits, and I am not dreaming of leaving it out of my book. I believe this poet is wholly
unknown in America and England; I take peculiar pleasure in bringing him forward because I
consider that I discovered him:

     THE LORELEI

     Translated by L. W. Garnham, B.A.

     I do not know what it signifies.
     That I am so sorrowful?
     A fable of old Times so terrifies,
     Leaves my heart so thoughtful.

     The air is cool and it darkens,
     And calmly flows the Rhine;
     The summit of the mountain hearkens
     In evening sunshine line.

     The most beautiful Maiden entrances
     Above wonderfully there,
     Her beautiful golden attire glances,
     She combs her golden hair.

     With golden comb so lustrous,
     And thereby a song sings,
     It has a tone so wondrous,
     That powerful melody rings.

     The shipper in the little ship
     It effects with woe sad might;
     He does not see the rocky slip,
     He only regards dreaded height.

     I believe the turbulent waves
     Swallow the last shipper and boat;
     She with her singing craves
     All to visit hermagic moat.

No translation could be closer. He has got in all the facts; and in their regular order, too.
There is not a statistic wanting. It is as succinct as an invoice. That is what a translation
ought to be; it should exactly reflect the thought of the original. You can't SING "Above wonderfully
there," because it simply won't go to the tune, without damaging the singer; but it is a most
clingingly exact translation of DORT OBEN WUNDERBAR--fits it like a blister. Mr. Garnham's
reproduction has other merits--a hundred of them--but it is not necessary to point them out.
They will be detected.

No one with a specialty can hope to have a monopoly of it. Even Garnham has a rival. Mr. X
had a small pamphlet with him which he had bought while on a visit to Munich. It was entitled
A CATALOGUE OF PICTURES IN THE OLD PINACOTEK, and was written in a peculiar kind of English.
Here are a few extracts:

"It is not permitted to make use of the work in question to a publication of the same contents
as well as to the pirated edition of it."

"An evening landscape. In the foreground near a pond and a group of white beeches is leading
a footpath animated by travelers."

"A learned man in a cynical and torn dress holding an open book in his hand."

"St. Bartholomew and the Executioner with the knife to fulfil the martyr."

"Portrait of a young man. A long while this picture was thought to be Bindi Altoviti's portrait;
now somebody will again have it to be the self-portrait of Raphael."

"Susan bathing, surprised by the two old man. In the background the lapidation of the condemned."

("Lapidation" is good; it is much more elegant than "stoning.")

"St. Rochus sitting in a landscape with an angel who looks at his plague-sore, whilst the dog
the bread in his mouth attents him."

"Spring. The Goddess Flora, sitting. Behind her a fertile valley perfused by a river."

"A beautiful bouquet animated by May-bugs, etc."

"A warrior in armor with a gypseous pipe in his hand leans against a table and blows the smoke
far away of himself."

