ZULUS, a section of the Bantu family which originally occupied the SE. seaboard of Africa from
Delagoa Bay to the Great Fish River; they are a race of superior physique and intellectual
endowment, as well as moral temperament, and incline to a quiet pastoral life; they were attacked
under Cetywayo by the English in 1879, but after falling upon an English force at Isandula,
and cutting it in pieces, were overpowered at Ulundi, and put to rout.

ZUMPT, KARL, philologist, born in Berlin, and professor at the University; edited a number
of the Latin classics, and is best known by his Latin Grammar (1792-1849).

ZURBARAN, FRANCISCO, Spanish painter, born in Estremadura; did mostly religious subjects; his
chef-d'oeuvre an altar-piece in Seville, where he lived and worked (1598-1662).

ZURICH (392), a northern canton in Switzerland, and the second largest; is in the basin of
the Rhine, with a well-cultivated fertile soil, and manufactures of cottons and silks, and
with a capital (151) of the same name at the foot of the Lake of Zurich; a large manufacturing
and trading centre; has a Romanesque cathedral and a university, with silk mills and cotton
mills, as well as foundries and machine shops; here Lavater was born and Zwingli was pastor.

ZUTPHEN (17), manufacturing town in the Dutch province of Guelderland, in the neighbourhood
of which Sir Philip Sidney fell wounded in a skirmish.

ZWICKAU (50), a town in Saxony, in a division (1,389) of the same name, 82 m. SW. of Dresden;
it is in the midst of rich beds of coal, and has a number of manufactures.

ZWINGLI, ULRICH, the Swiss Reformer, born at Wildhaus, in the canton of St. Gall, and founder
of the Reformed Church; studied at Bern and Vienna, afterwards theology at Basel, and was appointed
pastor at Glarus; he got acquainted with Erasmus at Basel, and gave himself to the study of
Greek, and in particular the epistles of St. Paul; attached to the monastery of Einsiedeln
he, in 1516, attacked the sale of indulgences, and was in 1518 elected to be preacher in the
cathedral of Zurich; his preaching was attended with an awakening, and the bishop of Constance
tried to silence him, but he was silenced himself in a public debate with the Reformer, the
result of which was the abolition of the Mass and the dispensation instead of the Lord's Supper;
the movement thus begun went on and spread, and Zwingli met in conference with Luther, but
they failed to agree on the matter of the Eucharist, and on that point the Lutheran and the
Reformed Churches separated; in 1531 the Catholic cantons declared war against the reformers
of Zurich and Bern, but the latter were defeated at Cappel, and among the dead on the battlefield
was the Reformer; his last words were, "They may kill the body, but not the soul" (1484-1531).
See LUTHERANS.

ZWOLLE (25), a manufacturing town in the Dutch province of Oberyssel, 50 m. NE. of Amsterdam;
close to it is Agnetenberg, famous as the seat of the monastery where Thomas à Kempis lived
and died.

ZYME, name of a germ presumed to be the cause of zymotic diseases.

ZYMOTIC DISEASES, diseases of a contagious nature, presumed to be due to some virus or organism
which acts in the system like a ferment.