Not only is a race which comes by sea likely to be peculiarly vigorous, self-reliant, and inclined,
when settled, to political liberty, but the very process of maritime migration can scarcely
fail to intensify the spirit of freedom and independence. Timon or Genghis Khan, sweeping on
from land to land with the vast human herd under his sway, becomes more despotic as the herd
grows larger by accretion, and the area of its conquests is increased. But a maritime migration
is a number of little joint stock enterprises implying limited leadership, common counsels,
and a good deal of equality among the adventurers. We see in fact that the Saxon immigration
resulted in the foundation of a number of small communities which, though they were afterwards
fused into seven or eight petty kingdoms and ultimately into one large kingdom, must, while
they existed, have fostered habits of local independence and self-government. Maritime migration
would also facilitate the transition from the tribe to the nation, because the ships could
hardly be manned on purely tribal principles; the early Saxon communities in England appear
in fact to have been semi-tribal, the local bond predominating over the tribal, though a name
with a tribal termination is retained. Room would scarcely be found in the ships for a full
proportion of women; the want would be supplied by taking the women of the conquered country;
and thus tribal rules of exclusive intermarriage, and all barriers connected with them, would
be broken down.

Another obvious attribute of an island is freedom from invasion. The success of the Saxon invaders
may be ascribed to the absence of strong resistance. The policy of Roman conquest, by disarming
the natives, had destroyed their military character, as the policy of British conquest has
done in India, where races which once fought hard against the invader under their native princes,
such as the people of Mysore, are now wholly unwarlike. Anything like national unity, or power
of co- operation against a foreign enemy, had at the same time been extirpated by a government
which divided that it might command. The Northman in his turn owed his success partly to the
want of unity among the Saxon principalities, partly and principally to the command of the
sea which the Saxon usually abandoned to him, and which enabled him to choose his own point
of attack, and to baffle the movements of the defenders. When Alfred built a fleet, the case
was changed.

William of Normandy would scarcely have succeeded, great as his armament was, had it not been
for the diversion effected in his favour by the landing of the Scandinavian pretender in the
North, and the failure of provisions in Harold's Channel fleet, which compelled it to put into
port. Louis of France was called in as a deliverer by the barons who were in arms against the
tyranny of John; and it is not necessary to discuss the Tory description of the coming of William
of Orange as a conquest of England by the Dutch. Bonaparte threatened invasion, but unhappily
was unable to invade: unhappily we say, because if he had landed in England he would assuredly
have there met his doom; the Russian campaign would have been antedated with a more complete
result, and all the after-pages in the history of the Arch-Brigand would have been torn from
the book of fate. England is indebted for her political liberties in great measure to the Teutonic
character, but she is also in no small measure indebted to this immunity from invasion which
has brought with it a comparative immunity from standing armies. In the Middle Ages the question
between absolutism and that baronial liberty which was the germ and precursor of the popular
liberty of after-times turned in great measure upon the relative strength of the national militia
and of the bands of mercenaries kept in pay by overreaching kings. The bands of mercenaries
brought over by John proved too strong for the patriot barons, and would have annulled the
Great Charter, had not national liberty found a timely and powerful, though sinister, auxiliary
in the ambition of the French. Prince Charles I. had no standing army, the troops taken into
pay for the wars with Spain and France had been disbanded before the outbreak of the Revolution;
and on that occasion the nation was able to overthrow the tyranny without looking abroad for
assistance. But Charles II. had learned wisdom from his father's fate; he kept up a small standing
army; and the Whigs, though at the crisis of the Exclusion Bill they laid their hands upon
their swords, never ventured to draw them, but allowed themselves to be proscribed, their adherents
to be ejected from the corporations, and their leaders to be brought to the scaffold. Resistance
was in the same way rendered hopeless by the standing army of James II., and the patriots were
compelled to stretch their hands for aid to William of Orange. Even so, it might have gone
hard with them if James's soldiers, and above all Churchill, had been true to their paymaster.
Navies are not political; they do not overthrow constitutions; and in the time of Charles I.
it appears that the leading seamen were Protestant, inclined to the side of the Parliament.
Perhaps Protestantism had been rendered fashionable in the navy by the naval wars with Spain.

A third consequence of insular position, especially in early times, is isolation. An extreme
case of isolation is presented by Egypt, which is in fact a great island in the desert. The
extraordinary fertility of the valley of the Nile produced an early development, which was
afterwards arrested by its isolation, the isolation being probably intensified by the jealous
exclusiveness of a powerful priesthood which discouraged maritime pursuits. The isolation of
England, though comparatively slight, has still been an important factor in her history. She
underwent less than the Continental provinces the influence of Roman Conquest. Scotland and
Ireland escaped it altogether, for the tide of invasion, having flowed to the foot of the Grampians,
soon ebbed to the line between the Solway and the Tyne. Britain has no monuments of Roman power
and civilization like those which have been left in Gaul and Spain, and of the British Christianity
of the Roman period hardly a trace, monumental or historical, remains. By the Saxon conquest
England was entirely severed for a time from the European system. The missionary of ecclesiastical
Rome recovered what the legionary had lost. Of the main elements of English character political
and general, five were brought together when Ethelbert and Augustine met on the coast of Kent.
The king represented Teutonism; the missionary represented Judaism, Christianity, imperial
and ecclesiastical Rome. We mention Judaism as a separate element, because, among other things,
the image of the Hebrew monarchy has certainly entered largely into the political conceptions
of Englishmen, perhaps at least as largely as the image of Imperial Rome. A sixth element,
classical Republicanism, came in with the Reformation, while the political and social influence
of science is only just beginning to be felt. Still, after the conversion of England by Augustine,
the Church, which was the main organ of civilization, and almost identical with it in the early
Middle Ages, remained national; and to make it thoroughly Roman and Papal, in other words to
assimilate it completely to the Church of the Continent, was the object of Hildebrand in promoting
the enterprise of William. Roman and Papal the English Church was made, yet not so thoroughly
so as completely to destroy its insular and Teutonic character. The Archbishop of Canterbury
was still Papa alterius orbis; and the struggle for national independence of the Papacy commenced
in England long before the struggle for doctrinal reform. The Reformation broke up the confederated
Christendom of the Middle Ages, and England was then thrown back into an isolation very marked,
though tempered by her sympathy with the Protestant party on the Continent. The country bordering
this lake is partly hilly, as on the north side, and partly flat, inhabited by savages, and thinly
covered with wood, including oaks. After crossing a bay, which forms one of the extremities
of the lake, [119] we went some seven leagues until we arrived in the country of the Attigouautan
at a village called Otoueacha, on the first day of August. Here we found a great change in the
country.

These localities seemed to me very pleasant, in comparison with so disagreeable a region as that
from which we had come. The next day I went to another village, called Carmaron, a league distant from this,
where they received us in a very friendly manner, making for us a banquet with their bread, squashes,
and fish. As to meat, that is very scarce there. The chief of this village earnestly begged me to
stay, to which I could not consent, but returned to our village, where on the next night but one,
as I went out of the cabin to escape the fleas, of which there were large numbers and by which
we were tormented, a girl of little modesty came boldly to me and offered to keep me company,
for which I thanked her, sending her away with gentle remonstrances, and spent the night with
some savages.

The next day I departed from this village to go to another, called Touaguainchain, and to another,
called Tequenonquiaye, in which we were received in a very friendly manner by the inhabitants,
who showed us the best cheer they could with their Indian corn served in various styles. This
country is very fine and fertile, and travelling through it is very pleasant.

Thence I had them guide me to Carhagouha, which was fortified by a triple palisade of wood
thirty-five feet high for its defence and protection. In this village Father Joseph was staying,
whom we saw and were very glad to find well. He on his part was no
less glad, and was expecting nothing so little as to see me in this
country. On the twelfth day of August the Recollect Father celebrated
the holy mass, and a cross was planted near a small house apart from
the village, which the savages built while I was staying there, awaiting
the arrival of our men and their preparation to go to the war, in
which they had been for a long time engaged.

It is needless to dwell on anything so obvious as the effect of an insular position in giving
birth to commerce and developing the corresponding elements of political character. The British
Islands are singularly well placed for trade with both hemispheres; in them, more than in any
other point, may be placed the commercial centre of the world. It may be said that the nation
looked out unconsciously from its cradle to an immense heritage beyond the Atlantic. France
and Spain looked the same way, and became competitors with England for ascendancy in the New
World, but England was more maritime, and the most maritime was sure to prevail. Canada was
conquered by the British fleet. To the commerce and the maritime enterprise of former days,
which were mainly the results of geographical position, has been added within the last century
the vast development of manufactures produced by coal and steam, the parents of manufactures,
as well as the expansion of the iron trade in close connection with manufactures. Nothing can
be more marked than the effect of industry on political character in the case of England. From
being the chief seat of reaction, the North has been converted by manufactures into the chief
seat of progress. The Wars of the Roses were not a struggle of political principle; hardly
even a dynastic struggle; they had their origin partly in a patriotic antagonism to the foreign
queen and to her foreign councils; but they were in the main a vast faction-fight between two
sections of an armed and turbulent nobility turned into buccaneers by the French wars, and,
like their compeers all over Europe, bereft, by the decay of Catholicism, of the religious
restraints with which their morality was bound up. Yet the Lancastrian party, or rather the
party of Margaret of Anjou and her favourites, was the more reactionary, and it had the centre
of its strength in the North, whence Margaret drew the plundering and devastating host which
gained for her the second battle of St. Albans and paid the penalty of its ravages in the merciless
slaughter of Towton. The North had been kept back in the race of progress by agricultural inferiority,
by the absence of commerce with the Continent, and by border wars with Scotland. In the South
was the seat of prosperous industry, wealth, and comparative civilization, and the banners
of the Southern cities were in the armies of the House of York. The South accepted the Reformation,
while the North was the scene of the Pilgrimage of Grace. Coming down to the Civil War in the
time of Charles I., we find the Parliament strong in the South and East, where are still the
centres of commerce and manufactures, even the iron trade, which has its smelting works in
Sussex. In the North the feudal tie between landlord and tenant, and the sentiment of the past,
preserve much of their force, and the great power in those parts is the Marquis of Newcastle,
at once great territorial lord of the Middle Ages and elegant grand seigneur of the Renaissance,
who brings into the field a famous regiment of his own retainers. In certain towns, such as
Bradford and Manchester, there are germs of manufacturing industry, and these form the sinews
of the Parliamentarian party in the district which is headed by the Fairfaxes. But in the Reform
movement which extended through the first half of the present century, the geographical position
of parties was reversed; the swarming cities of the North were then the great centres of Liberalism
and the motive power of Reform; while the South, having by this time fallen into the hands
of great landed proprietors, was Conservative. The stimulating effect of populous centres on
opinion is a very familiar fact; even in the rural districts it is noticed by canvassers at
elections that men who work in gangs are generally more inclined to the Liberal side than those
who work separately.

In England, however, the agricultural element always has been and remains a full counterpoise
to the manufacturing and commercial element. Agricultural England is not what Pericles called
Attica, a mere suburban garden, the embellishment of a queenly city. It is a substantive interest
and a political power. In the time of Charles I. it happened that, owing to the great quantity
of land thrown into the market in consequence of the confiscation of the monastic estates,
which had slipped through the fingers of the spendthrift courtiers to whom they were at first
granted, small freeholders were very numerous in the South, and these men like the middle class
in the towns, being strong Protestants, went with the Parliament against the Laudian reaction
in religion. But land in the hands of great proprietors is Conservative, especially when it
is held under entails and connected with hereditary nobility; and into the hands of great proprietors
the land of England has now entirely passed. The last remnant of the old yeomen freeholders
departed in the Cumberland Statesmen, and the yeoman freeholder in England is now about as
rare as the other. Commerce has itself assisted the process by giving birth to great fortunes,
the owners of which are led by social ambition to buy landed estates, because to land the odour
of feudal superiority still clings, and it is almost the necessary qualification for a title.
The land has also actually absorbed a large portion of the wealth produced by manufactures,
and by the general development of industry; the estates of Northern landowners especially have
enormously increased in value, through the increase of population, not to mention the not inconsiderable
appropriation of commercial wealth by marriage. Thus the Conservative element retains its predominance,
and it even seems as though the land of Milton, Vane, Cromwell, and the Reformers of 1832,
might after all become, politically as well as territorially, the domain of a vast aristocracy
of landowners, and the most reactionary instead of the most progressive country in Europe.

Before the repeal of the Corn Laws there was a strong antagonism of interest between the landowning
aristocracy and the manufacturers of the North, but that antagonism is now at an end; the sympathy
of wealth has taken its place; the old aristocracy has veiled its social pride and learned
to conciliate the new men, who on their part are more than willing to enter the privileged
circle. This junction is at present the great fact of English politics, and was the main cause
of the overthrow of the Liberal Government in 1874. The growth of the great cities itself seems
likely, as the number of poor householders increases, to furnish Reaction with auxiliaries
in the shape of political Lazzaroni capable of being organized by wealth in opposition to the
higher order of workmen and the middle class. In Harrington's "Oceana," there is much nonsense,
but it rises at least to the level of Montesquieu in tracing the intimate connection of political
power, even under elective institutions, with wealth in land.

Hitherto, the result of the balance between the landowning and commercial elements has been
steadiness of political progress, in contrast on the one hand to the commercial republics of
Italy, whose political progress was precocious and rapid but shortlived, and on the other hand
to great feudal kingdoms where commerce was comparatively weak. England, as yet, has taken
but few steps backwards. It remains to be seen what the future may bring under the changed
conditions which we have just described. English commerce, moreover, may have passed its acme.
Her insular position gave Great Britain during the Napoleonic wars, with immunity from invasion,
a monopoly of manufactures and of the carrying trade. This element of her commercial supremacy
is transitory, though others, such as the possession of coal, are not.

Let us now consider the effects of the division between the two islands and of those between
different parts of the larger island. The most obvious effect of these is tardy consolidation,
which is still indicated by the absence of a collective name for the people of the three kingdoms.
The writer was once rebuked by a Scotchman for saying "England" and "English," instead of saying
"Great Britain" and "British." He replied that the rebuke was just, but that we must say "British
and Irish." The Scot had overlooked his poor connections.

We always speak of Anglo-Saxons and identify the extension of the Colonial Empire with that
of the Anglo-Saxon race. But even if we assume that the Celts of England and of the Scotch
Lowlands were exterminated by the Saxons, taking all the elements of Celtic population in the
two islands together, they must bear a very considerable proportion to the Teutonic element.
That large Irish settlements are being formed in the cities of Northern England is proved by
election addresses coquetting with Home Rule. In the competition of the races on the American
Continent the Irish more than holds its own. In the age of the steam- engine the Scotch Highlands,
the mountains of Cumberland and Westmoreland, of Wales, of Devonshire, and Cornwall, are the
asylum of natural beauty, of poetry and hearts which seek repose from the din and turmoil of
commercial life. In the primaeval age of conquest they, with seagirt Ireland, were the asylum
of the weaker race. There the Celt found refuge when Saxon invasion swept him from the open
country of England and from the Scotch Lowlands. There he was preserved with his own language,
indicating by its variety of dialects the rapid flux and change of unwritten speech; with his
own Christianity, which was that of Apostolic Britain; with his un-Teutonic gifts and weaknesses,
his lively, social, sympathetic nature, his religious enthusiasm, essentially the same in its
Calvinistic as in its Catholic guise, his superstition, his clannishness, his devotion to chiefs
and leaders, his comparative indifference to institutions, and lack of natural aptitude for
self-government.

The further we go in these inquiries the more reason there seems to be for believing that the
peculiarities of races are not congenital, but impressed by primaeval circumstance. Not only
the same moral and intellectual nature, but the same primitive institutions, are found in all
the races that come under our view; they appear alike in Teuton, Celt, and Semite. That which
is not congenital is probably not indelible, so that the less favoured races, placed under
happier circumstances, may in time be brought to the level of the more favoured, and nothing
warrants inhuman pride of race. But it is surely absurd to deny that peculiarities of race,
when formed, are important factors in history. Mr. Buckle, who is most severe upon the extravagances
of the race theory, himself runs into extravagances not less manifest in a different direction.
He connects the religious character of the Spaniards with the influence of apocryphal volcanoes
and earthquakes, whereas it palpably had its origin in the long struggle with the Moors. He,
in like manner, connects the theological tendencies of the Scotch with the thunderstorms which
he imagines (wrongly, if we may judge by our own experience) to be very frequent in the Highlands,
whereas Scotch theology and the religious habits of the Scotch generally were formed in the
Lowlands and among the Teutons, not among the Celts.

The remnant of the Celtic race in Cornwall and West Devon was small, and was subdued and half
incorporated by the Teutons at a comparatively early period; yet it played a distinct and a
decidedly Celtic part in the Civil War of the seventeenth century. It played a more important
part towards the close of the following century by giving itself almost in a mass to John Wesley.
No doubt the neglect of the remote districts by the Bishops of Exeter and their clergy left
Wesley a clear field; but the temperament of the people was also in his favour. Anything fervent
takes with the Celt, while he cannot abide the religious compromise which commends itself to
the practical Saxon.

In the Great Charter there is a provision in favour of the Welsh, who were allied with the
Barons in insurrection against the Crown. The Barons were fighting for the Charter, the Welshmen
only for their barbarous and predatory independence. But the struggle for Welsh independence
helped those who were struggling for the Charter; and the remark may be extended in substance
to the general influence of Wales on the political contest between the Crown and the Barons.
Even under the House of Lancaster, Llewellyn was faintly reproduced in Owen Glendower. The
powerful monarchy of the Tudors finally completed the annexation. But isolation survived independence.
The Welshman remained a Celt and preserved his language and his clannish spirit, though local
magnates, such as the family of Wynn, filled the place in his heart once occupied by the chief.
Ecclesiastically he was annexed, but refused to be incorporated, never seeing the advantage
of walking in the middle path which the State Church of England had traced between the extremes
of Popery and Dissent. He took Methodism in a Calvinistic and almost wildly enthusiastic form.
In this respect his isolation is likely to prove far more important than anything which Welsh
patriotism strives to resuscitate by Eisteddfodds. In the struggle, apparently imminent, between
the system of Church Establishments and religious equality, Wales furnishes a most favourable
battle-ground to the party of Disestablishment.

The Teutonic realm of England was powerful enough to subdue, if not to assimilate, the remnants
of the Celtic race in Wales and their other western hills of refuge. But the Teutonic realm
of Scotland was not large or powerful enough to subdue the Celts of the Highlands, whose fastnesses
constituted in geographical area the greater portion of the country. It seems that in the case
of the Highlands, as in that of Ireland, Teutonic adventurers found their way into the domain
of the Celts and became chieftains, but in becoming chieftains they became Celts. Down to the
Hanoverian times the chain of the Grampians which from the Castle of Stirling is seen rising
like a wall over the rich plain, divided from each other two nationalities, differing totally
in ideas, institutions, habits, and costume, as well as in speech, and the less civilized of
which still regarded the more civilized as alien intruders, while the more civilized regarded
the less civilized as robbers. Internally, the topographical character of the Highlands was
favourable to the continuance of the clan system, because each clan having its own separate
glen, fusion was precluded, and the progress towards union went no further than the domination
of the more powerful clans over the less powerful. Mountains also preserve the general equality
and brotherhood which are not less essential to the constitution of the clan than devotion
to the chief, by preventing the use of that great minister of aristocracy, the horse. At Killiecrankie
and Prestonpans the leaders of the clan and the humblest clansman still charged on foot side
by side. Macaulay is undoubtedly right in saying that the Highland risings against William
III. and the first two Georges were not dynastic but clan movements. They were in fact the
last raids of the Gael upon the country which had been wrested from him by the Sassenach. Little
cared the clansman for the principles of Filmer or Locke, for the claims of the House of Stuart
or for those of the House of Brunswick. We remained some time in this place to await the rest of
our savages. When they were all assembled, with their arms, meal, and necessaries, it was decided
to choose some of the most resolute men to compose a party to go and give notice of our departure
to those who were to assist us with five hundred men, that they might join us, and that we might
appear together before the fort of the enemy. This decision having been made, they dispatched
two canoes, with twelve of the most stalwart savages, and also with one of our interpreters, [141]
who asked me to permit him to make the journey, which I readily accorded, inasmuch as he was
led to do so of his own will, and as he might in this way see their
country and get a knowledge of the people living there. Highlanders, at the
bidding of Chatham's genius, became the soldiers, and are now the pet soldiers, of the British
monarchy. A Hanoverian tailor with improving hand shaped the Highland plaid, which had originally
resembled the simple drapery of the Irish kern, into a garb of complex beauty, well suited
for fancy balls. The power of the chiefs and the substance of the clan system were finally
swept away, though the sentiment lingers, even in the Transatlantic abodes of the clansmen,
and is prized, like the dress, as a remnant of social picturesqueness in a prosaic and levelling
age. The hills and lakes--at the thought of which even Gibbon shuddered--are the favourite
retreats of the luxury which seeks in wildness refreshment from civilization. After Culloden,
Presbyterianism effectually made its way into the Highlands, of which a great part had up to
that time been little better than heathen; but it did not fail to take a strong tinge of Celtic
enthusiasm and superstition.

Of all the lines of division in Great Britain, the most important politically has been that
which is least clearly traced by the hand of nature. The natural barriers between England and
Scotland were not sufficient to prevent the extension of the Saxon settlements and kingdoms
across the border. In the name of the Scotch capital we have a monument of a union before that
of 1603. That the Norman Conquest did not include the Saxons of the Scotch Lowlands was due
chiefly to the menacing attitude of Danish pretenders, and the other military dangers which
led the Conqueror to guard himself on the north by a broad belt of desolation. Edward I., in
attempting to extend his feudal supremacy over Scotland, may well have seemed to himself to
have been acting in the interest of both nations, for a union would have put an end to border
war, and would have delivered the Scotch in the Lowlands from the extremity of feudal oppression,
and the rest of the country from a savage anarchy, giving them in place of those curses by
far the best government of the time. The resistance came partly from mere barbarism, partly
from Norman adventurers, who were no more Scotch than English, whose aims were purely selfish,
and who would gladly have accepted Scotland as a vassal kingdom from Edward's hand. But the
annexation would no doubt have formidably increased the power of the Crown, not only by extending
its dominions, but by removing that which was a support often of aristocratic anarchy in England,
but sometimes of rudimentary freedom. Had the whole island fallen under one victorious sceptre,
the next wielder of that sceptre, under the name of the great Edward's wittold son, would have
been Piers Gaveston. But what no prescience on the part of any one in the time of Edward I.
could possibly have foreseen was the inestimable benefit which disunion and even anarchy indirectly
conferred on the whole island in the shape of a separate Scotch Reformation. Divines, when
they have exhausted their reasonings about the rival forms of Church government, will probably
find that the argument which had practically most effect in determining the question was that
of the much decried but in his way sagacious James I., "No bishop, no king!" In England the
Reformation was semi-Catholic; in Sweden it was Lutheran; but in both countries it was made
by the kings, and in both Episcopacy was retained. Where the Reformation was the work of the
people, more popular forms of Church government prevailed. In Scotland the monarchy, always
weak, was at the time of the Reformation practically in abeyance, and the master of the movement
was emphatically a man of the people. As to the nobles, they seem to have thought only of appropriating
the Church lands, and to have been willing to leave to the nation the spiritual gratification
of settling its own religion. Probably they also felt with regard to the disinherited proprietors
of the Church lands that "stone dead had no fellow." The result was a democratic and thoroughly
Protestant Church, which drew into itself the highest energies, political as well as religious,
of a strong and great-hearted people, and by which Laud and his confederates, when they had
apparently overcome resistance in England, were as Milton says, "more robustiously handled."
If the Scotch auxiliaries did not win the decisive battle of Marston Moor, they enabled the
English Parliamentarians to fight and win it. During the dark days of the Restoration, English
resistance to tyranny was strongly supported on the ecclesiastical side by the martyr steadfastness
of the Scotch till the joint effort triumphed in the Revolution. It is singular and sad to
find Scotland afterwards becoming one vast rotten borough managed in the time of Pitt by Dundas,
who paid the borough-mongers by appointments in India, with calamitous consequences to the
poor Hindoo. But the intensity of the local evil perhaps lent force to the revulsion, and Scotland
has ever since been a distinctly Liberal element in British politics, and seems now likely
to lead the way to a complete measure of religious freedom.

Nature to a great extent fore-ordained the high destiny of the larger island, to at least an
equal extent she fore-ordained the sad destiny of the smaller island. Irish history, studied
impartially, is a grand lesson in political charity; so clear is it that in these deplorable
annals the more important part was played by adverse circumstance, the less important by the
malignity of man. That the stronger nation is entitled by the law of force to conquer its weaker
neighbour and to govern the conquered in its own interest is a doctrine which civilized morality
abhors; but in the days before civilized morality, in the days when the only law was that of
natural selection, to which philosophy, by a strange counter-revolution seems now inclined
to return, the smaller island was almost sure to be conquered by the possessors of the larger,
more especially as the smaller, cut off from the Continent by the larger, lay completely within
its grasp. The map, in short, tells us plainly that the destiny of Ireland was subordinated
to that of Great Britain. At the same time, the smaller island being of considerable size and
the channel of considerable breadth, it was likely that the resistance would be tough and the
conquest slow. The unsettled state of Ireland, and the half-nomad condition in which at a comparatively
late period its tribes remained, would also help to protract the bitter process of subjugation;
and these again were the inevitable results of the rainy climate, which, while it clothed the
island with green and made pasture abundant, forbade the cultivation of grain. Ireland and
Wales alike appear to have been the scenes of a precocious civilization, merely intellectual
and literary in its character, and closely connected with the Church, though including also
a bardic element derived from the times before Christianity, the fruits of which were poetry,
fantastic law-making, and probably the germs of scholastic theology, combined, in the case
of Ireland, with missionary enterprise and such ecclesiastical architecture as the Round Towers.
But cities there were none, and it is evident that the native Church with difficulty sustained
her higher life amidst the influences and encroachments of surrounding barbarism. It had overturned
that brain which was so prompt to go astray in fear or vexation, which lost so quickly the faculty
of good judgment, of discernment, clear-sightedness and appreciation of its surroundings, which
exaggerated its troubles, which plunged into foolish alarms, previsions of evil, despairing
presentiments, which looked upon its terrors as realities, and was constantly lost in the pessimism
of that species of delirium, at the end of which it could find nothing but this ejaculation and this
phrase: "Bah! Ecclesiastical intrigue had already been working in the same direction, and had in
some measure prepared the way for the conqueror by disposing the heads of the Irish clergy
to receive him as the emancipator of the Church from the secular oppression and imposts of
the chiefs. But in the case of England, a settled and agricultural country, the conquest was
complete and final; the conquerors formed everywhere a new upper class which, though at first
alien and oppressive, became in time a national nobility, and ultimately blended with the subject
race. In the case of Ireland, though the Septs were easily defeated by the Norman soldiery,
and the formal submission of their chiefs was easily extorted, the conquest was neither complete
nor final. In their hills and bogs the wandering Septs easily evaded the Norman arms. The Irish
Channel was wide; the road lay through North Wales, long unsubdued, and, even when subdued,
mutinous, and presenting natural obstacles to the passage of heavy troops; the centre of Anglo-Norman
power was far away in the south-east of England, and the force of the monarchy was either attracted
to Continental fields or absorbed by struggles with baronial factions. Richard II., coming
to a throne which had been strengthened and exalted by the achievements of his grandfather,
seems in one of his moods of fitful ambition to have conceived the design of completing the
conquest of Ireland, and he passed over with a great power; but his fate showed that the arm
of the monarchy was still too short to reach the dependency without losing hold upon the imperial
country. As a rule, the subjugation of Ireland during the period before the Tudors was in effect
left to private enterprise, which of course confined its efforts to objects of private gain,
and never thought of undertaking the systematic subjugation of native fortresses in the interest
of order and civilization. Instead of a national aristocracy the result was a military colony
or Pale, between the inhabitants of which and the natives raged a perpetual border war, as
savage as that between the settlers at the Cape and the Kaffirs, or that between the American
frontierman and the Red Indian. The religious quarrel was and has always been secondary in
importance to the struggle of the races for the land. In the period following the conquest
it was the Pale that was distinctively Romanist; but when at the Reformation the Pale became
Protestant the natives, from antagonism of race, became more intensely Catholic, and were drawn
into the league of Catholic powers on the Continent, in which they suffered the usual fate
of the dwarf who goes to battle with the giant. By the strong monarchy of the Tudors the conquest
of Ireland was completed with circumstances of cruelty sufficient to plant undying hatred in
the breasts of the people. But the struggle for the land did not end there, instead of the
form of conquest it took that of confiscation, and was waged by the intruder with the arms
of legal chicane. G. Small pond. H. Mont Royal. I. Small brook. L. The fall. M. Place on the north
side, where the savages transfer their canoes by land. N. Spot where one of our men and a savage
were drowned. O. Small rocky islet. P. Another islet where birds
make their nests. Into exile the Irish people have gone by millions,
and thus, though neither maritime nor by nature colonists, they have had a great share in the
peopling of the New World. The cities and railroads of the United States are to a great extent
the monuments of their labour. In the political sphere they have retained the weakness produced
by ages of political serfage, and are still the debris of broken clans, with little about them
of the genuine republican, apt blindly to follow the leader who stands to them as a chief,
while they are instinctively hostile to law and government as their immemorial oppressors in
their native land. British statesmen, when they had conceded Catholic emancipation and afterwards
Disestablishment, may have fancied that they had removed the root of the evil. But the real
root was not touched till Parliament took up the question of the land, and effected a compromise
which may perhaps have to be again revised before complete pacification is attained.

