"I am very glad to announce to my brethren in arms that all the positions are at the disposal
of the government. The actual government, which is revolutionary, whose intentions are pure,
and which merely desires the happiness of all,.... will search everywhere, even into the attics
for virtuous men,.... poor and genuine sans-culottes." And there is enough to satisfy them
thirty-five thousand places of public employment in the capital alone:[3328] it is a rich mine;
already, before the month of May, 1793, "the Jacobin club boasted of having placed nine thousand
agents in the administration,"[3329] and since the 2nd of June, "virtuous men, poor, genuine
sans-culottes," arrive in crowds from "their garrets," dens and hired rooms, each to grab his
share.--They besiege and install themselves by hundreds the ancient offices in the War, Navy
and Public-Works departments, in the Treasury and Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Here they rule,
constantly denouncing all the remaining, able employees thus creating vacancies in order to
fill them.[3330] Then there are twenty new administrative departments which they keep for themselves:
commissioners of the first confiscation of national property, commissioners of national property
arising from emigrants and the convicted, commissioners of conscripted carriage-horses, commissioners
on clothing, commissioners on the collecting and manufacturing of saltpeter, commissioners
on monopolies, civil-commissioners in each of the forty-eight sections, commissioners on propagandas
in the departments, Commissioners on provisions, and many others. Fifteen hundred places are
counted in the single department of subsistence in Paris,[3331] and all are salaried. Here,
already, are a number of desirable offices.--Some are for the lowest rabble, two hundred, at
twenty sous a day, paid to "stump-speakers," employed to direct opinion in the Palais-Royal,
also among the Tuileries groups, as well as in the tribunes of the Convention and of the Hôtel-de-Ville;[3332]
two hundred more at four hundred francs per annum, to waiters in coffee-houses, gambling-saloons
and hotels, for watching foreigners and customers; hundreds of places at two, three, and five
francs a day with meals, for the guardians of seals, and for garrisoning the domiciles of "suspects";
thousands, with premiums, pay, and full license, for brigands who, under Ronsin, compose the
revolutionary army, and for the gunners, paid guard and gendarmes of Henriot.--The principal
posts, however, are those which subject lives and freedom to the discretion of those who occupy
them: for, through this more than regal power, they possess all other power, and such is that
of the men composing the forty-eight revolutionary committees, the bureaus of the Committee
of General Security and of the Commune, and the staff-officers of the armed force. They are
the prime-movers and active incentives of the system of Terror, all picked Jacobins and tested
by repeated selection, all designated or approved by the Central Club, which claims for itself
the monopoly of patriotism, and which, erected into a supreme council of the party, issues
no patent of orthodoxy except to its own henchmen.[3333]

They immediately assume the tone and arrogance of dictatorship. " Pride has reached its highest
point:[3334]... One who, yesterday, had no post and was amiable and honest, has become haughty
and insolent because, deceived by appearances, his fellow-citizens have elected him commissioner,
or given him some employment or other." Henceforth, he behaves like a Turkish agha amongst
infidels, and, in command, carries things out with a high hand.--On the 20th of Vendémiaire,
year II., "in the middle of the night," the committee of the Piques section summons M. Bélanger,
the architect. He is notified that his house is wanted immediately for a new Bastille.--"But,
said he, 'I own no other, and it is occupied by several tenants; it is decorated with models
of art, and is fit only for that purpose.'--'Your house or you go to prison!'--'But I shall
be obliged to indemnify my tenants.'--'Either your house or you go to prison; as to indemnities,
we have vacant lodgings for your tenants, as well as for yourself, in (the prisons of) La Force,
or Sainte-Pélagie.' Twelve sentinels on the post start off at once and take possession of the
premises; the owner is allowed six hours to move out and is forbidden, henceforth, to return;
the bureaus, to which he appeals, interpret his obedience as 'tacit adhesion,' and, very soon,
he himself is locked up."[3335]--Administrative tools that cut so sharply need the greatest
care, and, from time to time, they are carefully oiled:[3336] on the 20th of July, 1793, two
thousand francs are given to each of the forty-eight committees, and eight thousand francs
to General Henriot, "for expenses in watching anti-revolutionary maneuvers;" on the 7th of
August, fifty thousand francs "to indemnify the less successful members of the forty-eight
committees;" three hundred thousand francs to Gen. Henriot "for thwarting conspiracies and
securing the triumph of liberty;" fifty thousand francs to the mayor, "for detecting the plots
of the malevolent;" on the 10th of September, forty thousand francs to the mayor, president
and procureur-syndic of the department, "for measures of security;" on the 13th of September,
three hundred thousand francs to the mayor "for preventing the attempts of the malevolent;"
on the 15th of November, one hundred thousand francs to the popular clubs, "because these are
essential to the propagation of sound principles."--Moreover, besides gratuities and a fixed
salary, there are the gratifications and perquisites belonging to the office.[3337] Henriot
appoints his comrades on the staff of paid spies and denunciators, and, naturally, they take
advantage of their position to fill their pockets; under the pretext of incivism, they multiply
domiciliary visits, make the master of the house ransom himself, or steal what suits them on
the premises.[3338]--In the Commune, and on the revolutionary-committees, every extortion can
be, and is, practiced.

"I know," says Quevremont, "two citizens who have been put in prison, without being told why,
and, at the end of three weeks or a month, let out and do you know how? By paying, one of them,
fifteen thousand livres, and the other, twenty-five thousand.... Gambron, at La Force, pays
one thousand five hundred livres a month for a room not to live amongst lice, and besides this,
he had to pay a bribe of two thousand livres on entering. This happened to many others who,
again, dared not speak of it, except in a whisper."[3339]

Woe to the imprudent who, never concerning themselves with public affairs, and relying on their
innocence, discard the officious broker and fail to pay up at once! Brichard, the notary, having
refused or tendered too late, the hundred thousand crowns demanded of him, is to put his head
"at the red window."--And I omit ordinary rapine, the vast field open to extortion through
innumerable inventories, sequestrations and adjudications, through the enormities of contractors,
through hastily executed purchases and deliveries, through the waste of two or three millions
given weekly by the government to the Commune for supplies for the capital, through the requisitions
of grain which give fifteen hundred men of the revolutionary army an opportunity to clean out
all the neighboring farms, as far as Corbeil and Meaux, and benefit by this after the fashion
of the chauffeurs.[3340]--With such a staff, these anonymous thefts cannot surprise us. You attack
me after I've been dancing for two hours, while I'm still reeling drunk with the movement, when
I've lost my head, when I've got no mind left but only a rhythmical body! It's as bad as making
love to someone you've drugged or intoxicated."

Gombauld laughed angrily. "Call me a White Slaver and have done with it."

"Luckily," said Anne, "I am now completely sobered, and if you try
and kiss me again I shall box your ears. Shall we take a few turns
round the pool?" she added.

III. A Revolutionary Committee.

     A Minister of Foreign Affairs.--A General in command.--The
     Paris Commune.--A Revolutionary Committee.

Let us examine some of these figures closely: the nearer they are to the eye and foremost in
position, the more the importance of the duty brings into light the unworthiness of the potentate.--There
is already one of them, whom we have seen in passing, Buchot, twice noticed by Robespierre
under his own hand as "a man of probity, energetic and capable of fulfilling the most important
functions,"[3342] appointed by the Committee of Public Safety "Commissioner on External Relations,"
that is to say, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and kept in this important position for nearly
six months. He is a school-master from the Jura,[3343] recently disembarked from his small
town and whose "ignorance, low habits and stupidity surpass anything that can be imagined...
The chief clerks have nothing to do with him; he neither sees nor asks for them. He is never
found in his office, and when it is indispensable to ask for his signature on any legislative
matter, the sole act to which he has reduced his functions, they are compelled to go and force
it from him in the Café Hardy, where he usually passes his days." It must be borne in mind
that he is envious and spiteful, avenging himself for his incapacity on those whose competency
makes him sensible of his incompetence; he denounces them as Moderates, and, at last, succeeds
in having a warrant of arrest issued against his four chief clerks; on the morning of Thermidor
9, with a wicked leer, he himself carries the news to one of them, M. Miot. Unfortunately for
him, after Thermidor, he is turned out and M. Miot is put in his place. With diplomatic politeness,
the latter calls on his predecessor and "expresses to him the usual compliments." Buchot, insensible
to compliments, immediately thinks of the substantial, and the first thing he asks for is to
keep provisionally his apartment in the ministry. On this being granted, he expresses his thanks
and tells M. Miot that it was very well to appoint him, but "for myself, it is very disagreeable.
I have been obliged to come to Paris and quit my post in the provinces, and now they leave
me in the street." Thereupon, with astounding impudence, he asks the man whom he wished to
guillotine to give him a place as ministerial clerk. M. Miot tries to make him understand that
for a former minister to descend so low would be improper. Buchot regards such delicacy as
strange, and, seeing M. Miot's embarrassment, he ends by saying: "If you don't find me fit
for a clerk, I shall be content with the place of a servant." This estimate of himself shows
his proper value.

The other, whom we have also met before, and who is already known by his acts,[3344] general
in Paris of the entire armed force, commander-in-chief of one hundred and ten thousand men,
is that former servant or under-clerk of the procureur Formey, who, dismissed by his employer
for robbery, shut up in Bicêtre, by turns a runner and announcer for a traveling show, barrier-clerk
and September assassin, has purged the Convention on the 2nd of June--in short, the famous
Henriot, and now simply a brute and a sot. In this latter capacity, spared on the trial of
the Hébertists, he is kept as a tool, for the reason, doubtless, that he is narrow, coarse
and manageable, more compromised than anybody else, good for any job, without the slightest
chance of becoming independent, unemployed in the army,[3345] having no prestige with true
soldiers, a general for street parade and an interloper and lower than the lowest of the mob;
his mansion, his box at the Opera-Comique, his horses, his importance at festivals and reviews,
and, above all, his orgies make him perfectly content.--Every evening, in full uniform, escorted
by his aides-de-camp, he gallops to Choisy-sur-Seine, where, in the domicile of a flatterer
named Fauvel, along with some of Robespierre's confederates or the local demagogues, he revels.
They toss off the wines of the Duc de Coigny, smash the glasses, plates and bottles, betake
themselves to neighboring dance-rooms and kick up a row, bursting in doors, and breaking benches
and chairs to pieces--in short, they have a good time.--The next morning, having slept himself
sober, he dictates his orders for the day, veritable masterpieces in which the silliness, imbecility
and credulity of a numskull, the sentimentality of the drunkard, the clap-trap of a mountebank
and the tirades of a cheap philosopher form an unique compound, at once sickening and irritating,
like the fiery, pungent mixtures of cheap bars, which suit his audience better because they
contain the biting, mawkish ingredients that compose the adulterated brandy of the Revolution.--He
is posted on foreign maneuvers, and enlarges upon the true reasons for the famine: "A lot of
bread has been lately found in the privies: the Pitts and Cobourgs and other rascals who want
to enslave justice and reason, and assassinate philosophy, must be called to account for this.
Headquarters, etc."[3346] He has theories on religions and preaches civic modesty to all dissenters:
"The ministers and sectaries of every form of worship are requested not to practice any further
religious ceremonies outside their temples. Every good sectarian will see the propriety of
observing this order. The interior of a temple is large enough for paying one's homage to the
Eternal, who requires no rites that are repulsive to every thinking man. The wise agree that
a pure heart is the sublimest homage that Divinity can desire. Headquarters, etc."--He sighs
for the universal idyllic state, and invokes the suppression of the armed force:

"I beg my fellow-citizens, who are led to the criminal courts out of curiosity, to act as their
own police; this is a task which every good citizen should fulfill wherever he happens to be.
In a free country, justice should not be secured by pikes and bayonets, but through reason
and philosophy. These must maintain a watchful eye over society; these must purify it and proscribe
thieves and evil-doers. Each individual must bring his small philosophic portion with him and,
with these small portions, compose a rational totality that will turn out to be of benefit
and to the welfare of all. Oh, for the time when functionaries shall be rare, when the wicked
shall be overthrown, when the law shall become the sole functionary in society! Headquarters,
etc. "--Every morning, he preaches in the same pontifical strain. We left Kuching at midday on the
21st of July, after bidding adieu to all our friends, not without regret at leaving a land where
we had passed so many pleasant days. The Raja Brooke (a small trading steamer of about 300 tons)
was heavily laden, not only with cargo, but also with over 100 deck passengers--Malays going
on a "Haji pilgrimage" to Mecca. There was also on board an old Hindoo, the proprietor of a dancing
bear, who had been making a good thing of it in the Sarawak capital.

The Commune which employs the commanding-general is of about the same alloy, for, in the municipal
sword, the blade and hilt, forged together in the Jacobin shop, are composed of the same base
metal.--Fifty-six, out of eighty-eight members, whose qualifications and occupations are known,
are decidedly illiterate, or nearly so, their education being rudimentary, or none at all.[3347]
Some of them are petty clerks, counter-jumpers and common scribblers, one among them being
a public writer; others are small shopkeepers, pastry-cooks, mercers, hosiers, fruit-sellers
and wine-dealers; yet others are simple mechanics or even laborers, carpenters, joiners, cabinet-makers,
locksmiths, and especially three tailors, four hair-dressers, two masons, two shoemakers, one
cobbler, one gardener; one stone-cutter, one paver, one office-runner, and one domestic. Among
the thirty-two who are instructed, one alone has any reputation, Paris, professor at the University
and the assistant of Abbé Delille. Only one, Dumetz, an old engineer, steady, moderate and
attending to the supplies, seems a competent and useful workman. The rest, collected from amongst
the mass of unknown demagogues, are six art-apprentices or bad painters, six business-agents
or ex-lawyers, seven second or third-rate merchants, one teacher, one surgeon, one unfrocked
married priest, all of whom, under the political direction of Mayor Fleuriot-Lescot and Payen,
the national agent, bring to the general council no administrative ability, but the faculty
for verbal argumentation, along with the requisite amount of talk and scribbling indispensable
to a deliberative assembly. And it is curious to see them in session. Toward the end of September,
1793,[3348] one of the veterans of liberal philosophy and political economy, belonging to the
French Academy and ruined by the Revolution, the old Abbé Morellet, needs a certificate of
civism, to enable him to obtain payment of the small pension of one thousand francs, which
the Constituent Assembly had voted him in recompense for his writings; the Commune, desiring
information about this, selects three of its body to inquire into it. Morellet naturally takes
the preliminary steps. He first writes "a very humble, very civic note," to the president of
the General Council, Lubin Jr., formerly an art-apprentice who had abandoned art for politics,
and is now living with his father a butcher, in the rue St. Honoré; he calls on this authority,
and passes through the stall, picking his way amongst the slaughterhouse offal; admitted after
some delay, he finds his judge in bed, before whom he pleads his cause. He then calls upon
Bernard, an ex-priest, "built like an incendiary and ill-looking," and respectfully bows to
the lady of the house, "a tolerably young woman, but very ugly and very dirty." Finally, he
carries his ten or a dozen volumes to the most important of the three examiners, Vialard, "ex-ladies'
hair-dresser;" the latter is almost a colleague, "for," says he, "I have always liked technicians,
having presented to the Academy of Sciences a top which I invented myself." Nobody, however,
had seen the petitioner in the streets on the 10th of August, nor on the 2nd of September,
nor on the 31st of May; how can a certificate of civism be granted after such evidences of
lukewarmness? Morellet, not disheartened, awaits the all-powerful hair-dresser at the Hôtel-de-Ville,
and accosts him frequently as he passes along. He, "with greater haughtiness and distraction
than the most unapproachable Minister of War would show to an infantry lieutenant," scarcely
listens to him and walks on; he goes in and takes his seat, and Morellet, much against his
will, has to be present at ten or twelve of these meetings. What strange meetings, to which
patriotic deputations, volunteers and amateurs come in turn to declaim and sing; where the
president, Lubin, "decorated with his scarf," shouts the Marseilles Hymn five or six times,
"Ca Ira," and other songs of several stanzas, set to tunes of the Comic Opera, and always "out
of time, displaying the voice, airs and songs of an exquisite Leander.. .