When I won the Championship again in the following year at Sandwich, my success was chiefly
due to my brassy play, which was better than it ever was before or has been since. From my
brassy strokes the ball was often enough laid dead near the hole; certainly my second shots
were always the winning shots. The game seemed very easy to me then, and I gained the Championship
for the third time with less difficulty than on either of the two previous occasions. In 1900
I made a long tour in America, and won the American Championship. Concerning these events I
desire to write at some length in a later chapter. The greatest success which I have ever achieved
in face of difficulties was when I again became Open Champion at Prestwick in 1903. For some
time beforehand I had been feeling exceedingly unwell, and, as it appeared shortly afterwards,
there was serious trouble brewing. During the play for the Championship I was not at all myself,
and while I was making the last round I was repeatedly so faint that I thought it would be
impossible for me to finish. However, when I holed my last putt I knew that I had won. My brother
Tom was runner-up, six strokes behind, and, glad as I was of the distinction of having equalled
the record of the two Morrises in having won the Championship four times, I could have wished,
and did wish, that Tom had been the victor. In all the circumstances I was very much surprised
that I did so well. The last day's work was an enormous strain, yet on the following day I
played in a tournament at Irvine, won the first prize, and broke the record of the course.
It is wonderful what golf can be played when one's mind is given to the task, whatever the
adverse factors in the case may be.

However, these are the events of recent golfing history, and I have no desire to inflict upon
my readers a narrative of any more of them. As nearly as I can reckon, I have up to date won
the first prize in forty-eight first-class tournaments, and by being four times British Open
Champion and once American have still that record to my credit. And I hope to play many of
my best games in the future, for it takes longer to kill the golf in a man than it does to
breed it.

There are different ways of learning to play the great game of golf, each of which enjoys its
share of patronage. Here as elsewhere, there are, of course, the two broad divisions into which
the methods of doing all things are in the first instance classed--the right way and the wrong
way--and, generally speaking, the wrong way has proved the more popular and is accountable
for much of the very bad golf that one sees almost every day upon the links. There are two
mistakes to which the beginner is much addicted, and to them is due the unhappy circumstance
that in so many cases he never gets his club handicap down to single figures. Before he has
ever played golf in his life, but at that interesting period when he has made up his mind to
do so, and has bought his first set of clubs, he is still inclined to make the same error that
is made by so many people who know nothing of the game, and loftily remark that they do not
want to know anything--that it is too absurdly simple to demand serious thought or attention,
and can surely need no special pains in learning to play. Is not the ball quite still on the
tee before you, and all that is necessary being to hit it, surely the rest is but a question
of strength and accuracy of aim? Well, we need not waste time in discussing the opinions of
the scoffers outside, or in submitting that there never was a game less easy to learn than
golf. But the man who has been converted to golf most frequently has a vestige of this superstition
of his heathen days lingering with him, and thus at the outset he is not inclined to waste
any time, as he would say, in tuition, particularly as it happens that these new converts when
quite fresh are invariably most delightfully enthusiastic. They have promised themselves a
new sensation, and they are eager to get on to the links and see how much further than the
two hundred yards that they have heard about they can drive at the first attempt or two. Then
comes the inevitable disappointment, the despair, the inclination to give it up, and finally
the utter abject despondency which represents the most miserable state on earth of the golfer,
in which he must be closely watched lest he should commit murder upon the beautiful set of
clubs of which at the beginning he was so proud, and which he spent his evenings in brightening
to the degree that they resembled the family plate. Then after this passage through purgatory
come the first gleams of hope, when two holes in succession have been done in only one over
bogey, and a 24 handicap man has actually been beaten by 3 up and 2 to play--a conquest which,
if it is the first one, is rarely forgotten in the golfer's lifetime. After that there is a
steady settling down to mediocrity. There is afterwards only an occasional fit of despair,
the game is for the most part thoroughly enjoyed, there are times when, after a round in which
driving and putting have been rather better than usual, the golfer encourages himself over
his cup of tea with the fancy that after all he may some day win a medal and become a senior;
but in the main the conviction forces itself upon him that it is impossible that he can ever
become a really fine player. He argues that this is not at all his own fault. He points out
to himself that circumstances are too strong for him. He considers that he is not very young--at
least not so young as many of the experts of his club who have been golfing ever since they
were boys. His limbs have not that suppleness which makes the scratch player. His eye is not
so keen as theirs. Besides, he is a business man who has to give up so much of his time to
the earning of his daily bread that it is impossible he should ever devote himself to the game
with that single-mindedness which alone can ensure proficiency. He must take himself as he
finds himself, and be satisfied with his 18 handicap. These are the somewhat pathetic excuses
that he makes in this mood of resignation. Of course he is wrong--wrong from the beginning
to the end--but there is little satisfaction in that for the earnest lover of the game who
would see all men excel, and who knows only too well that this failure is but a specimen of
hundreds of his kind--good golfing lives thrown away, so to speak. If a man is not a cripple,
if he suffers from no physical defect, there is no reason why he should not learn to play a
good game of golf if he goes about it in the right way. There is indeed a one-armed golfer
who plays a very fair game, and one may admit all these things without in any way suggesting
that golf is not a game for the muscles and the nerves and all the best physical qualities
of a well-grown man. No great amount of brute force is necessary, and fleetness of foot, which
men lose as they grow old, is never wanted; but still golf is a game for manly men, and when
they take it up they should strive to play it as it deserves to be played.

Now I know what severe temptation there will be to all beginners to disregard the advice that
I am about to offer them; but before proceeding any further I will invite them to take the
opinion of any old golfer who, chiefly through a careless beginning (he knows that this is
the cause), has missed his way in the golfer's life, and is still plodding away as near the
limit handicap as he was at the beginning. The beginner may perhaps be disposed to rely more
upon the statement of this man of experience and disappointment than on that of the professional,
who is too often suspected of having his own ends in view whenever he gives advice. Let the
simple question be put to him whether, if he could be given the chance of doing it all over
again from the beginning, he would not sacrifice the first three or six months of play to diligent
study of the principles of the game, and the obtaining of some sort of mastery over each individual
shot under the careful guidance of a skilled tutor, not attempting during this time a single
complete round with all his clubs in action, and refusing all temptations to play a single
match--whether he would not undergo this slow and perhaps somewhat tedious period of learning
if he could be almost certain of being able at the end of it to play a really good game of
golf, and now at this later period of his career to have a handicap much nearer the scratch
mark than his existing one is to the border-line between the senior and the junior? I am confident
that in the great majority of cases, looking back on his misspent golfing youth, he would answer
that he would cheerfully do all this learning if he could begin again at the beginning. Now,
of course, it is too late, for what is once learned can only with extreme difficulty be unlearned,
and it is almost impossible to reform the bad style and the bad habits which have taken root
and been cultivated in the course of many years; and if it were possible it would be far more
difficult than it would have been to learn the game properly at the beginning.

My earnest advice to the beginner is to undergo this slow process of tuition for nothing less
than three months, and preferably more. It is a very long time, I know, and it may seem painfully
tedious work, simply knocking a ball backwards and forwards for all those months; but if he
does not accept my suggestion he will have harder things to try his patience during many years
afterwards, while, if he takes my advice, he may be down very near to scratch at the end of
his first year, and he will be very thankful that he spent the period of probation as he did.
He will constantly be giving a half to players who have been playing for more years than he
has months, and he will be holding his own in the very best golfing company. He will be getting
the finest delight out of the game that it is possible to get. It is said that the long handicap
man gets as much pleasure out of the game as the short handicap man. As the former has never
been a short handicap man he is evidently not qualified to judge. The scratch man, who has
been through it all, would never change his scratch play for that of his old long-handicap
days--at least I have never yet met the scratch man who would. No doubt the noble army of foozlers
derive an immense amount of enjoyment from the practice of their game, and it is my earnest
prayer that they may long continue to do so. It is one of the glorious advantages of golf that
all, the skilled and the unskilled, can revel in its fascinations and mysteries; but there
is no golfing delight so splendid as that which is obtained from playing the perfect game,
or one which nearly approaches it. The next best thing to it is playing what one knows to be
an improving game, however bad, and the golfer whose play has been incorrectly established
has not often even the knowledge that his game is improving. He declares more often than not
that it gets worse, and one is frequently inclined to believe him.

