And this would be true--alas, it is true of multitudes--had she been stirred by merely human
causes, as sympathetic excitement, or appeals to her feelings or fears. But, as we have said
before, she had looked upon the face of the Son of God. Circumstances, and the story of Lazarus,
had concentrated her mind on Jesus Christ, as in that old and touching record He stands before
the world in one of His most winning attitudes. She did not understand how she connected with
Him the hope and happiness she felt.  She was no doubt like many who, eighteen centuries ago,
knew little of Christ, but in the midst of their pain and anguish suddenly felt his healing
touch, and exulted with great joy, forgetting that only one disease had been cured, or one
trouble banished, and that they still remained in a world where pain and trouble threatened
to the very end. But here was the ground of hope for those whom Jesus touched, as well as for
Lottie: in curing one evil, He had proved His power and willingness to remove every evil, and
when pain of body and the suffering of guilt again oppressed, the true source of help was known,
and so Christ eventually became their Good Physician, intrusted with the entire care of their
spiritual health.

No doubt at the time of Christ many a heart was stirred and borne heavenward, on the wings
of strong emotion, by the eloquence of some gifted rabbi, by a gorgeous ceremonial in the Temple,
or by the chantings of the multitudinous priests. But the emotions passed away, as they do
now; and men and women relapsed into their old, material, selfish lives.  They may have looked
back with regret upon the ecstasy that once thrilled them, and wished that it could always
have been maintained; but they found this impossible.  So, now, the emotion goes, and the combinations
that once produced it never return, or fail to inspire it again.  Looking to themselves and
their own feelings,--to inadequate means of help,--such persons are of course disappointed;
and so gradually grow hard and legal, or apathetic and unbelieving. When in trouble, when the
natural springs of life begin to fail, there seems no real and practical help.

If human experience proves anything it is that every life needs the personal and practical
help-the direct touch and word--of One who is Divinely powerful and Divinely patient.

Many days of folly--of sin, sorrow, and deep despondency--are before Lottie still; but she
has seen her God weeping from sympathy with weak humanity, and a moment later rescuing from
the hopeless extremity of death and corruption. Here is not some vague thing like a half-forgotten
emotion or an exalted religious experience in which to trust, but One who, instead of being
a vanished, half-forgotten sensation, a philosophy, or even a sound creed and a logical doctrine,
is a living personal and powerful Friend, who can put forth His hand and sustain, as He did
the timid Apostle who was sinking in the threatening waves.

The temple of Lottie's faith was yet to be built; but she had been so fortunate as to commence
with the true "corner stone."

During the morning hours she was the object of considerable and perplexed thought on the part
of several of the household. There was in her face the sweet spiritual radiance of the evening
before, and the same gentleness and considerateness of manner marked her action. Mrs. Marchmont
and her daughter said, "It is one of Lottie's moods." Bel surmised that she was a little sentimental
over Hemstead, and was indignant that she should herself indulge, and awake in the student,
feelings that doubtless, on Lottie's part, would end with the visit. As for De Forrest, he
was thoroughly puzzled. The idea that Hemstead could be anything to her was perfectly preposterous;
and as for religion, that was a decorous thing of form and ceremonial pertaining to Sunday,
and this was Monday. And yet, from some cause, Lottie seemed different from her old self.

He could not complain, however, for she had never been kinder to him; and if her eyes did seek
Hemstead's face rather often, she could see nothing there which for a moment could compare
with his own handsome features. He also concluded that it was a "mood"; but liked the new and
gentle Lottie quite as well as the piquant, and often rather brusque girl of other days.

But to Hemstead, as with chatting and reading they whiled away the morning hours around the
parlor fire, Lottie was the bright particular star. Her face, now transfigured in its spiritual
light, captivated his beauty-loving soul; while her words and manner suggested the hope that
she, with himself, had found her way into the Holy of Holies. If this could ever be true, he
felt that he could go to his work in the Western wilds, content and grateful, and that a long
and toilsome life would be illumined by this dear memory. He, too, like Lottie, was on the
Mount; but both would soon have to come down to the plain where the "multitude" was, and some
of them "lunatic"; and when in the plain they would be very much like the multitude.

After dinner, in compliance with an invitation from Dr.  Beams, they all went over to the church,
to aid in decorating it with evergreens. They found Miss Martell and several other ladies at
work; also a sprinkling of gentlemen and a few young men who were on the border line between
boys and beaux, and who were frequently passing from one character to the other.

Miss Martell greeted Hemstead more cordially than she did any of the others in the party from
Mrs. Marchmont's; and seemed slightly surprised at Lottie's gentle and hearty salutation.

De Forrest remained closely at the latter's side, but Hemstead noted with deep and secret satisfaction
that there was in her grave kindness nothing responsive to his constant and lover-like attention.
Her brow often contracted, as if his sentiment annoyed her, and she treated him as one who,
for some reason, must be borne with patiently.

"She is probably engaged, but is ceasing to love him," he thought. "She never could have respected
him, and now be has forfeited whatever affection she may have had. Still she feels that she
is chained to him, and must endure the life-long martyrdom of an ill-mated marriage"; and his
heart overflowed with a great pity.

It did not occur to him that he was a miracle of disinterestedness when Lottie was concerned;
and that her troubles moved him more than the woes of all the world beside. Like many another
life-voyager, with hand upon the helm, he thought that he was directing his course, when in
feet a strong and subtile current was sweeping him he not whither.

He and Lottie did not have much to say to each but their eyes often met, and at times, in his
frank impulsiveness, he looked at her so earnestly and sympathetically that she turned away
to hide her heightened color. She was becoming conscious, with a secret wonder, that he, as
no man ever before, had the power to cause her blood to ebb and flow in the most unaccountable
manner.

A short time after their arrival he wandered over to the side of the chapel where Miss Martell
was working, and she seemingly fascinated him. They apparently became so absorbed in each other's
words as to think of no one else, and Lottie grew pale and quiet, feeling, in the mean time,
an unreasonable resentment towards Miss Martell. If Lottie has received a little grace, she
is, and ever will be, the natural possessor of abundance of human nature.  Is this pale and
silent girl the one whose cheeks, a little before, were aflame, and every nerve tingling with
the most unwonted sensations, and for no better reason apparently than that Hemstead had seen
her tugging at a fibrous spray of hemlock, and had severed it with his knife? That was all
the others had seen; but there was a great deal more, for in the act their hands had touched,
and both had seemed in a positive state in the power to give, and in the negative in readiness
to receive, a subtile influence, compared with which electricity is a slow and material agent.
And he had lifted his large gray eyes to hers full of--he did not realize what, nor did she--but
the cause was there, and the effect followed.

But now, with secret uneasiness, Lottie notes that he seems oblivious of her in his eager talk
with Miss Martell.

Soon after joining the latter, Hemstead had said, in his straightforward manner, "You intimated
to Mr. Harcourt yesterday that you were 'sorry he heard my sermon.'"

With a little embarrassment she replied, "I do not think that Mr. Harcourt was in the right
condition of mind to be benefited by your line of thought."

"Do you think that any one could be benefited by it?"

She was a little puzzled. Was he, like some young clergy-men she had known, eager for a few
crumbs of praise for his first crude efforts? She was not one to give any faint and hollow
commendation, and yet she did not wish to hurt his feelings. But her reply had a tinge of satire
in it, for she had no patience with the weakness of vanity.

"I will hardly venture an opinion. You, who have given so much time and thought to these subjects,
ought to be a better judge than I."

He felt, rather than saw, the delicate barb, and flushed slightly as he replied, "I admit that
perhaps I ought to be, but whether I am or not, is quite another question. I am sure that your
views upon the subjects treated yesterday are far truer than mine were. The wretched, heretical
sermon that I inflicted upon you has already justly suffered an auto da fe. Before the day
was over I saw that instead of preaching the gospel I had been elaborating, from a partial
premise, a crude view of my own. I shall no longer preach, that is, if I preach at all, as
if human nature were the raw material which God intended to work up without any regard to the
process, or how much refuse there was, or what became of it. Is not Christ weeping from sympathy
at the grave of Lazarus a true manifestation of God's feeling toward us?"

"Mr. Hemstead," Miss Martell exclaimed, "I cannot tell you how glad I am to know your change
of views.  Most emphatically I say yes to your question. God is seeking to develop my character;
only He is more patient and gentle than my good, kind father. But why do you say, 'If I preach
at all'?"

His head bowed in honest humility, as he replied, in a low tone, "I often doubt whether I am
worthy,--whether I am called."

She now saw that she had misjudged him, and was eager to reassure and confirm his purpose for
life; and the converse that followed had grown so absorbing as to cause Hemstead to forget
for the time one, who by some right, divine or otherwise, had suddenly taken possession of
his thoughts with a despotism as sweet as absolute.

But while Miss Martell was speaking most earnestly to Hemstead, she saw some one enter the
chapel door. Her color came and went. The sentence upon her lips faltered to a lame conclusion,
and though she became deeply absorbed in the process of twining the fragrant cedar with the
shiny laurel, she did not work as deftly as before. Looking round to see the cause, Hemstead
caught one of Lottie's reproachful glances, and was soon at her side with a sense of almost
guilty neglect.

Addie Marchmont found work of any kind, even preparation for the Christmas festival, stupid
and tiresome; therefore she welcomed the diversion of Harcourt's coming with double zest; and
with extravagant exclamations of delight summoned him to her side. Miss Martell stood at some
distance, and had turned her back towards them.  Harcourt did not see her at first, but the
quest of his restless eyes indicated his hope that she was there. In the mean time he laughed
and jested with Addie in something of his old-time style. 

This apart, however, The Light Heart (CHAPMAN AND HALL) may be admitted an excellent sample of its
kind. It is all about the friendship of Thorgar and Thormod, with the former's untimely death,
and the punctilious attempts of the latter to fulfil his social obligation in the matter of exterminating
the slayers of his friend; also, as second theme, the love of Thormod for King Olaf, and the
ending of both of them--and of the tale also--in the heroic battle of Sticklestead. One way and another,
indeed, you seldom saw a short book that contained more bloodshed, or in which love-making
(oh, Mr. HEWLETT!) played a smaller part.

There was a "slip of a girl" in the early chapter of whom I had hopes, but sterner business
caused her to be too soon eliminated.

Skill and learning The Light Heart has in plenty, and an engaging suggestion of the early artistic
temperament in the character of Thormod, fighter and song-maker. But I fall back on my old complaint
of being left cold; and that I should suffer that way from the work of Mr. HEWLETT gives you the
measure of our loss.

* * * * *

In his last grim and terrible work, Realities of War (HEINEMANN), Sir PHILIP GIBBS has fairly
flung aside the restraint, enforced or self-imposed, that marked
his despatches from the fighting fronts, to present war, the horrible,
senseless nightmare, as it really appeared to him.

His work as a correspondent emphasised for him the accumulated miseries
of thousands rather than any individual's share, and his point of
view is as remorselessly gloomy as can be imagined.

He is detailed in disgust; he is passionate in pessimism. He presents not only the soldier's distaste
for trenches and machine guns, and his desire for the things of familiar
life, but also, with surprising vehemence, his hatred of generals
who give blundering orders from comfortable billets in the rear, or
of munitioners in England who keep optimistic in spite of bad news
from the Front.

He does not pretend to be quite fair in his criticisms, for obviously
the higher command had to keep out of the firing-line and somebody
had to work--and hard too--to supply the torrent of munitions demanded.

Sir PHILIP admits all that, but in a kind of agony calls on God and man to realise the meaningless
horror of it all and forbid, at any price, the possibility of its recurrence. If sometimes unjust and
nearly always tragical, the book none the less is free from anything
like hysteria.

* * * *

*
 Fierce though brief was the struggle that took place
beneath that gentle, calm exterior, for the human heart is ever the same,--wilful, passionate.
With many it is often like the wild storm that will spend itself to the end, no matter how
much of wreck and ruin is wrought. With such as Miss Martell, it is like the storm which, at
its height, heard the words of the Divine Master, "Peace, be still."

"Let him marry Addie Marchmont if he will," she concluded. "I will be kind and gentle to him
all the same, and, cost me what it may, I will still see him, and seek to make him a true,
good man."

So with woman's tact she turned his question, which savored only of sentimental gallantry,
to good account, and said quietly, "You know the only 'style of compliment' that I like, and
you enriched me with it at Mrs. Byram's company,--the promise you made me."

Harcourt sighed involuntarily. She seemed too angelic,--too far above and beyond him. As with
a ministering spirit from heaven, her only thought was to win him from evil. Her face was pale
from the hidden conflict which had cost her more dearly than he would ever know. Her eyes beamed
upon him with a gentle, yet sweet, strange, spiritual light. She scarcely appeared flesh and
blood.  But he was very human, and his heart craved from her human love and earthly solace.
Though now, as at other times, this seemed as presumptuous to him as if some devotee had sacrilegiously
fallen in love with his fair patron saint, still he felt a sudden and strong irritation that
they should be so far apart.

She misunderstood his sigh, and added, "Am I a hard task-mistress?"

He shook his head, but there was dejection in his tone as he replied, "There have been many
forms of idolatry in the world, but I have thought that those who worshipped the stars must
have become a little discouraged at times,--they are so far off."

Her face had the pained expression of one misunderstood, but who cannot well explain. She said
only, "Idolatry is ever profitless." She meant to hint, he thought, that his worship of her
certainly would be.

He was chilled at heart. His quick, impetuous spirit prompted him towards recklessness. She
saw that he was about to leave abruptly. As she played to win him, not for herself, but heaven,
she saw that she had made a mistaken move, though she could not understand his manner. In her
maidenly pride and delicacy, she would have let him go if she had thought only of herself;
but, conscious of her other motive, she could seek to detain him, and asked, "What did you
mean, Mr. Harcourt, by your fanciful allusion to star-worship?"

"I meant," he replied bitterly, "that to ordinary flesh and blood, kneeling in the cold before
a distant star, be it ever so bright, is rather chilling and discouraging. The Greeks were
shrewder. They had goddesses with warm, helping hands, and with a little sympathetic, human
imperfection."

It hurt her cruelly that he so misjudged her; and in her confusion, she again said that which
he interpreted wrongly.

"It is folly, then, to worship anything so cold and distant." She was about to add plainly,
"I am neither a star nor a goddess, but a sincere, human friend,--human as yourself." She was
about to make some delicate allusion to the time when he often sought her sisterly advice.
But he, in the blindness of strong feeling, saw in her words only rebuke for the presumption
of his love, and he harshly interrupted her.

"No doubt it is; but let me remind you of a fact often true in missionary experience. After
the poor devils have been bereft of the objects of their fond and credulous worship, by proof
that their deities are indifferent, they cease to have any faith at all"; and with a cold and
rather formal bow he left her side and also left the church.

Miss Martell's head bent lower than ever over her work, and it was a long time before she lifted
it or spoke to any one. But the others were occupied with themselves, and no one had noted
this little side scene save Addie, who pouted that Harcourt had remained, but not at her side,
after his expressed intention of leaving. No one surmised that two who had been present were
sorely hurt. When we receive our slight cuts and bruises through life, there are usually outcry
and abundant sympathy. But when we receive our deep wounds, that leave scars, often only God
knows; and it is best so, for He can heal, but the world can only probe.

CHAPTER XXII.

"YOU MUST WAIT AND SEE."

"How can you leave Miss Martell?" asked Lottie, as Hemstead approached propitiatingly with
a large armful of the choicest evergreens.

"Well, I can," he replied with a smile.

"As yet, but the next time you will stay longer, and the next longer still."

"That depends. I would not remain at her side, nor at any one's, if I thought they were tiring
of me a little."

"O, she got tired of you."

"Well, yes; a little, I think. She suddenly seemed to lose her interest in the conversation.
Still she was very good to talk to me as long and as kindly as she did. She is a very superior
woman. It has never been my good fortune to meet just such a lady before."

"Make the most of your rare 'good fortune.'"

"I have."

"And now that she is tired of you, you come back to me as a dernier ressort."

"Coming back to you, is like coming back home, for you have given me the only home-like feeling
that I have had during my visit."

The language of coquetry was to Lottie like her mother-tongue, and she fell into it as naturally
as she breathed.  Only now, instead of suggesting the false hope that he had been missed and
she had cared, it expressed her true feeling, for she did care.

De Forrest now returned from a momentary absence, and had it not been for his garrulity the
little group would have been a rather silent one. Both young men sought to supply Lottie with
the sprays of green that she was twining. She took the evergreens chiefly from De Forrest's
hands, but gave her thoughts and eyes to Hemstead. He, with man's usual penetration, thought
De Forrest the favored one, and was inclined to reverse his half-formed opinion that she was
destined to pathetic martyrdom, because bound by an engagement to a man whom she could not love.

"He can't think much of me," thought Lottie, with a sigh, "or he couldn't speak so frankly."
She, too, was losing her wonted quick discernment.

Only lynx-eyed Bel Parton partially surmised the truth, and suspected that Lottie was developing
a genuine, though of course a passing interest, in the student whom at first she had purposed
to beguile in mere reckless sport.

During the remainder of the afternoon and evening, De Forrest was Lottie's shadow, and she
could escape him, and be with Hemstead, only by remaining with all the others.  She was longing
for another of their suggestive talks, when, without the restraint of the curious and unsympathetic,
they could continue the theme that De Forrest had interrupted on Sunday afternoon.

She was thinking how to bring this about, when the old plan of visiting Mrs. Dlimm occurred
to her, and she adopted it at once.

Getting a moment aside with Hemstead, by being down to breakfast a little before the others,
she said, "After my naughty behavior in regard to our visit to Mrs. Dlimm, will you still take
me there?"

"I wish you would give me a chance," he answered eagerly.

"Well, I will, at ten this morning. But please say nothing about it. Drive to the door in the
cutter, and I will be ready. If the matter is discussed, there may be half a dozen other projects
started."

Hemstead ate but an indifferent breakfast, and there was also a faint glow of expectant excitement
in Lottie's face.

Hemstead promptly sought his aunt, and asked if he might have a horse and the single sleigh.

"I hope another time will answer," said Mrs. Marchmont, carelessly. "Addie wishes the horses
this morning, but I believe proposes taking you all out."

But Hemstead was not to be baffled, and acted with more energy than prudence perhaps. Lottie
from her window saw him posting with long strides towards the village, and exultingly surmised
his object. At ten he drove up to the door with a neat little turnout from the livery stable;
and she tripped down and took a seat at his side, and they were off before the rest of the
household realized their purpose.

They all looked at each other questioningly, as a few moments later they gathered in the parlor
for a general sleighride.

Mr. Dimmerly, who had quietly watched proceedings, broke out into his cackling laugh, as he
chuckled, "He shows his blood. A dozen seminaries could not quench him utterly."

Mrs. Marchmont frowned. She rigidly applied the rules of propriety to all save her own children,
and she justly thought that both Hemstead and Lottie had failed in courtesy to her and her
guests, by stealing away, as it were, without any explanations. But people of one idea often
fail in more than mere matters of courtesy; and Hemstead and Lottie were emphatically becoming
people of one idea. And they both had misgivings and a sense of wrong-doing as they drove away
without a word of explanation.

Mrs. Marchmont was still more puzzled when Addie exclaimed petulantly, "I thought the agreement
was that Lottie should carry out the joke when and where we could all enjoy it."

The lady was led to suspect that there was something on foot that might need her investigation,
and she quietly resolved to use her eyes and ears judiciously. She well knew that her proud
and fashionable sister, Lottie's mother, would hold her to strict account if Lottie did anything
foolish.

Bel merely shrugged her shoulders cynically. She had a certain kind of loyalty to her friend,
and said all her harsh things to Lottie herself, and not behind her back.

De Forrest had no other resource than to believe that Lottie was carrying out the practical
joke; but a sorry jest he found it that morning, during which he scarcely spoke to any one.

They drove over to town for Harcourt, but he greatly provoked Addie by pleading that his business
would not permit absence. During the rest of the drive they all might have formed part of a
funeral procession.

But the snow-crystals did not sparkle in the sunlight more brightly than Lottie's eyes, as
she turned to her companion, and said, "I am so delighted that we are safely off on our drive."

"O, it's the 'drive' you are thinking of. That is better than I hoped. I thought we were visiting
Mrs. Dlimm."

"So we are, and I want to see her too," said Lottie, with a sudden blush.

"Well, I'm glad you don't dread the long, intervening miles, with no better company than mine."

"It's a good chance to learn patient endurance," she replied, with a look delightfully arch.
"So please drive slower."

The horse instantly came to a walk.

"That is the other extreme," she continued. "You always go to extremes, as, for instance, your
quixotic purpose to go out among the border ruffians."

"Honestly, Miss Marsden," said Hemstead, his laughing face suddenly becoming grave, "you do
not now think, in your heart, my purpose to be a home missionary 'quixotic'?"

"I don't know much about my heart, Mr. Hemstead, except that it has always been very perverse.
But I now wish I had a better one. You have disturbed the equanimity with which I could do
wrong most wofully. I even feel a little guilty for leaving them all this morning, with no
explanations."

"It was hardly right, now I think of it," said Hemstead, reflectively.

"Have you just thought of it? How preoccupied you have been! What have you been thinking about?
Yes, it was wrong; but as it is the first wicked thing I have caught you in I am quite comforted.
I have been hoping all along that you would do something just a little bit encouragingly wicked."

"How little you understand me! My wickedness and consequent twinges of conscience have been
my chief sources of trouble thus far."

"O, well, your conscience is like Auntie Jane. A speck of dust gives her the fidgets where
other people would not see any dust at all. If your conscience had to deal with my sins there
would not be ashes and hair-cloth enough for you."

"What good can ashes, hair-cloth, or any kind of self-punishment, or even self-condemnation,
do us?"

"Well, we ought to be sorry, at least."

"Certainly, but there must be more than that. Many a wrong-doer has been sincerely sorry, but
has been punished all the same. I cannot tell you, Miss Marsden, how much good you did me on
Sunday afternoon. My mind had been dwelling on the attributes of God,--upon doctrines as if
they were things by themselves and complete in themselves. I almost fear that I should have
become, as I fear some are, the disciple of a religious system, instead of a simple and loyal
follower of Christ. But you fixed my eyes on a living personality, who has the right to say,
'I forgive you,' and I am forgiven; who has the right to say, 'I will save you,' and I am saved.
If He is the Divine Son of God, as He claims to be, has He not the right?"

"Yes. He must be able to do just what is pleasing to Him," said Lottie.

"Then look upon Him as you saw Him at the grave of Lazarus,--the very embodiment of sympathy.
Suppose that in sincere regret for all the wrong you have ever done, and with the honest wish
to be better, you go to such a being and cry, 'Forgive.' Can you doubt His natural, inevitable
course towards you? If pardoning love and mercy should encircle you at once, would it not be
in perfect keeping with His tears of sympathy?"

"And is that all I have to do to get rid of the old, dark record against me? O, how black it
looked last Saturday!"

"That is all. What more can you do? Who was it that said, 'Be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee'?"

"Mr. Hemstead," said Lottie, in a low tone, "I have felt very strangely--differently from any
time before in all my life--since last Sunday afternoon. I seemed to look upon Christ as if
He were before me, and I saw the tears in His eyes, as I saw them in yours the evening you
said such plain things to me, and I have felt a peculiar lightness of heart ever since. That
hymn we sang on Sunday evening expressed so exactly what I felt that I was overpowered. It
appeared written for me alone. Do you think that I can be a Christian?"

Hemstead's eyes glistened, and his heart bounded at the thought; but he felt that he was in
a grave and responsible position, and after a moment's thought answered wisely: 'I can base
no safe and positive answer on your feeling. I have already learned, from my own experience
and that of others, that religious feeling is something that comes and goes, and cannot be
depended upon. The test question is, How will you treat this Jesus whom you have seen, and
who has proved Himself both worthy to win and keep your trust?  A little strong feeling and
sentiment in regard to Him can.  not do you much good. What practical relation do you intend
to hold towards Him? No doubt many that saw Him weep, and then raise Lazarus after he had been
four days dead, were profoundly moved, but the majority went on in their old ways all the same.
You abound in strong common sense, and must see that more that even sincere, deep feeling is
necessary. What do you propose to DO?  Are you willing to take up your cross and become His
faithful follower?"

"That involves a great deal," said Lottie, with a long breath.

"It does indeed," he replied earnestly. "I would give my life to make you a Christian, and
yet I would not seek to win you for Him by false pretences, or hide any part of the rugged
path of self-denial. Count well the cost. But, believe me, Miss Marsden," he added, in a tone
that brought a sudden paleness to her cheek, "not following Him involves far more that is sad
and terrible."

Tears stood in Lottie's eyes. She was silent a few moments, and was evidently thinking deeply.
The young clergyman was desperately in earnest, and fairly trembled in the eagerness of his
expectation. He hoped that Lottie would come to a solemn and half-heroic and formal decision.
But he was both puzzled and disappointed by the sudden and brusque manner with which she turned
upon him as she said: "Where is the heavy cross that I must take up? Show it to me, and I will
think about it. Where is the rugged path? This one that leads to Mrs. Dlimm is very pleasant.
I don't see anything very awful in being a Christian nowadays. Of course I shall have to give
up all my old nonsense and flirt--Well, I suppose I might as well say it out. But there are
no Inquisitions, with thumbscrews and racks, any longer. Come, Mr. Hemstead, you are a Christian.
What heavy cross are you bearing? I hope you are not in the rugged path of self-denial this
morning, while taking me to Mrs. Dlimm's. I don't know any one who appears to enjoy the good
things of life more than you. I don't know what answer to give to your solemn and far-reaching
questions. I haven't much confidence in what Lottie Marsden will do. All I know is that I feel
as I imagine one of those children did whom Jesus took in his arms and blessed."

"But suppose," urged her anxious spiritual guide, who felt that she was giving a reason for
her faith that would hardly satisfy the grave elders of the church,--"suppose that at some
future time He should impose a heavy cross, or ask of you painful self-denial, would you shrink?"

She turned her dewy eyes upon him with a look of mingled archness and earnestness that he never
forgot, and said significantly, "I do not remember the New Testament story very perfectly,
but when the last, dark days came, women stood by their Lord as faithfully as the men,--didn't
they?"

Hemstead bowed his head in sudden humility, and said: "You are right. It was not woman who
betrayed, nor did woman desert or deny Him. Still I treasure the suggestion of your answer
beyond all words."

The tears stood thick in Lottie's eyes, and she was provoked that they did. Her strong feelings
were quick to find expression, and Hemstead seemed to have the power, as no one else ever had,
to evoke them. But she had a morbid dislike of showing emotion or anything verging toward sentiment;
therefore she would persist in giving a light and playful turn to his sombre earnestness.

"I did not mean," she said, "to be so hard upon the men, nor to secure so rich a tribute to
my sex. I imagine we all stand in need of charity alike. Only do not expect too much of me.
I dare not promise anything. You must wait and see."

"Though you promise so little, you inspire me with more confidence than many whom I have heard
make great professions"; and the light of a great joy and a great hope shone in his eyes.

"You look very happy, Mr. Hemstead," said Lottie, gratefully. "Would you be very glad to have
me become a Christian?"

He looked at her so earnestly that the rich blood mounted to her very brow. After a moment,
he replied, in a low, trembling tone: "I scarcely dare trust myself to answer your question,
and yet I do not exaggerate when I assure you that if I could feel that you were a Christian
before I go away, it seems as if I could never see a dark day again.  O Miss Marsden, how I
have hoped and prayed that you might become one!"

Her head bowed low in guilty shame. She compared her purpose towards him with his towards her.
Before she thought, the words slipped out, "And for all my wrong to you, you seek to give me
heaven in return."

He looked at her inquiringly, not understanding her remark; but after a moment said, "It would
be heaven to me on earth, even in my lonely work in the West, if I could remember that, as
a result of our brief acquaintance, you had become a Christian."

"Well," she said emphatically, "our acquaintance does promise to end differently from what
I expected; and it is because you are different. You are not the kind of a man that I expected
you would be."

"But I understood you from the first," remarked Hemstead, complacently. "My first impression
when you gave me your warm hand, and the only true welcome I received, has been borne out.
Though at times you have puzzled me, still, the proof you gave--on the evening of my arrival--of
a true, generous, and womanly nature, has been confirmed again and again. It has seemed to
me that your faults were due largely to circumstances, but that your good qualities were native."

Again Lottie turned away her burning cheeks in deep embarrassment. Should she tell him all?
She felt she could not. To lose his good opinion and friendship now seemed terrible. But conscience
demanded that she should be perfectly frank and sincere with him, and her fears whispered,
"He may learn it from the others, and that would be far worse than if I told him myself."

But her moral strength was not yet equal to the test. The old, prevailing influences of her
life again swayed her, and she guided the conversation from the topic as a pilot would shun
a dangerous rock.

"I will tell him all about it at some future time," she thought; "but not yet when the knowledge
might drive him away in anger."

She seized upon one of his words, which, when spoken, had jarred unpleasantly upon her feeling.

"Why do you speak of our acquaintance as brief? Are we to be strangers again after this short
visit is over?"

"I most positively assure you that you can never be a stranger to me again," he said eagerly.
"But in a few days you will go to New York, and I thousands of miles in another direction.
If I should tell you how you will dwell in my thoughts like an inspiration, I fear you would
think me sentimental. But in your absorbing city life I fear that I shall soon become as a
stranger to you."

"Well," said Lottie, averting her face, "I don't think I'll promise you anything this time
either. You must wait and see. But is that dreadful frontier life of yours a foregone conclusion?"

"Yes," he said, with quiet emphasis.

"There are plenty of heathen in New York, Mr. Hemstead. You found one of them in me, and see
how much good you have done; at least, I hope you have."

"There are also plenty of Christians in New York to take care of them. I commend some of the
heathen to you."

"I fear that they will remain heathen for all that I can do."

"No, indeed, Miss Marsden. Please never think that.  No one has a right to say, 'I can do nothing,'
and you least of all. Apart from your other gifts, you abound in personal magnetism, and almost
instantly gain control of those around you."

"How mistaken you are! I have no control over you."

"More than you think, perhaps," he said, flushing deeply.

It was his heart that spoke then, and not his will, instructed by deliberate reason.

She too blushed, but said laughingly, "What are words?  Let me test my power. Take a church
in New York, instead of a thousand miles out of the world."

"You are not in earnest," he said, a little sadly. "You would not seek to dissuade me from
what I regard as a sacred duty?"

"But is it 'a sacred duty'? There are plenty of others--less cultivated, less capable of doing
good--in the refined and critical East."

"That is not the way a soldier reasons. Some one must go to the front of the battle. And what
excuse can such a vigorous young fellow as I am have for hanging back?"

As he turned his glowing face upon her she caught his enthusiasm, and said impulsively, "And
in the front of the battle I would be, if I were a man, as I often wish I were."

"The line of God's battle with evil is very long, Miss Marsden. I think you can find the front
in New York as truly as I in the West. In this fight woman can often do as much as man. Won't
you try?"

"I shall not promise you anything," she said. "You must wait and see."

They were now before the parsonage in the hamlet of Scrub Oaks. The sound of the bells brought
Mrs. Dlimm's faded face to the window, and on recognizing them she clapped her hands for joy,
as one of her own children might have done; and a moment later was smiling upon the little
porch, the very embodiment of welcome.

CHAPTER XXIII.

A RATIONALIST OF THE OLD SCHOOL.

"I knew you would come," said Mrs. Dlimm, taking both of Lottie's hands with utter absence
of formality.  "Husband said I needn't look for you any more, but I felt it in my bones--no,
my heart--that you would come.  When I feel a thing is going to take place it always does.
So you are here. I am very glad to see your--Mr. Hemstead--too. This is splendid." And Mrs.
Dlimm exultantly ushered Lottie into the room that, when last seen, was crowded with such a
motley assembly. Hemstead meanwhile drove the horse to an adjacent shed.

"But he isn't my Mr. Hemstead," said Lottie, laughing.

"Well, it seems as if he were related, or belonged to you in some way. When I think of one,
I can't help thinking of the other."

"O dear!" exclaimed Lottie, still laughing, blushing, and affecting comic alarm; "being joined
together by a minister's wife is almost as bad as by the minister himself."

"Almost as good, you mean. You would have my congratulation rather than sympathy if you secured
such a prince among men."

"How little you know about him, Mrs. Dlimm! He is going to be a poor, forlorn home missionary;
and your husband's increased salary will be royal compared with his."

"He will never be forlorn; and how long will he be poor?"

--"All his life possibly."

"That's not very long. What will come after? What kind of a master is he serving?"

"Do you know," said Lottie, lowering her tone, and giving her chair a little confidential hitch
toward the simple-hearted lady with whom formality and circumlocution were impossible, "that
I am beginning to think about these things a great deal?"

"I don't wonder, my dear," said Mrs. Dlimm, with a little sigh of satisfaction. "No one could
help thinking about him who saw his manly courtesy and tact the evening you were here."

"O, no," said Lottie, blushing still more deeply; "I did not mean that. Please understand me.
Mr. Hemstead is only a chance acquaintance that I have met while visiting my aunt, Mrs. Marchmont.
I mean that when I was here last I was a very naughty girl, but I have since been thinking
how I could be a better one. Indeed, I should like to be a Christian, as you are."

In a moment the little lady was all tender solicitude. She was one who believed in conversion;
and, to her, being converted was the greatest event of life.

But just then Hemstead entered, and she had enough natural, womanly interest--not curiosity--to
note the unconscious welcome of Lottie's eyes, and the quick color come and go in her face,
as if a fire were burning in her heart and throwing its flickering light upon her fair features.

"Chance acquaintance, indeed!" she thought. "Why, here is this city-bred girl blushing as I
once did about Mr.  Dlimm. Whether she knows it or not, her blushes must tell the same story
as mine."

But though Mrs. Dlimm was so unconventional, she had tact, and turned the conversation to the
subject of the donation party.

"See here," she exclaimed exultantly, tugging a bulky commentary; "this is one of the results
of your coming the other evening. Mr. Dlimm has been wanting this book a long time, and now
he pores over it so much that I am getting jealous."

"The opinions expressed in such a ponderous volume ought to have great weight, surely," said
Hemstead, smiling.

"And do you know," she continued, in an aside to Lottie, "that each of the children has had
a new warm winter suit?  and, wonderful to tell, I have bought myself a dress right from the
store, instead of making over something sent me by brother Abel's wife from New York."

Lottie's eyes moistened, and she said in half soliloquy, "I didn't know it was so nice and
easy to make others happy."

"Ah! depend upon it, you are learning lots of things," said Mrs. Dlimm, significantly. "When
God begins to teach, then we do learn, and something worth knowing, too."

"I thought that God's lessons were very hard and painful," said Lottie to Hemstead, with a
spice of mischief in her manner.

"Mrs. Dlimm is a better authority than I was," he replied.  "Do you know," he continued, addressing
their hostess, "that Miss Marsden has done more to teach me how to preach than all my years
at the seminary?"

"Surely," exclaimed Mrs. Dlimm, "that's a rather strong statement. I can understand how Miss
Marsden can do a great deal for one. We have had very nice experience in that direction; but
just how she should teach you more than all the grave professors and learned text-books is
not clear at once."

"Well, she has," he maintained stoutly. "I doubt whether your husband gets as much light upon
the Bible from that huge commentary there as Miss Marsden gave me in one afternoon."

Mrs. Dlimm turned her eyes inquiringly toward Lottie, who said, laughingly, "It would seem,
last week, that I was a heathen and Mr. Hemstead a heretic."

"And what are you now?"

"O, he's all right now."

"And not you?"

"I fear I shall always be a little crooked; but I hope I am not exactly a heathen any longer."

"Miss Marsden was a heathen, as Nathanael was a shrewd and dishonest Jew," said Hemstead.

"What kind of a Jew was Nathanael?" asked Lottie, innocently.

"Christ said, when he first saw him," replied Mrs. Dlimm, smiling, "'Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no guile.'"

Then both were puzzled at Lottie's sudden and painful flush, but they ascribed it to her modesty;
and Hemstead, to give her time to recover herself, gave a brief sketch of his sermon, and how,
in the afternoon, while reading, at Lottie's suggestion, the complete story of Lazarus, they
both had seen the unspeakable sympathy of Christ for those He sought to save.

"O dear!" thought Lottie, "when shall I escape the consequences of my foolish jest? 'Without
guile,' indeed!"

Mr. Dlimm now appeared, and he and Hemstead were soon discussing the rendering of an obscure
passage, upon which the big commentary gave the conflicting opinions of a dozen learned doctors.
Mrs. Dlimm carried Lottie off to her sanctum, the nursery,--the fruitful source of questions
and mysteries the learned doctors would find still more difficult to solve.

"And you are contented with this narrow round of life?" asked Lottie, curiously, as Mrs. Dlimm
finished the narration of what seemed to her very tame experience.

"Narrow!" said Mrs. Dliram, reproachfully; "my life and work are not narrow. I have six little
immortals to train. A million years hence they will either bless or reproach me. What consideration
in fashionable life is equal to that? Besides, my husband is engaged in the same kind of work
that brought the Son of God from heaven to earth. It is my privilege to help him. Scrub Oaks
is as much of a place as many of the villages in which He preached, and I am grateful that
I can take part in so royal a calling."

"Mrs. Dlimm," said Lottie, with sudden animation, "I shouldn't wonder if you and your husband
were very great people in heaven."

"Oh!" cried the little lady, laughing. "We never think of that. Why should we? But I know there
will be a nook there for us, and the thought makes me very happy."

"And you really and truly have been happy in all your toil and privations?"

"Yes," said Mrs Dlimm, with a strange, far-away look coming into her large blue eyes; "when
everything on earth has been darkest I have been most happy, and this has confirmed my faith.
Little children are sources of great joy, but they also cause much pain and anxiety. Yet when
I have been suffering most,--when the wardrobe has been scanty and the larder almost bare,--God
has taken me to His heart as I clasp this child here, and comforted by assuring me, 'Never
fear, my child, I will take care of you and yours.' See how He keeps His word. He sent you
here, with your bright, sunny face. He sent Mr. Hemstead here; and between you both we shall
make a long stage of our homeward journey most pleasantly."

"I never heard any one talk like you before," said Lottie, musingly. "You seem to believe all
the Bible says, as if it were actually right before you."

"Believe! Why not? The idea of God not keeping His word!"

"And is faith just the certainty that God will keep His word?"

"That is just faith; and though this great world--for little bits of which people lose their
souls--shall pass away, God's word shall stand until His least promise is fulfilled."

"That is not our creed on Fifth Avenue," said Lottie sadly. "The world first, God last. But
you sometimes, surely, wish that Mr. Dlimm was rich, and that you could have for him and the
children and yourself all that heart could wish?"

"I used to feel so occasionally, but I have got past that now. God loves my husband and children
better than I do, and He will provide what is best for us all. I simply try to rest in His
arms as this child does in mine."

"How strange it all is!" said Lottie, thoughtfully.

"Why strange? Your earthly father provides for you the best he can; and if our Heavenly Father
provides for us in the same way, surely will not His be the better provision?  What an absurd,
unnatural thing it is to suppose there is anything better than what God will give His own dear
children.  Are not both earth and heaven His? and He has promised the best of both to us."

"I can scarcely realize it all yet," said Lottie, with tears in her eyes. "I suppose it is
because you are so natural and true that you seem so odd to me, who have been brought up among
those that I fear look at things in false lights."

"I think I understand you, my dear," said Mrs. Dlimm, hopefully. "A child's penny toy will
hide a great mountain if held too near the eyes. It is thus the eyes of the worldly are blinded
by trifles till I fear some will never see God or heaven. But He is teaching you better. As
long as you follow His gentle leadings, and the pure impulses of your own heart, all will be
well. But as soon as you begin to take counsel of the world and its self-seeking spirit, you
will find yourself in trouble. If we wish to prosper and be happy in God's world, we must do
His will. This is good, sound common sense, which the experience of every age has borne out.
It often seems hard at first, my dear, as you will find out. The scourging was very hard to
bear; but Paul and Silas, singing in prison, with their feet made fast in the stocks, were
better off than their jailer, who was about to kill himself, and the magistrates, who, no doubt,
were in mortal fear because of the earthquake. We, too, can sing, whatever happens, as long
as God and conscience are upon our side."

It will thus be seen that Mrs. Dlimm was a rationalist as well as a believer, though not of
the new school.

For some reason, her philosophy was peculiarly acceptable to Lottie, and, though scarcely conscious
why, the exhortation to follow the impulses of her own heart seemed especially natural and
right; but her fashionable mother would have been alarmed indeed, if she had known that her
beautiful daughter was becoming the disciple of Mrs. Dlimm.

Though their call was by no means a short one, it passed all too quickly. The memory of it
would never fade from Lottie's mind; and it became another link in the chain by which God was
seeking to bind her to a better future than her friends could dream of in their earthly ambition.

"I am very glad I made this visit," Lottie said, as they were hastening home lest they should
be late to dinner. "It was very kind of you to take me so far."

He turned and lifted his eyebrows comically.

"What do you mean by that?" she asked.

"To hear you, one would think that I had been a martyr for your sake, while, in truth, I never
enjoyed myself more."

"Yes," said she; "but you welcome afflictions and trials of your patience."

"Would that I might be ever thus afflicted!" he exclaimed impulsively. Then, suddenly becoming
conscious of the natural suggestion of his words, he blushed deeply; but not more so than Lottie,
who turned away her face to hide her flaming cheeks. He, misinterpreting the act, thought that
she meant a hint that such remarks were not agreeable, and was thinking how to remedy what
he now regarded as a very foolish speech, when she, with woman's tact, led the conversation
to unembarrassing topics, and before they were aware the horse stopped at Mrs. Marchmont's door.

Lottie disarmed both suspicion and censure to a considerable extent by saying, "I had promised
Mrs. Dlimm to come and see her again, and wished to keep my word. I knew no one would care
to go there save Mr. Hemstead, so I took him to see the parson while I visited the parson's
wife. I enjoyed my call very much, too; and as Mr. Hemstead and Mr. Dlimm had a great argument
over a knotty theological point, I suppose he feels somewhat repaid also."

This put matters in quite another light. That one should go to see a parson's wife, and the
other to discuss theology with the parson, was very different from stealing off for an indefinite
ride with the purpose of being alone together. De Forrest was quite comforted, and was even
inclined to regard Lottie as rather considerate in not asking him to accompany her when visiting
such undesirable people as the Dlimms.  Though why she should wish to visit them herself was
a mystery. But then, he thought, "Lottie is odd and full of queer moods and whims. Let her
indulge them now, because, as my wife, they will scarcely be the thing." He was still more
comforted by noting that she did not have a great deal to say to Hemstead--indeed, that she
rather avoided him.

"She has had enough, and too much, of his heavy stupid company," he thought, "and finds that
even the carrying out of the practical joke is too hard work. If I can only get another good
opportunity, I won't wait till she goes to sleep before bringing the question to an issue."

But Lottie gave him no opportunity, and, while kind and gentle toward him, adroitly managed
that they should never be alone.

And Hemstead also, who had found their private tete-a-tetes so delightful and productive of
good results, was equally unable to be alone with her. Not that Lottie was averse, but because
she saw that lynx-eyed Bel was watching her; and again for the hundredth time she wished her
cynical friend back in the city.

Lottie's manner and apparent reserve were so marked at one time that Hemstead began to grow
troubled, though why he scarcely knew. There was no cause, save the peculiar sensitiveness
of one whose sunshine is beginning to come, not from the skies, but from the changing features
of a fellow-mortal.

Lottie quickly saw his shadowed face, and surmised the cause. Soon after, when his eyes were
questioningly seeking hers, she gave him such a sunny, genial smile as to assure him that,
whatever might be the cause of her somewhat distant manner, it did not result from any estrangement
from him.

Heretofore, when Lottie had liked a gentleman, she had been frank in showing that preference
within the limits of lady-like bearing. But, for some reason, she began to grow excessively
shy in manifesting any interest in Hemstead that the others could note. The reason with which
she satisfied herself explained her feeling but partially.

"They will think I am still trying to carry out my wicked, foolish joke."

But she did long for another unrestrained talk with him, and watched keenly to secure it without
exciting remark.  De Forrest did all he could to prevent this, however, and Bel unconsciously
became his ally. With woman's quick perception, she saw that Lottie was indulging in something
more than a "mood," and felt that it was a duty she owed to her friend to prevent mischief.

Thus Monday and Tuesday passed away, Lottie being too circumspect to give Bel sufficient cause
for speaking plainly.

Dan and Mr. Dimmerly were the only ones of the household who regarded the change in Lottie
with unmixed satisfaction. Not giving a thought to the cause, they were pleased with the gentleness
and attention which resulted.

"Lottie," said her brother Dan, as she kissed him good-night, after telling a marvellously
good story, "what has come over you? You make me think of Auntie Jane."

"I must be growing good indeed, if I remind any one of Auntie Jane," thought Lottie, exultantly.

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE TERROR OF A GREAT FEAR.

Long before Harcourt reached his law-office, he was satisfied that he had blundered foolishly,
and done Miss Martell great injustice. Her right to refuse his unwelcome love was perfect,
and her manner of doing so, as he understood her, had been most delicate, even in his estimation.
At the same time she had never given him the slightest ground for his implied aspersion that
in her pure, Christian life she shone down upon him with the cold distance of a "star."

He recalled her words and bearing in Mrs. Byram's conservatory, and the degree in which his
unreasonable passion had blinded him grew more apparent.

"Why should I expect her to love me?" he asked himself in bitterness. "It is a hundred-fold
more than I deserve, or had a right to hope, that she should put out her hand to save me."

He was on the point of returning twenty times, and asking her pardon for his folly, but that
bane of our life,--that hinderance to more good and happiness than perhaps any other one cause,--pride,
deterred, and Monday evening passed, an unhappy one to the object of his thoughts as well as
to himself.

On Tuesday pride was vanquished, and as soon as his business permitted he repaired to the Martell
mansion, eager to ask forgiveness. To his deep disappointment, he learned that Mr. Martell
and his daughter had driven up to town, crossed on the ferry-boat, and were paying some visits
on the other side of the river.

He now purposed to call again as soon as they returned, but was unexpectedly detained until
quite late in the evening.  He approached the familiar place that now enshrined, to him, the
jewel of the world, in both a humble and an heroic mood. He would not presume again, but in
silence live worthily of his love for one so lovely. He would be more than content--yes, grateful--if
she would deign to help him climb toward her moral height.

As he stood on the piazza, after ringing the door-bell, he was in greater trepidation than
when he had made his first plea in court, and was so intent in trying to frame his thoughts
into appropriate language that he did not note for the moment that no one answered. Again he
rang, but there was no response. There were lights in the house, and he knocked upon the door
quite loudly. A housemaid soon after appeared, with a scared and anxious face.

"Is Miss Martell at home?" he asked, a sudden boding of evil chilling his heart.

"Indade an' she is not. Would to God she was!"

"What do you mean?"

"Faix, an' I'm sure I'm glad ye's come, Misther Harcourt. The coachman is down at the shore,
and he'll tell ye all."

Harcourt dashed through the snow and shrubbery, over rocks and down steeps that gave him one
or two severe falls, that he might, the nearest way, reach Mr. Martell's boat-house. Here he
found the coachman peering out upon the dark waters, and occasionally uttering a hoarse, feeble
shout, which could scarcely be heard above the surf that beat with increasing heaviness upon
the icy beach.

The man seemed nearly exhausted with cold and anxiety, and was overjoyed at seeing Harcourt;
but he told the young man a story which filled him with deepest alarm.  It was to this effect:

Mr. and Miss Martell had been delayed in leaving a friend's house on the opposite side of the
river until it was too late to reach the boat on which it was their intention to cross. They
had been prevailed upon by their hospitable host to send their sleigh up to a later boat, while
they remained for an early supper, and then should cross in a boat rowed by an experienced
oarsman, who was a tenant on the gentleman's place.

"It was quite a bit after dark when I got back, but Mr.  Martell and the young lady hadn't
come over yet. I first thought they was goin' to stay all night, and that I should go arter
them in the mornin'; but the woman as sews says how she was sittin' at one of the upper winders,
and how she sees, just afore night, a light push out from t'other side and come straight across
for a long while, and then turn and go down stream. I'm afeard they've caught in the ice."

"But what became of the light?" asked Harcourt, half desperate with fear and anxiety.

"Well, the woman as sews says it went down and down as long as she could see."

A faint scream from the house now arrested their attention, and hastening up the bank they
heard the servants crying from the upper windows of the mansion, "There it comes! there it
comes again!"

Harcourt rushed to the second story of the house. A door leading into an apartment facing the
river was open, and without a thought he entered and threw open the blinds. Away to the south,
where the river enters the Highlands, he saw a faint light, evidently that of the lantern carried
in the boat. Familiar with the river, the whole state of things flashed upon him. In the last
of the ebb tide their boat had become entangled in the ice, but had been carried down no very
great distance. Now that the tide had turned, it was coming back, with the mass of ice in which
it had become wedged.

And could that faint glimmer indicate the presence of the one who never before had been so
dear? Could Miss Martell, the child of luxury, so beautiful and yet so frail and delicate,
be out in the darkness and cold of this winter night, perishing perhaps, with the lights of
this her elegant home full in view?

Then, for the first time, he recognized that the room he was in must be Miss Martell's sleeping
apartment. Though the light was low and soft, it revealed an exquisite casket, in keeping with
the jewel it had once held, but might no more enshrine. On every side were the evidences of
a refined but Christian taste, and also a certain dainty beauty that seemed a part of the maiden
herself, she having given to the room something of her own individuality.

It would be hard to describe Harcourt's sensation as a hasty glance revealed the character
of the place. He felt somewhat as a devout Greek might, had he stumbled into the sacred grotto
of his most revered goddess.

But this thought was uppermost in his mind,--"Here is where she should be; yonder--terrible
thought--is where she is. What can I do?"

Again he dashed back to the shore, calling the coachman to follow him. When the man reached
the water's edge, he found that Harcourt had broken open the boat-house, and was endeavoring
to get out the boat.

"Ye'll gain nothing there, wid that big boat," said the coachman. "The master has been away
so long that it's all out o' order. The water can get in it as soon as yerself.  The young
lady's little scollop--the one as is called Naughty Tillus--is sent away for the winter."

"Stop your cursed croaking," cried Harcourt, excitedly, "and help me out with this boat. If
I can't save her, I can at least drown with her."

"Divil a lift will I give ye. It will do the master and young lady no good, and I'll not have
your drownding on my conscience."

Harcourt soon found that he could not manage the large boat alone, and the matches he struck
to guide him revealed that the man had spoken truly, and that the craft was in no condition
for the service he proposed.

"Great God!" he cried, "is there no way to save her?"

He sprang upon the boat-house, and there, away to the south, was the dim light coming steadily
up the stream.  The moon had not yet risen; the sky was overcast with wildly flying clouds;
the wind was rising, and would drive and grind the ice more fiercely. It was just the night
for a tragedy, and he felt that if he saw that light disappear, as a sign that the boat had
been crushed and its occupants swallowed up by the wintry tide, the saddest tragedy of the
world would have taken place.

He groaned and clenched his hands in his impotent anguish.

"O God!" he cried, "what can I do to save her."

He clasped his throbbing temples, and tried to think. It soon occurred to him that Mrs. Marchmont's
boat might be in better condition. Hemstead was strong and brave, and would assuredly join
him in the effort to rescue them. Without a word he rushed up the bank, sprang into his cutter,
gave his spirited horse a cut from the whip, which caused him at once to spring into a mad
gallop, and so vanished from the eyes of the bewilderd and terrified servants, who were left
alone to their increasing fears.

"Save her,--save her," muttered the coachman, as, stiff and numb with cold, he followed Harcourt
more slowly to the house. "It's kind o' queer how he forgits about the old man."

CHAPTER XXV.

A TRUE KNIGHT.

As the dusk deepened into night upon this memorable evening, Hemstead stood at the parlor window,
and looked out so long and intently that Lottie joined him at last, and asked, "What can you
see without, and in the darkness, so much more attractive than anything within?"

"Do you see that faint light out there upon the river?"

"Yes."

"Well, I've been watching it for some time, and it troubles me. I noticed this afternoon that
there was ice coming down with the tide. Is it possible that some one, in crossing with a small
boat, has been caught in the ice and carried downward?"

"Why should you think that? Nothing is more common than lights upon the river at night."

"Yes, but not of late. Since the last severe cold I have noticed that the river was almost
deserted, and the papers state that it is freezing north of us. But it is the peculiarity in
the movement of the light that perplexes me. When I saw it first, it appeared as if coming
across the river. Suddenly, when quite over toward this side, it seemed to stop a moment, then
turn directly down the stream."

"Uncle," cried Lottie, "you know all about the river.  How do you account for what Mr. Hemstead
has seen?" and she explained.

"Lights are very deceptive at night, especially upon the water," said Mr. Dimmerly, sententiously.
"It's probably a hardy water-rat of a boatman dropping down with the tide to a point opposite
to where he wishes to land."

"Yes, that is it, Mr. Hemstead, so dismiss your fears.  Your brow is as clouded as that murky
sky there."

"That comparison is quite oriental in its extravagance," he said, his anxious face relaxing
into a sudden smile.  "But then you are a bit tropical yourself."

"Well, you can't complain if I remind you of the tropics this dreary winter night; so I'll
bear out your fanciful conceit. Your face, a moment since, was like a burst of sunshine."

"Your figure now is incorrect as well as extravagant; for, whatever light my face has, it is
but the reflection of your kindness."

"I hope you do not mean to suggest that you have any tendency towards 'mooning'?"

"'Mooning' is the indulgence of sickly sentiment, is it not,--a diluted moonlight kind of feeling?"

"Very well defined. Does experience give you such accuracy?" said Lottie, laughingly.

"I can honestly say no; and most surely not in your case."

"I'm glad to hear it," said Lottie. "I should be sorry to think that cold, diluted moonlight
was the type of any of my friends' regard."

"You may rest assured," he replied impulsively, "there is nothing 'cold or diluted' in my regard
for you--"

"There is the supper-bell," interrupted Lottie, hastily.

"What are you looking at?" asked De Forrest, uneasily noting the fact of their standing together
within the shadowy curtains. He had just descended from the toilet which, with him, was a necessity
before each meal.

"Mr. Hemstead has seen a light upon the river, and bodes from it some vague danger to some
vague, indefinite people. Come, Mr. Hemstead, come away, or before we know it you will be off
on the quixotic attempt to rescue what uncle calls a 'hardy water-rat,' that all the water
of the river could not drown."

"O, I see," sneered De Forrest; "Mr. Hemstead wishes to get cheaply, standing here within and
in good company, the credit of being willing to attempt a perilous rescue."

"You are jumping at conclusions very rapidly, Julian, and not very charitable ones either,"
said Lottie, reproachfully.

"Come, Mr. De Forrest," said Hemstead, quietly, "we will test this question of cheapness. I
will go with you to investigate that light."

"Nonsense!" replied the exquisite. "As Miss Marsden suggested, Don Quixote may be your model
knight, but he is not mine."

"Now I didn't suggest any such thing," said Lottie, decidedly vexed.

"Come, young people, tea is waiting," called Mrs. Marchmont.

"Well, I did," said De Forrest to Lottie, aside; "and what's more, I believe it's true," and
he placed her reluctant hand upon his arm, and drew her to the supper-room.

But Hemstead lingered a moment, to watch the light, with increasing uneasiness. In his silent
abstraction at the table it was evident to Lottie that his mind was dwelling upon the problem
of the mysterious glimmer far out upon the river.  Before the meal was over, he abruptly excused
himself, but soon returned as if relieved, and said, "It is no more to be seen."

"I told you how it was," said Mr. Dimmerly. "The man floated down as far as he wished, and
now has pulled ashore."

The explanation fully satisfied the rest, and sounded plausible to Hemstead; and the evening
promised to pass quietly and uneventfully away. Mrs. Marchmont's parlor was a picture of cosey
elegance. Bel, and Addie with her mother and uncle, made a game of whist at one table; while
Hemstead in subdued tones read the latest magazine at another. De Forrest was half-dozing in
his chair, for the article was rather beyond him; and while Lottie's fair face was very thoughtful,
it might be questioned whether the thought was suggested by the reader or by what he read.
But the article was finished, and for the relief of change Hemstead paced the room a few moments,
and then half-aimlessly went to the window and looked out toward the river. His abrupt exclamation
startled them all.

"There is the light again!"

A moment later he stood, bare-headed, upon the piazza, straining his eyes out into the darkness.

"I feel impressed that there is something wrong,--that some one is in danger," he said to Lottie,
who had followed him.

"You will take cold standing here without your hat," she said.

"So will you. Where is your hat, that you should talk prudence to me?"

But the others were more thoughtful of themselves, and were well protected as they now also
came out upon the piazza.

"Well, it is a little queer," said Mr. Dimmerly.

"I suppose one ought to go and see what it means," said Bel, hesitatingly. "But then there
are those better able to go than any one from here."

"Hush!" said Hemstead.

Far and faint there seemed to come a cry for help across the darkness.

"That is enough," he cried; "some one is in distress and danger. Come, Mr. De Forrest. The
case has lost all its quixotic elements, and you may now emulate the Chevalier Bayard himself."

"O, please don't go, gentlemen!" cried Lottie. "See, the night is very dark; the wind is rising;
the water must be very rough. You may just throw away your own lives in the vain attempt to
save utter strangers."

"Miss Marsden is right," said De Forrest, as if greatly relieved. "The attempt is perfectly
foolhardy, and I am not a fool. If some one is in a boat that is fast in the ice, he has only
a few more miles to drift before coming opposite a large town, where there are many better
able to help than we are."

"Hush!" cried Hemstead; "do you hear that?"

Faint and far away, as a response to De Forrest's words, came again more clearly the cry for help.

"That is enough," again said Hemstead, excitedly; and he started for his hat.

Lottie laid her hand upon his arm, and said with seeming earnestness, "Surely, Mr. Hemstead,
you will not be guilty of the folly of going alone upon such a desperate attempt as this?"

"I surely will; and you surprise me greatly that you seek to detain me," he said, almost sternly.

"But you alone can do nothing."

"As I am a man I will try. Where can I get the key of the boat-house?"

"If the young gentleman will go, I will go with him," said a voice from the darkness beyond
the piazza, which they recognized as that of Mrs. Marchmont's coachman.  "I've been to sea
in my day, and am not afraid of a little water, salt or fresh."

"Good for you, my fine fellow. I'll be with you at once," cried Hemstead.

"I've got the key of the boat-house, a lantern, and an axe to cut the ice, so you have only
to put on your coat and hat."

"There," said Hemstead to Lottie; "a way is provided already. How could you wish to keep me
back?" and without waiting for an answer he hastily seized his hat and coat from the hall rack.

But before he could spring down the piazza, steps she again stopped him a moment, as she said,
in a low, husky tone: "I did not wish to detain, but to test you. I wish you to go. I am proud
of you, though my heart trembles at your peril. But you shall not go till you are protected
and equipped. See, your hands are bare; they will become numb, and so useless. Where are your
gloves? The wind will carry your hat away. Here, you shall be my knight upon this occasion,
and, if you will, may wear my colors;" and she snatched the ribbon from her hair, and tied
his hat firmly down.

In a low, thrilling tone, meant only for her, he said: "Now you are the Lottie of my ideal;
now you are yourself again, and your words have given me tenfold my former courage and strength.
Good-by;" and ere she was aware, he had seized her hand and pressed a kiss upon it, in true
old knightly style.

"God bring you back safely," she said, with a quick sob.

Heaven heard the prayer. He did not, for he was off with a bound; and the darkness swallowed
him up as he followed the stout-hearted ex-sailor.

Lottie stood where he left her, unconscious that the wintry wind was blowing her unconfined
hair wildly about.

"Miss Lottie," said De Forrest, approaching her humbly.

She raised her hand deprecatingly.

"Really, Miss Lottie," he persisted, "I would have gone if you had wished me to."

"Hark!" she said, in a low tone. "Can you heal them?"

Lynx-eyed Bel, standing unnoticed in the shadow, had witnessed and comprehended the scene more
fully than the Others, and speedily brought Lottie to her senses by whispering in her ear:
"Come, don't make a goose of yourself.  If Mr. Hemstead is your 'knight,' he has not gone to
fight a dragon, but to row a boat, and rescue a fisherman in all probability. Your hair is
down and blowing about your eyes, and you look like a guy generally."

Even Lottie, in her highly-wrought state, was not proof against such bald prose as this; and
she turned and hastened to her room.

Bel followed, proposing now, at last, to open Lottie's eyes to her folly. Her first words of
wisdom were, as Lottie, with wet eyes, stood binding up her hair, "What a fool you are beginning
to make of yourself over this Western student!"

"Hush!" said Lottie, imperiously.

"There it is again. You haven't been yourself since he came. If your mother knew what was going
on--"

"Bel," said Lottie, in a tone that quite startled that nervous young lady, "do you value my
friendship at all?"

"Certainly; and that is why I wish to prevent you from drifting into trouble: and it's not
right for you to get him into--"

Lottie's warning gesture was so emphatic that Bel paused.

"Has it ever occurred to you," Lottie continued, in a tone that Bel had never heard her use
before, "that I am not a child, and that you are not my natural guardian? Not another word,
please, about Mr. Hemstead, or we are strangers;" and she quietly finished her toilet and left
the room.

She had hardly reached the lower hall before there was a furious ring at the door. Before it
could be Opened Mr.  Harcourt burst in, and called, "Where is Mr. Hemstead?"

At the first sound of his voice Addie rushed out and clung to his arm, crying hysterically,
"What is the matter?"

He drew back, with an impatience akin to disgust, and repeated his question: "Where is Mr.
Hemstead? Why don't some one speak?"

"Mr. Harcourt," said Mrs. Marchmont, in offended dignity, "I think you might, at least, have
answered Addie's question and told us what the trouble is."

"Trouble enough, God knows. Mr. and Miss Martell have been caught in the ice, out in an open
boat, for hours.  Do you see that light there? Good heavens! there is another light shooting
out toward it--"

"Yes," cried Lottie, in a sudden ecstasy of delight; "there goes my brave, true knight to the
rescue, and he will save them, too; see how he gains upon them. That is Mr. Hemstead's voice.
I know it well. He is shouting encouragement to them. Hear the feeble answering cry."

"That's a woman's voice," Harcourt cried, after listening a moment as if his life depended
on what he heard.  "Thank God, she has not perished with cold"; and he dashed away toward the
river bank.

Addie and her mother looked at each other. They too, like the coachman, had been struck with
Mr. Harcourt's choice of pronouns.

But the prudent lady did not forget herself or her duty a moment. She made them all come in
from the bleak piazza, and had the light turned down in the parlor, so that they could see
through the window just as well,--a more comfortable point of observation.

But De Forrest quite ostentatiously muffled himself up to his eyes, that he might go down and
"help."

Approaching timidly, he said to Lottie as she stood at the window, "Can you not take another
knight into your service this evening?"

"O, yes, Julian," she replied good-naturedly; "a regiment in so good a cause as this. Hasten
to the shore.  You may be of some possible help;" and, with a gesture of dismission, she turned
again to her watch.

De Forrest slowly departed, feeling that this was a very different farewell from that bestowed
on Hemstead, of which he had caught an aggravating glimpse.

While the others were eagerly talking and surmising, and the servants bustling about, preparing
for those who would soon be brought in, chilled and wet with spray, Lottie stood at her post
motionless, oblivious of all around, and as intent upon Hemstead's light as if she were to
be rescued instead of Miss Martell.

CHAPTER XXVI.

ON A CRUMBLING ICE-FLOE.

The plan suggested by their host, of sending their sleigh home by the ferry, while they crossed
in a boat, just suited Miss Martell, and she proposed having a good vigorous pull at the oars
herself. She had always been fond of out-of-door sports, a taste which her father had judiciously
encouraged; and thus had saved her, no doubt, from the life of an invalid, for she had inherited
the delicacy of a feeble mother, who years before, in spite of all that wealth could do to
prevent it, had passed away.

Just at this time Miss Martell was waging that pathetic war with her own heart which so many
women must fight out in silence; and she welcomed eagerly any distraction of thought,--anything
that would so weary the body that the mind could rest. She dreaded the long, monotonous ride
home, and so warmly seconded the new plan that her father yielded, though somewhat against
his judgment.

Through the little delays of a hospitality more cordial than kind, they were kept until the
early December twilight was deepening into dusk. But the oarsman lighted his lantern, and was
confident that he could put them across most speedily. The boat was stanch and well built,
and they started with scarcely a misgiving, Miss Martell taking an oar with much zest. Their
friends waved them off with numberless good wishes, and then from their windows watched till
the boat seemed quite across, before drawing the curtains and concluding that all was well.

At first they did not meet much ice, and everything promised a safe and speedy passage; but,
when they were well past the middle of the river, two dark masses were seen just before them.
There appeared to be a wide opening between them, through which they could see the water ripple.

"I think we can shoot through," said the oarsman, standing up a moment; "perhaps it will be
the safest course, for we don't know what's above."

"Very well," said Mr. Martell, "I will steer you as well as I can. Pull strongly till we are
again in clear water."

Miss Martell bent her supple form to the oar, and her strokes counted as well as those of the
strong, practised man; and the boat sped, all too quickly, into what afterwards seemed the
very jaws of destruction.

The opening narrowed instead of widening. The ice above, for some reason, appeared to gain
on that below.

In growing alarm, Mr. Martell saw that they were becoming shut in, and pointed out the fact
to the oarsman.

"Shall we turn around?" he asked, excitedly.

The man stood up again, and instantly decided.

"No, we have not time; the tide is running very swiftly.  The ice would close on us before
we could get around.  Our best chance is to push through. I can see water beyond." They bent
to their oars again with the energy which danger inspires.

But there was not time. The opening closed too rapidly.  Suddenly the bow struck the upper
cake, and, being well out of the water, ran up on the ice, causing the boat to take in water
at the stern. For a second it seemed that they would be overturned and drowned at once.

But just at this moment the upper cake struck the lower ice, and the boat, being well up on
the first cake, was not crushed between the two masses, as would have been the case had the
ice closed against its sides while they were deep in the water. For a moment they were saved,
while the upper and lower floes crunched and ground together under the keel, lifting the light
craft still further above the tide and throwing it over on one side. Without a second's pause,
the now consolidated field of ice swept downward, carrying with it the wedged and stranded skiff.

The lantern gleamed on the pale faces of those who realized that they had just passed through
a moment of supreme peril, and perhaps had before them as great if not equally imminent dangers.

The oarsman hastily examined the boat, and found that it had been injured, though to what extent
he could not tell.  Water was oozing in slowly from some point near the keel, but they were
too high out of the water to know whether more dangerous leaks had been made. They tried to
break their way out, but found that the two cakes had become so joined together as to form
a solid mass, upon which they could make no impression.

They called aloud for help, and Miss Martell's plaintive cry was blended again and again with
the hoarse, strong shoutings of the men. But the river was wide; the tide swept them out toward
its centre, and then nearer the less peopled eastern shore. The evening was cold and bleak;
few were out, and these so intent upon reaching warm firesides that they never thought of scanning
the dark waste of the river; and so, to all the cries for aid there was no response, save the
gurgling water, that sounded so cold as to chill their hearts, and the crunching of the ice
as the rushing tide carried them downward, and away from the gleaming lights of their own loved
home,--downward and past the lights from Mrs. Marchmont's mansion, where, even in her peril,
poor Alice Martell could picture Harcourt at Addie's side, and she forgotten. As the imagined
scene rose vividly before her, the wild thought passed through her mind: "Since it must be
so, perhaps I can find more rest beneath these waters than in my home yonder. It may be for
the best, after all, and God designs mercy in what at first seemed so terrible."

As people saw Miss Marten's quiet and rather distant bearing in society, as many admired her
chiselled and faultlessly refined features, they little imagined that, as within snowy mountains
are volcanic fires, so within her breast was kindling as passionate a love as ever illumined
a woman's life with happiness, or consumed it with a smouldering flame.

But death is stern and uncompromising, and snatches away all disguises,--even those which hide
us from ourselves.  In bitterness of heart the poor girl learned, while darker than the night
the shadow of death hovered over her, how intense was her love for one who she believed loved
another. If but a hand's breadth away, beneath the rushing tide, there was a remedy for the
pain at her heart, why need she fear?

"My child," said a tremulous voice.

Then, with a natural and remorseful rush of love for one who had been as tender towards her
as a mother since that mother commended her to his care, she put her arms around him and whispered,
"I am not afraid, father. Mother and heaven may be nearer than we think."

"Thank God, my child,--thank God you are not afraid.  I was trembling for you,--not myself.
You are young, and I trusted that there was a happy life before you. But the home where mother
is promises me far more than the one yonder, whose lights are growing so faint."

"I am not afraid, dear father. I am content, if it's God's will, to go to that better home
and be with you and mother."

"God bless you, my child; and blessed be the God of mercy who has given you so true a faith.
It would be terrible to me beyond words if now you were full of hopeless dread."

But the poor oarsman had no such faith,--only the memory of his dependent wife and children,
and his material life, which never before had seemed so sweet and precious. He kept shouting
for aid until exhausted, and then despairingly sat down to await the result.

Mr. Martell, in the true Christian spirit, sought to impart to his humble companion in peril
some of his own confidence in God's mercy and goodness; but in vain. An intelligent, sustaining
faith cannot be snatched like a life-preserver in the moment of danger; and the man appeared
scarcely to heed what was said.

Downward and past the twinkling lights of many comfortable homes the remorseless tide still
swept them, until the huge outlines of the two mountains at the portal of the Highlands loomed
out of the darkness.

"If we get down among the mountains, we might as well give up," said the oarsman, sullenly.
"We might as well be cast away at sea as down in that wild gorge; though for that matter it
seems, to-night, as if one's neighbors wouldn't step out of doors to keep a body from drowning.
Why no one has heard us is more than I can understand, unless it is accordin' to the old sayin',
'None's so deaf as them as won't hear.'"

But there was nothing strange in the fact that they had been unnoted. The north wind blew their
voices down the river. There was a noisy surf upon the shore, and those who chanced to see
the light supposed it to come from some craft hastening to its winter quarters near the city.
So fate seemed against them, and they drifted down and down until the black shadow of "Storm
King" swallowed them up.

But now they became conscious that their motion was growing less steady and rapid. A little
later, and the floe apparently paused in its downward progress, and there was only some slight
movement caused by the increasing gale.

Then came what seemed interminable hours of weary waiting under the sombre shadow of "Cro'
Nest" mountain.  The strange and almost irresistible drowsiness that severe cold induces began
to creep over Miss Martell, but her father pleaded with her to fight against it; and, more
for his sake than her own, she tried. They took turns in endeavoring to break the ice around
them with the boat-hook. The exercise kept their blood in circulation, but was of little avail
in other respects. The ice was too heavy and solid for their feeble strokes.

At last the tide turned, and the dreary, monotonous waiting in their hopeless position was
exchanged for an upward movement that would soon bring them above the mountains again, where,
from the thickly peopled shores, there would be a better chance of being seen and rescued.

There was no certainty that they would be missed, and therefore sought for, as the coachman,
not finding them on his return, might conclude that they had been prevailed upon to remain
all night with the friend they were visiting.

But any exchange from the black, rayless shadows that surrounded them would be a relief; and
it was with a faint feeling of hopefulness--that they recognized their movement northward,
which slowly increased in speed as the tide gained mastery of the slight natural current of
the river.

The strengthening northern gale had thrown up quite a "sea," and the experienced oarsman soon
saw that the ice-field by which they were surrounded was breaking up under the influence of
the waves. This might at last bring relief, or increase their danger. If the ice should all
break up around them and leave their boat tight and sound, they could tow ashore. If the boat
had been or should become so injured as to leak badly, it might fill with water before they
could reach land. Thus, in any case, the trying nature of their peculiar position was aggravated
by a terrible uncertainty and suspense.

As they emerged from the Highlands into the broad waters of Newburgh Bay, their worst fears
seemed about to be realized. Here, for many miles, the north wind had an unrestrained sweep,
and the waves grew larger and more violent. Under their increasing force the ice-floe crumbled
around them rapidly, until at last little was left save the mass of double thickness caused
by the union of the two large cakes between which the boat had been caught. This, at last,
began to give under the weight of the boat, and let it more deeply into the water. Then, to
their dismay, they saw that the seams of the boat had been so wrenched apart that the water
came in rapidly.

They tried to keep it down by baling. The frosty gale tossed Mr. Martell's white hair, while
with his hat he worked, in pathetic earnestness, for the sake of his daughter; but in spite
of all that he and the oarsman could do, the water gained on them, wetting their feet and creeping
up their legs with the icy chili of death.

Every moment or two the man would pause in his work and send forth a cry of such terrible power
and earnestness that it would seem some one must hear.

Again Alice Martell saw the distant lights of her own home, but she turned from them to those
that gleamed from the nearer residence of Mrs. Marchmont. Was he there, safe and happy, looking
love into the eyes of Addie Marchmont, while every moment she sank lower into the cold river?
The thought sent a deeper chill to her heart than the icy tide from which she could no longer
keep her feet.

"God and man is agin us," said the oarsman, savagely.  "What is the use of trying any longer!
The sooner it's over the better"; and he was about to give up in despair. Alice, with equal
hopelessness of any earthly aid, was about to turn her eyes from the faint rays which, barbed
with the thoughts suggested above, pierced her heart like arrows, when the throwing open of
the hall-door by Hemstead let out such a broad streaming radiance as attracted her notice.
By calling the attention of the others to it, she inspired in them a faint hope.

But when, soon after, the door was closed, and the lights had their usual appearance, the flicker
of hope sank down into a deeper darkness.

Alice turned to her father, and in close embrace and with a oneness of spirit and hope that
needed not outward expression, they silently lifted their thoughts from the dark earth to the
bright heaven whose portals they soon expected to enter.

Just then a voice from earth recalled them to earthly hope and the prospect of human help.
It was Hemstead's shout of encouragement from the shore. Then they saw the glimmer of a lantern
moving hither and thither; a moment later it became stationary, then shot out towards them.

With cries of joy they recognized that they had been seen, and that an attempt to rescue them
was being made.

In the apathy of their despair the water had gained dangerously; but with the energy of hope,
that is ever greater than that of fear or despair, they set to work anew. Again the wintry
winds tossed Mr. Martell's white hair, as for want of something better he baled with his hat,
and Alice's little numb hands were lifted every moment as if in pathetic appeal, as she dipped
them in the ice-cold water at her feet, and threw out a tiny cupful, which the gale carried
away in spray.

"Come quick. We can't keep afloat much longer," cried the oarsman.

"Ay, ay," shouted the ex-sailor in a voice as hoarse as the winds in the cordage of his old ship.

"Courage!" cried Hemstead; and his tones, in contrast, rang out like a bugle, inspiring hope
in the chilled hearts of those who, a little before, had despaired, and also sending an almost
equal thrill of delight to the heart of Lottie Marsden, as, with the half-frenzied Harcourt,
she stood in Mrs.  Marchmont's open door.

The sailor-coachman was a good oarsman, and Hemstead pulled fairly. Both were very strong,
and they drove the boat through the short, chopping waves, rather than over them, caring not
how much water was shipped.

A little later came the shout, "Quick, quick! The ice is giving under us, and the boat sinking."

"Oh! come!--save my father!" cried Alice Martell, in a tone that might have moved the very
ice around her to pity.

"My child, my child!" came the agonized voice of the father. "Never think of me, if you can
save her."

Hemstead's nature was anthracite, and now glowed at white heat in his grand excitement. He
was no longer a man, but a giant, and would have ruined everything, snapped his oars, dragged
the oar-pins from their sockets, thus rendering his massive strength utterly useless, had not
the cool, wary ex-sailor taken command of the little craft, and insisted on seamanship. Under
his skilful direction the student was like a powerful engine, with a steady, measured stroke,
and the boat fairly flew, until their oars struck floating ice, and then they had to slacken
up, for to strike a mass of ice at their speed would be to sink at once.

"Steady now," cried the ex-sailor. "You pull; I will stand and steer."

Their boat was roughly grazed several times, but glided through without serious injury.

"Now or never!" cried the oarsman; "we're sinking."

Alice hid her face on her father's breast. Life had grown strangely sweet during the brief
time since, at Hemstead's voice, hope had revived; and it seemed a bitter thing to perish almost
within the grasp of rescuing hands.

"Oh! come!" groaned the father. "Great God! this is hard."

With a despairing cry she heard the water rush and gurgle around her, and closed her eyes,
not expecting to open them again in this world. But strong hands grasped and lifted her drenched,
helpless form tenderly into the boat.

With mingled hope and fear she looked up, and by the lantern's light recognized Frank Hemstead.

"My father," she gasped.

"Safe, my darling, thank God," said Mr. Martell, taking her into his arms; "and they have pulled
our stout oarsman in, too. So we are all safe."

"Well, I hope so," said the ex-sailor, with a little depressive dubiousness. "We shipped a
sight o' water comin' out.  There's a deal of ice runnin', and so chopped up one can skerce
see it. I must be skipper and all, mind, if we are to come safe out. Here, Mr. Hemstead, you
bale; and you, too, messmate, if yer hain't shipped too much water yerself.  I'll sit well
up towards the bow, where I can see and pull around the ice. Besides, with this cargo, we've
got to cross the waves kind o' easy and keerful, or they'll swamp us."

Thus in this instance the ex-sailor appeared a special providence, and gradually took them
out of the ice-strewn tide in the centre of the river to smoother, clearer water nearer the
shore. Soon after, drenched and half-frozen, they reached Mrs. Marchmont's boat-house.

Miss Martell's powers of endurance were nearly exhausted; and when the lantern, held aloft,
revealed  Harcourt's pale face,--when she knew that it was his arms that received her in her
helplessness, and she heard him murmur, "I now believe there's a merciful God, and thank Him,"--in
the strong reaction of feeling she became unconscious.

CHAPTER XXVII.

THE MEETING AND GREETING.

Mr. Martell's garments were frozen upon him, and he was so stiff and numb with cold that with
difficulty he made his way up the bank with the support of De Forrest and the gallant coachman,
who had suddenly blossomed out into a hero. Harcourt and Hemstead formed with their hands what
is termed a "chair," and bore the apparently lifeless form of Miss Martell swiftly towards
Mrs. Marchmont's residence. The poor oarsman was so glad to be on solid ground once more that
he was able to hobble along at a good pace by himself.

The wind again played mad pranks with Lottie's hair as she at last stood impatiently on the
piazza, and then dashed off through the snow to meet them.

"O, thank God, you are safely back. But Miss Martell--she is not--she is not--"

"Don't suggest such a thing," groaned Harcourt. "Of course she has only fainted."

Hemstead could not speak, even to Lottie. With white face and set teeth he sought to keep up
to the end. The effort he was now putting forth was less that of muscle than sheer force of
will. As with Miss Martell, he, too, was reacting from the tremendous strain that the last
hour had brought. He trembled with almost mortal weakness as he slowly mounted the piazza steps.
He staggered under his share of their burden as he crossed the hall. Lottie, puzzled by his
silence, now saw his deathly pallor with alarm, and instinctively stood at his side.

"You had better take Miss Martell directly to her room," said Mrs. Marchmont.

"In here, quick," gasped Hemstead. He tottered to the nearest sofa, and, a second later, lay
unconscious at Miss Martell's feet.

At this moment Alice again became conscious. Hemstead's condition did more to revive her than
all restoratives; for, woman-like, she thought of him more than herself. She sat up and exclaimed
faintly: "O, can't something be done for him? Quick. It looks as if he had given his life for
us"; and she looked around, not far enough to see the expression of Harcourt's face as he welcomed
her back to consciousness, but only to see Addie clinging to his arm, repeatedly asking to
be assured that he was not hurt.

"Thank heaven you are safe," he bent down and whispered.

"Don't think of me. Look at Mr. Hemstead."

Again he misunderstood her, and with bitterness thought, "After all my anguish on her account,
she gives me not even a thought, and her first words are, 'Don't think of me';" and he felt
that fate had been very cruel in sending Hemstead to her rescue instead of himself.

Mrs. Marchmont now appeared upon the confused scene, and proved that she was equal to the occasion.
It was a sad pity that she had not imparted to her daughter a little of her own capability.
She bade De Forrest, and the still stout and hearty ex-sailor, carry Hemstead at once to his
room, while she and one of the maids assisted Miss Martell to hers. No opportunity whatever
was given for any romantic and affecting scenes.

Lottie had stood for a second in dismay, after seeing her "true knight" sink on the floor,
and then, like a sensible girl, instead of going off into hysterics, went like a flash to her
aunt's wine-closet for brandy. But before she could find it Mrs. Marchmont had caused both
the rescued and the rescuer to be conveyed to the privacy of their own rooms, where they could
at once receive the prosaic treatment that their condition required.

The room which a moment before had presented a scene which she would never forget was empty,
Harcourt having gone for a physician.

She met Mr. Dimmerly on the stairs, who took the brandy from her, saying: "That's sensible.
We'll rub him down with it, inside and out, and he'll be all right in the morning.  Now you
see how blood tells. Making a parson of him can't change the fact of his coming from an old
family. He has been as brave to-night as the Dimmerlys were a thousand years ago."

But Lottie was not a bit interested in the millennial Dimmerlys, and, putting her arms around
her uncle's neck in a way that surprised that ancient fossil, she coaxed:

"Won't you promise me, uncle, that as soon as he is safe you will come out and let me know?"

"Safe! He's safe now. Who ever heard of even a half-blooded Dimmerly dying from a mere faint?
Old age is the only disease that runs in our family, my dear. But I will let you know as soon
as he is comfortably asleep. I am going to make my proper parson nephew almost drunk, for once
in his life; and you needn't expect to see him much before ten o'clock to-morrow."

Lottie, finding her services were not needed in Miss Martell's room, went down to the kitchen,
where she found the half-frozen oarsman-now rigged out in the dress-coat and white vest of
the colored waiter--and the brave coachman who had put his old sea-craft to such good use.
They were being royally cared for by the cook and laundress. The poor fellow who out in the
boat had thought that the hearts of even his neighbors were as cold and hard as the ice that
was destroying them had now forgotten his misanthropy, and was making a supper that, considering
the hour, would threaten to an ordinary mortal more peril than that from which he had escaped.
She drew from him--and especially from the coachman--the narrative of their thrilling experience,
and every moment Hemstead grew more heroic in her eyes.

"Bless you, miss," said the bluff ex-sailor, his tongue a little loosened by the whiskey he
had taken as an antidote for the cold and wet, "there's stuff enough in him to make a hundred
such as t'other young gentleman as wouldn't go.  Sudden spells, like that he had t'other night,
is all he'll ever be'stinguished for, I'm a-thinking. But I ax your pardon, miss."

"I can forgive you anything to-night, my brave fellow," said Lottie, blushing. "Though you
have given Mr. Hemstead so much credit, he will give you more to-morrow.  Take this and get
something to remember this evening by"; and she slipped a twenty-dollar bank-note into his hand.

"Now bless your sweet eyes!" exclaimed the man, ducking and bobbing with bewildering rapidity;
"it's your kindness that'll make me remember the evening to my dying day."

"How could you speak so of Mr. De Forrest, when the young leddy is engaged to him?" said the
cook, reproachfully, after Lottie had gone.

"No matter," said the ex-sailor, stoutly. "I've had it on my conscience to give her a warnin'.
I hadn't the heart to see such a trim little craft run into shallow water, and hoist no signal.
If she was my darter, she'd have to mitten that lubber if he was wuth a million."

As Lottie passed through the hall with silent tread, she saw that De Forrest was in the parlor,
and to escape him continued on up to her room, musing as she went: "What a strange blending
of weakness and strength Mr. Hemstead is! Well, I should like that. I should like a man to
be as strong as Samson generally, but often so weak that he would have to lean on me."

Whom did Lottie mean by that indefinite word "man"?  It did not occur to her that there was
a very definite image in her mind of one who was pale and exhausted, and whom it would now
be a dear privilege to nurse back into strength and vigor.

She met her uncle and the physician in the upper hall, and the latter said: "Mr. and Miss Martell
are doing as well as could be expected, when we consider the fearful ordeal they have passed
through. As far as I can foresee, a few days' rest and quiet will quite restore them."

"And Mr.--Mr. Hemstead?" faltered Lottie, the color mounting into her face, that anxiety had
made unwontedly pale.

"The brave fellow who rescued them? Now he is the right kind of a dominie,--not all white choker
and starch.  No fear about him, Miss Marsden. He's made of good stuff, well put together. A
night's rest and a warm breakfast, and he will be himself again"; and the old doctor bustled away.

"What delightful prose!" thought Lottie, and she tripped lightly to her room and kissed the
sullen and offended Bel good night; and, very grateful and at peace with all the world, soon
fell asleep.

But she had a disagreeable dream. Again she saw Hemstead at Miss Martell's feet; but now, instead
of being pale and unconscious, his face was flushed and eager, and he was pleading for that
which the king cannot buy. She awoke sobbing, called herself a "little fool," and went to sleep
again.

But in the morning the dream lingered in her mind in a vague, uncomfortable way.

She was early down to breakfast, for she was eager to speak to Hemstead, and tell him how she
appreciated his heroism. But either his exhaustion was greater than the physician had believed,
or his uncle's sedatives were very powerful, for he did not appear.

There was nothing better for her than to endure De Forrest's explanations why he had not gone,
and his assurances that if he had "only known, etc."; to which she gave an impatient hearing,
quite unlike her gentleness of the two preceding days. There were little things in her manner
Which indicated a falling barometer, and suggested that the day might not pass serenely.

She learned from her aunt and uncle that Mr. and Miss Martell were feeling better than might
have been expected, and that Hemstead was still sleeping.

"Sleep was all he wanted," said Mr. Dimmerly; "and I made it my business he should get it."

Quite early in the forenoon, Mr. Martell and his daughter felt equal to coming down to the
parlor, and after dinner it was their intention to return home. A luxurious lounge was wheeled
near the blazing wood fire, and on this Miss Mar-tell was tenderly placed by her father, who,
in joyful gratitude, could scarcely take his eyes from her pale face. Beyond the natural languor
which would follow so terrible a strain, she seemed quite well.

Both father and daughter appreciated Mrs. Marchmont's courtesy greatly; and Miss Martell's
effort to be cordial, even to Addie, was quite pathetic, when it is remembered that she felt
that her supposed rival would harm her more than could the cold river.

Lottie made frequent errands to her room, and lingered in the hall as much as she could without
attracting notice, in the hope of seeing Hemstead a moment alone. The impulsive girl's warm
heart was so full of admiration for what he had done that she longed to show him her appreciation
without the chilling restraint of observant eyes and critical ears. But he was so blind to
his interests as to blunder into the parlor when she was there and every one else also.

Though it cost her great effort, Alice Martell rose instantly, and greeted him so cordially
as to bring the deepest crimson into his pale face. Mr. Martell also pressed to his side, speaking
words which only a grateful father could utter.

When, for any cause, Hemstead was the object of general attention, the occasion became the
very hour and opportunity for his awkward diffidence to assert itself, and now he stood in
the centre of the floor, the most angular and helpless of mortals.

De Forrest looked at him with disdain, and thought, "I would like to show him how a gentleman
ought to act under the circumstances."

De Forrest would have been equal to receiving all the praise, and as it was, in view of his
readiness to have saved Miss Martell if he "had only known," could have accepted, with graceful
complacency, a gratitude that quite overwhelmed the man of deeds.

Hemstead's confusion was so great as even to embarrass Miss Martell for a moment, and her face,
from reminding one of a lily, suddenly suggested an exquisite pink rose.  But before he was
aware she had ensconced him in an easy chair at her side, and with a tact peculiarly her own
had rallied his panic-stricken faculties into such order that he could again take command of them.

But as Lottie saw them grasping each other's hands and blushing, her dream recurred to her
with the force of an ominous prophecy. Hemstead, in his severe attack of diffidence, had not
greeted any. one on his entrance, but had fallen helplessly into Miss Kartell's hands, and
had been led to his chair like a lamb to the slaughter. But Lottie took it as much to heart
as if he had purposely neglected to speak to her. And when, a little later, Mr. Dimmerly commenced
a formal eulogy, Hemstead with an expression of intense annoyance raised his hand deprecatingly,
and pleaded that no one would speak again of what he had done, she feared that all the glowing
words she meant to say would be unwelcome after all.

Everything had turned out so differently from what she had anticipated that she was disappointed
above measure, and before he could collect his scattered wits she left the room.

"And so it all ends," she thought bitterly, as she chafed up and down the hall. "I sent him
out last night as my own 'true knight,' wearing my colors, and he rescues another woman. When
I see him again he brushes past me to speak to the one who, owing him so much, of course will
be grateful. With eyes for her alone he wears my colors in his face, and she raises the same
blood-red signal. I was looking forward to the pleasure of giving him a welcome that he might
value on his return, and he has not even spoken to me. After our parting last night could anything
have turned out more flat and prosaic?"

Just at this moment Harcourt, who was another victim of circumstances, entered, and Lottie,
too annoyed to meet any one, fled to her own room.

He had already called early in the morning, to inquire aftei the invalids; but Miss Martell
did not know this, and his coming now seemed a little dilatory, considering all they had passed
through. Deep in her heart there was disappointment that he had not come to her rescue instead
of Hemstead. Was he one to stand safely on the shore while others took risks from which true
manhood would not have shrunk? Could he have dreamt that she was in peril, and still have let
Hemstead go without him to her aid? These were thoughts that had distressed her during part
of a sleepless night and all the morning.

Moreover, when he entered, Addie had pounced upon him in her usual style, as if she had in
him certain rights of possession.

Addie's manner, together with her own thoughts, gave an involuntary tinge of coldness to Miss
Martell's greeting, which he was quick to recognize, while her cordiality to Hemstead suggested
to him, as to Lottie, that she might be very grateful.

Mr. Martell was more than slightly distant: he was stiff and formal. As circumstances then
appeared to him, he thought that Harcourt had acted a very unworthy part.  Mr. Martell naturally
supposed that both Harcourt and De Forrest were at Mrs. Marchmont's, but that only Hemstead
had been willing to venture to their assistance. To De Forrest he gave scarcely a thought,
having accurately estimated that superficial youth's light weight. But that Harcourt, the son
of his old and dear friend, should have so failed in manly duty, was a bitter trial. As he
saw him and Addie together, he thought contemptuously, "They are well mated, after all. How
strange that my peerless daughter can have such a regard for him!"

He had become aware of his daughter's preference, though, out of delicate regard for her feelings,
he had feigned blindness.

Even had Harcourt known how greatly they misjudged him, in his sensitive pride he would have
made no explanations; and he was the last one in the world to tell them, as would De Forrest,
how he meant to go to their aid, etc.

His manner puzzled Alice. She could not help noting with a secret satisfaction that, while
polite, he was annoyed at Addie's demonstrativeness; and at times she thought his eyes sought
her face almost as if in appeal. But her own and her father's manner had evidently chilled
him, and he soon took his leave. His face, in which pride and dejection contended for mastery,
haunted her like a reproach.

"If Mr. Harcourt had only arrived a little earlier last evening, Miss Martell," said De Forrest,
complacently, "you would have had three to thank instead of one. I'm sure if I had known that
you and your father--"

"How is that?" asked Mr. Martell, quickly. "Was not Mr. Harcourt spending the evening here?"

"O, no. It was from him we first learned of your peril.  He came tearing over like mad, a few
moments after the coachman and Mr. Hemstead had gone; then he dashed off to the shore, where
I soon joined him. I thought at one time," continued De Forrest, glad to say anything that
would dim the glory of Hemstead's achievements, "that he would start out into the river with
no better support than a plank, so eager was he to go to your aid. If we could only have found
another boat we would have both gone. As it was, it was well I was there to restrain him, for
he seemed beside himself."

The rich color mounted to Miss Martell's face as she gave her father a swift glance of glad
intelligence, and he drew a long breath of relief, as if some heavy burden had been lifted.

"Yes," said Mrs. Marchmont, quietly, but at the same time fixing an observant eye on the young
lady; "I never gaw Mr. Harcourt so moved before."

Conscious of Mrs. Marchmont's object, Alice mastered herself at once, and with equal quietness
answered: "It would be strange if it were otherwise. We have been acquainted from childhood."

Nevertheless, the experienced matron surmised danger to the match which she would gladly bring
about between her daughter and Harcourt; and instead of fearing, as was the case with the latter
and Lottie, she hoped that Miss Martell would be very grateful to Hemstead.

And so she appeared to be, for she talked to him so enchantingly, and for a time absorbed him
so completely, that Lottie entered unobserved, and remained so a few moments.  Then his eyes,
that from the moment he gained composure had seemed in quest of something, lighted on her as
she sat a little back of him, apparently absorbed in her fancy-work.  He wanted to speak to
her, and yet what could he say before them all?

The telltale color was again in his face, and his wretched diffidence returned. Neither courtesy
nor his heart would permit him to ignore her and continue his conversation with Miss Martell.
And yet it had seemed easier to go in a boat out among the ice than to think of any proper
way to recognize the presence of one in whose eyes he had a morbid anxiety to appear well.

Lottie saw his dilemma, and, while she too began to blush absurdly, would not help him, and
her head bent lower than ever over her work.

"Serves him right," she thought. "If he had only met me in the hall, I might--well, I wouldn't
have been an icicle."

At last Hemstead concluded that he could safely say "good morning"; and he did so in a very
awkward manner over his shoulder.

"Did you speak to me?" asked Lottie, as if suddenly aroused.

"Yes," he replied, under the painful necessity of repeating something that had sounded very
flat in the first place, "I said good morning."

"O, excuse me. As it is so late I bid you good afternoon."

Her manner as well as her words so quenched poor Hemstead that he did not venture another syllable;
and thus Lottie and her "true knight" had the meeting to which, in remembrance of their parting,
both had looked forward with strange thrills of expectation.

But in the light of their flaming cheeks Miss Martell caught a glimpse of their hearts; and
Mrs. Marchmont was again led to fear that more was going on than should be permitted by so
good a manager as herself.

The dinner-bell soon brought welcome relief to all, breaking the spell of awkward constraint.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE TRAIL OF LOVE.

Miss Martell improved visibly, for a most depressing fear had been removed. Though Harcourt
might not return her love, he had not proved himself unworthy of it, by actual cowardice, or
even by unmanly regard for personal ease. It also appeared that more than general philanthropy
must have spurred him on, or he could not have acted as if "beside himself."

The hungry heart will take even the crumbs of regard that fall from the hand which alone can
satisfy. The thought that her old friend and playmate had been far from indifferent to her
fate was like a subtile, exhilarating wine to Miss Martell.

Her rising spirits, and her wish to show appreciation of Mrs. Marchmont's courtesy, made her
as brilliant as beautiful at the dinner-table, while Lottie, in contrast, was silent and depressed.
The new-fledged little saint soon became conscious that for some reason she was very jealous
and very envious,--emotions which she seldom had even imaginary cause to cherish towards any
of her sex.

Nor were Mrs. Marchmont and her daughter disposed to be very friendly and responsive to Miss
Martell's genial mood; but the young lady was possessed of that strength of mind and high-bred
courtesy which enabled her to ignore the weaknesses and infelicities of those around her, and
to shine with her own pure light on all objects alike.

Hemstead again was charmed with her,--a fact that his frankness made plainly evident. Her bright
thoughts elicited corresponding ones from him, and Lottie was reluctantly compelled to admit
to herself that she had never before known Mrs. Marchmont's viands to be seasoned with Attic
salt of such high flavor. For the first time the proud and flattered belle felt, in the presence
of another woman, a humiliating sense of her own inferiority. She clearly recognized that Miss
Martell was far in advance of her. How could the student fail to be fascinated? Her mind was
the equal of his in force, and as highly cultivated. They were congenial in their views and
feelings, and of course she would be very grateful.

Lottie's manner had puzzled Hemstead greatly. He was even more disappointed than she had been
over their prosaic meeting. In his honest modesty, broad eulogy from the others was exceedingly
distasteful; and yet one of his chief incentives the evening before had been the hope of a
welcome back from Lottie, in which her eyes, if not her tongue, would suggest the reward his
heart craved. But he had said "good morning," and she a little coldly had responded "good afternoon."
Moreover, she was strangely silent and depressed. What could it mean? and what the cause? 
That it was himself never entered his mind.

Her bearing towards De Forrest, which was anything but genial, finally led him to believe that
she was again deeply mortified by her lover's lack of manhood, and that she was depressed because
of her relation to one who had failed so signally, the evening before, in those qualities that
women most admire.

While lingering over the dessert, Mr. Martell's sleigh was announced.

"It as my purpose to send you home," exclaimed Mrs.  Marchmont. "Indeed, I had ordered my horses
to be at the door within half an hour."

"I appreciate your kindness," said Mr. Martell, "but after the heroic efforts of your amphibious
coachman last night, I should feel guilty if we broke in upon his rest to-day."

"I'm glad you recognize his merit," said Hemstead, quickly. "You owe far more to him than to
me"; and he launched out into the most hearty eulogy of the ex-sailor.

Then, for the first time, Lottie's old, mirthful laugh was heard, as she said: "Well, in one
respect, Mr. Hemstead, you and the coachman are birds of a feather, and rare birds at that.
He gives you all the credit of the rescue, and you insist that you had nothing to do with it,
but only went along for company, as it were. But I think we all surmised the truth, when you
fainted from exhaustion at Miss Martell's feet. That was a very happy chance, and so it all
turned out as well as any knight of old could have desired."

This sudden speech from Lottie bewildered Hemstead more than ever. What could she mean? But
Miss Martell understood her better, and gave a keen thrust in return as she smilingly answered,
"With the only exception that Mr.  Hemstead fainted at the feet of the wrong lady."

This unexpected retort threw both Hemstead and Lottie into disastrous confusion, which Mrs,
Marchmont was not slow to observe, and which was not allayed by Mr. Dimmerly's cackling laugh,
as he chuckled, "A well-flown arrow."

"Well," said Hemstead, trying to laugh it off, "all I can say in self-defence is, that in either
case my faint could not be spelled with an e. It was the first, and I hope it will be the last
time I ever do anything so melodramatic."

"Mr. Hemstead must be an ideal knight, as we learn from his phrase 'in either case,'" said
Lottie. "He would have us believe that he is entirely impartial in his homage to our sex. And,
now I think of it, he was more polite to old Auntie Lammer than ever he has been to me."

"Now, Miss Marsden," said Hemstead, reproachfully, "you are again indulging in orientalism."

"Certainly," chimed in De Forrest; "that sylph so filled his eye that she became his ideal,
as you told us, Miss Lottie."

"I told you?" she answered in sudden annoyance; "your memory is better than mine."

Soon after, Mr. Martell and his daughter took their departure, with many sincere and graceful
acknowledgments of the kindness they had received.

Many were the words of force and wisdom that Miss Martell had read and heard, but never had
any made so profound an impression upon her as the vain vaporings of De Forrest, as he insisted
on claiming all the credit he could for his action the evening before.

"Did he exaggerate," she asked herself a hundred times, "when he said, 'It was well I was there;
for Mr. Harcourt was beside himself, and was ready to venture out upon a plank to your aid'?
I fear he did."

Her father surmised something of her thoughts and said gently, "I fear we have done Mr. Harcourt
injustice."

"Yes, father," she answered, "I think we have."

"Well," he said, after a moment, "I never had a pleasanter duty than the amends I purpose making.
It cut me to the heart to think the son of my old friend had permitted a stranger to come to
our rescue."

"I feel sure that Mr. Harcourt would have come also, had it been in his power," she said, with
quiet emphasis.

"You always stood up for Tom," said her father, gently.

But she made no answer.

Mr. Martell then questioned his coachman somewhat.

"Indade, sir, we was all putty nigh crazy when Mr. Harcourt druv in late last night and said
you were safe. He told me to come-over this morning and get your orders, and to have the house
ready for yez."

"Now that was considerate. I feel, my daughter, that we owe Mr. Harcourt an apology. Do you
feel equal to entertaining him at supper?"

"I will try, father."

"Drive right on up to town," said Mr. Martell, a little later, from the steps of his piazza,
"and present my compliments to Mr. Harcourt, and ask him if he will favor us with his company
at supper."

Alice gave him a shy, grateful glance, and then sought her room.

As she was unwrapping herself before her mirror, she noted that a pane of glass in the window
near was badly cracked, and that the lace curtain above was torn partially from its fastening.

As her maid entered she asked how it happened.

The woman in evident confusion answered: "Indeed, miss, I meant to mend the curtain this morning,
but I've not had me head straight since last evening."

"But how did it happen?" persisted Alice. "Who could have been so rough and careless?"

"Well," said the maid, hesitatingly, "it must have been Mr. Harcourt."

"Mr. Harcourt!"

"Well, you see, miss, he came last night to see you, for one of the girls said he asked for
you, and when he found you was out on the river he just seemed beside himself.  We was a-lookin'
out upstairs, and we first saw the light a-coming up after the tide turned, and we screamed
to him and the coachman, and Mr. Harcourt he came upstairs like a gust o' wind. Your door stood
open, and in he rushed in a way that I thought he'd break everything."

"There, that will do. I understand. You need not mend the curtain. You must be tired after
all your fright, and can rest awhile this afternoon, as I shall."

A beautiful color dawned in Alice's face. She was recovering from her languor and weakness
with marvellous rapidity.  It was not strange, for no elixir was ever distilled so potent as
that which now infused its subtile spirit into heart and brain.

But a few hours before, the wayward but good-hearted companion of her childhood, the manly
friend of the present and future,--she would permit herself to think of him in no other light,--had
seemed lost to her forever; to have had in fact no real existence; for if Harcourt had been
content to act De Forrest's part the evening before, Alice Martell would have soon shaken off
even his acquaintance. But De Forrest's words had suggested that the Harcourt of her dreams
still existed. She had seen another trace of manly, considerate feeling in his thoughtfulness
of the servants' fears, and of their comfort. And now the torn curtain and broken glass suggested
the impetuous action of one who thought of her peril rather than of the trifles around him.

Twice now she had been told that Harcourt was "beside himself," and yet never had madness seemed
so rational; and her eyes dwelt on the marks of his frenzy before her with unmixed satisfaction.
If he had been cool then, her heart now would be cold.

She could not rest, and at last thought that the frosty air would cool the fever in her cheeks,
and so wrapped herself for a walk upon the broad \ piazza. Moreover, she felt, as Lottie had,
that she would be glad to have no eyes, not even her father's, witness their meeting. She felt
that she could act more naturally and composedly if alone with him, and at the same time show
the almost sisterly regard through which she hoped to win him to his better self.

As she paced up and down the piazza, in the early twilight, her attention was attracted to
a spot where some one, instead of going deliberately down the steps, had plunged off into the
piled-up snow, and then just opposite and beyond the broad path were tracks wide apart, as
if some one had bounded rather than run towards the river.

She ceased her walk, and stood as one who had discovered a treasure. Did these footprints and
the torn curtain belong together? She felt that it could not be otherwise. There was, then,
no cold-blooded, cowardly Harcourt, and traces of the real man grew clearer.

"But how could he reach the river in that direction without risking his neck?" and she indulged
hi quite a panic as she remembered the intervening steeps. She longed yet dreaded to see him,
that she might ask an explanation of the traces she had found; for, having done him injustice,
she generously meant to make him full amends.

But to her great disapointment the sleigh now returned without him.

"I left the message, miss," said the coachman, "but they told me that Mr. Harcourt had a sudden
business call to New York."

Alice sought to draw the man out a little, and it was also her habit to speak kindly to those
in her employ; so she said: "I fear, Burtis, you will be a little jealous of Mrs.  Marchmont's
coachman. If it had not been for him we could not have escaped, I think."

"Well, thank God, I'm not much behind him. If he stopped two funerals, I stopped one."

"Why, how is that, Burtis?"

"Faix, miss, an' do ye see thim tracks there? They go straight to the river, and it was Misther
Harcourt as made them. He was jist one second on the way after he saw the light, and by rinnin'
an' rollin' an' tumblin' he was at the boat-house in a wink. When I gets there, a-puffin' an'
a-blowin', he's unlocked the door by taeakin' it in, and is a-haulin' at the ould boat; and
because I wouldn't lend a band in gettin' out the crazy ould craft that wouldn't float a hundred
foot, he swears at me in the most onchristian manner, and tries to get it out alone. But ye
know, miss, how he couldn't do that, and soon he gives it up and falls to gnawin' his nails
like one beside himself, an' a-mutterin' how he must either'save her or drown with her.' Then
he dashed up the bank ag'in, and he and his black hoss was off like a whirlwind. If the Naughty
Tillus, or any other thing as would float was here, ye'd had no need of Mrs. Marchmont's coachman.
But I thought he'd off wid me head because I wouldn't help out wid the ould boat."

Not a word or sign did Alice place in the way of the man's garrulity, but rather manifested
breathless interest, as with parted lips she bent forward, encouraging him to go on.

Was he not reciting an epic poem of which she was the heroine and Harcourt the hero? The true
epics of the world are generally told in the baldest prose.

"There was one thing I didn't like," continued the man, gathering up his reins, "and I've thought
I ought to speak of it to ye or ye's father. All his talk was about savin' yerself, and not
a whisper of the ould gentleman, who has been so kind to him all his life. It sounded kinder
onnatteral like."

"Very well, Burtis; you have done your duty in speaking to me, and so need not say anything
to Mr. Martell about it.  I rather think you have prevented a funeral, and perhaps I owe you
as many thanks as Mrs. Marchmont's coachman.  At any rate you will find on Christmas that you
have not been forgotten."

So the man drove to the stable with the complacent consciousness of having done his duty and
warned his mistress against a "very onnatteral feelin'" in the young man.

The moment he disappeared around the corner, Alice stood undecided a moment, like a startled
deer, and then sped down the path to the boat-house. The snow was tramped somewhat by the big
lumbering feet of the coach-man, but had it not been, Alice now had wings. The twilight was
deepening, and she could not wait till the morrow before following up this trail that led to
the idol of her heart.

She paused in the winding path when half-way down the bank, that she might gloat over the mad
plunges by which Harcourt had crossed it, straight to the river. She followed his steps to
the brink of a precipice, and saw with a thrill of mingled fear and delight where he had slid
and fallen twenty feet or more.

"How cruelly I have misjudged him!" she thought.  "When he was here eager to risk his life
for me, my false fancy pictured him at Addie Marchmont's side. And yet it was well I did not
know the truth, for it would have been so much harder to look death in the face so long, with
this knowledge of his friendship. How strangely he and Addie act when together! But come, that
is no affair of mine. Let me be thankful that I have not lost the friend of my childhood."

A little later she stood at the boat-house. The door hung by one hinge only, and the large
stone lay near with which he had crashed it in. She entered the dusky place as if it had been
a temple. Had it not been consecrated by a service of love,--by the costliest offering that
can be made,--life?  Here he had said he would save her or perish with her; here he had sought
to make good his words.

She picked up one of the matches he had dropped, and struck it, that she might look into the
neglected boat.  Never was the utter unseaworthiness of a craft noted with such satisfaction
before.

"While I vilely thought he would not venture to our aid at all, he strained every nerve to
launch this old shell.  Thanks to obstinate Burtis, who would not help him."

She struck another match, that she might look more closely; then uttered a pitiful cry.

"Merciful heaven! is this blood on this rope? It surely is. Now I think of it, he kept his
right hand gloved this morning, and offered his left to Mr. Hemstead in salutation.  Father
and I, in our cruel wrong, did not offer to take his hand. And yet it would seem that he tugged
with bleeding hands at these ropes, that he might almost the same as throw away his life for us.

"I can scarcely understand it. No brother could do more. He was braver than Mr. Hemstead, for
he had a stanch boat, and experienced help, while my old playmate was eager to go alone in
this wretched thing that would only have floated him out to deep water where he would drown. 

Louis Quatorze.--Sparkling, glittering. Absence of color, want of symmetry.

I. ANCIENT OR CLASSIC ART.

Ancient art is also known as classic, a term which, in architecture,
sculpture, painting, and music, is almost synonymous with good and
admirable.

Taken as a whole and at its best, classic art has never been surpassed. The designs of the Greeks,
Romans, and Egyptians, and even the forms of their buildings, are
still copied at the present day.

The horizontal line is a marked feature of classic art. It is visible in the leading lines
of their architecture, in the frequency of horizontal borders, friezes,
etc. It accords admirably with the constructive features of classic
architecture, and thus conforms to the important decorative principle
that ornament should emphasize rather than disguise construction.

1. Egyptian Art.--The oldest of which we have any record dates from 1800 B.C. Egyptian art is
symbolic, that is to say, the forms were chosen not so much on account of their beauty as for
the purpose of conveying some meaning.

The government of Egypt being almost entirely in the hands of the priests, these symbols were
generally of a religious character, signifying power and protection. The principal ones were:
The lotus, signifying plenty, abundance; the zigzag, symbolic of
the river Nile; the winged globe or scarabæus, signifying protection
and dominion, usually placed over doors of houses; the fret, type
of the Great Labyrinth, with its three thousand chambers, which was,
in its turn, symbolic of the life of a human soul.

The column originated with the Egyptians.

It was at first heavy, broad compared to its length, and was usually covered with hieroglyphics.
The architecture of Egypt, of which the principal forms are pyramids, sphinxes, obelisks, and
temples, is characterized by massiveness of material, grandeur of
proportion, and simplicity of parts--a style well suited to its flat,
sandy soil, though it would look heavy and out of place in a country
where nature had herself supplied the elements of grandeur and massiveness
in the form of lofty mountains or mighty forests.

Egyptian art greatly influenced all the succeeding styles, and to this time is unsurpassed in
many of its qualities.

2. Greek Art.--The next great historic style is the Greek. Its spirit differed entirely from
the Egyptian, being æsthetic and not symbolic. Its sole aim was to create beautiful forms, without
any thought of attaching to them a meaning. It adopted many Egyptian forms, such as the lotus,
fret, and scroll, but divested them of all symbolism or significance. The most characteristic
feature of Greek ornament is the anthemion, a conventionalized flower form resembling our honeysuckle
bud, which was usually alternated with the lotus or lily form bud.

The Greeks also borrowed the column and flat arch from the Egyptians, but changed it to a more slender,
graceful form. The three principal orders of Greek architecture are named from the style of
the column used that characterized them, viz., the Corinthian, the Doric, the Ionic. Of these
the Doric is the simplest and the Corinthian the most elaborate.

For harmony of proportions, elegance of form, and simplicity of detail,
Greek architecture and ornament has probably never been surpassed.

These qualities are admirably displayed in the Parthenon, a temple in Athens, dedicated to Venus.
Though in ruins, it is still one of the greatest attractions to travelers in Greece. A very fine
collection of fragments taken from it is to be seen in the British
Museum.

They are known as the Elgin marbles.

The most flourishing period of Greek art, as will be found in the history of almost all nations,
was identical with the most flourishing period of its literature and general welfare.

3.

Roman Art.--In the 6th century B.C. the Greeks, already on the decline,
were conquered by the Romans, a nation hardier and more powerful,
though ruder and less civilized than themselves.

The conquerors recognized this, and immediately set to work to copy or steal from their vanquished
foes everything that might enhance the beauty and splendor of their
own city.

Greek artists were transported to Rome and placed in charge of the
most important public works.

Roman art is, consequently, but a development or adaptation of the
Greek.

It is noticeable, however, that it almost completely ignored the
most characteristic and popular of the Greek forms--for example, the
anthemion--and adapted those, such as the acanthus and the scroll,
which had been considered of minor importance among the Greeks.

They added another to the three orders of the Greek architecture,
viz., the Composite, the most elaborate of all, being a combination
of the Ionic and the Corinthian.

This leads us to consider the leading features of Roman ornament--richness and profusion. With
the acanthus and scroll as their principal units of design, they elaborated and enriched every
form that would admit of it.

The most elaborate Greek example cannot compare in this respect to the simplest Roman. The Roman
style of architecture was very similar to the Greek, though more massive in its proportions,
probably on account of the larger number of people to be accommodated.

The details were also bolder and the curves fuller.

They used the round arch to a great extent. The column of Trajan and the Forum are fine examples
of their architecture.

II. MEDIÆVAL ART.

The Roman empire, after having reigned as mistress of the world for upward of five centuries, commenced
to show signs of decay. Its people had gradually lost the sturdy spirit of independence, endurance,
and courage which had characterized their forefathers, and had degenerated into a race of effeminate
slaves and cowards. Ostentation became the feature of their art; immorality and luxury, of their
mode of living. They thus fell an easy prey to the rude but vigorous barbarians of the North.
The latter, rude and uncivilized as they were, extended the contempt they had for the nation
they had conquered to their works of art as well, and mutilated or destroyed them whenever they
could lay hands on them.

This spirit of antagonism was strengthened upon their conversion to Christianity, and everything
that savored of paganism in art or literature was severely proscribed. For the heathen forms,
whose only aim and object was beauty, were substituted religious
symbols, the cross and other implements of the passion, the lily,
the fish, the aureole, etc., whose object was to recall to the faithful
the mysteries of religion.

Gradually, however, as the artistic feelings of the new people became
awakened, principles of beauty commenced to be regarded, and, while
symbolism remained an important feature of European art until the
period of the Renaissance, and even then was not entirely superseded,
magnificent artistic results were obtained.

1. Byzantine Art.--The principal of the early mediæval art developments
was the Byzantine.

It flourished principally in the eastern part of Europe.

In the west it was known, with a few variations, as the Lombard and
the Norman.

All three are often included under the term Romanesque.

Byzantine art was essentially Christian in its spirit and motives. It used religious symbols
extensively, but incorporated in its ornament a few pagan elements,
such as the acanthus and the scroll.

Natural forms were always conventionally treated. Its coloring was rich and gorgeous. The principal
features of its architecture were the dome and round arch. The plan of the churches was often
in the form of a Greek or Latin cross, with the dome placed over the intersection of the two arms.
The church of St. Sophia, in Constantinople, is the most magnificent example of Byzantine architecture
and ornament.

Although now a Mohammedan mosque, it is, probably, in the motive and spirit that actuated
its construction, the most Christian building in the world.

2.

Saracenic Art.--Developed from the Byzantine by the Moors and the
Saracens.

It differs from it, however, in one important respect. While the Byzantine makes use of numerous
conventionalized plant and animal forms, the Saracens and Moors were forbidden by their religion,
the Mohammedan, to copy in any manner the form of any living thing, animal or vegetable. They
were thus limited entirely to geometric forms, which, however, often
fall insensibly into flower and leaf forms.

Interlacing bands and curves of intricate pattern, and exhibiting the peculiar Moorish curve,
are very characteristic of Saracenic ornament. Inscriptions were frequently interwoven in this
tracery.

The coloring was gorgeous, consisting principally of blue, red, and
gold.

The principal arches used were the pointed and the horseshoe arch. The Alhambra Palace in Spain
is the most famous example of Saracenic ornament and architecture.

3.

Gothic Art.--Gothic art grew out of the Byzantine, all the symbolic elements being retained.
It is divided into many different varieties.

In the earliest the round arch was used, but the later and more perfect styles having employed
the pointed arch almost exclusively, the latter became characteristic
of Gothic art generally.

It is a style of architecture and ornament usually applied to churches,
and well adapted to moist and cold climates on account of the sloping
roof.

Clustered columns, the spire or belfry, the arched roof, and the division of the interior into
nave, transept, and choir, are leading features. Natural as well as conventional treatment of
plants is another important characteristic.

The Gothic style flourished principally in England, France, and parts of Germany. Nearly all
the principal cathedrals and churches in these countries, and many in our own, are built after
this style. The most beautiful example in this country is St. Patrick's Cathedral, in New York.
The finest specimen in the world is probably the Cathedral of Cologne, which was commenced in the
14th century, but was not completed until many years later.

III. MODERN ART.

In the 15th century a remarkable revival occurred in literature and the fine arts, showing a
decided tendency to return to the old classic ideas of the Greeks and Romans. After an almost
complete neglect, which lasted for centuries, artists and men of letters turned their attention
to the long neglected relics of pagan civilization as worthy of study
for their intrinsic beauty alone.

Symbolism was relegated to a minor position, and beauty was once more cultivated for its own sake.
This epoch is termed the Renaissance--which literally means a rebirth or revival.

1.

Renaissance Style.--The term Renaissance is also applied to one of the early styles which came
into vogue at this time.

It flourished principally in southern Europe.

It is not a pure style, but marks a transition period from the old
popular Gothic and Saracenic forms to the revivified classic.

It naturally exhibits a queer mixture of conflicting elements--classic
and mediæval thrown together without much regard to propriety or fitness.

It still showed traces of symbolism.

2. The Cinquecento Style.--The Renaissance reached its most perfect development in the Cinquecento
or the 15th century style. It followed the Quatrocento or 14th century style. Entirely untrammeled
by symbolism, and with the whole field of classic and mediæval ornament
to glean from, its aim was to develop a perfect style of ornament.

The best examples of this period are founded on the soundest principles
of ornamental art.

Nothing that could be turned into an element of beauty was neglected.

Animals, real and fictitious, flowers, leaves, fruit, the human form, etc., were conventionalized
and made to contribute their part to enhance the beauty of the whole.

Some of the principal characteristics of the Cinquecento style are the delicate arabesque scroll
work, the profusion and beauty of the curves, its admirable variations
of standard classic ornaments, such as the anthemion and scroll.

The coloring, also, was one of its most pleasing features. This style flourished principally
in Italy and France.

Farnese Palace and the tombs of the Medicis are noted examples.

3. The Louis Quatorze.--This style succeeded the Cinquecento, but
was far inferior to it.

It arose in Italy, and while preserving generally the materials of
the style that preceded it, it added as characteristic features the
scroll and the shell.

Its principal object was to create brilliant and startling effects in light and shade. Color
was, in consequence, decidedly secondary, gilding being used everywhere.

The Palace of Versailles, near Paris, is a gorgeous example of this style. Everything in it
is glittering and sparkling.

Mirrors are everywhere placed to intensify this effect.

This style was followed by the Louis Quinze, inferior to it in every respect, and in which
symmetry, at least in detail, seems to be carefully avoided.

It still further degenerated into the Rococo, the most extravagant
and exaggerated of all the historic styles, and which prevailed in
the latter part of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century.

The present century cannot boast of any great characteristic style
in either architecture or ornament.

Whether it is only in a course of development, and what will be the results, time only can show.
All styles are now in vogue, hence the importance of accurate knowledge on the subject. To be able
to judge of and appreciate the best, and to profit by the labors of those gone before us,
at the same time imparting individuality and character to our own design, should be the aim
and object of the study of decoration, and it should enter into any scheme of general education
and culture.--Journal of Education.

* * * * *

THE MONTAUD ACCUMULATOR.

This accumulator is of the Plante type, and is modified so as to obtain a more rapid formation,
a larger surface, and a symmetrical distance of the plates from each other. If into an alkaline
bath saturated with litharge (added in excess) we plunge two lead
electrodes and pass in a current of suitable tension and intensity,
there is deposited upon the anode a layer of peroxide of lead varying
in thickness with the intensity of the current, and more or less rich
in oxygen according to the intensity of the bath, while the cathode
is covered with a stratum of reduced lead.

The liquid of the bath supplies material for both deposits, while in galvanoplastic operations
the anode supplies it to the cathode. The principle of the formation consists in introducing in
an efficacious manner currents of a great intensity, and thus abridging its duration.

Of two plates thus treated, the one becomes positive, and is covered with a thick layer of peroxide
of lead. On leaving the bath it undergoes various preparations and several washings, and is then
fit to be mounted along with others to form an accumulator ready
to be charged and to work.

The second, or negative, plate is covered with a thick sponge of
lead.

It is carefully washed, preserved in water with exclusion of air,
and submitted to a very considerable pressure.

After this operation it presents the appearance of ordinary sheet
lead, but though the physical porosity has disappeared, the chemical
porosity is intact, and this alone comes into play in accumulators.

When a negative plate is constructed in this manner, it is ready
to be combined with the positives to form an accumulator.

The inventor has sometimes put into the bath at the positive pole
negative plates prepared as just described.

They become very easily peroxidized, but they have the grave defect of requiring two preparations
in place of one. To secure an accumulator against any leakage from plate, the solderings and
the entire plates must be submerged in the liquid, so that nothing
projects up out of the acidulated water except two strong rods for
making contact.

These rods are covered with an insulating varnish from their origin to above the point where
they issue from the liquid.

The plates are of a rectangular form (Fig. 1).

They are sloped out at one corner, and as two plates in juxtaposition
are cut together, when they are separated the sloping out of the one
serves for the handle of the other.

This handle is doubled back on the plate which is suspended in the bath, so that the part which
has to be soldered does not undergo any preparation. A hole pierced in this corner of the plate
serves to receive a square rod of lead, which connects the plates together and supports one
of the poles or contacts of the accumulator. At the point of soldering the doubled-down handle
gives a double thickness, and the margins of the plate are folded in such a manner as to insure
their solidity.

The sloped out corner affords the free space necessary for the rod of the opposite pole, and one
and the same plate may be indifferently connected either to the +
or the - at the right or the left.

The plates are made of four different sizes: No. 1, 19 of which serve
for an accumulator of 1 square meter; No. 2, 21, 25, or 29 of which
serve for accumulators of 2, 3, and 4 square meters; No. 3, which
with 21, 25, or 29 plates composes accumulators of 5, 6, and 7 square
meters; and No. 4, which with 21, 23, 25, 27 or 29 plates forms accumulators
of 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 square meters.

As the plates are entirely submerged in the liquid their entire surface is active, and the entire
surface being absolutely flat, it is sufficient to preserve their respective distance at any
one point in order to have it everywhere alike. The weight of the plate depends on the intended
duration of the plate and its capacity. As for the negative plate, its thickness is the most important
factor of its capacity. The proportion has yet to be established
for daily practice.

The inventor uses in practice positive plates of 0.002 meter in thickness.

On the other hand, the negative plates have a body of only 0.001 meter in thickness, their greater
thickness being due only to the deposit of compressed lead. The rod which fixes the plate to each
pole (Fig. 2) is formed of a special alloy of lead and antimony,
not attacked by acid.

This gives rigidity to the rod, and hinders it from binding when
the accumulator is taken out of its case.

The copper piece which surmounts it is fitted at its base with an iron cramp, which is fixed in
the lead, and above which is a wide furrow with two grooved parts, which being immersed in
the lead hinders the copper from slipping round under the action of the screw. The rod is square,
and is cast in a single piece. Against one of its surfaces the ends of the connected plates
press flatly up. A square form has been selected to give more surface for soldering. The soldering
is autogenous (as in the lead chambers at vitriol works).

The soldering, as well as the entire plates, is entirely immersed
in the liquid, and to prevent any leakage an insulating varnish, perfectly
proof against the acid and the current, is laid over the rod from
the part soldered upward.

If it is wished to lift the accumulator from its chest for any verification,
hooks passing between the plates seize hold of the rods, and thanks
to the rigidity of the antimony lead, they effect the removal of the
apparatus without bending the rods in the least.

All the parts of the plates must be kept at exactly the same reciprocal distances, and a difference
of only 0.001 meter between two points is sufficient to affect the
yield considerably.

For an insulating material, wood, when plunged in dilute acid, is
preferred by the inventor.

He makes a comb of wood, the teeth of which vary according to the thickness of the plates to
be lodged between them.

Fig. 3 represents a comb having 15/10 of a millimeter for the negative plates and 25/10 for the
positive plates.

This appliance, which is 0.01 meter in thickness and 0.02 meter in width in the back, is made
very cheaply by machinery.

The weight of the accumulator bears entirely upon the back of the
combs, which are all placed back downward, and the number of which
varies according to the size of the plates.

Small combs of wood clasp the plates at their extremities, and make
the entire accumulator quite compact and manageable.

The entire accumulator is shut up in a wooden chest, which the outer teeth of the comb serve
to insulate from the leaden chest, and to prevent any loss of electricity along the sides.

Fig.
4 shows the arrangement of the side combs. A single glance at this figure shows that it would
be difficult to have more surface without having recourse to curved, undulated, or folded plates,
in which the distances are variable, and consequently defective.

In the Montaud accumulator, the weight is simply proportional to
the intended duration.

For the notion, "So much capacity and so much yield per kilo.," Montaud
substitutes the notion, "So much capacity or yield per square meter,
the weight not being taken into consideration."

These Montaud accumulators are classified as follows: They have from 1 to 12 square meters of surface,
and the number corresponding to the surface indicates its weight
of useful lead, its manner of charging, its capacity, and its manner
of discharge.

According to the inventor's experiments, the square meter of active
surface can receive a charging current of 10 amperes, and furnish
on discharging a current of the intensity of 20 amperes.

For a "No. 10" accumulator we have an active surface of 10 square
meters, a charging current of 100 amperes, and on discharging a current
of 200 amperes.

A square meter of lead of the thickness of 0.001 meter weighs about
11 kilos.

As both surfaces of the lead are utilized, their weight is reduced to 5½ kilos. A No. 10 therefore
requires 55 kilos. of useful lead. It will be seen that to increase the thickness of the sheet
of lead merely augments the duration of the accumulator, without
affecting its capacity or its manner of charging and discharging.

Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 may be placed in vessels of stoneware, glass, or ebonite, or in boxes
of pitch pine, painted with three coats of gum lac and lined with
sheet lead. Nos.

5 to 12 are only sent out in pitch pine boxes lined with lead.

The box is supported on feet of porcelain of the shape of a mushroom.

If a drop of water falls upon this foot, it cannot give a communication with the earth, since,
falling upon the broad part of the mushroom, it will glide off without running along the foot,
which serves as the stalk of the mushroom. A slip of glass is placed under each foot; the part
which supports the mushroom is covered with an insulating varnish,
which prevents the formation of climbing salts and preserves the screws
from rust.

A common layer of insulating varnish is applied under the head of the mushroom.


Lottie's radiant face at supper, in contrast with her clouded one at dinner, again puzzled
certain members of the household; and De Forrest, to his disgust, learned that while he slept
she had again been with Hemstead. He resolved on sleepless vigilance till the prize was secured,
and mentally cursed the ill-starred visit to the country over and over again.

Bel was cool and cynical outwardly, but was really perplexed as to what ought to be done. With
all her faults she had a sincere affection for her friend, and was shrewd enough to perceive
that this affair with Hemstead promised to be more serious than Lottie's passing penchants
had been previously. But with her usual weakness and irresolution she hesitated and waited,
Micawber-like, to see what would "turn up."

The impression grew on Mrs. Marchmont that Lottie was fascinating her nephew; and yet just
how to interfere she did not see. It was rather delicate business to speak, with nothing more
tangible than what she had yet seen. That Lottie herself was becoming sincerely attached to
a young man of Frank's calling and prospects, could not occur to a lady of Mrs. Marchmont's
ideas of propriety and the fitness of things. It was only Lottie's "inveterate disposition
to flirt." As to Lottie's "moods and emotions," she smiled at them with cool indifference,
as far as she noticed them at all. "Young people pass through such phases as through the measles,"
she was accustomed to say.

Addie was too much wrapped up in herself to think particularly about others.

Save by queer little chuckling laughs, which no one understood, Mr. Dimmerly gave no sign that
he noted any thing unusual going on.

Besides, Lottie was very circumspect when in the presence of others, and Hemstead unconsciously
followed the suggestion of her manner. Thus even lynx-eyed Bel could seldom lay her finger
on any thing and say, "Here is something conclusive."

But if ever there was an earthly elysium, Hemstead and Lottie dwelt in it during the remainder
of that week. Not that they were much together, or had much to say to each other by word of
mouth. Scarcely another opportunity occurred for one of their momentous private talks, for
De Forrest's vigilance had become sleepless indeed.

Besides, Hemstead was shut up in his room most of the time, engaged on another sermon. For
Dr. Beams was ill, and the student had been asked to preach again. He gladly complied with
the request, for he was most anxious to correct the dreary impression he had made on the previous
Sabbath. Lottie, too, was much in her room, at work on something which no one was permitted
to see. But little was thought of this, for the house was full of the mystery that always prevails
just before Christmas. Every one was cherishing innocent, and often transparent, little secrets,
which were soon to be proclaimed, if not on the "house-top," on the tree-top of the fragrant
cedar that had already been selected and arranged in the back parlor, suggesting to all the
blessedness of both giving and receiving.

Yet, while seemingly separated, what moment passed when they were not together? How vain was
De Forrest's vigilance!--how futile were Mrs. Marchmont's precautions!  Lottie was the muse
that sat at Hemstead's side; and every time he lifted his eyes from the paper his vivid fancy
saw her face glowing like the sunset, and beaming upon him.  She inspired his sermon. Unconsciously,
he wrote it for her alone, letting her need and spiritual state color the line of thought which
his text naturally suggested; and a fresh, hope-imparting Christmas sermon it promised to be,--a
veritable gospel. He was unconsciously learning the priceless advantage to a clergyman of pastoral
visitation; for, in discovering and meeting the needs of one heart, nearly all are touched,--so
near a kinship exists throughout humanity.

As Lottie stitched away at an odd bit of fancy-work--very different from any thing that had
ever taxed her dainty skill before--strange gleams flitted across her face. At times her eyes
would sparkle with mirth as she lived over scenes in which the student was ever the chief actor;
and again she would grow pale, and her breath come quick and short, as her fancy portrayed
him--when in the darkness he could not have been seen by human eyes--far out amid the ice upon
the river. Then again her face would grow comically pitiful, as she murmured: "I could have
brought him to quicker than uncle. I could have given him a stimulant more potent than the
forty-year-old brandy of which uncle is so proud. I've found out my power over him."

Then her face would light up with exultation as she exclaimed, "O, it's grand to have such
power over a strong, richly-endowed man,--to be able to move and play upon him at your will
by some mystic influence too subtile for prying eyes to see. I can lift him into the skies
by a smile.  I can cast him into the depths by a frown. If I but touch his hand, the giant
trembles. He would be a Hercules in my service, and yet I've got him just there"; and she depressed
her little thumb with the confidence of a Roman empress desiring to show favor to some gladiatorial
slave.

Then her face would change in quick and piquant transition to the expression of equally comic
distress, as she sighed, "But, alas! where am I? Right under his big thumb, whether he knows
it or not. How it all will end I dare not think."

When her jewelled watch indicated that the time for dinner or supper was near, she would make
the most bewitching of toilets, and laugh at herself for doing so, querying, "What is the use
of conquering one over and over again who is already helpless at your feet?"

And yet the admiration of Hemstead's beauty-loving eyes was sweeter incense than all the flattery
she had ever received before.

And what hours of dainty, ethereal banqueting were those prosaic meals in Mrs. Marchmont's
dining-room! The corpulent colored waiter served the others, but airy-winged love attended
these two, bearing from one to the other glances, tones, accents, of the divinest flavor.

De Forrest noted and chafed over this subtile interchange.  Bel and Mrs. Marchmont saw it also,
and Mr. Dimmerly's queer chuckling laugh was heard with increasing frequency.  But what could
be done? Lottie's and Hemstead's actions were propriety itself. Mrs. Marchmont could not say,
"You must not look at or speak to each other." As well seek to prevent two clouds in a summer
sky from exchanging their lightnings!

Hemstead was in a maze. The past and the future had lost their existence to him, and he was
living in the glorified present. He no more coolly realized the situation than would one in
an ecstatic trance. In one sense he verified the popular superstition, and was bewitched; and,
with the charming witch ever near to weave a new spell a dozen times a day, how could he disentangle
himself? He was too innocent, too unhackneyed, to understand what was going on in his own heart.

The days and the hours fled away until Saturday--the day before Christmas--came. By noon Hemstead
had finished his sermon, and Lottie had completed her mysterious fancy-work; and both were
ready for the festivities of Christmas eve.

Mr. Dimmerly was a great stickler for the old English customs, and always had the yule-log
brought in with great ceremony. With his own hands he suspended the mistletoe from the chandelier
in the hall, which he always obtained from Dimmerly Manor in England. Lottie, without thinking,
stood beneath, watching him, when, with a spryness not in keeping with his years, he sprang
down and gave her a sounding smack in honor of the ancient custom.

"There," said he, "that pays me for all my trouble and expense. But you will get another kiss
here, that you will like better, before I take the mistletoe down."

"Well, uncle," said Lottie, laughing and rubbing her tingling cheek, "I hope it won't be such
an explosion as yours was, or it will alarm the household."

"Be careful, or it may attract more attention than mine"; and he departed with his queer chuckling
laugh.

Lottie looked after him with sudden intelligence, and asked herself, "Now what does he mean
by that? Does he suspect anything?"

At the dinner-table Mr. Dimmerly indulged in a long homily on the importance of keeping up
old customs, and ended with a sly, significant glance at Lottie, which brought the color into
her face. But during the afternoon she foiled all the devices of De Forrest to get her under
the mistletoe bough, and yet with such grace that, however disappointed, he could not become
angry. As for Hemstead, he was fat too diffident to attempt any such strategy, much as he would
have liked to solemnize the venerable rite.

And so at last Christmas eve came; and with it a fevr guests. Harcourt and Miss Martell had
been specially invited; for the fact of their engagement had become known at once, and Mrs.
Marchmont hastened to assure them, by this invitation, that she had no regrets or resentment.
Not for the world would she have Miss Martell imagine that any maternal projects had been frustrated.

Harcourt, grateful for all the kindness he had received at Mrs. Marchmont's, induced Alice
to accept; and so their illumined faces were added to the circle that gathered around the yule-log
in the large dining-room, that had been cleared for games and dancing.

In spite of the incongruous elements composing that circle, it made, with the crackling fire
playing on happy faces and Christmas decorations, a pretty picture,--one that might convert
a pagan into willingness to honor the chief Christian festival.

After some old-fashioned country dances--through which even Hemstead had been induced to blunder,
to Lottie's infinite delight--they sat down to nuts, apples, and cider.  Billets of hickory
were piled higher than ever against the great yule-log; and never did the sacred flame light
up fairer and happier faces than those of Alice Martell and Lottie Marsden. And yet they were
as different as could be. One was the lily, and the other the rose. Harcourt and Hemstead also
looked as if some angelic messenger had brought them "tidings of great joy."

Harcourt and Alice sat together; but Lottie, with seeming perverseness, got as far away as
possible. But it was only seeming, for she sat where she could look Hemstead full in the face,
and, with her brilliant eyes, indulge in love's mystic telegraphy without restraint.

Now was the time for Mr. Dimmerly to shine out; and be proposed that some one should begin
a story, and carry it forward to a certain point, then stop abruptly, while some one else took
it up for a brief time, when, in like manner, it would again be dropped that another might
continue it, so that each one who was willing might have a chance to contribute.

"You commence, Mr. Harcourt," said Mr. Dimmerly.

After a preface of hemming, the young man said: "Once upon a time, in a village in the south
of France, it was arranged that there should be a general fete and dance on the village green
the afternoon before Christmas. Little Ninon was a peasant's daughter, and she was only fourteen.
If she were petite, she was also piquant and pretty--"

"Very good, very good," cried a chorus of voices; and a round of applause stimulated the narrator.

"Until this occasion, Ninon had always been kept at home as a child; but, after interminable
coaxings, she obtained her mother's permission to go to the fete. Now her mother was a widow,
and it so happened that she could not go with her daughter, and after she had given her consent
had not one whom she could send with her child as a protector. But Ninon was in such glee that
her mother had not the heart to take back her promise.

"'Now, mother, tell me what shall I say when the boys, and perhaps some of the very young men,
ask me to dance with them?'

"'Say, I'm only a little child who have come to see. Go thy ways.'

"'But suppose they don't go their ways,' pouted Ninon.

"'Go thine then, and come home.'

"'Now, mother dear, am I not almost old enough to have a lover?'

"'Lover indeed! Silly child, but yesterday I rocked thee in the cradle there. I'm a fool to
let thee go.'

"Then Ninon, in fear, kept still, lest her mother should change her mind, a thing which women
sometimes do, even in France--"

"Now I protest against innuendoes," cried Lottie. "It is the Frenchman, as it is man all over
the world, who changes his mind. Adam first said he wouldn't eat the apple, and then he did!"

"Where's your authority for that?" said Harcourt.

"It's in the Bible," answered Lottie, stoutly; at which there was a great explosion.

"Miss Marsden equals modern commentators in amplifying the text," laughed Hemstead.

"Well," persisted Lottie, "if it isn't just so written, I know enough of human nature to be
sure that that was just how it happened."

"On with the story!" cried Mr. Dimmerly. "Come, Miss Martell."

"The afternoon of the fete came," said Alice, "and Ninon's mother was depressed with a boding
of evil.

"'Whom shall I send with thee, my child? My heart fails me in sending thee alone.'

"'Little brother Pierre shall go with me,' said Ninon.  'He's an odd child, and talks to the
saints and angels more than to us. If he goes with me, the saints will take care of us both.'

"This seemed to strike the mother as true, and she was comforted; and the pale little boy,
with large, spiritual eyes that appeared to look into the other world, took his sister's hand
without even a smile flitting across his sad face; and they started for the fete.

"Now, Miss Marchmont," said Miss Martell, with a graceful inclination to Addie.

"And the pale little boy, with big, owl-like eyes," continued Addie, flippantly, "stalked along
as if going to a  funeral, while Ninon tripped and danced at his side. But soon the young girl's
steps grew slower and slower, and her face thoughtful, and she began to question her mother's
words,--that she was too much of a child to have a lover; and by the time she reached the village
green she gave her pretty head a toss as she said, 'We'll see about this. Mother doesn't know
everything.'"

"Now, Bel."

"But poor little Ninon," said Bel, "soon became sadly bewildered, for there were so many people
all talking at once, and they pushed against and jostled her as if she were very small and
insignificant indeed, and she began to think that her mother was right, and that she was only
a child; and she grew frightened and wished herself at home again.  But she kept fast hold
of the hand of her brother whom the saints loved, and felt that as long as he was with her
she was safe. Finally they were pushed and jostled to a quiet nook on the edge of the green,
under a tree, and here they sat down. Soon the dancing commenced, and Ninon amused herself
by criticising the people and making remarks to her brother about their dress and manner. But
he did not seem to hear her, and his eyes were fixed on the sky, as if he saw more that was
wonderful there than she upon the village green."

"Mr. De Forrest, you next."

"But as Ninon sat there smiling and talking more to herself than to her queer little brother,
who didn't listen, the young men began to notice her, and to nudge each other and ask who she
was; for in truth she reminded every one of a half-blown rose. But no one knew who she was,
and no one had ever seen her before. Then the handsomest young man in the village--indeed he
was the one at whom all the girls were setting their caps--stepped forward and took a deliberate
survey, and soon was convinced that, among all the village maidens, there was not a face as
fair as Ninon's. And while he looked at her Ninon from under her long lashes as intently watched
him. At last the young man made up his mind, and said to himself, 'I will be her lover for
this afternoon,' and in a manner that was the very embodiment of grace, he stepped up to her
and said, 'My pretty maiden, wilt dance with me?'"

And De Forrest bowed to Lottie to continue. It was strange how the foolish little story was
gaining the breathless interest of all present--all the more because each one was unconsciously
coloring his bit of the mosaic with his own individuality. Lottie's manner by no means tended
to allay this interest as she began her part of the impromptu tale.  She was a natural actress,
and, for the moment, became little Ninon. The scene had grown actual to her vivid fancy, and
by some process that cannot be explained she impressed it upon the minds of the others as real.
They saw the crowded village green, the petite maiden and her weird brother sitting upon its
edge, as she began.

"And Ninon shyly raised her dark eyes to the face of the handsomest young man of all the village,
at whom the girls were setting their caps, and said, a trifle coldly, 'I am only a little child
who has come to see. Go thy ways.'

"And the handsome young man stalked away, haughty and offended; and the youth of the village
nudged each other and smiled and wondered and said, 'She must be a princess in disguise, or
she would dance with him whom all the girls covet.' So no one else would venture to speak to
her. But Ninon for a while was content to be left alone to watch all the funny people and their
funny ways. She didn't see any one with whom she wanted to dance.

"At last she became conscious that one who seemed a stranger like herself was watching her,
and she began to look curiously at him. At first she did not like his looks at all, His dress
was very plain,--not a bit smart and gay like that of the other young men. Besides, he was
so tall and grave; and once, when some one said a rude word to him, his eyes were so fiery
that Ninon was afraid of him. But a moment later, when his eyes rested on her, they became
so kind and gentle that she wondered how it could be. Then she began to grow sorry for him
because, like herself, he was a stranger and had no one to talk to. But he seemed in quest
of some one, for he would look all around among the people; but soon his eyes would come back
and rest wistfully upon her face, as if she were the one he was looking for after all.  This
puzzled Ninon greatly, and she asked herself, 'Now can it be that I am the one he's looking
for?' At last it seemed that the stranger wished to speak to her, but hadn't the courage, and
this amused Ninon vastly. Twice he advanced, faltered, and then retreated. Ninon was convulsed
with laughter and whispered, 'O Pierre, isn't this the funniest thing that ever was in this
great world? That big man there is afraid of me,--little Ninon.'

"Then she saw that he thought she was laughing at him, and that he had straightened himself
up stiff and haughty and had looked the other way. But he couldn't keep looking the other way
very long," Lottie said, with an indescribable air that brought out a round of applause; "and
when he timidly glanced towards her again she gave him such an encouraging smile that he came
at once to her side and said, 'Little sister, wilt walk with me?'

"A happy thought struck Ninon. Her mother had said she was too young to have a lover, but nothing
had been said against her having another brother. So, with conscience clear, she whispered,
'Sit still here till I come back '; and the little boy sat still, looking up into the sky,
while Ninon let the tall stranger take her hand and lead her away. But his eyes were so gentle
and true that she lost all fear and asked, 'Why do you call me sister?'

"'Perhaps you can tell me,' he said. 'I came here an utter stranger, and I looked all around
among the people, and their faces were strange, and it seemed to me that they ever would be
strange; but when I saw your face you appeared to belong to me. I think we must be related.'

"'I never saw you before,' said Ninon, shaking her head.

"'I've seen you in my dreams all my life,' he replied, looking at her so earnestly that the
color deepened on her cheek.

"'I never heard anything so queer in all my life,' said Ninon.

"'You have much to learn,' said the stranger.

"'Yes,' said Ninon, humbly; 'as mother says, I'm only a little child.'

"'You are not a little child; you are a beautiful maiden, Ninon,' said the stranger, earnestly.

"'Nonsense!' she said blushingly. 'I'll never be that.' But she liked to hear him say it, nevertheless,"
Lottie added with an accent that again brought out a round of applause.

"I'm taking too much time," Lottie said, deprecatingly.

"Go on, go on," was the unanimous cry; and her little brother Dan, who had dropped nuts and
apples and was leaning open-mouthed on her knees, said, "Lottie, if you don't go on, I'll do
something dreadful."

So Lottie continued: "And the tall stranger smiled down upon her and said, 'Violets are my
favorite flower, and you are a modest little violet.'

"'Now you are wrong again,' said Ninon; 'violets are a pale blue flower, and my cheeks are
burning so oddly--I never had them do so before. I know I look like the peonies in the cure's
garden.'

"'You look like the sweetest rose in the cure's garden.'

"'Is that the way big brothers talk to their little sisters?'

"'That is the way I talk to you, and I'm in earnest.'

"'How do little sisters treat a brother as big as you are?'

"'Well, for one thing, they kiss them.'

"'That's queer,' said Ninon, innocently. 'I should think it would be just the other way.'

"'Now I think of it, you are right,' and the stranger gave her a kiss that set every nerve
tingling.

"'How odd!' she exclaimed, half-frightened, half-delighted. 'Pierre sometimes kisses me, but
I never felt that way before.'

"'And big brothers take their little sisters in their arms and lift them over the rough places,
as I do.'

"And he carried her over a low stone wall that separated them from a shadowy grove.

"'O, how nice!' sighed Ninon, complacently; 'I've always had to get over the rough places by
myself before.'

"'You will no longer,' said the youth, as they passed under the low branches of a sheltering
tree. 'O Ninon, as innocent as beautiful, can you not see that I am not your brother, but your
lover?' and he threw himself at her feet.

"But Ninon clasped her hands in the deepest distress, and cried, 'O, why did you say that?
You might have been my brother as long as you chose. But mother says I can have no lover,--that
I am only a child'; and like a startled fawn she fled from him, and, a few moments later, panting
and breathless, was sitting again beside her strange little brother, who was still looking
into the sky as if he saw a vision.

"The young stranger followed sadly, thinking how he might still win her, and teach her that
she was no longer a child. Ninon soon became more composed, and looked around as if she would
like to see him again. As at a distance he watched her from under his bent eyebrows, a happy
thought struck him, and he said, 'I'll teach her that she is a woman'; and, stepping forward,
he singled out a neglected village maiden, who seemed ready for a little attention from anybody,
and whirled her into the dance. Ninon, to her dismay, saw the arm of her whilom brother and
lover encircling another girl, while she, apparently, was forgotten. She could scarcely believe
her eyes. She looked at him fixedly, the picture of reproach, but he never seemed to look towards
her. Surprise, resentment, grief, followed each other upon her fair face, like clouds passing
over a sunny landscape.  At last she buried her face upon little Pierre's shoulder, and sobbed,
'He may be my lover, or anything else, if he will only leave that hateful minx and come to
me once more.'

"The tall stranger saw her drooping head, and quickly led his partner out of the dance and
bowed himself away, leaving her bewildered,--so quickly had he come and gone.

"Ninon looked up, but he was nowhere to be seen, and the 'hateful minx' stood alone. Suddenly
a voice that had grown strangely familiar said at her side, 'May I be thy lover now?'

"'Thou art false,' she said faintly.

"'Never to thee, Ninon. My thoughts were with thee every moment since thou so cruelly left
me. Do you not see why I sought another maiden? I wished to teach you that you were no longer
a child, but a woman. I am your lover. Your heart has already claimed me, and these jealous
tears prove it.'

"'Well, then,' said Ninon, shyly smiling again, 'if my heart has gone to you, and I half believe
it has, I must follow my heart'; and she put her hand in his."

Loud and long was the applause that greeted Lottie's conclusion. Dan executed a miniature breakdown
as an expression of his feelings, and it seemed as if Mr. Dimmerly's chuckling laugh would
never cease. De Forrest looked uneasy, and Hemstead was in a trance of bewildered delight.
Alice and Harcourt exchanged significant glances.  but upon the faces of Mrs. Marchmont and
Bel were traces of disapproval.

"Now, uncle," cried Lottie, "it's your turn. I have given you COMEDY; we shall expect from
you high tragedy."

The word "comedy," as Lottie here used it, jarred unpleasantly on Hemstead's ear, and the thought
crossed Harcourt's mind, "Can she be leading Hemstead on in heartless jest, as we proposed
at first? How I have changed since that day! and I was in hopes that she had, too, somewhat."

But Mr. Dimmerly had taken up the thread of the narrative where Lottie had dropped it.

"Ninon," he said, "lived a long while ago, and did not properly refer the tall stranger to
her mamma. A trysting place and time were agreed upon, and the mysterious stranger in green,
who was apparently a forester, said that he had a deer to kill before nightfall; and, raising
her hand to his lips, departed. Ninon sat a long time, lost in a maze of thought, and then,
in the twilight, roused the rapt child from his visions, and they started for their home. But
villainous faces had hovered on the outskirts of the village green, and ill-omened eyes had
marked the beauty of Ninon and the spiritual face of her brother. At that time there was in
France a terrible monster, known as Giles de Laval, whose emissaries were ever on the alert
for such victims. It was this cruel man who suggested to Perrault his world-renowned story
of Barbe-bleu, the Blue-Beard that Dan there knows all about. Well, when Ninon and her little
brother were passing a thicket but half-way home, two masked men sprang out upon them, and,
stifling their terror-stricken cries, carried them to a distance from the highway. They then
bound bandages firmly over their mouths, and lifted them on their horses and galloped away
and away, till poor Ninon felt that she could never find her way home again, even if she had
a chance. Soon the shadowy walls of a great castle rose before them, with a single light in
a lofty tower. The feet of the iron-shod horses rang on the draw-bridge, which rose after them,
and then Ninon knew they were prisoners.  At first they were shut up in a dungeon that was
perfectly dark, for their cruel jailer knew the overpowering effect of such rayless gloom.
But strange little Pierre said that the place was brighter than the sun, and that lovely faces
were smiling at him. Ninon, however, saw nothing, and it was dark indeed to her, and she sobbed
bitterly, and called on her mother and lover for help. But only stony-hearted Laval and his
accomplices heard her girlish voice. A bell in one of the towers slowly tolled out eleven o'clock.
A little later the door of their cell opened, and light streamed in.  Two men in hideous masks
seized them, and carried them up and up, till Ninon, in horror, thought that they were to be
thrown from the top of the tower. But worse than that awaited them; for soon they entered a
large circular room, in which, on a sort of throne, sat a dreadful-looking man, clad in sable.
He had human form and features, but reminded one of the more disgusting kind of wild beasts.
His eyes were small, piercing, and malignant, but his face was large, sensual, devilish, and
poor Ninon lost hope from the moment she saw him. She instinctively felt that to sue for mercy
from such a monster would be worse than vain. She had lost hope utterly. She and her mother
had been mistaken. The saints cared for neither little Pierre nor herself, and had left them
to fall into the clutches of this demon.  She glanced slowly around the room in the faint hope
of escape, or even for the chance of throwing herself from a window, if it were needful, in
order to escape from that horrible man. But the walls were thick. No light came from without,
but only from a great furnace, that was Strangely constructed and made her shudder. For a long
time there was perfect silence in the dreadful place. The two masked men, grotesque and horrible,
stood near the furnace, motionless as statues. The sable monster on his black throne watched
them without moving a muscle in his great, coarse face, only his small eyes seemed like two
scintillating sparks of infernal fire, as with a fiendish kind of pleasure he marked the agony
of Ninon. Although the young girl instinctively gave up all hope of life, yet never had life
seemed so sweet. Its homeliest details now appeared precious, and their poor little cottage,
heaven, compared with this den of infamy. She had just tasted the exquisite happiness of a
new and before unknown love, and now she was to die. She thought of her mother growing gray
in loneliness and grief. She thought of her lover coming eagerly to their trysting-place; but
when he should come on the morrow, Christmas day, what would she be?--where would she be? and
in her anguish she cried aloud, and, kneeling, stretched out her hands towards the sable throne.

"Then for the first time the coarse, thick lips of the monster distorted themselves into a
hideous grin, but otherwise he did not move, and the awful silence continued in that chamber
of death.

"Ninon put her hands to her face, to hide his ugly visage, and then sank down in the apathy
of despair.

"There was nothing in Ninon's agony that disturbed Laval. Scarcely a night passed but some
victim like herself writhed under his remorseless eyes. Their mortal fear and sufferings were
his recreation before the sterner business of sorcery that followed; and the more demonstrative
they were in their pain, the more highly spiced was his pleasure.  At first Ninon's beautiful
and expressive face kept his whole attention; but after a time he began to note the strange-appearing
little boy who accompanied her. There was no fear in his calm, pale face. There was no dread
in his large, spiritual eyes, that seemed to look past the monster and his thick walls to some
rare vision beyond.

"'What does the little wretch see?' he queried, for Laval, like his age, was very superstitious. 

For it hath been rumoured abroad, that our nation had purchased St. Paul's church, for to make
it their synagogue, notwithstanding it was a temple formerly consecrated
to Diana.

And many other things have been reported of us that never entered
the thought of our nation."

J.K.

Sneck-up or Snick-up.--Surely this means nothing more or less than what we should write Hiccup!
or Hiccough! so, at least, I have always supposed; misled, perhaps, by Sir Toby's surname, and
his parenthetical imprecation on "pickle herring". I do not pretend to be a critic of Shakspeare,
and must confess that I do not possess a copy of the "Twelfth Night" but after seeing your
correspondent R.R.'s letter (Vol. i., p. 467.), I resolved to write you a note. First, however, I called
on a neighbour to get a look at the text, and he brought me down
Theobald's edition of 1773, where it stands,--

"Sir To.

We did keep time, Sir, in our catches. Sneck up!" [Hiccoughs.

The effort necessary to pronounce the word "catches" might help to
produce a catch of another sort in the stomach of a gentleman oppressed
with drink and pickle herring; and it seems likely that some such
idea was in the author's mind.

DAVUS.

* * * * *

+MISCELLANEOUS+

NOTES ON BOOKS, CATALOGUES, SALES, ETC.

The
readiness which many of our friends have evinced to illustrate that
most curious, interesting, and valuable of all gossiping histories,
the recently completed edition of The Diary of Samuel Pepys, for which
the public is indebted to our noble correspondent Lord Braybrooke,
tempts us to call their attention to the no less important work now
in course of publication, The Diary and Correspondence of John Evelyn.

This we are the more anxious to do, inasmuch as, although the two volumes already issued complete
the Diary, there remains still an opportunity of introducing into the concluding volumes such
farther notes and illustrations as any of our readers may be enabled and disposed to furnish
and who would not gladly so show his reverence for the memory of
such a man as John Evelyn?

A List of Printed Service Books according to the Ancient Uses of the Anglican Church has recently
been{15} printed by Mr. F. Dickenson (late M.P. for Somersetshire), as a first attempt towards getting
a complete account of all such books, and of all copies of each class that are extant. Mr. Dickenson's
object is, eventually to produce a complete Catalogue raisonnée of all books of this class, whether
printed or MSS., comprising, as to the MSS., a careful abstract of
the contents of each, with a notice of its probable age and of anything
that may help to fix the place where it was written, or intended to
be used; and as to the printed copies, supplying the title, colophon,
foliation, and any peculiarities of type, woodcuts, or ornaments,
and including besides, an account of the origin and history of the
Anglican uses.

Any information on these heads with which that gentleman may be favoured, our readers may calculate
on seeing turned to good account.
 At the last
stroke of the bell take their hearts out of their living bodies.'

"Ninon sank on the floor, murmuring like a dying zephyr among the chords of an AEolian harp,
'Farewell, mother dear. Farewell, my lover true. I cannot meet you to-mortarn  at the FALLEN
TREE' (here Hemstead glanced at Lottie, whose face was instantly suffused); and she bowed her
bead upon her brother's shoulder, and sobbed aloud.

"Slowly and solemnly upon the silent night the iron tongue tolled out the fatal moments.

"With increasing uneasiness the monster upon his sable throne watched little Pierre, who, from
first to last, had not shown a trace of fear or trouble. Among all his victims he had never
seen a child like this, and his guilty heart began to fail him wofully.

"'He surely sees something,' he muttered, as the boy's large eyes dilated with a wondrous awe,
and his face grew luminous with a great joy.

"The heavy vibrations of the last stroke of the bell resounded through the silent night.

"Suddenly, with a shrill, piercing voice that went like an arrow to the guilty heart of Laval,
little Pierre exclaimed, 'It is Christmas morn! O Ninon, look! there is Jesu, the Christ-Child,
and the Lord of all the saints. See, He is coming towards us, bearing His cross--He is here--He
is placing His pierced hands upon our heads--we are saved'; and the child knelt reverently
on the pavement, and his sister knelt beside him.

"The monster tumbled off his sable throne and lay grovelling and groaning upon the floor, while
his terror-stricken accomplices ran clattering down the stairs.

"Far above the tower even, Ninon thought she heard a burst of heavenly song, while little Pierre
in rapt ecstasy cried,' Listen.'

"Suddenly a clarion voice that Ninon heard most plainly, and that thrilled her to the heart,
rang up from the earth beneath.

"' Harm but a hair of their heads, and I will make you suffer the tortures of the damned.'

"Even at their height they could hear the sound of galloping steeds.

"A dozen brave fellows swam the moat, and a moment later the draw-bridge fell heavily, and
the clangor of a hundred hoofs rang upon it.

"Up the winding stair came the tramp of armed men. A thud and a groan followed when any resisted.
The dethroned monster lay grovelling on the floor, not daring to move.

"Little Pierre still looked heavenward. Ninon looked towards the door. A moment later her lover
rushed in with drawn sword; and Ninon, unharmed, with a cry of joy sprang to his heart.

"But the fire of a terrible anger burned in the young man's cheek, and he raised his gleaming
sword against Laval, who now pleaded piteously for mercy.

"'What mercy would you have shown these children?' thundered the youth. 'What mercy have you
shown to your other innocent victims?' and he was about to run him through when Ninon caught
his arm and cried, 'Stay, kill him not this Christmas morn in his terrible guilt. It was Jesu
who saved us; and does He not ever say, Forgive--even our enemies?'

"Slowly she drew down the raised arm of human vengeance. She took from his reluctant hand the
gleaming sword, and returned it in its sheath.

"And now Ninon has become more than a woman,--she is a Christian."

CHAPTER XXXI.

UNDER THE MISTLETOE.

Instead of applause, there was the truer and more appropriate tribute of silence when Hemstead
finished the mosaic of a story which, by the various narratives, had been developed so differently
and yet characteristically.  The eyes of more than one were moist, and Lottie hastily left
the room.

Mr. Dimmerly was the first to recover himself, and, after blowing his nose most vociferously,
managed to say: "Well, nephew, it was hardly the thing to get a sermon off on us before Sunday,
but, since it was rather well done, I don't think we will complain. I now suggest that you
young people have some games that will set your blood in motion. The last hours of Christmas
eve should ever be the merriest. I will send Lottie back,--the tender-hearted little minx,
who must take everything in earnest."

His advice was followed, and Lottie soon returned, becoming, as usual, the life of the company.
A breezy sound of voices and many a ringing laugh took the place of the former hush, as games
and jests followed in quick succession.

Harcourt was good-naturedly on the alert to serve Hemstead, and, in a game that required the
absence of two of the company from the room a few moments, suggested the names of the student
and Lottie Marsden. They, nothing loath, went out together into the empty hall.

"Do you know," said Hemstead, "I think it a little strange I have not had a chance to speak
to you alone since we were at the fallen tree in the clump of hemlocks?"

"I did not know," said Lottie, laughing and blushing, "that the 'fallen tree' was a trysting
place."

"Well," said he, eagerly, "I met a young lady there once, whom I would gladly meet there or
anywhere else again."

"To see whether she had taken your advice?"

"That depends. I doubt whether she can 'make a man' of a certain individual, and I fear she
will not take the other alternative."

"She will probably do as Ninon did,--follow her heart." "If one could only know whither your
heart would lead you!" he said, looking at her so wistfully that she, seeing through his thin
disguise, had it on her tongue to tell him.  But, instead, she took a few dancing steps away,
and, with no such intention whatever, stood just under the mistletoe as she laughingly said,
"That reminds me of what father often says: How nice it would be to speculate, if one only
knew every time how it would turn out!"

"Miss Marsden!" he exclaimed, hurriedly, "you are right under the mistletoe."

She tried to spring away, but he snatched her hand and detained her, while he stood hesitatingly
at her side, looking at her lips as if they were the gates of Paradise.

"Well," said she, laughing and blushing, "I have nothing to do in the matter."

"But I dare not take it unless you give it."

"And I dare not give it unless you take it."

If Hemstead did not emulate Mr. Dimmerly's "explosion," the ancient rite was nevertheless honored
in a way that Lottie would not soon forget. Never did a kiss mean more, express more, or impart
more, upon any occasion of the observance of the ceremony by her ancestors, back to the times
of the Druids.

But this moment of bliss was of short duration, for Mrs.  Marchmont unexpectedly entered the
hall, and threw them both into disastrous confusion by exclaiming, in unfeigned astonishment,
"Well, well! what does this mean?"

Of course Lottie was the first to recover herself, and managed to falter: "You see, auntie,
by some accident--I assure you it was an accident; I didn't mean to do it at all--I got under
that pesky mistletoe of uncle's, and Mr.  Hemstead, it would seem, had taken to heart uncle's
homily on the duty of keeping up old customs. Mr. Hemstead, you know, is so conscientious,
and I suppose he felt that he must, poor man; and so--and thus"--

At this moment Harcourt's expedients of delay failed, and they were loudly summoned back to
the dining-room.

"I hope there will be no more such nonsense," said Mrs.  Marchmont, severely.

"O, no, indeed, auntie; it will never happen again.  Only the strongest sense of duty could
have impelled Mr.  Hemstead to do such a thing"; and they escaped to the dining-room only to
be subjected to a fire from another quarter. Their color was so high, and they had such an
air of general confusion, that Harcourt cried, laughingly, "I more than half believe that you
have been under the mistletoe."

"Nonsense!" said Lottie; "with auntie in the hall? If you think Mr. Hemstead is brave enough
for that, you greatly misjudge him."

But De Forrest was wofully suspicious, and had many uneasy thoughts about the "jest" which
Lottie must be carrying out; for surely it could not be possible that she was becoming in earnest.

Hemstead and Lottie made wretched work in guessing the word required of them from the nature
of the game; for Mr. Dimmerly's prolonged chuckling laugh, which could be heard from the parlor,
did not tend to allay their confusion.

When Mrs. Marchmont entered that apartment she found her brother apparently in a convulsion;
but he was only vainly endeavoring to prevent his merriment from developing into an outrageous
chuckle, for he too had seen Lottie under the mistletoe.

"This thing must be stopped," said Mrs. Marchmont, most emphatically; at which her brother
chuckled louder than ever, and said, "Stopped, indeed! As if it could be, or ever had been
'stopped,' since Adam and Eve first cast sheep's eyes at each other in the Garden of Eden."

His sister left the room with a gesture of annoyance.

Suddenly the little man's queer, cackling laugh ceased, and his wrinkled face grew sad and
thoughtful as he sighed: "I'm the only Dimmerly who was ever 'stopped,'--fool that I was. His
mother, sister Celia, would marry a poor man; and her life, in spite of all her toil and privation,
has been happier than mine"; and he shook his head pathetically over "what might have been."

The marble clock on the mantel chimed out the hour of twelve, and the young people came flocking
in from the dining-room, their noisy mirth hushed as they remembered that the sacred hours
of the Christmas Sabbath had begun.

"I have induced Miss Martell to give us a Christmas hymn before parting," said Harcourt; and
he led Alice to the piano, as if there had been some preconcerted arrangement.

Lottie went to her uncle's side, and took his arm in a sort of wheedling, affectionate way.
She was beginning instinctively to recognize that she had an ally and sympathizer in him. As
he looked down upon her fair face in its dewy freshness and bloom, he vowed that, as far as
it was in his power, she should have her own way. Time and the inevitable ills of our lot might
dim that face, but it should not become withered by a lifetime of vain regret.

"What were you laughing at so, uncle?" she whispered.

"At my nephew's painful conscientiousness and stern performance of duty. What a martyr he made
of himself, to be sure!"

"Now, uncle, I half believe you think I stepped under your old mistletoe on purpose. It's no
such thing."

"O, no, my dear. The mistletoe is haunted, and has been for a thousand years or more, and viewless
elves draw under it those who are to receive kisses,--prophetic of many others from the same lips."

But here he found Lottie's hand upon his lips for a second, and then she stood at Miss Martell's
side, who was now playing a prelude. In some surprise, Lottie noticed that, instead of there
being a printed sheet upon the piano-rack, both the words and music were written by hand. As
Miss Martell sang, in a sweet but unfamiliar air, the following words, her surprise and interest
deepened:

    At midnight, in Judean skies,
        There dawned a light whose holy rays
    Not only cheered the shepherds' eyes,
        But filled with hope all coming days.

    At midnight, o'er Judea's plain
        Was heard a song unknown before;
    The echoes of that sweet refrain
        Are reaching earth's remotest shore.

    'Twas not the sun o'er Eastern hills,
        That shed a transient radiance round;
    Nor a feeble heir of earthly ills
        The shepherds in the manger found.

    Upon the darker midnight sky
        Of human sorrow, care, and sin--
    A night that broods at noontide high;
        A dreary gloom all hearts within--

    There rose a gentle, human face,
        Whose light was love and sympathy--
    The God of heaven, yet of our race--
        The humblest of humanity.

    The night of sorrow, sin, and care
        Still shadows many hapless hearts;
    But all who will this light may share,--
        This hope which Christmas morn imparts.

Lottie's eyes were suffused with tears when the simple hymn was finished, but they did not
prevent her from following Miss Kartell's finger as she turned to the title-page and pointed
to the inscription:

"Music by Alice Martell.

"Words by Frank Hemstead.

"Dedicated to Miss Lottie Marsden.

"We wish you more than a 'merry'--the happy Christmas, rather, of the Christian."

Her first response was an impulsive kiss to Alice. But when she looked around to thank Hemstead
he had gone.

A little later, as he came stamping up the piazza, out of the snow, after assisting Harcourt
and Miss Martell away, the hall-door opened, and some one darted out, and took his hand in
a quick, thrilling pressure. A voice that had grown as dear as familiar said, "Before we parted
to-night I wanted to tell you that I think Lottie Marsden, like Ninon, has become more than
a woman,--a Christian."

And she vanished, but left the night so luminous about him that he could not, for a long time,
enter the house.

He felt, like the shepherds who kept watch centuries ago, that an angel had brought him "tidings
of great joy."

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE CHRISTMAS SUNDAY.

This Christmas Sabbath, though marked by no unusual event, was destined to be a memorable day
in the lives of Frank Hemstead and Charlotte Marsden. A chain of unforeseen circumstances and
experiences, and a sequence of emotions still less understood, had lifted them higher and higher,
until this culminating day was scarcely one of earthly existence.

Lottie, in her previous life, had been frivolous and selfish; but her evil resulted from thoughtlessness,
rather than from the deliberate purpose to do wrong. She was the type of multitudes of her
fair sisters, who, with sparkling eyes, look out upon life in its morning to see only what
it offers to them, and not the tasks it furnishes them for others. Only by experience--only
by God's logic of events--do they find that their happiness is in these tasks; in unselfish
giving and doing.

The world had been at Lottie's feet. It had offered her all that it has to give to a girl in
her station; but when, withdrawn from it by a day of suffering, she had summed up her treasures,
she had found that she had nothing but remorse.  She had been receiving all her life, and yet
had nothing.  She would then gladly have remembered that she had given even one an impulse
towards a truer and happier life. But she could not. Apart from natural impulses of affection
towards kindred and friends, her only thought in regard to all had been,--How can I make them
minister to me and my pleasure? With tact and skill, enhanced by exceeding beauty, she had
exacted an unstinted revenue of flattery, attention, and even love; and yet, when, in weakness
and pain, she wished the solace of some consoling memory, she found only an accusing conscience.

This experience conveyed to the practical girl a startling lesson. With all her faults, she
did not belong to the class that is hopeless, because so weak and shallow. Though her handsome
face might often express much that was unlovely and unwomanly, it ever expressed mind.

When she, in her turn, like hosts of others, came to realize the limitations of her being,
her weakness and need, she looked around, instinctively, for help and support. Human teaching
presented a God from whom she shrank in fear and dislike. The Bible revealed Jesus. When she
most felt her need, the Bible presented One whose eyes overflowed with sympathy, and whose
hand was omnipotent. She instinctively felt, like Mary of old, that, at "His feet," there were
rest and hope.

The feeling was not reached as a mathematician solves an equation, or a theologian comes to
a conclusion, but more after the manner in which some women and most children will look at
a person and say, "I like him; I'll trust him."

There was nothing incongruous or unnatural in the contemporary love growing up in her heart
for Hemstead, though it is possible that some may so think. In some minds the ideas of love
and passion seem inseparable, and they regard religion as something far removed. These are
but the right wing of that sinister class who jumble their passions and religion together,
and, in pious jargon and spiritual double entendre, half conceal and half convey the base meaning
of their hearts. In others, love, or what with them goes by the name, is equally inseparable
from management  and match-making, trousseaux and settlements,--concerns pertaining to earth,
and very earthy, it must be admitted. No doubt many excellent, solid people would regard Lottie's
spiritual condition with grave suspicion, and ask, disapprovingly, "What business have two
such DIFFERENT loves to be originating in her heart at the same time?" But, in the term "different,"
they beg the question. Where is the antagonism? Where is even the dissimilarity? Are not these
two impulses of the heart near akin, rather? and does not a truer and deeper philosophy of
life teach that love for a human object may be as certainly God's will as love towards Himself?
Have these solid, excellent people aught to say against the faithful devotion of a wife, or
the patient tenderness of a mother, which are corner-stones of the family, as the family is
the corner-stone of all true civilization? But what is the origin of the wife's devotion and
the mother's tenderness? These people, surely, are as wist as they are solid. They would have
the day without the dawn.

At any rate, it would appear that Heaven was making the match between Hemstead and Lottie,--making
it as the spring comes on in northern latitudes, subtilely, imperceptibly, and yet speedily.
Just how or when it came about, they did not know; but when they met on that Christmas morning,
the peace and gladness of an assured and reciprocal love smiled from each other's eyes. They
needed no explanations. Frank Hemstead's face had ever been as easily interpreted as his honest
words; and he now had taught Lottie's face to tell the truth. A blessed truth it revealed to
him that Christmas day.

As he entered the pulpit that morning his face was radiant with the purest human love, as well
as love to God. So far from being incongruous, the one seemed to kindle and intensify the other.
Though his sermon was simplicity itself he spoke as one inspired. His message now was a gospel,
and came to his hearers as the angel's announcement (which was his text) to the shepherds.

But his closing words were searching, and sent many of his hearers home thoughtful and conscience-smitten,
as well as cheered by the great hope which Christmas day should ever bring to the world.

"I would gladly correct," he said, "the impression which I fear was made on some minds last
Sabbath. Christ is the embodiment of Christianity, and His coming to the world was 'tidings
of great joy'; His coming to every sinful heart should be 'tidings of great joy.' But I fear
that I led some to dread His coming, as they would purgatorial fires. How did the All-powerful
One come? As a little, helpless child, that he might disarm our fears and enlist our sympathy.
How did He live? The humblest among the humble, that no one on earth should be too lowly to
go straight to His side with his griefs. How did He act? He took little children in His arms,
and blessed them. He laid His hand on the loathsome leper from whom all shrank. He looked into
the glare of the demoniac's eyes: the demons fled. Then, in meekness, He would offer to enter
the poor wretch's heart, and dwell in what had been the foul abode of the foulest fiends. When
men wept, He, from sympathy, wept with them, though his next breath changed their mourning
into joy. When man dishonored God, or wronged his fellow-men,--as did the Pharisees, with their
unhallowed traffic in the Temple, their robbery of the widow and fatherless, their blocking
up of the way of life with their senseless ceremonies, puerile traditions,--no knight in all
the heroic past ever breathed out a more fiery indignation. How did He die? In such a way that
even the thief might be redeemed and live eternally. He was an ideal man, as well as perfect
God. He was the servant of all, as well as King of kings. Not from his throne did He stoop
to us. He stood at our side, and sustained fainting humanity with His encircling arm, as a
brother. Little wonder, then, that the angel called the announcement that God had thus visited
His creatures 'good tidings of great joy.'

"But there is a brief word of pointed and searching significance in this message. The angel
said, 'Unto YOU is born a Saviour.' Is that true of each one of us? Is this Christmas day a
mockery, reminding us of a hope that is not ours,--of a heaven in which we have no right or
part?  Does conscience tell us to-day that we have looked upon the light that shone at Bethlehem
with apathetic eyes, and heard the angel's message with unbelieving hearts, so that practically
no Saviour has been born unto us? Why do you keep this day as a festival, my hearer? I can
tell you why you may. If you will receive it, the angel's message is to you personally; unto
you is born a Saviour who will forgive your past sin, and shield you from its consequences,--who
will ennoble your future life, and sustain and comfort you under the inevitable sorrow and
suffering awaiting,--and who will receive you into an eternal and a happy home at the end of
your brief sojourn here. May not this Christmas pass until each one has received the abiding
peace and joy of the angel's message into the depths of his heart."

After the service, Miss Martell, with glistening eyes, said to Harcourt, "I am glad you heard
that sermon."

"I admit," he replied, with bowed head, "that it is better than my old philosophy. I think
Hemstead must have written it for me."

As the young clergyman helped Lottie into the sleigh, she whispered, "You wrote that sermon
for me."

Both were right. Hemstead had preached Christ, who is God's embodied truth, meant alike for
every human hearty and alike adapted to all.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE END OF THE "JEST."

It is a common impression that impending disasters cast their shadows before; and especially
in the realm of fiction do we find that much is made of presentiments, which are usually fulfilled
in a very dramatic way. But the close observer of real life, to a large degree, loses faith
in these bodings of ill. He learns that sombre impressions result more often from a defective
digestion and a disquieted conscience than from any other cause; and that, after the gloomiest
forebodings, the days pass in unusual serenity. Not that this is always true, but it would
almost seem the rule. Perhaps more distress is caused by those troubles which never come, but
which are feared and worried over, than by those which do come, teaching us, often, patience
and faith.

Does not experience show that disasters and trials more often visit us, like the "thief in
the night," unexpectedly?

At any rate, it so occurred to Hemstead and Lottie on the dreary Monday that followed their
glorified Sunday. And yet, never did a day open with fairer promise. A cloudless sky bent over
a crystal earth. The mystic peace of Christmas seemed to have been breathed even into bleak
December; for the air was mild and still, and the shadow of many a slender tree crept across
the snow as steadily as that made by the sun-dial on the lawn.

Within doors all appeared equally serene. The fire burned cheerily upon the hearth when Hemstead
came down to breakfast. What was of far more importance, the light of love glowed as brightly
in Lottie's eyes, as she beamed upon him across the table; and the spell which kept him, unthinking,
unfearing, in the beatified present remained unbroken.

But the darkest shadows were creeping towards both.

To any situated as they were, and in their condition of mind and heart, a mere awakening would
have been a rude shock. Some one had only to show them, with the remorseless logic of this
world, what all their heavenly emotions involved, in order to cause perplexity and almost consternation.
They could not long dwell, like the immortal gods, on the Mount Olympus of their exalted feeling,
subsisting on the nectar and ambrosia of tones and glances. 

They are said to have once connected with Mont St. Eloy, some three or four miles away. Now
these tunnels are blocked, but they are very extensive and cold;
even in the hot weather cardigans had to be worn below.

Electricity supplied the light for our one and only globe until it got smashed, when the law of
"might" supplied another.

The old German dug-outs in other parts excited our interest, rows of beds in tiers of wooden
frames and rabbit wire reminded one of a lodging-house, but the latter type of residence is
probably fresher.

The beds were delightful for sleeping on, and clean, but one restless sleeper would make the
row oscillate in harmony.

At this time we were in the Eighth Corps, and our corps commander, Lieut.-General Hunter Weston,
paid us a visit in July and made a complete tour at a high rate of speed, and finished fresh
at the head of an exhausted staff.

One spell out of the line was spent at Villiers au Bois, where some training was expected,
as we had had none worth speaking of in France. Instead of that we became the village road sweepers
and scavengers and so fitted ourselves for our return to the line.

Lieut. Carmichael, D.S.O., supplied the one thrill in the way of patrols. The two lines near Arleux
lay some 600 yards or so apart and the Bosche was very inactive. He did not seem to be so keen on
roaming about in the dark as the Turk.

One night in July Lieut. Carmichael set out with two battalion scouts, Ptes. Pirie and Kinniburgh,
to reconnoitre a part of the Bosche wire. The men were armed in the usual way for those adventures,
i.e. with bayonet and a few bombs only and dressed in burberry suits,
which made them look more like deep-sea divers than soldiers.

A covering party accompanied them part of the way and took up a position;
the three had examined the wire and were commencing to withdraw when
they were attacked. As the sergeant left in charge of the covering
party reported, the first he heard was a revolver shot followed by
a "D---- it." This relapse to the colloquial we afterwards heard was
owing to a jamb in the revolver. Pirie was seized by the throat by
a Hun, but he put his bayonet through his assailant's neck and left
it there; the Bosche fell dead as Kinniburgh came to the rescue. "With all Lottie's wild nonsense
and fondness for flirting, I would not have thought that she could be guilty of such deliberate
and persistent effort to trifle with one so sincere and good as Frank. The most heartless coquette
would scarcely call him fair game. She puzzles me too, for she does not seem like one who is
acting, but more like one in earnest. Besides, look at the interest she is beginning to take
in religion. She surely could not employ such sacred things for the purposes of mere flirtation."

But Bell soon converted Mrs. Marchmont to her way of thinking. Lottie had found Hemstead more
interesting than she had expected, and had foolishly and recklessly permitted a mere sentiment
for him to develop, which, in her case, would end with the visit, and soon be forgotten in
the mad whirl of New York gayety. "But with Mr. Hemstead," concluded Bel, "it will be a very
different affair. He is one of the kind that will brood over such a disappointment and wrong
to the end of life."

So it was settled that Mrs. Marchmont should "speak plainly" to her nephew, and warn him against
"Lottie's wiles," as soon as possible.

But no opportunity occurred before Monday morning, and then not until Hemstead had received
some of the most blissful experiences that he had yet enjoyed. For, immediately after breakfast,
all had flocked into the back parlor, where the laden Christmas tree revealed the secrets that
had filled the air with mystery during the preceding days.

All had been remembered, and Mr. Martell's munificence towards the gallant coachman quite took
away his breath.

But Hemstead was overwhelmed and troubled at first, when he opened an envelope, and found a
check for a thousand dollars, with the words:

"We send you this, not in any sense as compensation,--for we know enough of your character
to recognize that you would have taken equal risks in behalf of the penniless,--but because
we wish to be remembered by you, whom we can never forget. And we only request tint you invest
this sum towards your library, so that, in coming years, the thoughts of your favorite authors
may remind you of those whose best wishes, sincerest gratitude, and highest esteem Will ever
be yours.

"(Signed) HERBERT MARTELL, ALICE MARTELL."

"Now, Frank, what is the use of putting on such airs?" said Addie. "You surely expected a handsome
present from Mr. Martell."

"I assure you, I expected nothing of the kind," he replied, a trifle indignantly. "Why should
I? As it is, I am doubtful whether I ought to accept it."

"Why should I?" Lottie echoed with a merry laugh.  "That's like you. But, unless you wish to
hurt and wrong sincere friends very much, I advise you to keep it and do as they say. You are
so exceedingly proud or humble--which shall I call it?--that I fear you neither expect, nor
will take anything from me."

"Here is a queer-looking parcel for Frank Hemstead," said Mr. Dimmerly, with his chuckling laugh.

With intense delight Lottie saw the student hesitate, and his hand tremble as he slowly began
to open it.

"It's not a torpedo, or an infernal machine, that you need be in such trepidation," she whispered.
"It won't go off."

"Is it from you?"

"Look and see."

It was a sermon holder, of rich, plain morocco without, but within, most elaborately embroidered.
Most prominent among the rare and dainty devices was a single oar.

The expression of his face repaid her, as he examined it with a comical blending of reverence
and affection, such as a devout Catholic would manifest towards a relic. In the blade of the
oar were worked, with the most exquisite fineness, the words, "A True Knight." Within an inner
pocket, where they could not be readily seen, were the words,

"With the thanks of Lottie Marsden."

But his quick scrutiny soon discovered them, and he turned and said, with an emphasis that
did her good, "I value this more than the check."

"What folly!" she said, blushing with pleasure; "it isn't worth five dollars."

"I can prove that it is worth more than the check," he said, in a low tone.

"How?"

"We value that gift most which we receive from the friend we value most. There; it is proved
in a sentence; but I can prove it over again."

"What delightful lessons in logic! But you surely cannot prove it again."

"Yes. If the gift from the friend we value most contains evidence that thought and time have
been expended upon it, that gift, however slight its market value, has a worth to us beyond
price, because showing that the friend we love supremely thinks of us in our absence."

"I did put a great deal of time and thought in that little gift, but you have repaid me," Lottie
answered.

Their brief but significant tete-a-tete was now interrupted by De Forrest, who came forward
to thank Lottie for her costly gift to him,--a gift bought on Broadway. He had uneasily marked
the fact that she had given something to Hemstead, but when he saw that it was only a sermon-cover,
he was quite relieved.

"Come here, Frank, and show me your present," said Mr. Dimmerly, a little later.

Hemstead good-naturedly complied, and the old gentleman looked at the single embroidered oar,
with a comical twinkle in his eye, and called again, "Lottie, come here."

She approached rather shyly and reluctantly, not knowing what to expect.

"Now, Lottie," said her uncle, reproachfully, pointing to the oar, "I did not expect that from
so sensible a girl as you are. What is a man going to do with one oar, unless he is to take
a lonely scull through life as I have? Did you mean to suggest that to Mr. Hemstead?"

"Mr. Hemstead found out another meaning than that," she said, laughing, "and I'm not going
to stay here to be teased by you"; and she ran out of the room, the picture of blushing happiness.

When Hemstead again saw her it was with a great dread in his heart, and his tones were grave
and almost stern.

"O--h--h, you found out another meaning, did you?" said Mr. Dimmerly, looking both kindly and
quizzically over his spectacles at his nephew.

"Well, uncle, to tell you the truth I hardly understand myself. My visit here is a great contrast
to my quiet seminary life, and I have been getting deeper and deeper into a maze of happy bewilderment
every day. So much has happened, and I am so changed, that, like many in tales of enchantment,
I scarcely know whether I am myself."

"I have seen the spell working," said Mr. Dimmerly, dryly, "and am thankful that the transformation
has not been of the nature that Shakespeare portrayed in his Midsummer Night Fantasy. Your
head might have become turned by the wrong girl, and you have reached the period when it is
bound to be turned by some one."

"Uncle," he said, fervently, "she is the noblest and most beautiful being in existence."

"Frank, I wish to see you," said his aunt, quietly; and he followed her to her own private
sitting-room.

Mr. Dimmerly indulged in his chuckling laugh as he looked after them.

"Now she's going to 'stop' it, he--he--In the mean time I'll go out and stop the brook from
running down hill."

"The time has come," said Mrs. Marchmont to her perplexed nephew, with the complacent superiority
with which the wise of this world enlighten those whose "heads are often in the clouds,"--"the
time has come when I must speak plainly to you of a matter as important as it is delicate.
You are my own sister's child, and I cannot see you wronged or going blindly into trouble without
warning you.  Are you not permitting yourself to become interested in Miss Marsden to a degree
that is not wise?"

"Why not wise?" he answered with burning cheeks.

"Have you not realized that she is one of the most fashionable young ladies in New York, and
belongs to one of the wealthiest and most fashionable families? If you could but once see her
mother you would understand me."

"But she herself has changed," he urged, eagerly.

Mrs. Marchmont smiled incredulously and pityingly.  "How little you know the world!" she said.
"In what do you expect all your sentiment to end? Only sentiment?  You say you purpose being
a home missionary. Can you imagine for a moment that one situated as she is would contemplate
such a life? Her parents would as soon bury her."

Hemstead groaned under his aunt's remorseless words, but said in a sort of blind desperation:
"Her parents! Is this Hindostan, that parents can treat their daughters as merchandise? A girl
of Miss Marsden's force and nobility of character--"

"O Frank, hush! It absolutely makes me sick to see one so easily deceived. 'Nobility of character,'
indeed!  Well, I didn't wish to speak of it. I could not believe it even of Lottie, but nothing
less than the whole truth will convince you"; and she told him of the plot in which Lottie
purposed to make him the ridiculous subject of a practical joke, and intimated that all her
action since had been but the carrying out of that plot.

At first Hemstead grew deathly pale, and his aunt, thinking he was going to faint, began fumbling
for her salts. But a moment later the blood suffused even his neck and brow, and he said passionately,
"I don't believe a word of this; Miss Marsden is not capable of such falsehood."

"Whether in your unreasoning passion you will believe it or not makes no difference," said
Mrs. Marchmont, quietly.  "It is true, as I can prove by Addie and Miss Parton."

He took a few hasty strides up and down the room and muttered, "I will take her word against
all the world. She shall answer for herself"; and he rang the bell.

When the servant appeared he said, "Please ask Miss Marsden to come here at once."

Mrs. Marchmont regretted Hemstead's action very much, but it was too firm and decided to be
prevented. She had planned that after his "eyes had been opened to his folly," and Lottie's
frivolity, to say the least, her nephew would, with quiet dignity, cease his attentions, and
perhaps shorten his visit. She had a horror of scenes, but feared that one was coming now.

Hemstead admitted Lottie with a silent bow and gave her a chair.

When she saw his grave, pale face, her heart misgave her strangely, and she trembled so that
even he noticed it, and also another fact,--she did not meet his eyes. He fastened his upon
her, as if he would read her soul, for he now felt that more than life was at stake.

"Miss Marsden," he said, in a low, deep tone, "my aunt has made a strange charge against you,
but I said to her, and I now say to you, that I will take your word against all the world.
She asserts, and she gives the names of her witnesses, that your action--your kindness towards
me from the first--has been but the carrying out of a deliberate and heartless jest. Is it true?"

Lottie's wonted quickness failed her. She had been so happy, she had seemed to have got so
far beyond her old, false self, and so established in his affection, that such a reverse did
not appear possible. But the evil that at one time she had feared had now come in a form so
unexpected and serious that, for a moment, she was stunned and bewildered, and fell into helpless
confusion. The nature of the case aggravated her distress. How could she explain? What could
she say? In response to his question she only trembled more violently and buried her burning
face in her hands.

He saw in this action confirmation of fears that he at first would scarcely entertain, and
regarded her a moment with a strange expression upon his face,--anger and pity blended,--and
then silently left the room.

The sleigh stood at the door, and the coachman was just starting on an errand to Newburgh.

Mr. Dimmerly looked with surprise at his nephew's pale face,--a surprise that was greatly increased
as the young man seized his hat and coat, and said in a husky tone, "I am going to New York
for some days," and sprang into the sleigh and was driven away.

"Well," said the old man, testily, "if she 'stopped' him as easily as that, he deserves to
lose her."

And Mrs. Marchmont, seeing Hemstead depart so silently, congratulated herself that she had
escaped a scene after all, and complacently thought, "These things can be 'stopped' if taken
in time, notwithstanding brother's sentimental nonsense." 

As there are no cavalry, reconnaissances will be carried out under the direction of mounted officers
by Beduins attached to them.

ARTILLERY.

1. In the case of entrenched positions. The Turkish Mountain Gun, firing Austrian Mtn. Gun Shell
is to be used against moving (or movable) targets in the enemy's
lines, while the German Heavy Guns are to be employed against the
entrenched positions thereof.

2.

As shell is scarce and can only be replaced with great difficulty,
great economy is to be displayed by the Artillery.

3. (Obscure.)

4.

Among the chief duties of O.C. Batteries will be choice of observation
stations.

With this object, when required, the O.C. Battery will leave his Battery and observe fearlessly,
keeping up communication with his Battery by telephone over the intervening space.

5.

To prevent dust caused by discharge betraying gun positions, mats are to be spread under the
muzzle of each gun.

6.

During prolonged infantry encounters O.C.'s of Infantry Units will send officers to observe
the effect of the Turkish Mountain Batteries and Austrian shells on the enemy's firing line.

H.Q.
1ST EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, July 9th, 1916.

ORDERS FOR ADVANCE FROM EL ARISH.

1. The regulations regarding the march have been explained in previous orders.

2. Fresh orders will be issued to the advanced guard on reaching the line Oghratina--Hod-el-Messia--Mugheibra
and to the detachment proceeding to Bir-el-Abd.

The orders issued on July 8th, 1916, refer to the advance from El Arish.

THE MARCH.

1. The march under war conditions commences from El Arish, i.e. it
being probable that hostile reconnaissances will be encountered, the
advance must be effected with the necessary screen.

There being a Turkish Detachment at Bir-el-Mazar, up to this point precautions need be observed.
From Bir-el-Mazar the war zone commences. From this point it is necessary
to separate the advanced guard and main body and send reconnoitring
detachments ahead of the advanced guard.

2. Silence is to be strictly
observed on the march. Special attention must be paid to this by troops
moving along the shore. Orders must be given quietly during night
marches. No smoking at night and no use to be made, if possible, of
electric torches after Bir-el-Mazar.

3. It is probable that units
moving along the shore may be exposed to the fire of enemy ships.
In this event troops will take to the nearest cover in an orderly
manner without waiting for orders.

4. Every precaution must be taken
to facilitate the march, e.g. collars, shirts, head-covering to be
opened, boots to be removed.

To prevent confusion among the units
on the march, the intervals by day must be increased to 100 metres.
Files must be opened to give the men air. They must be closed at night
and all straggling stopped immediately.

To take advantage of the
cool nights to cover long distances, halts must be shortened.

As
a rule the troops will march between 6 and 7 p.m. till 11 p.m. After
a halt from 11 p.m. to 1 a.m. they will proceed so as to reach their
destination by 7 a.m. After every 100 minutes marching troops to halt
20 minutes. Men and animals to be given "a breather" (soluk molasi)
after passing through difficult ground.

5. Draught oxen to be watered
at every watering place.

Little wonder that she was so drearily apathetic to all that could be said or done to rouse
her. The fall from the pinnacle of her religious hope and earthly happiness was too far and
great to permit speedy recovery.

At last she rose, and mechanically disrobed for the night: but no sleep blessed her eyes, for,
on every side, she saw, in flaming letters, the word false. With increasing vividness her fancy
portrayed a pale, stern, averted face.

The next morning she was really ill, and her aunt, in alarm, was about sending for the physician,
but Lottie prevented her by saying, somewhat coldly, "What drug has the doctor for rny trouble?
If you really wish me to get better, give Bel another room, and leave me to myself. I must
fight this battle out alone."

"Now, Lottie, how can you take a little thing so greatly to heart?"

"Is it a little thing that the one whom I most honor and respect in all the world regards me
as a false coquette?"

"You surely cannot apply such language to my nephew?"

"I do; and on the best grounds. If I am young, I am somewhat capable of judging. He is not
the first man I have seen. You do not know, and have never appreciated Mr. Hemstead."

"But, Lottie, compare your station and prospects with his."

"There is scarcely any one with whom I would not exchange prospects. I am sick of society's
artificial distinctions, in which true worth and manhood--all that Heaven cares for--count
for nothing. What does Mr. Hemstead care about my wealth, name, and position in New York? 
He looks at me; and you, or, rather, my own senseless folly, have made me appear a weak, false
thing, that, from the very laws of his being, he cannot help despising. But it was cruelly
hard in you and Bel, when you saw that I was trying to be a different--a better girl, to show
him only what I was, and give me no chance to explain. He will never trust,--never even look
at me again." And, for the first time, the unhappy girl burst into a passion of tears, and
sobbed so long and violently that Mrs. Marchmont had a distressing consciousness that her worldly
wisdom was not equal to this case at all. She would have telegraphed Hemstead to return, if
she had known where to address him.  She was often tempted to write to Lottie's mother, but
dreaded the reproaches of Mrs. Marsden for permitting matters to reach such a crisis before
"stopping" them. And so, in anxiety and perplexity, the day dragged slowly on, until, at last,
Lottie, wearied out, fell into the heavy sleep of utter exhaustion, from which she did not
wake till the following morning.

But the respite from that most depressing of all suffering; mental trouble, had given her a
chance, and her healthful nature began to recover.

She was a girl of too much force and character to succumb long to any misfortune; and, as she
said to her aunt, she meant to fight this battle out to some kind of solution.

To the surprise of every one, she appeared at the breakfast table, very pale, but quiet, and
perfectly self-possessed.  Her bearing, however, had a dignity and a decision which would make
even Mrs. Marchmont hesitate before she "meddled" again. De Forrest was half afraid of her,
and began to realize that she was not the girl he had brought to the country but a few weeks since.

After breakfast, she dismissed Bel by saying plainly that she wished to be alone, and then
sat down, and, for the first time, tried to clearly understand the situation. It grew more
and more evident how desperately against her were appearances. She had been false at first,
and, in a certain sense, must appear false to the last, in that she had not told him the truth.
Besides, just when and how she had become in earnest she could not remember. The poor girl
was greatly discouraged, and again gave way to tears, as if her heart would break.

But in the midst of her sore trouble, like a flash of genial light came the thought, "If Mr.
Hemstead will never look at me again, there is One who will"; and she sprang up, and, having
found a Bible, turned again to its shortest text, remembering, with a quick sob, how she had
first discovered it. With almost the distinctness and reality of actual presence, there rose
up before her mind One who, with bowed head, wept with men for men. Every tear of sympathy
appeared to fall on her bruised heart; and hope, that she believed dead, began to revive. She
just clung to one simple thought: "He feels sorry for me"; and it comforted her.

Then she began to turn the leaves back and forth to find places where Jesus showed kindness
and forgave, and she soon found that this was His life,--His work in which He never wearied,--kindness
to all, forgiveness for all. Then the thought stole into her heart, like the dove bringing
the "olive leaf" from across a dreary waste, "If Mr. Hemstead is like his Master he will forgive
me." Hope now grew strong and steadily, and the impulsive, demonstrative girl kissed the little
Book, pressed it to her heart, and caressed it as if it were a thing of life.  She got out
her portfolio and wrote:

"Mr. Hemstead, I sincerely ask your forgiveness for my folly, which you cannot condemn as severely
as I do. Though unworthy, indeed, of your friendship and esteem, can you believe that I am
not now the weak, wicked creature that I was when we first met? But I have not the courage
to plead my own cause. I know that both facts and appearances are against me. I can only ask
you, Who told His disciples to forgive each other, 'seventy times seven'?

"Yours, in sorrow and regret,

"LOTTIE MARSDEN."

"I have now done the best I can," she said. "The issue is in God's hands."

At the dinner-table she again perplexed the mystified household. They, in their narrow worldliness,
had no key to such a problem as Lottie Marsden had become. She was gentleness itself. The mystic
tears falling from Divine eyes had melted away all coldness and hardness, and the touch of
her words and manner, if we may so speak, had in it a kindliness and a regard for others to
which even the most callous respond. Patient self-forgetfulness is the most God-like and the
most winning of all the graces.

After dinner, Mr. Dimmerly shuffled away by himself, with a sound between a sniffle and his
old chuckle, muttering, "I don't believe it's 'stopped,' after all. Anyway, I wish she were
going to be a home missionary in my home."

Lottie went with Dan again to the pond, and then to the "fallen tree"; but she found no other
tryst there than memories, that, in view of what had happened, were very painful.

After her return, she no longer shunned the others, but sat down and talked quietly with them,
as multitudes of men and women are doing daily, giving no sign that in the mean time they are
patiently watching at the sepulchre of a buried hope, which may, or may not, rise again.

As with Lottie at first, so with Hemstead, the word false seemed to have the malignant power
to quench hope and happiness. If it is faith that saves, it would seem that it is its opposite--distrust--that
most quickly destroys. In no way can we deal more fatal and ruinous blows than to deceive those
who trust us.

And Hemstead felt, at first, that he had been deceived and trifled with in all that was sacred.
For hours both faith and reason reeled in passion, that grew and raged in the strong man's
breast like a tropical storm. He plunged into the streets, crowded with his unknowing, uncaring
fellow-creatures, as he would lose himself in the depths of a lonely forest, and walked hour
after hour, he knew not and cared not whither.

Two thoughts pursued him like goading phantoms,--she was false--he was deceived.

At last, when the frenzy left him, weak and exhausted, he found himself near a large hotel,
and he went in and slept almost as the dead sleep.

In his case also sleep proved "nature's sweet restorer." In the morning faith and reason sat
together on their throne, and he recognized his duty to act the part of a man and a Christian,
whatever the truth might be.

He sat down at last and calmly tried to disentangle the web. Second thoughts brought wiser
judgment, for, after  going over every day and hour of his acquaintance with Lottie, he could
scarcely resist the conclusion that if she had begun in falsehood she was ending in truth.
If she, in all her words and manner, had been only acting, he could never trust his senses
again, or be able to distinguish between the hollow and the real.

Hour after hour he sat and thought. He held a solemn assize within his own breast, and marshalled
all he could remember as witnesses for and against her. Much in her conduct that at first had
puzzled him now grew clear in view of her purpose to victimize him, and, even as late as Christmas
eve, he remembered how her use of the word "comedy" had jarred unpleasantly upon his ear. But
on the other hand there seemed even more conclusive evidence that she had gradually grown sincere,
and come to mean all she said and did. Could the color that came and went like light from an
inner flame,--could tears that seemed to come more from her heart than from her eyes,--could
words that had sounded so true and womanly, and that had often dwelt on the most sacred themes,
be only simulated?

"If so," he groaned, "then there are only two in the wide universe that I can ever trust,--God
and mother."

Moreover, in her trial, Lottie had an eloquent advocate to whom even deliberate reason appeared
only too ready to lend an attentive ear,--the student's heart.

Therefore she finally received a better vindication than the Scotch verdict "not proven," and
the young man began to condemn himself bitterly for having left so hastily, and before Lottie
had time to explain and defend herself.

His first impulse was to go back at once and give her another hearing. But, almost before he
was aware, he found a new culprit brought to the bar for judgment,--himself.

If the trial, just completed, had failed to prove Lottie's guilt, it had most conclusively
shown him his love. He saw how it had developed while he was blind to its existence.  He saw
that his wild agony of the preceding day was not over falsehood and deception in the abstract,
but over the supposed falsehood of a woman whom he had come to love as his own soul. And even
now he was exulting in the hope that she might have passed, as unconsciously as himself, into
like sweet thraldom. In the belief of her truthfulness, how else could he interpret her glances,
tones, actions, and even plainly-spoken words?

But the flame of hope, that had burned higher and brighter, gradually sank again as he recalled
his aunt's words, "How is all this sentiment to end?--in only sentiment?"

He remembered his chosen calling. Could he ask this child of luxury to go with him to the far
West and share his life of toilsome privation? He had long felt that the work of a missionary
was his vocation. She had never had any such feeling. He recalled her words, spoken but yesterday,
it seemed: "Do you imagine that any nice girl will go out with you among the border ruffians?"

That is the way it appeared to her then. If such a thing were possible, that she had become
attached to him, would it not be an unfair and almost a mean thing to take advantage of her
affection, and, by means of it, commit her to a life for which she was unfitted, and which
might become almost a martyrdom? The change from her luxurious home to frontier-life would
be too great. If she had felt called of God to such a work,--if she had laid herself as a sacrifice
upon the Divine Altar, that would be very different, for the Master would give no task without
imparting strength and patience for its fulfilment. Besides, He had Heaven to give in return.

But Frank Hemstead's unselfish manhood told him plainly that he had no right to ask any such
sacrifice.

Incidentally, Lottie had mentioned the number of her residence, and he hastily went up Fifth
Avenue, and saw her palace of a home. Every stone in the stately abode seemed part of the barrier
between them.

An elegant carriage with liveried coachman and footman came around to the entrance, and a lady
who had Lottie's features, except that they had grown rigid with pride and age, entered it,
and was driven away. As he saw her stately bearing, and the pomp and show of her life, he could
almost believe his aunt,--that this proud woman of the world would rather bury the daughter
of whom she expected so much than marry her to an obscure home missionary.

His heart grew heavy as lead, and he groaned, "Even if she loves me I have lost her."

Then came the supreme temptation of his life. Why must he be a home missionary? Who was there
to compel such a sacrifice of himself? He might come to this city, and win a place as high
as hers, as many poorer and more friendless than himself had done. He might even seek some
well-situated Eastern church. He might aim to be one of the great popular preachers of the
day; and so be able to come to the door of that proud home and ask what it would be no condescension
to grant.

Again he was out in the storm; again he was in the thick of the battle;--passionate longings
and love on one hand; stern, steady conscience on the other. In painful pre-occupation he again
walked unknown distances. His aimless steps took him away from the mansions of the rich down
among the abodes of the poor. As he was crossing a street his troubled eyes rested upon a plain
cross over a lowly chapel door. He stopped before it like a superstitious Romanist,--not reverencing
the emblem, however, but in vivid remembrance of Him who suffered thereon. He recalled His
self-sacrifice and His words, "Whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after me, cannot
be my disciple."

He bowed his head a moment, then turned quietly, and went back to his hotel.

The conflict was over,--the temptation passed,--and he was loyal.

CHAPTER XXXV.

MR. DIMMERLY CONCLUDES TO "MEDDLE."

Hemstead found some solace, during the next two days, in the selection of books for his library.
He did not expect to visit the East again for many years, and made all his arrangements accordingly.
He wrote Mr. and Miss Martell a letter, which they regarded as a model in its expression of
delicate appreciation and manly modesty.

Towards the end of the week he returned to Mrs. Marchmont's, by no means sure whether he would
find Lottie there or not, and quite certain that the less he saw of her the better.

He walked from the depot, and went around by the way of the pond. His resolution almost failed
him, as he looked at the "fallen tree," especially as he believed he saw evidence, from traces
in the snow, that Lottie had visited the place in his absence.

Lottie looked forward with a strange blending of hope and fear to the meeting with him, and
had portrayed to herself every possible way in which she imagined it could take place. But
it happened, as such things usually do, after the most prosaic fashion possible. They were
all sitting in the parlor, after dinner, and Hemstead opened the door and walked in.

Her face became scarlet, but his was so pale as to remind her of the time when he had carried
Miss Martell into that room. It was, indeed, the pallor of one who was making a desperate moral
effort. But he was successful, and spoke to her, giving his hand, in almost the same manner
as to his aunt. His bearing towards even De Forrest was most courteous. He then sat down composedly,
and began to talk on ordinary topics.

Lottie's heart failed her. This was entirely different from what she had expected. His manner
was not in the least cold or resentful, but his words seemed to come from a great distance,
and his eyes no longer sought her face, as if she only had for him the true sunlight. Their
old, quick, subtile interchange of sympathy and thought appeared lost as completely as if a
thick wall rose between them. The warm-hearted girl could not act his part. She was silent,
and her head bent low over her work.

Mrs. Marchmont and Bel were greatly pleased, and gave Hemstead credit for being a "very sensible
young man, who, having been shown his folly, could act like a gentleman and not make a fuss." 

On the 24th the Battalion was relieved and went into Brigade reserve at Tel el Ahmar, occupying
the redoubts about two miles behind the front line. By the beginning of September we were back
in the Wadi Simeon working on fatigues by night and day.

After a fortnight of this, orders came to rejoin the rest of the Brigade at Sheikh Nahkrur. This
was a bivouac area near to the tomb of some ancient holy man and almost within the shadow of Tel
el Jemmi, the huge circular earth-tower, which was the most southerly
outpost of the Crusaders.

There we began a hard programme of training in musketry, bayonet-fighting, physical and close-order
drill and movements by night, a plain showing that we were entering
again the valley of decision.

On the 19th, General Hill, the commander of the 52nd Division, inspected the Brigade, and, after
complimenting it on the steadiness of drill and marching, foretold the near approach of the day when
all its steadiness and valour would be required. The last week spent at Sheikh Nahkrur we
were attached to the 155th Brigade, the remainder of our Brigade having gone nearer the line
as they had come out before us. Left to ourselves we thoroughly enjoyed life. The training on
the open country was a delightful change, and after our recent experiences we were easily
able to devise small night operations of the most hair-raising kind.

It was here that our Battalion Concert Party made their debut. There were seven of them, Corpl.
Hamilton, Ptes.

 Would he, indeed, go away without
giving her a chance to say one word of explanation? She could endure it no longer. In accordance
with her impulsive nature, she went straight to him, and said in a low tone, "Mr. Hemstead,
will you please read that?"

He trembled, but took the note, and said, after a moment, "Certainly," and was gone.

An hour passed, and another; still he did not return.  Lottie's head bent lower and lower over
her work. Mr.  Dimmerly never played a more wretched game of whist.  At last he quite startled
them all by throwing down the cards and saying, in the most snappish of tones, "I wish the
blockhead would come home."

"Why, brother, what is the matter?" asked Mrs. Marchmont, in a tone of surprise.

"I want to lock up," said the old gentleman, in some confusion.

"It's not late, yet."

"Well, it ought to be. I never knew such an eternally long evening. The clocks are all wrong,
and everything is wrong."

"There, there, you have had bad luck over your whist."

Lottie, however, knew what was the matter, and she gave him a shy, grateful look. But the old
man was still more incensed when he saw that there were tears in her eyes, and he shuffled
away, muttering something that sounded a little profane.

Lottie, soon after, left the room also, but as she was passing through the hall she met Hemstead,
who had come in at a side door. He took her hand in both of his, and said, gently, "I do forgive
you, fully and completely, and I have your forgiveness to ask for my hasty judgment."

"And will you be my friend again?" she asked, timidly, and in a way that taxed his resolution
sorely.

"You have no truer friend," he said, after a moment.

"I think it was a little cruel, in so true a friend, to leave me all this desperately long
evening."

"You are mistaken," he said, abruptly, and passed hastily up to his room. She did not see him
again that night.

What could he mean? Had he recognized her love, and, not being able to return it fully, did
he thus avoid her and hasten through his visit? The bare thought crimsoned her cheek. But she
felt that this could not be true. She knew he had loved her, and he could not have changed
so soon.  It was more probable that he believed her to be totally unfit to share in his sacred
work,--that he feared she would be a hindrance,--and, therefore, he was shunning, and seeking
to escape from one who might dim the lustre of his spiritual life and work. In some respects
she had grown very humble of late, and feared that he might be correct, and that she was indeed
utterly unfit to share in his high calling.

"But if he only knew how hard I would try!" she said, with a touch of pathos in her tone which
would have settled matters if he had heard it.

That he was sacrificing himself rather than ask her to share in his life's privation, did not
occur to her.

Restless and unhappy, she wandered into the dining-room, where she found Mr. Dimmerly standing
on the hearth-rug, and staring at the fire in a fit of the deepest abstraction. That the Brigade
arrived at its destination without a hitch reflects great credit on the Staff work and is
evidence of the benefit we had obtained from night training at el Arish. Soon after ten there
was a halt, during which the men were given a drink from the water the camels carried, in order
to ensure that their bottles should be full on the morrow.

On arrival behind Burjaliye, companies changed their formation so as to be ready to move forward
at dawn, "B" and "D" Companies taking the front line, and the men
lay down to try and get a few hours' sleep--no easy task considering
the cold and the heavy dew.

The 6th H.L.I. prolonged the outpost line to the right of "A" Company, who were now pleasantly
conscious of the near presence of their friends, but considered them
a very noisy crowd.

In point of fact the whole operation was carried out with surprising quietness considering its
difficulties, but ears strained to catch the faintest sound from
the front naturally magnified the disturbance from the rear.

Stand-to was at 3.45 a.m., and there followed one of those "dreary,
doubtful, waiting hours"--which to some temperaments seem more unbearable
than anything that follows zero hour.

There was no rum and of course no possibility of making tea, while even the nerve soothing cigarette
was out of the question.

At 4.45 a.m. the Brigade advanced--the 7th on our right, and the 6th
on their right again, while the Argylls were in reserve.

"B" and "D" Companies moved through "A" Company's picket line and extended by platoons in succession
as they got clear--"B" Company being on the left.

"A" Company closed immediately the leading line was through and followed on in support to "D"
Company, while "C" supported "B." It was beginning to get light and the indignant Turks suddenly
perceiving lines of rough looking men advancing upon them, opened
a brisk fire, to which was soon added the obscene stuttering of machine
guns.

 It won't do for you to go West. You will set the
prairies on fire. There, there, now don't be afraid. If you think I can say anything to my
nephew--the thick-headed blunderbuss--which will prevent his getting down on his knees to ask
for what he'll never deserve, you don't know the Dimmerly blood.  Trust to the wisdom of my
gray hairs and go to bed."

"But, uncle, I would rather you wouldn't say anything at all," persisted Lottie.

"Well, I won't, about you," said her uncle, in assumed irritability. "I can get the big ostrich
to pull his head out of the sand and speak for himself, I suppose. He's my nephew, and I'm
going to have a talk with him before he leaves for the West. So be off; I'm getting cross."

But Lottie gave him a kiss that stirred even his withered old heart.

"O, good gracious!" he groaned after she was gone, "why was I ever 'stopped'?"

The next morning Hemstead appeared at breakfast as calm, pale, and resolute as ever. His manner
seemed to say plainly to Lottie, "Our old folly is at an end. I have remembered the nature
of my calling, and I know only too well that you are unfitted to share in it."

She was all the more desponding as she remembered how conscientious he was.

"If he thinks it's wrong, there's no hope," she thought, drearily.

After breakfast Mr. Dimmerly said, "Nephew, I wish you would do a little writing for me; my
hand isn't as steady as it was"; and he took the student off to his private study.

After the writing was finished, Mr. Dimmerly gave a few awkward preliminary ahems, and then
said, "So you go West next Monday?"

"Yes. I wish to get off on the first train."

"You seem very anxious to get away."

"I am sorry, now, I ever came," the young man said, in tones of the deepest sadness.

"Thank you."

"O, it's no fault of yours. You and aunt have been very kind, but--"

"But you are thinking of the 'noblest and most beautiful being in existence,' as you once said,
referring to my pretty little niece. You have evidently changed your mind. Did you see some
one in New York you liked better?"

"I have not changed my mind. I have only learned too well what my mind is. I wish that I had
learned it sooner.  There is one thing that troubles me greatly, uncle. I cannot speak of it
to aunt, because--Well, I can't. Do you think that Miss Marsden cares much for me? She will
surely forget me, will she not, in the excitement of her city life? I do hope she has no such
feeling as I have."

Mr. Dimmerly stared at his nephew as if he thought him demented.

"Well," said he, "I think you have been 'enchanted, and are no longer yourself.' You now out-Bottom
old Bottom himself. Do you mean to say that you love such a gem of a girl as Lottie, and yet
hope she does not love you, and will soon forget you?"

"Certainly I do. If I had my will, she would not have another unhappy hour in her life."

"Well, if you have the faintest notion that she has any regard for you, why don't you get down
on your marrow-bones and plead for a chance to make her happy? If I were in your place, and
there was half a chance to win a Lottie Marsden, I would sigh like a dozen furnaces, and swear
more oaths than were heard in Flanders, if it would help matters along any."

"But would you ask her to leave a home of luxury, her kindred, and every surrounding of culture
and refinement, to go out on a rude frontier, and to share in the sternest poverty and the
most wearing of work?"

"O--h--h, that is the hitch, is it?"

"Yes. Before I was aware, I had learned to love her. I trust she will never know how deeply;
for if she had half a woman's heart, she would be sad from very pity. If, unconsciously to
herself, some regard for me has grown during our visit, it would be a mean and unmanly thing
to take advantage of it to inveigle her into a life that would be a painful contrast to all
that she had known before. It would be like a soldier asking a woman to share all the hardships
and dangers of a campaign."

Mr. Dimmerly stroked his chin thoughtfully, while he regarded his nephew with a shrewd, sidelong
glance. "Well," said he, suggestively, "there is force in what you say. But is there any necessity
of your being a home missionary, and living out among the 'border ruffians,' as Lottie used
to call them? There are plenty of churches at the East. Dr.  Beams is old and sick: there may
be a vacancy here before long."

"No, uncle," said Hemstead, firmly, "I fought that fight out in New York, and it was a hard
one. I have felt for years that I must be a missionary, and shall be true to my vocation. It's
duty"; and he brought his clenched hand down heavily on the table.

"My good gracious!" ejaculated Mr. Dimmerly, giving a nervous hop in the air. "Between the
two, what will become of me? Yes, yes; I see. You are like your mother. If she took it into
her head that anything was 'duty,' all the world couldn't change her. So, rather than give
up being a missionary, you will sacrifice yourself and Lottie too?"

"I should have no hesitation in making the sacrifice myself, but it would more than double
my pain if I knew she suffered. And it is this that troubles me. But I must obey my orders,
whatever happens."

"Well," said Mr. Dimmerly, dryly, and with a queer little twinkle in his eyes, "I cannot give
you much aid and comfort. I never meddle in such matters. A third party never can. Of course
you can sacrifice yourself and your own happiness if you choose. That is your own affair. But
when it comes to sacrificing another, that is very different.  Lottie is a warm-hearted girl
with all her faults, and if she ever does love, it will be no half-way business with her. So
be careful what you do. Sacrificing her happiness is a very different thing from sacrificing
your own."

"But do you think there is any danger of such a thing?" asked Hemstead, in a tone of the deepest
distress.

"Bless me, boy! how should I know?" said his uncle, in seeming irritability. "Do you think
that I am a go-between for you two? Why don't you go and ask her, like a man? How do you know
but she has a vocation to be a missionary as well as yourself?"

Hemstead strode up and down the room, the picture of perplexity. "Was ever a man placed in
so cruel a position?" he groaned. But after a moment he became quiet and said, "When a thing
is settled, let it stay settled; my course is the only right and manly one"; and he left the
room saying he would be out for a walk till dinner.

But as he entered the hall Addie cried, "Frank, you must go; we won't take no for an answer."

"Go where?"

"To West Point. It's a glorious day. We want one more sleigh-ride before we break up,--one
that shall exceed all the others. There is going to be a cadet hop over there this afternoon,
in the dancing-hall, and a friend has sent for us to come. I've set my heart on going, and
so have Bel and Lottie. Mother says that we can go, if you will go with us and drive, for the
coachman is ill. You will see lots of grand scenery, and all that kind of thing, which you
like so much."

"And have you set your heart on the 'cadet hop' also?" asked Hemstead of Lottie.

"I think I should appreciate scenery more at present," she said, with a quick blush.

"You'll go; say you'll go. He'll go, mother. It's all settled. Let us have some lunch, and
we'll start at once;" and the spoiled little beauty already anticipated the conquest of a cadet
or two as a holiday episode.

So, in a single breezy moment, it was arranged, Hemstead scarcely having a voice in the matter.
As he mounted to his room, reason told him that this long drive in the society of the one whom
he believed he should avoid, for her sake as well as his own, was anything but wise. But he
tried to satisfy himself with the thought that at no time would he be alone with her; and his
heart craved this one more day of companionship, before a lifetime of separation.

As Lottie was about to ascend the stairs, she heard, for the first time since that wretched
Monday, Mr. Dimmerly's odd, chuckling laugh. She looked into the parlor, and, seeing that he
was alone, went straight to him, and said, "Now! what do you mean by that queer little laugh
of yours?"

"Why do you think I mean anything?" he said, staring at the ceiling.

"Because I haven't heard it since that dreadful Monday, and before I always heard it when something
nice had happened between me and--and--"

"Some one told me last night to mind my own business."

"Now, uncle, you know something."

"I should hope so, at my years,--enough not to meddle." And he still stared high over her head.

"There," said Lottie with tears in her eyes, "everybody in the house is against me now."

The old man's eyes dropped to her flushed, disappointed face, and his features became almost
noble in their expression of tender sympathy. In a grave, gentle tone, such as she never had
heard him use before, he said, "Lottie, come to my private study, before you go."

While the others were at lunch, she glided, unseen, to the little study, that she might receive
some comfort to sustain her fainting heart. Her uncle's first words, however, seemed prosaic,
indeed, and very different from what she had expected.

"How old are you, Lottie?"

"I was twenty-one last June," she said, a little proudly.

"So you are a June blossom, eh? Well, you look like it." But he puzzled her by his long, searching
glance into her face.

"Why do you ask?" she said.

"I want to be sure that you are old and mature enough to decide a very important question."

"Well," said Lottie, her breath coming quick, "I intend to decide all questions which relate
to my own life and well-being."

"Be careful, young woman. You had better follow the advice of old and wise heads like your
aunt's and mother's."

"Uncle, what do you mean?" said she, impatiently.

"Well," said Mr. Dimmerly, deliberately, looking searchingly into her face all the time, "I
have sounded that thick-headed nephew of mine--there, you needn't start so: do you suppose
a Dimmerly would betray a woman's secret?--and what do you think he most dreads to discover
as true?--that you love him a little."

"It's something he never shall discover," said Lottie, almost harshly, springing up with flashing
eyes and scarlet face. "I will not go on this ride, and he shall have no trouble in escaping
my society."

"Hold on, now," expostulated Mr. Dimmerly. "Nitroglycerine doesn't go off half so quick as
you of late. I haven't told you why he is afraid you love him."

"What other reason can he have save that he doesn't love me, or thinks I am unfit to be a clergyman's
wife?"

"He has another reason,--one that will devolve upon you the necessity of deciding some very
important questions.  Are you old and mature enough?"

"O uncle!" exclaimed Lottie, impatiently tapping the floor with her foot. "You ought to be
made Grand Inquisitor General. You have kept me upon the rack of suspense--it seems an hour."

"Hold on, little firebrand. Questions concerning a lifetime should not be decided in a moment.
You had better take a few years--certainly, a few months--to think over what I am going to
tell you. Frank worships the ground you tread on. He does not give you the little remnant of
a heart that has been left after dozens of flirtations with other girls. You have the whole
of his big, unworldly heart, and from what I know of him, or, rather, his mother, you always
will; but he is so unselfish--so unlike the rest of us--that he won't ask you to exchange your
life of wealth and luxury for his life of toil, poverty, and comparative exile. So, while I
believe he will idolize your memory all his days, he is hoping that you won't suffer any, but
will soon be able to forget him.  Of course I feigned profound ignorance as to your feelings,
and left him in a pitiable state of distress. But he finally concluded that, even if you did
love him a little, it would be very unmanly to take advantage of your feelings to get you into
the awful scrape of a home missionary's life."

As Mr. Dimmerly proceeded in this last speech, joy came into Lottie's face like the dawn of
a June morning. Tears gathered slowly in her eyes, but their source was happiness, not sorrow.
By the time he concluded, she had buried her burning face in her hands.

"Well," said her uncle, after a moment, "what's to be done I hardly know. He is just like his
mother. If he thinks it isn't right to speak, tortures could not wring a word out of him. I
don't see but you will have to propose yourself--"

"Propose myself! Never," said she, springing to her feet.

"What will you do, then?--sit and look at each other, and fade away like two dying swans?"

"No, indeed," said Lottie, dancing about the room, and brushing the tears from her face, like
spray. "He shall propose to me, and very humbly, too. I have the key to the problem, now. My
hand is now on the helm of this big ship of war, and you shall see how I will manage. He shall
do just what I want him to, without knowing it. He shall--"

"But, hold on," said Mr. Dimmerly, breathlessly. "You look like a rainbow run wild. Listen
to reason. O my good gracious! the idea of her being a home missionary!"

"That is just what I am going to be,--a home missionary, in his home; and all the principalities
and powers of earth shall not prevent it. And now, you dear, precious, old meddler, good-by.
You shall, one day, sit in the snuggest corner of as cosy a little home in the West as was
ever made in the East;" and she vanished, leaving the old gentleman chuckling to himself, "It
doesn't look as if it would be 'stopped' after all. Perhaps sister will find out that I know
how to meddle a trifle better than she does."

CHAPTER XXXVI.

A NIGHT IN THE SNOW.

"Where have you been?" exclaimed Addie, as Lottie came down dressed warmly, but plainly. "We
are all through lunch, and ready to start."

"I will not detain you, but will wrap up some lunch and take it with me. May I sit with you?"
she said to Hemstead, a little later, as she came out where he was standing on the piazza,

"You will be very much exposed to the cold on the driver's seat, Miss Marsden," he said, hesitatingly;
but she saw well enough what he wished, though conscience was condemning him all the time.

"So will you," she answered.

"Yes, but I am a man."

"And I am a woman," she said, with something of her old piquant style. "I do not like your
implied assertion of superiority, sir. I have as good a right to expose myself to the cold
as a man."

"I was not disputing your right, Miss Marsden, but--"

"O, I understand. You are of those who think so poorly of women as to regard them merely as
men's pets,--the weaker sex, you would call us,--who prefer to wait till everything is made
nice and comfortable, and then languidly step forward. Afterwards, however, the Jews of Holland
sent a deputation, consisting of the famous Rabbi Manasseh ben Israel,
and several wealthy Jewish merchants.

When Cromwell came into full power their hopes were raised, for he was known to be favourable
to their re-admission; but after much discussion, the popular feeling, and the voices of many
influential preachers, were found to be so much against the measure that nothing was eventually
done; and Charles II. must be regarded as the restorer of the Jews
to this country.

Tovey says that the Rabbi Netto, "the governor of the synagogue" in his time, had searched
the Jewish registers at his request, and had found that, so late as 1663, there were but twelve
Jews in England. It seems that while these negotiations were in hand, all sorts of absurd
and idle rumours were afloat.

Among these I incline to reckon the alleged proposal to purchase St. Paul's for a synagogue. It
seems to be sufficiently refuted by the intrinsic absurdity of the
thing.

But beyond this we have the express denial, made on the spot and at the time, by Rabbi Manasseh
ben Israel himself. On turning to his Vindiciæ Judæorum, written in this country, I find that
after recapitulating various calumnies on his people--such as their
sacrificing Christian children, etc.--he thus goes on:--

"'Love and
hatred,' says Plutarch, 'corrupt the truth of every thing;' as experience
sufficiently declares it, when we see that which comes to pass, that
one and the same thing, in one and the same city, at one and the same
time, is related in different manners.

 He had grown desperately jealous of Hemstead, and yet his vanity
would not permit him to believe it possible that Lottie Marsden, of all others, could be won
to such a life as the predestined missionary would lead. Like the narrow rationalists of this
world, he was ever underrating the power of that kind of truth with which Hemstead was identified.
To all of his class, the apparent self-sacrifice caused by love to God, and its kindred flame,
love (not a passion) for some human object, has ever appeared both stupid and irrational. He
did not understand Lottie, and could only curse the wretched visit, and wish it over every
moment. When she returned to her accustomed life in New York, she would, he believed, soon
be her old self.

Since he could not watch Lottie and Hemstead, he tried to use his ears as far as possible,
but the noisy bells drowned their voices, so that he could catch but few words. He was somewhat
comforted in the fact that at first they did not appear to have very much to say to each other.

Hemstead tried to introduce various topics remote from the thoughts that were weighing upon
both their hearts, but Lottie did not sustain his effort. She maintained her hurt and injured
air, until at last he could no longer endure her grieved, sad face, and said, in a low tone,
"And could you imagine that I regard you, of all others, as weak and un-womanly?"

"What else could I think from your words? I admit I have given you cause to think very poorly
of me indeed.  Still it's anything but pleasant to be so regarded by those whose esteem we value."

"But I do not think poorly of you, at all," said Hemstead, half desperately. "How little you
understand me!"

"I understand you better than you do me. You are a man.  You have high aims, and have chosen
a noble calling. But you have virtually said that I am only a woman, and a very ordinary one
at that, not capable of emulating the lives of my heroic sisters. I must be shielded from the
rough wind, while you, in your superiority, can face it as a matter of Course. And your later
words intimate that so, figuratively, it will always be, in MY CASE,--weak, womanly, shrinking,
and cowering, ever shielded by something or somebody. History, to be sure, records what women
MAY do, but that is a very different thing from what Miss Marsden WILL do."

"You go to extremes, Miss Marsden, and infer far more than the occasion warrants," Hemstead
replied, in great perplexity. "Was it unnatural that I wished you to be shielded from the cold?"

"And was it unnatural," she answered, "that since one of our party must be exposed to the cold,
I should be willing to share in the exposure? But it is to your later words that I refer, and
not the trifling incident that led to them. They, with your manner, revealed, perhaps, more
than you intended.  You once said I was 'capable of the noblest things.' I knew that was not
true then, and to my lasting regret, and I proved the fact to you. But I think I have changed
somewhat since that time. At least, I hope I am no longer capable of the meanest things."

"Miss Marsden," he said, impetuously, "you now give me credit for knowing you better than at
that time--"

"Yes; and you have evidently revised your opinion very materially. But, as I said before, I
can scarcely complain, when I remember my own action. But you will never know how bitterly
I have repented of my folly. When that terrible charge was made against me last Monday--it
came, when I was so happy and hopeful, like a sudden thunderbolt--I thought I should lose my
reason. I felt that you had gone away believing I was utterly false and had been insincere
in everything from first to last. I was like one who had fallen from a great height, and I
scarcely spoke or moved for two days. I was not like some girls, who imagine they can find
a remedy for their troubles in wealth and luxury and attention from others. I have had these
things all my life, and know how little they are worth--how little they can do for one at such
times. No one will ever know what I suffered. At first, when you thought so well of me, I deserved
your harshest condemnation. But it did seem cruel, hard, when I was honestly trying to be better--when,
at last, my life had become real and true--to be cast aside as a false thing, that must, of
necessity, be despised. I dreaded, last night, that you were going away without giving me any
chance to explain and correct my folly. I did mean that Monday to tell you the truth, and should
have done so, if you had given me a chance. I should have condemned myself then, and I do now,
more severely than even you could, who had such just cause for anger. But, Mr.  Hemstead, I
have changed. In all sincerity I say it, I wish to become a good, Christian girl, and would
do so, if I only knew how. I was not deceiving you when I said last Christmas eve that I hoped
I had become a Christian. I still think I have, though for two days I was in thick darkness.
At any rate, I love my Saviour, and He has helped and comforted me in this greatest trial and
sorrow of my life. I was ted to hope that you would forgive me, because He seemed so ready
to forgive. There! I have now done what I have been most anxious to do--I have told you the
truth. I have said all that I can, justly, in self-defence. If I have not raised your opinion
of me very greatly, I cannot help it, for henceforth I intend to be honest, whatever happens."

Lottie had said the words she so wished to speak in a low tone, but with almost passionate
earnestness, and no one could have doubted their truth a moment. The horses had been trotting
briskly over the level ground at the foot of the steep mountain slope, and the noisy bells
that made musical accompaniment to her words, as heard by Hemstead, disguised them from De
Forrest and the others. The student received each one as if it were a pearl of great price.

But now the horses, mounting the steep ascent, had come to a walk, and the chime of the bells
was not sufficient to drown his words. If he had answered as his feelings dictated, the attention
of the others would have been gained in a most embarrassing way. He could only say in a very
low voice, "I believe and trust you fully."

But Lottie heard and welcomed the assurance.

The light of the sun, that had been too brilliant upon the snow, was now becoming softened
by an increasing haze.  The air was growing milder, and the branches of bowed evergreens by
the wayside suddenly lifted themselves as the hold of the fleecy burdens was loosened, and
the miniature avalanches dropped away. At times they reached points from which the magnificent
and broadening landscape could be seen to the best advantage, and as Hemstead stopped the horses
at such places to rest, even Bel and Addie abounded in exclamations of delight. The river had
become a vast, white plain, and stretched far away to the north. The scene was one that would
have filled Hemstead with delight upon any other occasion, but Lottie was now well pleased
to note that he gave to it hurried glances and little thought.

His face was a study, and, more clearly than he realized, betrayed the perplexity and trouble
of his mind. How could he give up the lovely girl at his side, whose very imperfection and
need won more upon him than any display of conscious strength and advanced spirituality? Her
frankness, her humility and severe self-condemnation, appealed to every generous trait of his
large, charitable nature. He now believed, as never before, that she was "capable of the noblest
things," and he began to suffer from the torturing thought that his course was a mistaken one,
and that he wronged her by acting upon the supposition that her old surroundings of luxury
and culture were essential to her happiness. Might it not be true that, in a nature like hers,
something far more profound was needed to create and sustain true serenity of heart? Had she
not in effect plainly said that she had fathomed the shallow depths of luxury, wealth, and
general flattering attention? Had she not unconsciously given him a severe rebuke? What right
had he to assume that he was any more capable of heroic self-sacrifice than she? Only the certainty
that he was sacrificing himself for her happiness enabled him to make the sacrifice at all,
and now he began to think that his course might be a wretched blunder which would blight them
both. The very possibility of making such a mistake was agony.  To have come so near happiness,
and then to miss it by as great a wrong to her as to himself, would be more than fortitude
itself could endure. His uncle's words were ever present: "If Lottie loved, it would be no
half-way business.  He had no right to sacrifice her happiness." It was her happiness that
he was thinking of, and if he could secure it best by consummating his own at the same time,
it seemed to him that heaven would begin at once.

A trivial circumstance had enabled Lottie to intimate plainly to him that he had virtually
asserted, "I am a man, and can do that of which only the noblest and most unselfish natures
are capable. You are not only a woman, but you cannot rise to the level of many of your sisters,
who have left on history's page the heroic record of their triumphs over the supposed weakness
of their sex." What he had not meant, but still had appeared to hint from his language, was
he not, in fact, practically acting upon as true? While he had taken his course in the spirit
of the most generous self-sacrifice, might he not, at the same time, be ignoring the fact that
she was as capable of self-sacrifice and noble consecration to a sacred cause as himself?

If she had been sincere in her religious experiences, and in all her words and actions in that
direction, how could he help believing that she was equally sincere in the language of tone
and eye, which had revealed her heart so plainly that even he, who was the last in the world
to presume, had come to think that she loved him? The S.O. was a little excited and the instructions
he gave were not so clear as one could have desired. The patch on which we were forming up was
a favourite target for the enemy's shells from Asia. They were in the habit of devoting special
attention to it on nights when they thought troops were being landed. We were to proceed to No.
1 area--wherever that might be. A guide would accompany each party and an officer of the Divisional
Staff would be with the first party. We must move in absolute silence; no lights or smoking.
We would be exposed to shell-fire whenever we passed the crest of
the rise from the beach, where we ought to adopt an extended formation.

At our destination we would find some trenches, but not sufficient to accommodate the whole Battalion,
and it was up to us to lose no time in digging ourselves in.

The C.O. was hustled off with two platoons of "A" Company before these were properly landed. Where
we were bound for and exactly what we were to do when we got there, none of us knew, except presumably
the Staff Officer who accompanied us and perhaps the N.C.O. who acted
as guide.

But subsequent happenings proved that they were almost as ignorant on these points as ourselves.

Winding
up a steepish rise through a region which seemed crowded with dug-outs and piles of stores, we
gained the crest where we had been urged to extend. It was pitch dark, with a steadily increasing
drizzle of rain and an occasional rumble of thunder.
 If from any motive, even the noblest, he did
not speak, how could she meet the long, lonely future, in which every day would make more clear
the dreary truth that she had missed her true life and happiness?--missed it through no necessity
that might in the end bring resignation, but through a mistake,--the unselfish blundering of
a man who wrongly supposed she could be happier without than with him. It was her delicate
task to show him, without abating one jot of woman's jealous reserve, that she was capable
of all the self-sacrifice to which he looked forward, and that, as his uncle had told him,
he had no right to sacrifice her happiness.

He was one of those single-hearted, resolute fellows, who have the greatest faculty for persistently
blundering under an honest but wrong impression. But, in this case, his impression was natural,
and he was wrong, only because Lottie was "capable of noble things,"--only because she did
belong to that class of women to whom the love of their heart counts for infinitely more than
all externals. If he had fallen in love with a very goodish sort of girl of the Bel Parton
type, the course he had marked out would have been the wisest and best, eventually, for both,
even though it involved, at first, a good deal of suffering.

