For this event preparations were actually made by the Earl of Mar, whose sanguine spirit appears
to have been somewhat revived by the presence of the Chevalier. The addition of a new dignity
to his own ancestral honours had marked the favour and confidence of James. Before the arrival
of the Chevalier in Scotland, the Earl of Mar had been informed that a patent of dukedom was
made out for him; on which he thus expressed himself in a letter, written before the Chevalier's
landing, full of gratitude and professions.[131]

"Your Majesty has done me more honour than I deserve. The capital is $1,000,000, and the company
is composed of a large number of individual stockholders. The present proprietors of Congress
Spring have contributed not a little to the beauty and attractiveness of this favorite watering
place.

Properties.
When taken before breakfast the water is a very pleasant and effective
cathartic. Drank in moderate quantities throughout the day, it is
a delightful, wholesome beverage, its effects being alterative and
slightly tonic.

In the first place, the landing of the Chevalier evidently sealed the doom of those gallant
and unfortunate noblemen who had been taken prisoners at Preston; and rendered all hopes of
mercy futile. The sixteenth of January, which witnessed the forming of the Chevalier's council
at Perth, was the day on which the unfortunate Derwentwater, Nithisdale, Kenmure, Wintoun,
and Widdrington, petitioned for two days' delay to prepare for their trials. Their doom was
hurried on in the general panic; and in the addresses from both Houses of Parliament to King
George, it was declared by the members of those assemblies "that the landing of the Pretender
in this kingdom had greatly encreased their indignation against him and his adherents."

It is impossible that the Earl of Mar could have heard, without deep commiseration, and perhaps
remorse, of the peril in which those ill-fated adherents of James were placed, although he
may not have anticipated the full severity of the law. In one of his subsequent letters he
remarks: "By the news I see the Parliament is to have no mercie on our Preston folks: but I
hope God will send them salvation in time." One of his greatest sources of anxiety had been
respecting the movements of the Duke of Ormond, upon whose making a diversion in favour of
James, in England, Mar had counted. The news that Ormond, after having been seen on the coast
of England, had returned, disheartened, was brought by the Chevalier, who heard of it at St.
Maloes. The only chance of success, the last hope, were centered in this resource. The failure
of this expectation was fatal, as Lord Mar conceived, to the cause, and on it he grounded his
own subsequent withdrawal from England.

The entrance of the Chevalier into Perth, on the ninth of January, was attended with far less
enthusiasm than the previous portion of his progress. His reception was comparatively cold.
On asking to see their "little kings" (the chieftains) with their armies, the Highlanders,
diminished in numbers by the secession of the Marquis of Huntley and the absence of Lord Seaforth
and others, were marched before him. James could not help admiring their bearing; but the small
amount of troops in the camp filled him with a dejection which he could not conceal. When,
a few days afterwards, the unfortunate Prince addressed his council for the first time, he
said, with mournful truth, these words. "For me it will be no new thing if I am unfortunate:
my whole life, even from my cradle, has been a constant series of misfortunes." This sentiment
of ill-presage was re-echoed in the address of the Episcopal clergymen.

"Your Majesty has been trained up," said these divines, at Fetteresso, "in the School of the
Cross, in which the Divine grace inspires the mind with true wisdom and virtue, and guards
it against those false blandishments by which prosperity corrupts the heart." And as this school
has sent forth the most illustrious princes,--Moses, Joseph, and David, it was hoped that a
similar benefit would accrue to the character of the Prince whom the Episcopal Clergy thus
welcomed to their country.

Meantime the project of crowning the Chevalier at Scone amused the minds of the people, and
continued to be the subject of diligent preparation by the Earl of Mar. Unhappily a ship laden
with money and other aids, had been lost on its passage from France, close to the Tay, for
want of a pilot.[132] The difficulties which were augmented by this misfortune, are alluded
to in the following extract from one of Lord Mar's letters.

                                               "January 15th, 1715-16.

    "Sir,

    "I wrote to you yesterday by one that used to come here from Mr.
    Hall, which I hope will come safe to your hands. At night I had
    yours of the fourteenth, and this night that of the tenth. The caps
    do pritty well, and I have orders to thank you for them. During these
    many years a goodly proportion of tottering humanity have found in this
    spring an amendment to their several crippled constitutions. It
    was first tubed in 1835.

    In 1865 the Star Spring Co. was formed, and in the following year
    the spring was retubed under their direction. In 1870 they erected
    the finest bottling-house in Saratoga. Great care is taken to preserve
    the spring in a pure condition and perfect repair. The water has become
    immensely popular in New England, where it is "the spring," and throughout
    the United States and Canada.
    

    For Commercial Use.
    
    The water is sold in cases of quarts and pints, and besides, owing
    to the large amount of gas which is finely incorporated with the water,
    the company are enabled to supply families with it in kegs of fifteen
gallons, in which the water keeps as well as in bottles, and at one-fourth
to one-sixth the cost.

    This method seems to give entire satisfaction and is fast coming into
    general use. This is the only spring that supplies the water in bulk
    to families. The price to druggists in bulk is twenty cents
    per gallon, to families $4 per half barrel, to the trade in cases at
    $21 per gross for pints, and $30 per gross for quarts.
    
    Properties.
    
    The Star water is mildly cathartic, has a pleasant, slightly acid taste,
    gentle and healthy in its action, and yet powerful in its effects.

It
    is far more desirable for general use as a cathartic than the preparations
    of the apothecary.
    Rev. Dr. Cuyler, in one of his peculiarly charming letters, gives
the Star Water preference over all others as an active and efficient
cathartic.

THE TEN SPRINGS.

This is the name which was formerly
given to several springs in the immediate vicinity of the Excelsior,
and embracing the Union and the Minnehaha, which have been recently
tubed.

By the next letter it appears that the good opinion entertained by Lord Mar of the Chevalier
was real; since the whole of the epistle has the tone of being a natural effusion of feeling,
and is a simple statement of what actually took place, and not the letter of a diplomatist.

    "Sir,

    "I have seen a letter from Mr. S----g, who had spoke with you on the
    subject I formerly wrote to you of, concerning that fo--f--y of the
    D----h to a gentleman with us, Mr. S----q's friend, and upon it our
    master has thought fit to write the enclosed to him, and orders me
    to tell you that you must cause give him an hundred guineas at the
    delivery of the letter. The letter is left open for your perusal,
    and I wish it may have effect, as perhaps it may. There's no time
    to be lost in it, and I'll long to know what passes in it, and what
    hopes you have of him. I sent you credit for five hundred pounds,
    which I hope you got safe; but if by any accident it should not come
    to your hands, Mr. S----q there, is a certain goldsmith that will
    advance what there is occasion for this way. I send you enclosed a
    letter, which may be of use in an affair I wrote of in my last.

    "We have got severall deserters since the K. came and last night
    nine came in with their clothes and arms, and says many more will
    follow soon, which I wish we may see. They say, too, that the two
    regiments of dragoons are marcht from Glasgow for England, and that
    two are to go from Stirling to replace them. Were they designing to
    march against Scoon, sure they would not do this, nor is it possible
    they can do anything in this weather; but if they, notwithstanding,
    attempt it, perhaps they may find frost in it.

    "As I am writing I have received yours of the thirteenth. I read it
    to the K----g, and delivered him the enclosed letter from Mr.
    Holmes, which was very well taken, as you will see by the enclosed
    return, which you'll take care to forward safely; and pray do me the
    favour to make my compliments there.

    "Perhaps you'll hear things of the two northern powers[135] that
    will look odd to your other friends, as no wonder; but all will come
    right again--the time they had taken being out in a few days.
    There's one sent some days ago to assist them, so I hope things will
    be soon right there, tho' they have done much to spoil them, and
    each of them makes an excuse of one another as they have done from
    the begining. The K----, you will see by all the enclosed, is not
    spareing of his pains. You must fall on the right way of having them
    all delivered.

    "That to Seaforth he writes upon the great professions he made when
    in France; he is such a fellow that I'm afraid it will do little
    good.

    "I have nothing else material to say just now, but I cannot give
    over without telling a thing which I'm sure will please you--that
    the longer one knows the King the better he's liked, and the more
    good qualities are found in him; that of good-nature is very
    eminent, and so much good sense that he might be a first minister to
    any king in Europe, had he not been born a king himself. He has
    allowed Neil Campbell to go to Edinburgh t'other day on his parole,
    he being ill, and it was with so much good nature that was evident
    in his doing of it, that it charmed me. I wish you could get notice
    how Neil represents it or expresses himself when he gets there; for
    I wrote it at length to the gentleman who wrote to me about him.
    Adieu.

    "If people from S----q be designing to come to us, they should
    either do it soon or give us assurances of doing it soon as we are
    in view of each other; and these assurances must be such that we can
    depend on, for our conduct must in a great measure be regulated by
    what we expect that way.

    "It were highly necessary that methods and measures were concerted
    for the right way of doing this, which you should let such of them
    as you know are so trusted know, and it is absolutely necessary that
    they either send one to me about this, or let me know it certainly
    some other way, that we may not be drawing different ways when we
    are designing the same thing.

    "We have no return of the last message which was sent to the good
    man of the house you wrote of, and t'is above eight days ago. I
    believe he designs right, tho' t'is odd."

The enthusiasm which was at first displayed towards the Chevalier was soon cooled, not only
by his grave and discouraging aspect, but by his fearless and impolitic display of his religious
faith. He never allowed any Protestant even to say grace for him, but employed his own confessor
"to repeat the Pater nosters and Ave Marias:" and he also shewed an invincible objection to
the usual coronation oath,--a circumstance which deferred the ceremony of coronation,--Bishop
Mosse declaring that he would not consent to crown him unless that oath were taken. This sincerity
of disposition--for it cannot be called by a more severe name--especially diminished the affections
of the Chevalier's female episcopal friends, who had excited their male relations to bear arms
in his favour. But the circumstance which weighed the most heavily against James, was the order
which he published, on hearing that the Duke of Argyle was making preparations to march against
him, for burning the towns and villages, and destroying the corn and forage, between Dumblane
and Perth. This act of destruction, from the effects of which the desolate village of Auchterarder
has never recovered, was determined on, in order that the enemy might be incommoded as much
as possible upon their march; it added to the miseries of a people already impoverished by
the taxes and contributions which the Jacobites had levied. It appears, however, from a letter
of James's, since discovered, or perhaps, only suppressed at the time, to have been an act
which he bitterly regretted, and the order for which he signed most unwillingly. He was desirous
of making every reparation in his power for the ravages which were committed in his name.[136]

On the ninth of January a council of war was held by the Duke of Argyle at Stirling, where,
by a singular coincidence, the council sat in the same room in which James the Second, then
Duke of York, had, in 1680, been entertained by the Earl of Argyle, to whom he had proposed
the repeal of the sanguinary laws against Papists. The refusal of Argyle to concur in that
measure, the consequences of his conduct, and his subsequent death, are circumstances which,
doubtless, arose to the remembrance of his descendant, as he discussed, in that apartment,
the march towards Perth.

The country between Stirling and Perth was covered with a deep snow; the weather was one continual
storm; it was therefore impossible for the army of Argyle to proceed until the roads were cleared,--a
process which required some time to effect. It is asserted, nevertheless, by an historian,
that upon Colonel Ghest being sent with two hundred dragoons to reconnoitre the road leading
to Perth, that the greatest panic prevailed in that town: immediate preparations were made
for defence, and nothing was to be seen except planting of guns, marking out breastworks and
trenches, and digging up stones, and laying them with sand to prevent the effects of a bombardment.[137]
The Earl of Mar, nevertheless, does not appear, if we may accredit his own words, to have even
then despaired of a favourable issue. The following letter betrays no fear, but speaks of some
minor inconvenience, which is far from being of a melancholy description. The difficulty of
procuring the right sort of ribbon for the decoration of the Garter, is altogether a new feature
among the adversities of royal personages. It seems strange that James should not have provided
himself, before quitting France, with all that was necessary to preserve the external semblance
of majesty.

                                               "January 20th, 1715-16.

    "Sir,

    "I wrote to you the eighteenth, and sent severall others enclosed,
    which I hope will come safe to you. The inclosed, markt D. F., is
    from the King to Davie Floid at London, which he desires you may
    take care to gett conveid to him safly and soon, it being of
    consequence. The other is for my wife, which I beg you may forward
    as usewall.

    "We are told that ther's some foot come to Dumblain, and that ther's
    more expected there. And they still talk as if they designed to
    march their whole armie against us nixt week. Perhaps they intend
    it, but with this weather I see not how 'tis in their power. If they
    do tho', upon their expecting we are to abandon Perth upon their
    aproach, as I'm told they believe, they will find themselves
    mistaken, for all here are resolved to stand it to the last, and
    perhaps we will not wait their comeing the lenth, but meet them by
    the way. We might have left it indeed, some time ago; but that time
    is past, and the King's being with us alters the case in every
    respect. After all, I cannot get myself to belive that they will
    actually come to us in haste, and if they do they may mistake their
    reckning. Sure I am, it were impossible for us to march to them in
    this snow, and our folks are as good at that as they. The snow puts
    me in mind of the children of Israel's pillar of smoke and pillar of
    fire; and to say truth, ther's something in the weather very odd
    and singular; I never saw such.

    "My cloathes are almost all worn out, haveing left some at the
    battle: I know not if you could get me any made and sent from
    Edinburgh; but if you could, I should be glad of it. Ther's one Bird
    was my tayler and I belive has my measur, or some old cloathes of
    mine, that he could make them by. Perhaps he's a whig tho', and will
    not do it. I would have them deep blew, laced with gold, but not on
    the seams. I have but one starr and no riban, but 'tis no great
    matter for that, a better man than I is in the same case; he has
    only one scrub, one which he got made since he came, and no right
    riban. Certain it is that the Puritans excelled in this as in every other
    kindred extravagance. The elect of the Lord were fond of describing
    themselves as the most contemptible of sinners; the salt of the earth
as being rottenness and corruption.
    We got a little Burgundy for the King, but it is out; and tho' we
    know of a little more, I'm affraid we shall scarce get it brought
    here; and he does not like clarit, but what you'l think odd, he
    likes ale tolorably well. I hope they will send us some from France,
    but with this wind nothing can come from thence. George Hamilton
    saild on Saturday last, and I belive is there long e'er now, which I
    heartily wish he may, and I hope you shall soon see the effects of
    his going with what he caried with him.

    "I am affraid Macintosh's men in England may be in hard
    circumstances for want of money. The King has ordred some for them,
    which is this daye given to a friend of theirs who was sent to me
    from the North, who sayes he knows how to get it remitted to them.

    "I wish you would send us the newspapers oftner for we get them but
    seldome; the soonest way of sending them is by A. W. at Kirkaldy,
    who will find some way of sending them to us, notwithstanding of
    their garisons in Fife.

    "I'm affraid what I wrote to you of formerly to be in danger will
    never be recovered, for it could not at this time, tho' it was
    try'd; and I fear shall not the next either, tho' we are to do all
    we can about it, and it was too much to go that way.

    "We have heard nothing further as yet from the goodman of the house,
    as you call him, which I am surprized at. I can say no more now, so
    Adieu."

If we may believe the public prints of the day, dissensions now arose between the Chevalier
and the Earl of Mar: the former blaming his general for having urged him to come over, when
he had so small a force to appear in his favour; the latter, recriminating that the failure
of aid from the Continent had discouraged the Chevalier's friends. The Earl of Mar was severely
blamed, to quote from the same source, for having deceived the Chevalier in making him believe
that the forces in Scotland were more considerable than they really were, and for giving his
Scottish friends reason to suppose that the Chevalier would bring over foreign auxiliaries.
That the former part of these allegations against Mar was untrue, is shewn by the letter which
has been given, explaining to the Prince the state of affairs; and rather discouraging him
from his attempt.[138] That the whole report was groundless, was manifested by the favour and
confidence which James long continued to extend to the Earl after his exile abroad.

For some time, the Earl of Mar and his party contrived to keep up their hopes. The season was
indeed in some respects their friend, since it necessarily impeded the movements of Argyle's
army against them. The winter of 1715-16 was one of the most severe that had been felt for
many years, not only in Scotland, but abroad. In France and Spain the cold was so excessive,
and the snow so deep, that the country people could not go to the market towns to buy provisions,
whilst the plains were infested with bears and wolves, emboldened by the desolation, and ranging
over the country in great numbers.[139]

Whilst the intense frost lasted, the three thousand Highlanders who were encamped at Perth
were able to defy the English army, although now supplied with artillery and ammunition from
Berwick. Their security was furthermore increased by a heavy fall of snow succeeding a partial
thaw, and followed by a frost, which rendered the roads more impracticable than ever, especially
for the foot-soldiers. This circumstance had even occasioned some deliberation whether it would
not be advisable for the Duke of Argyle to defer his march to Perth until the winter should
be ended. Until the middle of January, it was the full intention of the Highlanders, and also
that of the Earl of Mar, to stand the event of a battle, let the enemy's force be what it might.
That they purposed thus to maintain their ancient character for valour, was, even as those
most adverse to them allow, the prevalent report. It is borne out by the Earl of Mar's correspondence.
On the twenty-third of January he thus writes to Captain Straiton:

                                                    "The 23rd January.

    "I have yours of the seventeenth and the twentieth both togather
    last night, and a paket from H. in the last. I wrote to you on
    Saturday the old way, and sent you a paket enclosed, which I belive
    is of consequence, so I hope it's come safe, and that H. has gott
    it. He has had two or three sent him from this of late, different
    ways, and one goes of this day by the near way he sometimes uses. We
    hear from all hands of the preparations against us, but we resolve
    to stand it, cost what it will, and if they come out we will
    certainly give them battle, lett their number be never so great. It
    must now be plain to all that will allow themselves to see, that
    nothing less is designed by the present managers than the intire
    ruin and destruction of this poor country, and of every honest man
    in it; and if this will not be an awakened people, I know nothing
    that will. Since this then is plainly the case, there can be no
    choise in dying honourably in the field for so just a cause, or
    leving to see the ruin and intire destruction of our country, our
    King, and our friends and relations. For my part, I shall prefer the
    first with all cheerfulness, and never desire to live to be a
    witness to the latter, which certainly will be the case if it please
    God our King should be defeat."

The next paragraph of this letter speaks mournfully of disappointment in those on whose aid
the Earl had counted. 

    If there is any one who still believes that Cromwell was a thorough
    hypocrite, that his religion was a systematic feint to cover his ambitious
    designs, the perusal of these volumes will entirely undeceive him.
    We look upon this hypothesis, this Machiavelian explanation
    of Cromwell's character, as henceforth entirely dismissed from all
    candid and intelligent minds. It was quite natural that such a view
    should be taken of their terrible enemy by the royalists of the Restoration,
    hating his memory with a most cordial hatred, and accustomed, in their
    blinding licentiousness, to look upon all religion as little better
    than cant and hypocrisy. It was quite natural that such a portrait
    of him should be drawn by the men who unearthed his bones, and vented
    their rage upon a senseless corpse. We see it was quite inevitable
    that some such coarse caricature should be thus limned and transmitted
    to us. But it has lasted long enough. We believe, indeed, that by most
    persons it has already been dismissed and disowned.

It may now be torn into shreds, and cast aside as utterly faithless.

Cromwell was a genuine Puritan. There is no doubt of that. He was no youth when the war broke
out, nor a man who had yet to seek his religious party or principles. As the farmer of St Ives,
we see him, as distinctly as if he still lived upon the earth, the man of fierce sectarian
piety, in natural temper not unamiable, somewhat gloomy and hypochondriacal, but, above all, distinguished
by whatsoever of good or ill the sort of Calvinistic divinity prevalent at the time could
infuse into its professors. Such the war found him, and such he continued
to be; throughout his whole career we never for a moment lose sight
of "the saint," the title which, then as now, the profane world gave
to this class of men. Mar therefore regarded it as a temporary cessation on the part of Seaforth
and Huntley, for a given period, of hostilities against the Government.

As far as related to Lord Seaforth, the belief of Lord Mar was correct. At the end of the days
agreed upon for the cessation of arms, Seaforth drew his people together, the influence of
clanship enabling him to summon them at will, like a king; and again appeared in arms. This
was the consequence of the news that James had landed having reached Inverness. But Seaforth
could not retrieve the cause of James in the North, nor repair the effects of even a temporary
submission. Eventually he returned to the party which he had espoused, and escaped to France.
The Marquis of Huntley made his own terms with the Government.

At this critical juncture, unanimity still prevailed, according to Lord Mar, among the assembled
chieftains at Perth. "I do assure you," he writes, "that since the arms came here, there has
not been a quarrel of any kind happened among us--not even among the Highland men, which is
very extraordinary; and you may depend upon it there is the greatest unanimity here just now,
and all fully resolved to stand to it, let what will come. I pray God preserve our King from
the wicked and hellish designs of his enemies! I hope we will be apprized of their motions,
so as to be in readiness to receive them."

These expressions were written, but the letter which contained them was not sent, on the twenty-third
of January. The postscript, written in a hurried hand, shows that the camp at Perth was not
unprepared for the coming attack.

    "Since writing of the inclosed, I have two from which I gott last
    night with the paket; and ane account of that detachment of horse
    comming out, who we hear came the lenth of Acterardie,[140] upon
    which account the whole army here were ordred to be in a readyness
    to march this morning, and we have no account they are returned: we
    hear it was to vew the roads, and to try if it was practicable to
    march their army, which they will find very hard to doe while this
    weather holds. The account you gave in yours of their motions and
    that detachment was very distinct. The K. read it himself,--it came
    prety quick. I entreat you fail not to lett us have what accounts
    you can learn, for what comes from you are among the best we can
    gett.

    "The K. ordered a review of the whole army here this morning, and
    they are all to hold themselves ready at one half ane hour's
    advertisment. Lett me hear from you soon. Adieu."

Again, on the twenty-fourth of January:

    "What is above should have gone this morning, but was delyed. Six
    hundered of the clans are gone out this night to reinforce the
    garison of Braco and Crief. I hear they have orders to destroy the
    corn-yards and barns about Achterardir and Black Ford, which we hear
    were revewed by the enemy yesterday. The King signed thir orders, I
    can ashour you, most unwillingly; and caused put it in the order
    that every thing should be made good to the poor people, with a
    gratuity; and if any of them pleased to come to Perth, they should
    be maintained and all care taken of them. This you may take for
    truth, for no doubt they will make a great noise about it.

    "We have just now got ane account of a ship being come into
    Montross, but we know not yett what she brings. Adieu,--writte soon.
    I am in haste."

    "Eleven att night."

On the twenty-fourth of January, the Duke of Argyle marched to Dumblane, with two hundred horse,
to reconnoitre the roads. The report that the enemy was approaching, was quickly conveyed to
Perth; and now was the order to burn and destroy the village of Auchterarder, the contents
of the houses, all stores of corn and forage, mournfully and promptly executed. It was supposed
by this, that the march of Argyle's forces would be impeded; but it produced no other inconvenience
to that army than obliging them to lie one night in the open air; whilst the unpopularity it
brought on James and his advisers, was long the subject of comment to their enemies. It is
consolatory to those who wish to judge favourably of James to find this declaration in Lord
Mar's correspondence.

    "The King was forced, sore against his will, to give these burning
    orders, as all of us were, could we have helped it; but this
    extraordinary manœuvre of the enemy made it absolutely necessary.
    A finger must be cut off to save the whole body. I have ordered some
    copies of a proclamation to be sent you. There is about two of the
    places burnt, and there's another ordred about the rest. Adieu.

    "It was not amiss that this proclamation were sent to London."

In pursuance of the cruel and impolitic commands to which Lord Mar refers, three thousand Highlanders
were sent forth to the act of destruction. Auchterarder, Crieff, Blackford, Denning and Muthel,
were mercilessly burned; and the wretched inhabitants turned out at that inclement season to
destitution without a roof to shelter them. Many decrepid people and children perished in the
flames.[141] Had James sought, in truth, to prepare a way for the Government in the hearts
of the people, he could not have adopted a more suitable means. In the Duke of Argyle, he had
a generous and humane adversary to deal with,--one whose forbearance laid him under the imputation
of a want of zeal for the cause of the Government, and rendered him no favourite at the English
Court. The fashion at the Court of St. James's, according to a letter in the Mar Papers, was,
to rail against the Duke, and even George the First and those about him joined in the unjust
and ungrateful abuse.

