The next day five hundred daily, weekly, monthly, or bi-monthly newspapers took up the question;
they examined it under its different aspects--physical, meteorological, economical, or moral,
from a political or social point of view. They debated whether the moon was a finished world,
or if she was not still undergoing transformation. Did she resemble the earth in the time when
the atmosphere did not yet exist? What kind of spectacle would her hidden hemisphere present
to our terrestrial spheroid? Granting that the question at present was simply about sending
a projectile to the Queen of Night, every one saw in that the starting-point of a series of
experiments; all hoped that one day America would penetrate the last secrets of the mysterious
orb, and some even seemed to fear that her conquest would disturb the balance of power in Europe.

The project once under discussion, not one of the papers suggested a doubt of its realisation;
all the papers, treatises, bulletins, and magazines published by scientific, literary, or religious
societies enlarged upon its advantages, and the "Natural History Society" of Boston, the "Science
and Art Society" of Albany, the "Geographical and Statistical Society" of New York, the "American
Philosophical Society" of Philadelphia, and the "Smithsonian Institution" of Washington sent
in a thousand letters their congratulations to the Gun Club, with immediate offers of service
and money.

It may be said that no proposition ever had so many adherents; there was no question of hesitations,
doubts, or anxieties. As to the jokes, caricatures, and comic songs that would have welcomed
in Europe, and, above all, in France, the idea of sending a projectile to the moon, they would
have been turned against their author; all the "life-preservers" in the world would have been
powerless to guarantee him against the general indignation. There are things that are not to
be laughed at in the New World.

Impey Barbicane became from that day one of the greatest citizens of the United States, something
like a Washington of science, and one fact amongst several will serve to show the sudden homage
which was paid by a nation to one man.

Some days after the famous meeting of the Gun Club the manager of an English company announced
at the Baltimore Theatre a representation of Much Ado About Nothing, but the population of
the town, seeing in the title a damaging allusion to the projects of President Barbicane, invaded
the theatre, broke the seats, and forced the unfortunate manager to change the play. Like a
sensible man, the manager, bowing to public opinion, replaced the offending comedy by As You
Like It, and for several weeks he had fabulous houses.

CHAPTER IV.

ANSWER FROM THE CAMBRIDGE OBSERVATORY.

In the meantime Barbicane did not lose an instant amidst the enthusiasm of which he was the
object. His first care was to call together his colleagues in the board-room of the Gun Club.
There, after a debate, they agreed to consult astronomers about the astronomical part of their
enterprise. Their answer once known, they would then discuss the mechanical means, and nothing
would be neglected to assure the success of their great experiment.

A note in precise terms, containing special questions, was drawn up and addressed to the observatory
of Cambridge in Massachusetts. This town, where the first University of the United States was
founded, is justly celebrated for its astronomical staff. There are assembled the greatest
men of science; there is the powerful telescope which enabled Bond to resolve the nebula of
Andromeda and Clarke to discover the satellite of Sirius. This celebrated institution was,
therefore, worthy in every way of the confidence of the Gun Club.

After two days the answer, impatiently awaited, reached the hands of President Barbicane.

It ran as follows:--

"The Director of the Cambridge Observatory to the President of the Gun Club at Baltimore.

"On the receipt of your favour of the 6th inst., addressed to the Observatory of Cambridge
in the name of the members of the Baltimore Gun Club, we immediately called a meeting of our
staff, who have deemed it expedient to answer as follows:--

"The questions proposed to it were these:--

"'1. Is it possible to send a projectile to the moon?

"'2. What is the exact distance that separates the earth and her satellite?

"'3. What would be the duration of the projectile's transit to which a sufficient initial speed
had been given, and consequently at what moment should it be hurled so as to reach the moon
at a particular point?

"'4. At what moment would the moon present the most favourable position for being reached by
the projectile?

"'5. What point in the heavens ought the cannon, destined to hurl the projectile, be aimed at?

"'6. What place in the heavens will the moon occupy at the moment when the projectile will start?'

"Regarding question No. 1, 'Is it possible to send a projectile to the moon?'

"Yes, it is possible to send a projectile to the moon if it is given an initial velocity of
1,200 yards a second. Calculations prove that this speed is sufficient. In proportion to the
distance from the earth the force of gravitation diminishes in an inverse ratio to the square
of the distance--that is to say, that for a distance three times greater that force is nine
times less. In consequence, the weight of the projectile will decrease rapidly, and will end
by being completely annulled at the moment when the attraction of the moon will be equal to
that of the earth--that is to say, at the 47/52 of the distance. At that moment the projectile
will have no weight at all, and if it clears that point it will fall on to the moon only by
the effect of lunar gravitation. The theoretic possibility of the experiment is, therefore,
quite demonstrated; as to its success, that depends solely in the power of the engine employed.

"Regarding question No. 2, 'What is the exact distance that separates the earth from her satellite?'

"The moon does not describe a circle round the earth, but an ellipse, of which our earth occupies
one of the foci; the consequence is, therefore, that at certain times it approaches nearer
to, and at others recedes farther from, the earth, or, in astronomical language, it has its
apogee and its perigee. At its apogee the moon is at 247,552 miles from the earth, and at its
perigee at 218,657 miles only, which makes a difference of 28,895, or more than a ninth of
the distance. The perigee distance is, therefore, the one that should give us the basis of
all calculations. It must, therefore, be hurled 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20 seconds before
the arrival of the moon at the point aimed at. But the moon is not always at her zenith when
she reaches her perigee, which is once a month. She is only under the two conditions simultaneously
at long intervals of time. This coincidence of perigee and zenith must be waited for. It happens
fortunately that on December 4th of next year the moon will offer these two conditions; at
midnight she will be at her perigee and her zenith--that is to say, at her shortest distance
from the earth and at her zenith at the same time. But for the moon to reach the zenith of
a place that place must not exceed in latitude the declination of the luminary--in other words,
it must be comprised between 0° and 28° of north or south latitude. In any other place the
range must necessarily be oblique, which would seriously affect the success of the experiment.

"Regarding question No. 6, 'What place will the moon occupy In the heavens at the moment of
the projectile's departure?'

"At the moment when the projectile is hurled into space, the moon, which travels forward 13°
10' 35" each day, will be four times as distant from her zenith point--i.e., by 52° 42' 20",
a space which corresponds to the distance she will travel during the transit of the projectile.
But as the deviation which the rotatory movement of the earth will impart to the shock must
also be taken into account, and as the projectile cannot reach the moon until after a deviation
equal to sixteen radii of the earth, which, calculated upon the moon's orbit, is equal to about
11°, it is necessary to add these 11° to those caused by the already-mentioned delay of the
moon, or, in round numbers, 64°. Thus, at the moment of firing, the visual radius applied to
the moon will describe with the vertical line of the place an angle of 64°.

"Such are the answers to the questions proposed to the Observatory of Cambridge by the members
of the Gun Club.

"To sum up--

"1st. The cannon must be placed in a country situated between 0° and 28° of north or south
latitude.

"2nd. It must be aimed at the zenith of the place.

"3rd. The projectile must have an initial speed of 12,000 yards a second.

"4th. It must be hurled on December 1st of next year, at 10hrs. 46mins. 40secs. p.m.

"5th. It will meet the moon four days after its departure on December 4th, at midnight precisely,
at the moment she arrives at her zenith.

"The members of the Gun Club ought, therefore, at once to commence the labour necessitated
by such an enterprise, and be ready to put them into execution at the moment fixed upon, for
they will not find the moon in the same conditions of perigee and zenith till eighteen years
and eleven days later.

"The staff of the Observatory of Cambridge puts itself entirely at their disposition for questions
of theoretic astronomy, and begs to join its congratulations to those of the whole of America.

"On behalf of the staff,

"J.M. BELFAST,

"Director of the Observatory of Cambridge."

CHAPTER V.

THE ROMANCE OF THE MOON.

A spectator endowed with infinite power of sight, and placed at the unknown centre round which
gravitates the universe, would have seen myriads of atoms filling all space during the chaotic
epoch of creation. But by degrees, as centuries went on, a change took place; a law of gravitation
manifested itself which the wandering atoms obeyed; these atoms, combined chemically according
to their affinities, formed themselves into molecules, and made those nebulous masses with
which the depths of the heavens are strewed.

These masses were immediately animated by a movement of rotation round their central point.
This centre, made of vague molecules, began to turn on itself whilst progressively condensing;
then, following the immutable laws of mechanics, in proportion as its volume became diminished
by condensation its movement of rotation was accelerated, and these two effects persisting,
there resulted a principal planet, the centre of the nebulous mass.

By watching attentively the spectator would then have seen other molecules in the mass behave
like the central planet, and condense in the same manner by a movement of progressively-accelerated
rotation, and gravitate round it under the form of innumerable stars. The nebulae, of which
astronomers count nearly 5,000 at present, were formed.

Amongst these 5,000 nebulae there is one that men have called the Milky Way, and which contains
eighteen millions of stars, each of which has become the centre of a solar world.

If the spectator had then specially examined amongst these eighteen millions of stars one of
the most modest and least brilliant, a star of the fourth order, the one that proudly named
itself the sun, all the phenomena to which the formation of the universe is due would have
successively taken place under his eyes.

In fact, he would have perceived this sun still in its gaseous state, and composed of mobile
molecules; he would have perceived it turning on its own axis to finish its work of concentration.
This movement, faithful to the laws of mechanics, would have been accelerated by the diminution
of volume, and a time would have come when the centrifugal force would have overpowered the
centripetal, which causes the molecules all to tend towards the centre.

Then another phenomenon would have passed before the eyes of the spectator, and the molecules
situated in the plane of the equator would have formed several concentric rings like that of
Saturn round the sun. In their turn these rings of cosmic matter, seized with a movement of
rotation round the central mass, would have been broken up into secondary nebulae--that is
to say, into planets.

If the spectator had then concentrated all his attention on these planets he would have seen
them behave exactly like the sun and give birth to one or more cosmic rings, origin of those
secondary bodies which we call satellites.

Thus in going up from the atom to the molecule, from the molecule to the nebulae, and from
the nebulae to the principal star, from the principal star to the sun, from the sun to the
planet, and from the planet to the satellite, we have the whole series of transformations undergone
by the celestial powers from the first days of the universe.

The sun seems lost amidst the immensities of the stellar universe, and yet it is related, by
actual theories of science, to the nebula of the Milky Way. Centre of a world, and small as
it appears amidst the ethereal regions, it is still enormous, for its size is 1,400,000 times
that of the earth. Around it gravitate eight planets, struck off from its own mass in the first
days of creation. Between Mars and Jupiter circulate regularly other smaller bodies, the wandering
débris, perhaps, of a star broken up into thousands of pieces, of which the telescope has discovered
eighty-two at present. Some of these asteroids are so small that they could be walked round
in a single day by going at a gymnastic pace.

Of these attendant bodies which the sun maintains in their elliptical orbit by the great law
of gravitation, some possess satellites of their own. Uranus has eight, Saturn eight, Jupiter
four, Neptune three perhaps, and the Earth one; this latter, one of the least important of
the solar world, is called the Moon, and it is that one that the enterprising genius of the
Americans means to conquer.

The Queen of Night, from her relative proximity and the spectacle rapidly renewed of her different
phases, at first divided the attention of the inhabitants of the earth with the sun; but the
sun tires the eyesight, and the splendour of its light forces its admirers to lower their eyes.

The blonde Phoebe, more humane, graciously allows herself to be seen in her modest grace; she
is gentle to the eye, not ambitious, and yet she sometimes eclipses her brother the radiant
Apollo, without ever being eclipsed by him. The Mahommedans understood what gratitude they
owed to this faithful friend of the earth, and they ruled their months at 29-1/2 days on her
revolution.

The first people of the world dedicated particular worship to this chaste goddess. The Egyptians
called her Isis, the Phoenicians Astarte, the Greeks Phoebe, daughter of Jupiter and Latona,
and they explained her eclipses by the mysterious visits of Diana and the handsome Endymion.
The mythological legend relates that the Nemean lion traversed the country of the moon before
its apparition upon earth, and the poet Agesianax, quoted by Plutarch, celebrated in his sweet
lines its soft eyes, charming nose, and admirable mouth, formed by the luminous parts of the
adorable Selene.

But though the ancients understood the character, temperament, and, in a word, moral qualities
of the moon from a mythological point of view, the most learned amongst them remained very
ignorant of selenography.

Several astronomers, however, of ancient times discovered certain particulars now confirmed
by science. Though the Arcadians pretended they had inhabited the earth at an epoch before
the moon existed, though Simplicius believed her immovable and fastened to the crystal vault,
though Tacitus looked upon her as a fragment broken off from the solar orbit, and Clearch,
the disciple of Aristotle, made of her a polished mirror upon which were reflected the images
of the ocean--though, in short, others only saw in her a mass of vapours exhaled by the earth,
or a globe half fire and half ice that turned on itself, other savants, by means of wise observations
and without optical instruments, suspected most of the laws that govern the Queen of Night.

Thus Thales of Miletus, B.C. 460, gave out the opinion that the moon was lighted up by the
sun. Aristarchus of Samos gave the right explanation of her phases. Cleomenus taught that she
shone by reflected light. Berose the Chaldean discovered that the duration of her movement
of rotation was equal to that of her movement of revolution, and he thus explained why the
moon always presented the same side. Lastly, Hipparchus, 200 years before the Christian era,
discovered some inequalities in the apparent movements of the earth's satellite.

These different observations were afterwards confirmed, and other astronomers profited by them.
Ptolemy in the second century, and the Arabian Aboul Wefa in the tenth, completed the remarks
of Hipparchus on the inequalities that the moon undergoes whilst following the undulating line
of its orbit under the action of the sun. Then Copernicus, in the fifteenth century, and Tycho
Brahe, in the sixteenth, completely exposed the system of the world and the part that the moon
plays amongst the celestial bodies.

At that epoch her movements were pretty well known, but very little of her physical constitution
was known. It was then that Galileo explained the phenomena of light produced in certain phases
by the existence of mountains, to which he gave an average height of 27,000 feet.

After him, Hevelius, an astronomer of Dantzig, lowered the highest altitudes to 15,000 feet;
but his contemporary, Riccioli, brought them up again to 21,000 feet.

Herschel, at the end of the eighteenth century, armed with a powerful telescope, considerably
reduced the preceding measurements. He gave a height of 11,400 feet to the highest mountains,
and brought down the average of different heights to little more than 2,400 feet. But Herschel
was mistaken too, and the observations of Schroeter, Louville, Halley, Nasmyth, Bianchini,
Pastorff, Lohrman, Gruithuysen, and especially the patient studies of MM. Boeer and Moedler,
were necessary to definitely resolve the question. Thanks to these savants, the elevation of
the mountains of the moon is now perfectly known. Boeer and Moedler measured 1,905 different
elevations, of which six exceed 15,000 feet and twenty-two exceed 14,400 feet. Their highest
summit towers to a height of 22,606 feet above the surface of the lunar disc.

At the same time the survey of the moon was being completed; she appeared riddled with craters,
and her essentially volcanic nature was affirmed by each observation. From the absence of refraction
in the rays of the planets occulted by her it is concluded that she can have no atmosphere.
This absence of air entails absence of water; it therefore became manifest that the Selenites,
in order to live under such conditions, must have a special organisation, and differ singularly
from the inhabitants of the earth.

Lastly, thanks to new methods, more perfected instruments searched the moon without intermission,
leaving not a point of her surface unexplored, and yet her diameter measures 2,150 miles; her
surface is one-thirteenth of the surface of the globe, and her volume one-forty-ninth of the
volume of the terrestrial spheroid; but none of her secrets could escape the astronomers' eyes,
and these clever savants carried their wonderful observations still further.

Thus they remarked that when the moon was at her full the disc appeared in certain places striped
with white lines, and during her phases striped with black lines. By prosecuting the study
of these with greater precision they succeeded in making out the exact nature of these lines.
They are long and narrow furrows sunk between parallel ridges, bordering generally upon the
edges of the craters; their length varied from ten to one hundred miles, and their width was
about 1,600 yards. Astronomers called them furrows, and that was all they could do; they could
not ascertain whether they were the dried-up beds of ancient rivers or not. The Americans hope,
some day or other, to determine this geological question. They also undertake to reconnoitre
the series of parallel ramparts discovered on the surface of the moon by Gruithuysen, a learned
professor of Munich, who considered them to be a system of elevated fortifications raised by
Selenite engineers. These two still obscure points, and doubtless many others, can only be
definitely settled by direct communication with the moon.

As to the intensity of her light there is nothing more to be learnt; it is 300,000 times weaker
than that of the sun, and its heat has no appreciable action upon thermometers; as to the phenomenon
known as the "ashy light," it is naturally explained by the effect of the sun's rays transmitted
from the earth to the moon, and which seem to complete the lunar disc when it presents a crescent
form during its first and last phases.

Such was the state of knowledge acquired respecting the earth's satellite which the Gun Club
undertook to perfect under all its aspects, cosmographical, geographical, geological, political,
and moral.

The immediate effect of Barbicane's proposition was that of bringing out all astronomical facts
relative to the Queen of Night. Everybody began to study her assiduously. It seemed as if the
moon had appeared on the horizon for the first time, and that no one had ever seen her in the
sky before. She became the fashion; she was the lion of the day, without appearing less modest
on that account, and took her place amongst the "stars" without being any the prouder. The
newspapers revived old anecdotes in which this "Sun of the wolves" played a part; they recalled
the influence which the ignorance of past ages had ascribed to her; they sang about her in
every tone; a little more and they would have quoted her witty sayings; the whole of America
was filled with selenomania.

The scientific journals treated the question which touched upon the enterprise of the Gun Club
more specially; they published the letter from the Observatory of Cambridge, they commented
upon it and approved of it without reserve.

In short, even the most ignorant Yankee was no longer allowed to be ignorant of a single fact
relative to his satellite, nor, to the oldest women amongst them, to have any superstitions
about her left. Science flooded them; it penetrated into their eyes and ears; it was impossible
to be an ass--in astronomy.

Until then many people did not know how the distance between the earth and the moon had been
calculated. This fact was taken advantage of to explain to them that it was done by measuring
the parallax of the moon. If the word "parallax" seemed new to them, they were told it was
the angle formed by two straight lines drawn from either extremity of the earth's radius to
the moon. If they were in doubt about the perfection of this method, it was immediately proved
to them that not only was the mean distance 234,347 miles, but that astronomers were right
to within seventy miles.

To those who were not familiar with the movements of the moon, the newspapers demonstrated
daily that she possesses two distinct movements, the first being that of rotation upon her
axis, the second that of revolution round the earth, accomplishing both in the same time--that
is to say, in 27-1/3 days.

The movement of rotation is the one that causes night and day on the surface of the moon, only
there is but one day and one night in a lunar month, and they each last 354-1/3 hours. But,
happily, the face, turned towards the terrestrial globe, is lighted by it with an intensity
equal to the light of fourteen moons. As to the other face, the one always invisible, it has
naturally 354 hours of absolute night, tempered only by "the pale light that falls from the
stars." This phenomenon is due solely to the peculiarity that the movements of rotation and
revolution are accomplished in rigorously equal periods, a phenomenon which, according to Cassini
and Herschel, is common to the satellites of Jupiter, and, very probably to the other satellites.

Some well-disposed but rather unyielding minds did not quite understand at first how, if the
moon invariably shows the same face to the earth during her revolution, she describes one turn
round herself in the same period of time. To such it was answered--"Go into your dining-room,
and turn round the table so as always to keep your face towards the centre; when your circular
walk is ended you will have described one circle round yourselves, since your eye will have
successively traversed every point of the room. Well, then, the room is the heavens, the table
is the earth, and you are the moon!"

And they go away delighted with the comparison.

Thus, then, the moon always presents the same face to the earth; still, to be quite exact,
it should be added that in consequence of certain fluctuations from north to south and from
west to east, called libration, she shows rather more than the half of her disc, about 0.57.

When the ignoramuses knew as much as the director of the Cambridge Observatory about the moon's
movement of rotation they began to make themselves uneasy about her movement of revolution
round the earth, and twenty scientific reviews quickly gave them the information they wanted.
They then learnt that the firmament, with its infinite stars, may be looked upon as a vast
dial upon which the moon moves, indicating the time to all the inhabitants of the earth; that
it is in this movement that the Queen of Night shows herself in her different phases, that
she is full when she is in opposition with the sun--that is to say, when the three bodies are
on a line with each other, the earth being in the centre; that the moon is new when she is
in conjunction with the sun--that is to say, when she is between the sun and the earth; lastly,
that the moon is in her first or last quarter when she makes, with the sun and the earth, a
right angle of which she occupies the apex.

Some perspicacious Yankees inferred in consequence that eclipses could only take place at the
periods of conjunction or opposition, and their reasoning was just. In conjunction the moon
can eclipse the sun, whilst in opposition it is the earth that can eclipse him in her turn;
and the reason these eclipses do not happen twice in a lunar month is because the plane upon
which the moon moves is elliptical like that of the earth.

As to the height which the Queen of Night can attain above the horizon, the letter from the
Observatory of Cambridge contained all that can be said about it. Every one knew that this
height varies according to the latitude of the place where the observation is taken. But the
only zones of the globe where the moon reaches her zenith--that is to say, where she is directly
above the heads of the spectators--are necessarily comprised between the 28th parallels and
the equator. Hence the important recommendation given to attempt the experiment upon some point
in this part of the globe, in order that the projectile may be hurled perpendicularly, and
may thus more quickly escape the attraction of gravitation. This was a condition essential
to the success of the enterprise, and public opinion was much exercised thereupon.

As to the line followed by the moon in her revolution round the earth, the Observatory of Cambridge
had demonstrated to the most ignorant that it is an ellipse of which the earth occupies one
of the foci. These elliptical orbits are common to all the planets as well as to all the satellites,
and rational mechanism rigorously proves that it could not be otherwise. It was clearly understood
that when at her apogee the moon was farthest from the earth, and when at her perigee she was
nearest to our planet.

This, therefore, was what every American knew whether he wished to or no, and what no one could
decently be ignorant of. But if these true principles rapidly made their way, certain illusive
fears and many errors were with difficulty cleared away.

Some worthy people maintained, for instance, that the moon was an ancient comet, which, whilst
travelling along its elongated orbit round the sun, passed near to the earth, and was retained
in her circle of attraction. The drawing-room astronomers pretended to explain thus the burnt
aspect of the moon, a misfortune of which they accused the sun. Only when they were told to
notice that comets have an atmosphere, and that the moon has little or none, they did not know
what to answer.

Others belonging to the class of "Shakers" manifested certain fears about the moon; they had
heard that since the observations made in the times of the Caliphs her movement of revolution
had accelerated in a certain proportion; they thence very logically concluded that an acceleration
of movement must correspond to a diminution in the distance between the two bodies, and that
this double effect going on infinitely the moon would one day end by falling into the earth.
However, they were obliged to reassure themselves and cease to fear for future generations
when they were told that according to the calculations of Laplace, an illustrious French mathematician,
this acceleration of movement was restricted within very narrow limits, and that a proportional
diminution will follow it. Thus the equilibrium of the solar world cannot be disturbed in future
centuries.

Lastly there was the superstitious class of ignoramuses to be dealt with; these are not content
with being ignorant; they know what does not exist, and about the moon they know a great deal.
Some of them considered her disc to be a polished mirror by means of which people might see
themselves from different points on the earth, and communicate their thoughts to one another.
Others pretended that out of 1,000 new moons 950 had brought some notable change, such as cataclysms,
revolutions, earthquakes, deluges, &c.; they therefore believed in the mysterious influence
of the Queen of Night on human destinies; they think that every Selenite is connected by some
sympathetic tie with each inhabitant of the earth; they pretend, with Dr. Mead, that she entirely
governs the vital system--that boys are born during the new moon and girls during her last
quarter, &c., &c. But at last it became necessary to give up these vulgar errors, to come back
to truth; and if the moon, stripped of her influence, lost her prestige in the minds of courtesans
of every power, if some turned their backs on her, the immense majority were in her favour.
As to the Yankees, they had no other ambition than that of taking possession of this new continent
of the sky, and to plant upon its highest summit the star-spangled banner of the United States
of America.

CHAPTER VII.

THE HYMN OF THE CANNON-BALL.

The Cambridge Observatory had, in its memorable letter of October 7th, treated the question
from an astronomical point of view--the mechanical point had still to be treated. It was then
that the practical difficulties would have seemed insurmountable to any other country but America;
but there they were looked upon as play.

President Barbicane had, without losing any time, nominated a working committee in the heart
of the Gun Club. This committee was in three sittings to elucidate the three great questions
of the cannon, the projectile, and the powder. It was composed of four members very learned
upon these matters. Barbicane had the casting vote, and with him were associated General Morgan,
Major Elphinstone, and, lastly, the inevitable J.T. Maston, to whom were confided the functions
of secretary.

On the 8th of October the committee met at President Barbicane's house, No. 3, Republican-street;
as it was important that the stomach should not trouble so important a debate, the four members
of the Gun Club took their seats at a table covered with sandwiches and teapots. J.T. Maston
immediately screwed his pen on to his steel hook and the business began.

Barbicane opened the meeting as follows:--

"Dear colleagues," said he, "we have to solve one of the more important problems in ballistics--that
greatest of sciences which treats of the movement of projectiles--that is to say, of bodies
hurled into space by some power of impulsion and then left to themselves."

"Oh, ballistics, ballistics!" cried J.T. Maston in a voice of emotion.

"Perhaps," continued Barbicane, "the most logical thing would be to consecrate this first meeting
to discussing the engine."

"Certainly," answered General Morgan.

"Nevertheless," continued Barbicane, "after mature deliberation, it seems to me that the question
of the projectile ought to precede that of the cannon, and that the dimensions of the latter
ought to depend upon the dimensions of the former."

J.T. Maston here interrupted the president, and was heard with the attention which his magnificent
past career deserved.

"My dear friends," said he in an inspired tone, "our president is right to give the question
of the projectile the precedence of every other; the cannon-ball we mean to hurl at the moon
will be our messenger, our ambassador, and I ask your permission to regard it from an entirely
moral point of view."

This new way of looking at a projectile excited the curiosity of the members of the committee;
they therefore listened attentively to the words of J.T. Maston.

"My dear colleagues," he continued, "I will be brief. I will lay aside the material projectile--the
projectile that kills--in order to take up the mathematical projectile--the moral projectile.
A cannon-ball is to me the most brilliant manifestation of human power, and by creating it
man has approached nearest to the Creator!"

"Hear, hear!" said Major Elphinstone.

"In fact," cried the orator, "if God has made the stars and the planets, man has made the cannon-ball--that
criterion of terrestrial speed--that reduction of bodies wandering in space which are really
nothing but projectiles. Let Providence claim the speed of electricity, light, the stars, comets,
planets, satellites, sound, and wind! But ours is the speed of the cannon-ball--a hundred times
greater than that of trains and the fastest horses!"

J.T. Maston was inspired; his accents became quite lyrical as he chanted the hymn consecrated
to the projectile.

