One day the Captain commenced complaining of the expense of so large a family, and proposed
to my mother that we should work out and he take part of the pay. My mother told him she would
need what she earned for my little brother's support. Finally the Captain consented, and I
was the first to be disposed of. The Captain took me in his buggy and carried me to the Depot,
and I was put into a Union family, where I remained five months. Previous to my leaving, however,
my mother and the Captain entered into a contract--he agreeing not to sell us, and mother agreeing
not to make her escape. While she was carrying out her promise in good faith, he was plotting
to separate us. We were all divided except mother and my little brother, who remained together.
My sister remained with one of the rebels, but was tolerably treated. We all fared very well;
but it was only the calm before the rending tornado. Captain T. was Captain of the boat to
Memphis, from which the Union soldiers had rescued us. He commenced as a deck hand on the boat,
then attained a higher position, and continued to advance until he became her Captain. At length
he came in possession of slaves. Then his accomplishments were complete. He was a very severe
slave master. Those mushroom slaveholders are much dreaded, as their severity knows no bounds

    Bondage and torture, scourges and chains
    Placed on our backs indelible stains.

I stated previously, in relating a sketch of my mother's history, that she was married twice,
and both husbands were to be sold and made their escape. They both gained their freedom. One
was living,--the other died before the war. Both made every effort to find us, but to no purpose.
It was some years before we got a correct account of her second husband, and he had no account
of her, except once he heard that mother and children had perished in the woods while endeavoring
to make their escape. In a few years after his arrival in the free States he married again.

When about sixteen years of age, while residing with her original master, my mother became
acquainted with a young man, Mr. Adams, residing in a neighboring family, whom she much respected;
but he was soon sold, and she lost trace of him entirely, as was the common occurrence with
friends and companions though united by the nearest ties. When my mother arrived at Captain
Tirrell's, after leaving the boat, in her excitement she scarce observed anything except her
little group so miraculously saved from perhaps a final separation in this world. She at length
observed that the servant who was waiting to take her to the Captain's residence in the country
was the same man with whom she formed the acquaintance when sixteen years old, and they again
renewed their acquaintance. He had been married and buried his wife. It appeared that his wife
had been in Captain Tirrell's family many years, and he also, for some time. They had a number
of children, and Capt. Tirrell had sold them down South. This cruel blow, assisted by severe
flogging and other ill treatment, rendered the mother insane, and finally caused her death.

    In agony close to her bosom she pressed,
    The life of her heart, the child of her breast--
    Oh love from its tenderness gathering might
    Had strengthed her soul for declining age.

    But she is free. Yes, she has gone from the land of the slave;
    The hand of oppression must rest in the grave.
    The blood hounds have missed the scent of her way,
    The hunter is rifled and foiled of his prey.

After my mother had left the Captain to take care of herself and child, according to agreement
with the Captain, she became engaged to Mr. Adams. He had bought himself previously for a large
price. After they became acquainted, the Captain had an excellent opportunity of carrying out
his stratagem. He commenced bestowing charity upon Mr. Adams. As he had purchased himself,
and Capt. T. had agreed not to sell my mother, they had decided to marry at an early day. They
hired a house in the city and were to commence housekeeping immediately. The Captain made him
a number of presents and seemed much pleased with the arrangement. The day previous to the
one set for the marriage, while they were setting their house in order, a man called and enquired
for a nurse, pretending he wanted one of us. Mother was absent; he said he would call again,
but he never came. On Wednesday evening we attended a protracted meeting. After we had returned
home and retired, a loud rap was heard at the door. My Aunt enquired who was there. The reply
was, "Open the door or I will break it down." In a moment in rushed seven men, four watchmen
and three traders, and ordered mother to take my brother and me and follow them, which she
hastened to do as fast as possible, but we were not allowed time to put on our usual attire.
They thrust us into a close carriage. For fear of my mother alarming the citizens they threw
her to the ground and choked her until she was nearly strangled, then pushed her into a coach.
The night was dark and dreary; the stars refused to shine, the moon to shed her light.

    'Tis not strange the heavenly orbs
    In silence blushed neath Nature's sable garb
    When woman's gagged and rashly torn away
    Without blemish and without crime.
    Unheeded by God's holy word:--
    Unloose the fetters, break the chain,
    And make my people free again,
    And let them breath pure freedom's air
    And her rich bounty freely share.
    Let Eutopia stretch her bleeding hands abroad;
    Her cry of anguish finds redress from God.

We were hurried along the streets. The inhabitants heard our cries and rushed to their doors,
but our carriage being perfectly tight, and the alarm so sudden, that we were at the jail before
they could give us any relief. There were strong Union men and officers in the city, and if
they could have been informed of the human smuggling they would have released us. But oh, that
horrid, dilapidated prison, with its dim lights and dingy walls, again presented itself to
our view. My sister was there first, and we were thrust in and remained there until three o'clock
the following afternoon. Could we have notified the police we should have been released, but
no opportunity was given us. It appears that this kidnapping had been in contemplation from
the time we were before taken and returned; and Captain Tirrell's kindness to mother,--his
benevolence towards Mr. Adams in assisting him to furnish his house,--his generosity in letting
us work for ourselves,--his approbation in regard to the contemplated marriage was only a trap.
Thus instead of a wedding Thursday evening, we were hurled across the ferry to Albany Court
House and to Kentucky through the rain and without our outer garments. My mother had lost her
bonnet and shawl in the struggle while being thrust in the coach, consequently she had no protection
from the storm, and the rest of us were in similar circumstances. I believe we passed through
Springfield. I think it was the first stopping place after we left East St. Louis, and we were
put on board the cars and secreted in the gentlemen's smoking car, in which there were only
a few rebels. We arrived in Springfield about twelve o'clock at night. When we took the cars
it was dark, bleak and cold. It was the 18th of March, and as we were without bonnets and clothing
to shield us from the sleet and wind, we suffered intensely. The old trader, for fear that
mother might make her escape, carried my brother, nine years of age, from one train to the
other. We then took the cars for Albany, and arrived at eight o'clock in the morning. We were
then carried on the ferry in a wagon. There was another family in the wagon, in the same condition.
We landed at Portland, from thence to Louisville, and were put into John Clark's trader's yard,
and sold out separately, except my mother and little brother, who were sold together. Mother
remained in the trader's yard two weeks, my sister six, myself four.

THE FARE AT THEIR NEW HOMES

Mother was sold to Captain Plasio. My sister to Benj. Board, and myself to Capt. Ephraim Frisbee.
The man who bought my mother was a Spaniard. After she had been there a short time he tried
to have my mother let my brother stop at his saloon, a very dissipated place, to wait upon
his miserable crew, but my mother objected. In spite of her objections he took him down to
try him, but some Union soldiers called at the saloon, and noticing that he was very small,
they questioned him, and my brother, child like, divulged the whole matter. The Captain, fearful
of being betrayed and losing his property, let him continue with my mother. The Captain paid
eight hundred dollars for my mother and brother. We were all sold for extravagant prices. My
sister, aged sixteen, was sold for eight hundred and fifty dollars; I was sold for nine hundred
dollars. This was in 1863. My mother was cook and fared very well. My sister was sold to a
single gentleman, whose intended took charge of her until they were married, after which they
took her to her home. She was her waiter, and fared as well as could be expected. I fared worse
than either of the family. I was not allowed enough to eat, exposed to the cold, and not allowed
through the cold winter to thoroughly warm myself once a month. The house was very large, and
I could gain no access to the fire. I was kept constantly at work of the heaviest kind,--compelled
to move heavy trunks and boxes,--many times to wash till ten and twelve o'clock at night. There
were three deaths in the family while I remained there, and the entire burden was put upon
me. I often felt to exclaim as the Children of Israel did: "O Lord, my burden is greater than
I can bear." I was then seventeen years of age. My health has been impaired from that time
to the present. I have a severe pain in my side by the slightest over exertion. In the Winter
I suffer intensely with cold, and cannot get warm unless in a room heated to eighty degrees.
I am infirm and burdened with the influence of slavery, whose impress will ever remain on my
mind and body. For six months I tried to make my escape. I used to rise at four o'clock in
the morning to find some one to assist me, and at last I succeeded. I was allowed two hours
once in two weeks to go and return three miles. I could contrive no other way than to improve
one of these opportunities, in which I was finally successful. I became acquainted with some
persons who assisted slaves to escape by the underground railroad. They were colored people.
I was to pretend going to church, and the man who was to assist and introduce me to the proper
parties was to linger on the street opposite the house, and I was to follow at a short distance.
On Sunday evening I begged leave to attend church, which was reluctantly granted if I completed
all my work, which was no easy task. It appeared as if my mistress used every possible exertion
to delay me from church, and I concluded that her old cloven-footed companion had impressed
his intentions on her mind. Finally, when I was ready to start, my mistress took a notion to
go out to ride, and desired me to dress her little boy, and then get ready for church. Extensive
hoops were then worn, and as I had attached my whole wardrobe under mine by a cord around my
waist, it required considerable dexterity and no small amount of maneuvering to hide the fact
from my mistress. While attending to the child I had managed to stand in one corner of the
room, for fear she might come in contact with me and thus discover that my hoops were not so
elastic as they usually are. I endeavored to conceal my excitement by backing and edging very
genteelly out of the door. I had nine pieces of clothing thus concealed on my person, and as
the string which fastened them was small it caused me considerable discomfort. To my great
satisfaction I at last passed into the street, and my master and mistress drove down the street
in great haste and were soon out of sight. I saw my guide patiently awaiting me. I followed
him at a distance until we arrived at the church, and there met two young ladies, one of whom
handed me a pass and told me to follow them at a square's distance. It was now twilight. There
was a company of soldiers about to take passage across the ferry, and I followed. I showed
my pass, and proceeded up the stairs on the boat. While thus ascending the stairs, the cord
which held my bundle of clothing broke, and my feet became entangled in my wardrobe, but by
proceeding, the first step released one foot and the next the other. This was observed only
by a few soldiers, who were too deeply engaged in their own affairs to interfere with mine.
I seated myself in a remote corner of the boat, and in a few moments I landed on free soil
for the first time in my life, except when hurled through Albany and Springfield at the time
of our capture. I was now under my own control. The cars were waiting in Jefferson City for
the passengers for Indianapolis, where we arrived about nine o'clock.

MATTIE IN INDIANAPOLIS--THE GLORY OF FREEDOM--PRESIDENT LINCOLN'S REMAINS EXHIBITED

My first business, after my arrival at Indianapolis was to find a boarding place in which I
at once succeeded, and in a few hours thereafter was at a place of service of my own choice.
I had always been under the yoke of oppression, compelled to submit to its laws, and not allowed
to advance a rod from the house, or even out of call, without a severe punishment. Now this
constant fear and restless yearning was over. It appeared as though I had emerged into a new
world, or had never lived in the old one before. The people I lived with were Unionists, and
became immediately interested in teaching and encouraging me in my literary advancement and
all other important improvements, which precisely met the natural desires for which my soul
had ever yearned since my earliest recollection. I could read a little, but was not allowed
to learn in slavery. I was obliged to pay twenty-five cents for every letter written for me.
I now began to feel that as I was free I could learn to write, as well as others; consequently
Mrs. Harris, the lady with whom I lived, volunteered to assist me. I was soon enabled to write
quite a legible hand, which I find a great convenience. I would advise all, young, middle aged
or old, in a free country to learn to read and write. If this little book should fall into
the hands of one deficient of the important knowledge of writing, I hope they will remember
the old maxim:--"Never too old to learn." Manage your own secrets, and divulge them by the
silent language of your own pen. Had our blessed President considered it too humiliating to
learn in advanced years, our race would yet have remained under the galling yoke of oppression.
After I had been with Mrs. Harris seven months, the joyful news came of the surrender of Lee's
army and the capture of Richmond.

    Whilst the country's hearts were throbbing,
      Filled with joy for victories won;
    Whilst the stars and stripes were waving
      O'er each cottage, ship and dome,
    Came upon like winged lightning
      Words that turned each joy to dread,
    Froze with horror as we listened:
      Our beloved chieftain, Lincoln's dead

    War's dark clouds has long held o'er us,
      They have rolled their gloomy fold's away,
    And all the world is anxious, waiting
      For that promised peaceful day.
    But that fearful blow inflicted,
      Fell on his devoted head,
    And from every town and hamlet
      Came the cry our Chieftain's dead.

    Weep, weep, O bleeding nation
      For the patriot spirit fled,
    All untold our country's future--
      Buried with the silent dead.
    God of battles, God of nations to our country send relief
      Turn each lamentation into joy whilst we mourn our murdered chief.

On the Saturday after the assassination of the President there was a meeting held on the Common,
and a vote taken to have the President's body brought through Indianapolis, for the people
to see his dear dead face. The vote was taken by raising the hands, and when the question was
put in favor of it a thousand black hands were extended in the air, seemingly higher and more
visible than all the rest. Nor were their hands alone raised, for in their deep sorrow and
gloom they raised their hearts to God, for well they knew that He, through martyred blood,
had made them free. It was some time before the remains reached Indianapolis, as it was near
the last of the route. The body was placed in the centre of the hall of the State House, and
we marched in by fours, and divided into two on each side of the casket, and passed directly
through the hall. It was very rainy,--nothing but umbrellas were to be seen in any direction.
The multitude were passing in and out from eight o'clock in the morning till four o'clock in
the afternoon. His body remained until twelve o'clock in the evening, many distinguished persons
visiting it, when amid the booming of cannon, it moved on its way to Springfield, its final
resting-place. The death of the President was like an electric shock to my soul. I could not
feel convinced of his death until I gazed upon his remains, and heard the last roll of the
muffled drum and the farewell boom of the cannon. I was then convinced that though we were
left to the tender mercies of God, we were without a leader.

    Gone, gone is our chieftain,
    The tried and the true;
    The grief of our nation the world never knew.
    We mourn as a nation has never yet mourned;
    The foe to our freedom more deeply has scorned.

    In the height of his glory in manhood's full prime,
    Our country's preserver through darkest of time;
    A merciful being, whose kindness all shared
    Shown mercy to others. Why was he not spared?

    The lover of Justice, the friend of the slave,
    He struck at oppression and made it a grave;
    He spoke for our bond-men, and chains from them fell,
    By making them soldiers they served our land well.

    Because he had spoken from sea unto sea
    Glad tidings go heavenward, our country is free,
    And angels I'm thinking looked down from above,
    With sweet smiles approving his great works of love.

    His name with the honor forever will live,
    And time to his laurels new lustre will give;
    He lived so unselfish, so loyal and true,
    That his deeds will shine brighter at every view.

    Then honor and cherish the name of the brave,
    The champion of freedom, the friend to the slave,
    The far-sighted statesman who saw a fair end,
    When north land and south land one flag shall defend.

    Rest, rest, fallen chieftain, thy labors are o'er,
    For thee mourns a nation as never before;
    Farewell honored chieftain whom millions adore,
    Farewell gentle spirit, whom heaven has won.

SISTER LOST--MOTHER'S ESCAPE

In two or three weeks after the body of the President was carried through, my sister made her
escape, but by some means we entirely lost trace of her. We heard she was in a free State.
In three months my mother also escaped. She rose quite early in the morning, took my little
brother, and arrived at my place of service in the afternoon. I was much surprised, and asked
my mother how she came there. She could scarcely tell me for weeping, but I soon found out
the mystery. After so many long years and so many attempts, for this was her seventh, she at
last succeeded, and we were now all free. My mother had been a slave for more than forty-three
years, and liberty was very sweet to her. The sound of freedom was music in our ears; the air
was pure and fragrant; the genial rays of the glorious sun burst forth with a new lustre upon
us, and all creation resounded in responses of praise to the author and creator of him who
proclaimed life and freedom to the slave. I was overjoyed with my personal freedom, but the
joy at my mother's escape was greater than anything I had ever known. It was a joy that reaches
beyond the tide and anchors in the harbor of eternal rest. While in oppression, this eternal
life-preserver had continually wafted her toward the land of freedom, which she was confident
of gaining, whatever might betide. Our joy that we were permitted to mingle together our earthly
bliss in glorious strains of freedom was indescribable. My mother responded with the children
of Israel,--"The Lord is my strength and my song. The Lord is a man of war, and the Lord is
his name." We left Indianapolis the day after my mother arrived, and took the cars at eleven
o'clock the following evening for St. Louis, my native State. We were then free, and instead
of being hurried along, bare headed and half naked, through cars and boats, by a brutal master
with a bill of sale in his pocket, we were our own, comfortably clothed, and having the true
emblems of freedom.

MOTHER'S MARRIAGE

It appeared to me that the city presented an entirely new aspect. The reader will remember
that my mother was engaged to be married on the evening after we were kidnapped, and that Mr.
Adams, her intended, had prepared the house for the occasion. We now went in search of him.
He had moved about five miles into the country. He had carefully preserved his furniture and
was patiently awaiting our return. We were gone two years and four months. The clothing and
furniture which we had collected were all destroyed. It was over a year after we left St. Louis
before we heard from there. We went immediately from the cars to my aunt's, and from there
went to Mr. Adams' residence and took him by surprise. They were married in a week after our
return. My mother is comfortably situated on a small farm with a kind and affectionate companion,
with whom she had formed an early acquaintance, and from whom she had been severed by the ruthless
hand of Wrong; but by the divine hand of Justice they were now reunited forever.

MATTIE MEETS HER OLD MASTER--GOES TO SERVICE--IS SENT FOR BY HER STEP-FATHER IN LAWRENCE, MASS.

In a short time I had selected a place of service, and was improving my studies in a small
way. The place I engaged was in the family where I was born, where my mother lived when my
father Jackson made his escape. Although Mr. Canory's family were always kind to us, I felt
a great difference between freedom and slavery. After I had been there a short time my step-father
sent for me and my half brother to come to Lawrence. He had been waiting ever since the State
was free, hoping to get some account of us. He had been informed, previously, that mother,
in trying to make her escape, had perished by the way, and the children also, but he was never
satisfied. He was aware that my aunt was permanently in St. Louis, as her master had given
her family their freedom twenty years previous. She was formerly owned by Major Howe, harness
and leather dealer, yet residing in St. Louis. And long may he live and his good works follow
him and his posterity forever. My father well knew the deception of the rebels, and was determined
to persevere until he had obtained a satisfactory account of his family. A gentleman moved
directly from Lawrence to St. Louis, who made particular enquiries for us, and even called
at my aunt's. We then heard directly from my father, and commenced correspondence. He had not
heard directly from us since he made his escape, which was nine years. He had never heard of
his little son who my mother was compelled by Mrs. Lewis to confine in a box. He was born eight
months after he left. As soon as possible after my mother consented to let my little brother
go to his father he sent means to assist us to make preparations for our journey to the North.
At first he only sent for his little son. My mother was anxious about sending him alone. He
was only eleven years old, and perfectly unused to traveling, and had never been away from
his mother. Finally my father came to the conclusion that, as my mother had endured such extreme
hardships and sufferings during the nine years he was not permitted to participate or render
her any assistance, that it would afford him much pleasure in sending for us both, bearing
our expenses and making us as comfortable as his means would allow. Money was sent us, and
our kind friend, Mr. Howe, obtained our tickets and voluntarily assisted us in starting. We
left for the North on Monday, April 9th, and arrived safe and sound, on the 11th. We found
my step-father's residence about six o'clock in the evening. He was not expecting us till the
next day. Our meeting is better imagined than told. I cannot describe it. His little son was
only two years old when he left, and I was eleven, and we never expected to meet him again
this side of eternity. It was Freedom that brought us together. My father was comfortably situated
in a nice white cottage, containing some eight rooms, all well furnished, and attached to it
was a fine garden. His wife, who is a physician, was absent, but returned on the following
day. The people were kind and friendly. They informed me there was no other colored family
in the city, but my step-mother was continually crowded with friends and customers without
distinction. My step-mother had buried her only son, who returned from the war in a decline.
The white friends were all in deep sympathy with them. I felt immediately at home among such
kind and friendly people, and have never felt homesick, except when I think of my poor mother's
farewell embrace when she accompanied us to the cars. As soon as my step-mother had arrived,
and our excitement was over, they commenced calculating upon placing me in the Sabbath school
at the church where my mother belonged. On the next Sabbath I accompanied her and joined the
Sabbath school, she occupying a side seat about middle way up the house. I was not reminded
of my color except by an occasional loafer or the Irish, usually the colored man's enemy. I
was never permitted to attend a white church before, or ride in any public conveyance without
being placed in a car for the especial purpose; and in the street cars we were not permitted
to ride at all, either South or West. Here I ride where I please, without the slightest remark,
except from the ignorant. Many ask me if I am contented. They can imagine by the above contrast.
My brother and myself entered the public school, and found a host of interested friends and
formed many dear acquaintances whom I shall never forget. After attending school a month the
term closed. I advanced in my studies as fast as could be expected. I never attended school
but one month before. I needed more attention than my kind teacher could possibly bestow upon
me, encumbered as she was by so many small children. Mother then proposed my entering some
select school and placing myself entirely under its discipline and influence. I was much pleased
with the idea, but as they had already been to so much expense for me, I could not wish to
place them under any heavier contribution.