In the Duomo of the same city, on the right hand as one enters the church, there is upon an
altar a picture in oils by his hand, in which there are Our Lady with the Child on her knee,
S. Joseph on one side, and S. Calixtus on the other; which work is likewise held to be very
beautiful, because it is evident that in colouring it Sodoma showed much more diligence than
he used to devote to his works. He also painted for the Company of the Trinity a bier for carrying
the dead to burial, which was very beautiful; and he executed another for the Company of Death,
which is held to be the most beautiful in Siena; and I believe that the latter is the finest
that there is to be seen, for, besides that it is indeed much to be extolled, it is very seldom
that such works are executed at much cost or with much diligence. In the Church of S. Domenico,
in the Chapel of S. Caterina da Siena, where there is in a tabernacle the head of that Saint,
enclosed in one of silver, Giovanni Antonio painted two scenes, which are one on either side
of that tabernacle. In one, on the right hand, is that Saint when, having received the Stigmata
from Jesus Christ, who is in the air, she lies half-dead in the arms of two of her sisters,
who are supporting her; of which work Baldassarre Peruzzi, the painter of Siena, after considering
it, said that he had never seen anyone represent better the expression of persons fainting
and half-dead, or with more similitude to the reality, than Giovanni Antonio had contrived
to do. And in truth it is so, as may be seen, apart from the work itself, from the design by
Sodoma's own hand which I have in my book of drawings. On the left hand, in the other picture,
is the scene when the Angel of God carries to the same Saint the Host of the most Holy Communion,
and she, raising her head to Heaven, sees Jesus Christ and Mary the Virgin, while two of her
sisters, her companions, stand behind her. In another scene, which is on the wall on the right
hand, is painted the story of a criminal, who, going to be beheaded, would not be converted
or commend himself to God, despairing of His mercy; when, the above-named Saint praying for
him on her knees, her prayers were so acceptable to the goodness of God, that, when the felon's
head was cut off, his soul was seen ascending to Heaven; such power with the mercy of God have
the prayers of those saintly persons who are in His grace. In this scene is a very great number
of figures, as to which no one should marvel if they are not of the highest perfection, for
the reason that I have heard as a fact that Giovanni Antonio had sunk to such a pitch in his
negligence and slothfulness, that he would make neither designs nor cartoons when he had any
work of that kind to execute, but would attack the work by designing it with the brush directly
on the plaster, which was a strange thing; in which method it is evident that this scene was
executed by him. The same master also painted the arch in front of that chapel, making therein
a God the Father. The other scenes in that chapel were not finished by him, partly from his
own fault, he not choosing to work save by caprice, and partly because he had not been paid
by him who was having the chapel painted. Below this is a God the Father, who has beneath Him
a Virgin in the ancient manner, on panel, with S. Dominic, S. Gismondo, S. Sebastian, and S.
Catharine.

=. Siena: S. Agostino)

Alinari]

For S. Agostino, in an altar-piece that is on the right hand at the entrance into the church,
he painted the Adoration of the Magi, which was held to be, and is, a good work, for the reason
that, besides the Madonna, which is much extolled, the first of the three Magi, and certain
horses, there is a head of a shepherd between two trees which has all the appearance of life.
Over a gate of the city, called the Porta di S. Viene, he painted in fresco, in a large tabernacle,
the Nativity of Jesus Christ, with some Angels in the air; and on the arch of that gate a child
in foreshortening, very beautiful and in strong relief, which is intended to signify that the
Word has been made Flesh. In this work Sodoma made a portrait of himself, with a beard, being
now old, and with a brush in his hand, which is pointing to a scroll that says "Feci."

He painted likewise in fresco the Chapel of the Commune at the foot of the Palace, in the Piazza,
representing there Our Lady with the Child in her arms, upheld by some little Angels, S. Ansano,
S. Vittorio, S. Augustine, and S. James; and above this, in a triangular lunette, he painted
a God the Father with some Angels about Him. From this work it is evident that when he executed
it he was beginning, as it were, to have no more love for art, having lost that certain quality
of excellence that he used to have in his better days, by means of which he gave a certain
air of beauty to his heads, which made them graceful and lovely. And this is manifestly true,
for some works that he executed long before this one have quite another grace and another manner,
as may be seen above the Postierla, from a wall in fresco over the door of the Captain Lorenzo
Mariscotti, where there is a Dead Christ in the lap of His Mother, who has a marvellous divinity
and grace. In like manner, a picture in oils of Our Lady, which he painted for Messer Enea
Savini della Costerella, is much extolled, and also a canvas that he executed for Assuero Rettori
of S. Martino, in which is the Roman Lucrece stabbing herself, while she is held by her father
and her husband, all painted with much beauty of attitude and marvellous grace in the heads.

