He had not pleaded his cause badly, and so Florence felt. That he had pleaded it hopelessly
was a matter of course. But he had given rise to feelings of gentle regard rather than of anger.
He had been honest, and had contrived to make her believe him. He did not come up to her ideal
of what a lover should be, but he was nearer to it than Mountjoy Scarborough. He had touched
her so closely that she determined at once to tell him the truth, thinking that she might best
in this way put an end to his passion forever. "Mr. Anderson," she said, "though I have known
it to be vain, I have thought it best to listen to you, because you asked it."

"I am sure I am awfully obliged to you."

"And I ought to thank you for the kind feeling you have expressed to me. Indeed, I do thank
you. I believe every word you have said. It is better to show my confidence in your truth than
to pretend to the humility of thinking you untrue."

"It is true; it is true,--every word of it."

"But I am engaged." Then it was sad to see the thorough change which came over the young man's
face. "Of course a girl does not talk of her own little affairs to strangers, or I would let
you have known this before, so as to have prevented it. But, in truth, I am engaged."

"Does Sir Magnus know it, or Lady Mountjoy?"

"I should think not."

"Does your mother?"

"Now you are taking advantage of my confidence, and pressing your questions too closely. But
my mother does know of it. I will tell you more;--she does not approve of it. But it is fixed
in Heaven itself. It may well be that I shall never be able to marry the gentleman to whom
I allude, but most certainly I shall marry no one else. I have told you this because it seems
to be necessary to your welfare, so that you may get over this passing feeling."

"It is no passing feeling," said Anderson, with some tragic grandeur.

"At any rate, you have now my story, and remember that it is trusted to you as a gentleman.
I have told it you for a purpose." Then she walked out of the room, leaving the poor young
man in temporary despair.

CHAPTER XVI.

MR. AND MISS GREY.

It was now the middle of October, and it may be said that from the time in which old Mr. Scarborough
had declared his intention of showing that the elder of his sons had no right to the property,
Mr. Grey, the lawyer, had been so occupied with the Scarborough affairs as to have had left
him hardly a moment for other considerations.

He had a partner, who during these four months had, in fact, carried on the business. One difficulty
had grown out of another till Mr. Grey's whole time had been occupied; and all his thoughts
had been filled with Mr. Scarborough, which is a matter of much greater moment to a man than
the loss of his time. The question of Mountjoy Scarborough's position had been first submitted
to him in June. October had now been reached and Mr. Grey had been out of town only for a fortnight,
during which fortnight he had been occupied entirely in unravelling the mystery. He had at
first refused altogether to have anything to do with the unravelling, and had desired that
some other lawyer might be employed. But it had gradually come to pass that he had entered
heart and soul into the case, and, with many execrations on his own part against Mr. Scarborough,
could find a real interest in nothing else. He had begun his investigations with a thorough
wish to discover that Mountjoy Scarborough was, in truth, the heir. Though he had never loved
the young man, and, as he went on with his investigations, became aware that the whole property
would go to the creditors should he succeed in proving that Mountjoy was the heir, yet for
the sake of abstract honesty he was most anxious that it should be so. And he could not bear
to think that he and other lawyers had been taken in by the wily craft of such a man as the
Squire of Tretton. It went thoroughly against the grain with him to have to acknowledge that
the estate would become the property of Augustus. But it was so, and he did acknowledge it.
It was proved to him that, in spite of all the evidence which he had hitherto seen in the matter,
the squire had not married his wife until after the birth of his eldest son. He did acknowledge
it, and he said bravely that it must be so. Then there came down upon him a crowd of enemies
in the guise of baffled creditors, all of whom believed, or professed to believe, that he,
Mr. Grey, was in league with the squire to rob them of their rights.

If it could be proved that Mountjoy had no claim to the property, then would it go nominally
to Augustus, who according to their showing was also one of the confederates, and the property
could thus, they said, be divided. Very shortly the squire would be dead, and then the confederates
would get everything, to the utter exclusion of poor Mr. Tyrrwhit, and poor Mr. Samuel Hart,
and all the other poor creditors, who would thus be denuded, defrauded, and robbed by a lawyer's
trick. It was in this spirit that Mr. Grey was attacked by Mr. Tyrrwhit and the others; and
Mr. Grey found it very hard to bear.

And then there was another matter which was also very grievous to him. If it were as he now
stated,--if the squire had been guilty of this fraud,--to what punishment would he be subjected?
Mountjoy was declared to have been innocent. Mr. Tyrrwhit, as he put the case to his own lawyers,
laughed bitterly as he made this suggestion. And Augustus was, of course, innocent. Then there
was renewed laughter. And Mr. Grey! Mr. Grey had, of course, been innocent. Then the laughter
was very loud. Was it to be believed that anybody could be taken in by such a story as this?
There was he, Mr. Tyrrwhit: he had ever been known as a sharp fellow; and Mr. Samuel Hart,
who was now away on his travels, and the others;--they were all of them sharp fellows. Was
it to be believed that such a set of gentlemen, so keenly alive to their own interest, should
be made the victims of such a trick as this? Not if they knew it! Not if Mr. Tyrrwhit knew it!

It was in this shape that the matter reached Mr. Grey's ears; and then it was asked, if it
were so, what would be the punishment to which they would be subjected who had defrauded Mr.
Tyrrwhit of his just claim. Mr. Tyrrwhit, who on one occasion made his way into Mr, Grey's
presence, wished to get an answer to that question from Mr. Grey. "The man is dying," said
Mr. Grey, solemnly.

"Dying! He is not more likely to die than you are, from all I hear." At this time rumors of
Mr. Scarborough's improved health had reached the creditors in London. Mr. Tyrrwhit had begun
to believe that Mr. Scarborough's dangerous condition had been part of the hoax; that there
had been no surgeon's knives, no terrible operations, no moment of almost certain death. "I
don't believe he's been ill at all," said Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"I cannot help your belief," said Mr. Grey.

"But because a man doesn't die and recovers, is he on that account to be allowed to cheat people,
as he has cheated me, with impunity?"

"I am not going to defend Mr. Scarborough; but he has not, in fact, cheated you."

"Who has? Come; do you mean to tell me that if this goes on I shall not have been defrauded
of a hundred thousand pounds?"

"Did you ever see Mr. Scarborough on the matter?"

"No; it was not necessary."

"Or have you got his writing to any document? Have you anything to show that he knew what his
son was doing when he borrowed money of you? Is it not perfectly clear that he knew nothing
about it?"

"Of course he knew nothing about it then,--at that time. It was afterward that his fraud began.
When he found that the estate was in jeopardy, then the falsehood was concocted."

"Ah, there, Mr. Tyrrwhit, I can only say, that I disagree with you. I must express my opinion
that if you endeavor to recover your money on that plea you will be beaten. If you can prove
fraud of that kind, no doubt you can punish those who have been guilty of it,--me among the
number."

"I say nothing of that," said Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"But if you have been led into your present difficulty by an illegal attempt on the part of
my client to prove an illegitimate son to have been legitimate, and then to have changed his
mind for certain purposes, I do not see how you are to punish him. The act will have been attempted
and not completed. And it will have been an act concerning his son and not concerning you."

"Not concerning me!" shrieked Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"Certainly not, legally. You are not in a position to prove that he knew that his son was borrowing
money from you on the credit of the estate. As a fact he certainly did not know it."

"We shall see about that," said Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"Then you must see about it, but not with my aid. As a fact I am telling you all that I know
about it. If I could I would prove Mountjoy Scarborough to be his father's heir to-morrow.
Indeed, I am altogether on your side in the matter,--if you would believe it." Here Mr. Tyrrwhit
again laughed. "But you will not believe it, and I do not ask you to do so. As it is we must
be opposed to each other."

"Where is the young man?" asked Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"Ah, that is a question I am not bound to answer, even if I knew. It is a matter on which I
say nothing. You have lent him money, at an exorbitant rate of interest."

"It is not true."

"At any rate it seems so to me; and it is out of the question that I should assist you in recovering
it. You did it at your own peril, and not on my advice. Good-morning, Mr. Tyrrwhit." Then Mr.
Tyrrwhit went his way, not without sundry threats as to the whole Scarborough family.

It was very hard upon Mr. Grey, because he certainly was an honest man and had taken up the
matter simply with a view of learning the truth. It had been whispered to him within the last
day or two that Mountjoy Scarborough had lately been seen alive, and gambling with reckless
prodigality, at Monte Carlo. It had only been told to him as probably true, but he certainly
believed it. But he knew nothing of the details of his disappearance, and had not been much
surprised, as he had never believed that the young man had been murdered or had made away with
himself. But he had heard before that of the quarrel in the street between him and Harry Annesley;
and the story had been told to him so as to fall with great discredit on Harry Annesley's head.

According to that story Harry Annesley had struck his foe during the night and had left him
for dead upon the pavement. Then Mountjoy Scarborough had been missing, and Harry Annesley
had told no one of the quarrel. There had been some girl in question. So much and no more Mr.
Grey had heard, and was, of course, inclined to think that Harry Annesley must have behaved
very badly. But of the mode of Mountjoy's subsequent escape he had heard nothing.

Mr. Grey at this time was living down at Fulham, in a small, old-fashioned house which over-looked
the river, and was called the Manor-house. He would have said that it was his custom to go
home every day by an omnibus, but he did, in truth, almost always remain at his office so late
as to make it necessary that he should return by a cab. He was a man fairly well to do in the
world, as he had no one depending on him but one daughter,--no one, that is to say, whom he
was obliged to support. But he had a married sister with a scapegrace husband and six daughters
whom, in fact, he did support. Mrs. Carroll, with the kindest intentions in the world, had
come and lived near him. She had taken a genteel house in Bolsover Terrace,--a genteel new
house on the Fulham Road, about a quarter of a mile from her brother. Mr. Grey lived in the
old Manor-house, a small, uncomfortable place, which had a nook of its own, close upon the
water, and with a lovely little lawn. It was certainly most uncomfortable as a gentleman's
residence, but no consideration would induce Mr. Grey to sell it. There were but two sitting-rooms
in it, and one was for the most part uninhabited. The up-stairs drawing-room was furnished,
but any one with half an eye could see that it was never used. A "stray" caller might be shown
up there, but callers of that class were very uncommon in Mr. Grey's establishment.

With his own domestic arrangements Mr. Grey would have been quite contented, had it not been
for Mrs. Carroll. It was now some years since he had declared that though Mr. Carroll,--or
Captain Carroll, as he had then been called,--was an improvident, worthless, drunken Irishman,
he would never see his sister want. The consequence was that Carroll had come with his wife
and six daughters and taken a house close to him. There are such "whips and scorns" in the
world to which a man shall be so subject as to have the whole tenor of his life changed by
them. The hero bears them heroically, making no complaints to those around him. The common
man shrinks, and squeals, and cringes, so that he is known to those around him as one especially
persecuted. In this respect Mr. Grey was a grand hero. When he spoke to his friends of Mrs.
Carroll his friends were taught to believe that his outside arrangements with his sister were
perfectly comfortable. No doubt there did creep out among those who were most intimate with
him a knowledge that Mr. Carroll,--for the captain had, in truth, never been more than a lieutenant,
and had now long since sold out,--was impecunious, and a trouble rather than otherwise. But
I doubt whether there was a single inhabitant of the neighborhood of Fulham who was aware that
Mrs. Carroll and the Miss Carrolls cost Mr. Grey on an average above six hundred a year.

There was one in Mr. Grey's family to whom he was so attached that he would, to oblige her,
have thrown over the whole Carroll family; but of this that one person would not hear. She
hated the whole Carroll family with an almost unholy hatred, of which she herself was endeavoring
to repent daily, but in vain. She could not do other than hate them, but she could do other
than allow her father to withdraw his fostering protection; for this one person was Mr. Grey's
only daughter and his one close domestic associate. Miss Dorothy Grey was known well to all
the neighborhood, and was both feared and revered. As we shall have much to do with her in
the telling of our story, it may be well to make her stand plainly before the reader's eyes.

In the first place, it must be understood that she was motherless, brotherless and sisterless.
She had been Mr. Grey's only child, and her mother had been dead for fifteen or sixteen years.
She was now about thirty years of age, but was generally regarded as ranging somewhere between
forty and fifty. "If she isn't nearer fifty than forty I'll eat my old shoes," said a lady
in the neighborhood to a gentleman. "I've known her these twenty years, and she's not altered
in the least." As Dolly Grey had been only ten twenty years ago, the lady must have been wrong.
But it is singular how a person's memory of things may be created out of their present appearances.
Dorothy herself had apparently no desire to set right this erroneous opinion which the neighborhood
entertained respecting her. She did not seem to care whether she was supposed to be thirty,
or forty, or fifty. Of youth, as a means of getting lovers, she entertained a profound contempt.
That no lover would ever come she was assured, and would not at all have known what to do with
one had he come. The only man for whom she had ever felt the slightest regard was her father.
For some women about she did entertain a passionless, well-regulated affection, but they were
generally the poor, the afflicted, or the aged. It was, however, always necessary that the
person so signalized should be submissive. Now, Mrs. Carroll, Mr. Grey's sister, had long since
shown that she was not submissive enough, nor were the girls, the eldest of whom was a pert,
ugly, well-grown minx, now about eighteen years old. The second sister, who was seventeen,
was supposed to be a beauty, but which of the two was the more odious in the eyes of their
cousin it would be impossible to say.

Miss Dorothy Grey was Dolly only to her father. Had any one else so ventured to call her she
would have started up at once, the outraged aged female of fifty. Even her aunt, who was trouble
enough to her, felt that it could not be so. Her uncle tried it once, and she declined to come
into his presence for a month, letting it be fully understood that she had been insulted.

And yet she was not, according to my idea, by any means an ill-favored young woman. It is true
that she wore spectacles; and, as she always desired to have her eyes about with her, she never
put them off when out of bed. But how many German girls do the like, and are not accounted
for that reason to be plain? She was tall and well-made, we may almost say robust. She had
the full use of all her limbs, and was never ashamed of using them. I think she was wrong when
she would be seen to wheel the barrow about the garden, and that her hands must have suffered
in her attempts to live down the conventional absurdities of the world. It is true that she
did wear gloves during her gardening, but she wore them only in obedience to her father's request.
She had bright eyes, somewhat far apart, and well-made, wholesome, regular features. Her nose
was large, and her mouth was large, but they were singularly intelligent, and full of humor
when she was pleased in conversation. As to her hair, she was too indifferent to enable one
to say that it was attractive; but it was smoothed twice a day, was very copious, and always
very clean. Indeed, for cleanliness from head to foot she was a model. "She is very clean,
but then it's second to nothing to her," had said a sarcastic old lady, who had meant to imply
that Miss Dorothy Grey was not constant at church. But the sarcastic old lady had known nothing
about it. Dorothy Grey never stayed away from morning church unless her presence was desired
by her father, and for once or twice that she might do so she would take her father with her
three or four times,--against the grain with him, it must be acknowledged.

But the most singular attribute of the lady's appearance has still to be mentioned. She always
wore a slouch hat, which from motives of propriety she called her bonnet, which gave her a
singular appearance, as though it had been put on to thatch her entirely from the weather.
It was made generally of black straw, and was round, equal at all points of the circle, and
was fastened with broad brown ribbons. It was supposed in the neighborhood to be completely
weather-tight.

The unimaginative nature of Fulham did not allow the Fulham mind to gather in the fact that,
at the same time, she might possess two or three such hats. But they were undoubtedly precisely
similar, and she would wear them in London with exactly the same indifference as in the comparatively
rural neighborhood of her own residence. She would, in truth, go up and down in the omnibus,
and would do so alone, without the slightest regard to the opinion of any of her neighbors.
The Carroll girls would laugh at her behind her back, but no Carroll girl had been seen ever
to smile before her face, instigated to do so by their cousin's vagaries.

But I have not yet mentioned that attribute of Miss Grey's which is, perhaps, the most essential
in her character. It is necessary, at any rate, that they should know it who wish to understand
her nature. When it had once been brought home to her that duty required her to do this thing
or the other, or to say this word or another, the thing would be done or the word said, let
the result be what it might. Even to the displeasure of her father the word was said or the
thing was done. Such a one was Dolly Grey.

CHAPTER XVII.

MR. GREY DINES AT HOME.

Mr. Grey returned home in a cab on the day of Mr. Tyrrwhit's visit, not in the happiest humor.
Though he had got the best of Mr. Tyrrwhit in the conversation, still, the meeting, which had
been protracted, had annoyed him. Mr. Tyrrwhit had made accusations against himself personally
which he knew to be false, but which, having been covered up, and not expressed exactly, he
had been unable to refute. A man shall tell you you are a thief and a scoundrel in such a manner
as to make it impossible for you to take him by the throat. "You, of course, are not a thief
and a scoundrel," he shall say to you, but shall say it in such a tone of voice as to make
you understand that he conceives you to be both. We all know the parliamentary mode of giving
an opponent the lie so as to make it impossible that the Speaker shall interfere.

Mr. Tyrrwhit had treated Mr. Grey in the same fashion; and as Mr. Grey was irritable, thin-skinned,
and irascible, and as he would brood over things of which it was quite unnecessary that a lawyer
should take any cognizance, he went back home an unhappy man. Indeed, the whole Scarborough
affair had been from first to last a great trouble to him. The work which he was now performing
could not, he imagined, be put into his bill. To that he was supremely indifferent; but his
younger partner thought it a little hard that all the other work of the firm should be thrown
on his shoulders during the period which naturally would have been his holidays, and he did
make his feelings intelligible to Mr. Grey. Mr. Grey, who was essentially a just man, saw that
his partner was right, and made offers, but he would not accede to the only proposition which
his partner made. "Let him go and look for a lawyer elsewhere," said his partner. They both
of them knew that Mr. Scarborough had been thoroughly dishonest, but he had been an old client.
His father before him had been a client of Mr. Grey's father. It was not in accordance with
Mr. Grey's theory to treat the old man after this fashion. And he had taken intense interest
in the matter. He had, first of all, been quite sure that Mountjoy Scarborough was the heir;
and though Mountjoy Scarborough was not at all to his taste, he had been prepared to fight
for him. He had now assured himself, after most laborious inquiry, that Augustus Scarborough
was the heir; and although, in the course of the business, he had come to hate the cautious,
money-loving Augustus twice worse than the gambling spendthrift Mountjoy, still, in the cause
of honesty and truth and justice, he fought for Augustus against the world at large, and against
the band of creditors, till the world at large and the band of creditors began to think that
he was leagued with Augustus,--so as to be one of those who would make large sums of money
out of the irregularity of the affair. This made him cross, and put him into a very bad humor
as he went back to Fulham.

