THE COMPOSITION OF

INDIAN GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES,

ILLUSTRATED FROM THE

ALGONKIN LANGUAGES.

BY J. HAMMOND TRUMBULL.

PRESS OF CASE, LOCKWOOD & BRAINARD, Hartford, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     2. A breve is represented by a ), e.g., [)a]

     3. [n] represents a superscripted n (see Footnote 4).

     4. [oo] represents an oo ligature (see Footnote 4.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE COMPOSITION OF

INDIAN GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES. Whenever, by phonetic corruption or by change of circumstance, it
loses its self-interpreting or self-defining power, it must be discarded from the language.
"It requires tradition, society, and literature to maintain forms which can no longer be analyzed
at once."[2] In our own language, such forms may hold their places by prescriptive right or
force of custom, and names absolutely unmeaning, or applied without regard to their original
meaning, are accepted by common consent as the distinguishing marks of persons and places.
We call a man William or Charles, Jones or Brown,--or a town, New Lebanon, Cincinnati, Baton
Rouge, or Big Bethel--just as we put a number on a policeman's badge or on a post-office box,
or a trademark on an article of merchandise; and the number and the mark are as truly and in
nearly the same sense proper names as the others are.

[Footnote 1: Mill's Logic, B. I. ch. viii.]

[Footnote 2: Max Müller, Science of Language, (1st Series,) p. 292.]

Not that personal or proper names, in any language, were originally mere arbitrary sounds,
devoid of meaning. The first James or the first Brown could, doubtless, have given as good
a reason for his name as the first Abraham. But changes of language and lapse of time made
the names independent of the reasons, and took from them all their significance. Patrick is
not now, eo nomine, a 'patrician;' Bridget is not necessarily 'strong' or 'bright;' and in
the name of Mary, hallowed by its associations, only the etymologist can detect the primitive
'bitterness.' Boston is no longer 'St. Botolph's Town;' there is no 'Castle of the inhabitants
of Hwiccia' (Hwic-wara-ceaster) to be seen at Worcester; and Hartford is neither 'the ford
of harts,' (which the city seal has made it,) nor 'the red ford,' which its name once indicated.

In the same way, many Indian geographical names, after their adoption by Anglo-American colonists,
became unmeaning sounds. Their original character was lost by their transfer to a foreign tongue.
Nearly all have suffered some mutilation or change of form. In many instances, hardly a trace
of true original can be detected in the modern name. Some have been separated from the localities
to which they belonged, and assigned to others to which they are etymologically inappropriate.
A mountain receives the name of a river; a bay, that of a cape or a peninsula; a tract of land,
that of a rock or a waterfall. And so 'Massachusetts' and 'Connecticut' and 'Narragansett'
have come to be proper names, as truly as 'Boston' and 'Hartford' are in their cis-Atlantic
appropriation.

The Indian languages tolerated no such 'mere marks.' Every name described the locality to which
it was affixed. The description was sometimes topographical; sometimes historical, preserving
the memory of a battle, a feast, the dwelling-place of a great sachem, or the like; sometimes
it indicated one of the natural products of the place, or the animals which resorted to it;
occasionally, its position or direction from a place previously known, or from the territory
of the nation by which the name was given,--as for example, 'the land on the other side of
the river,' 'behind the mountain,' 'the east land,' 'the half-way place,' &c. The same name
might be, in fact it very often was, given to more places than one; but these must not be so
near together that mistakes or doubts could be occasioned by the repetition. With this precaution,
there was no reason why there might not be as many 'Great Rivers,' 'Bends,' 'Forks,' and 'Water-fall
places' as there are Washingtons, Franklins, Unions, and Fairplays in the list of American
post-offices.

With few exceptions, the structure of these names is simple. Nearly all may be referred to
one of three classes:

I. Those formed by the union of two elements, which we will call adjectival and substantival;[3]
with or without a locative suffix or post-position meaning 'at,' 'in,' 'by,' 'near,' &c.

[Footnote 3: These terms, though not strictly appropriate to Indian synthesis, are sufficiently
explicit for the purposes of this paper. They are borrowed from the author of "Words and Places"
(the Rev. Isaac Taylor), who has employed them (2d ed., p. 460) as equivalents of Förstemann's
"Bestimmungswort" and "Grundwort," (Die deutschen Ortsnamen. Nordhausen, 1863, pp. 26-107,
109-174). In Indian names, the "Bestimmungswort" sometimes corresponds to the English adjective--sometimes
to a noun substantive--but is more generally an adverb.]

II. Those which have a single element, the substantival or 'ground-word,' with its locative suffix.

III. Those formed from verbs, as participials or verbal nouns, denoting a place where the action
of the verb is performed. To this class belong, for example, such names as Mushauwomuk (Boston),
'where there is going-by-boat,' i.e., a ferry, or canoe-crossing. Most of these names, however,
may be shown by rigid analysis to belong to one of the two preceding classes, which comprise
at least nine-tenths of all Algonkin local names which have been preserved.

The examples I shall give of these three classes, will be taken from Algonkin languages; chiefly
from the Massachusetts or Natick (which was substantially the same as that spoken by the Narragansetts
and Connecticut Indians), the Abnaki, the Lenni-Lenâpe or Delaware, the Chippewa or Ojibway,
and the Knisteno or Cree.[4]

[Footnote 4: It has not been thought advisable to attempt the reduction of words or names taken
from different languages to a uniform orthography. When no authorities are named, it may be
understood that the Massachusetts words are taken from Eliot's translation of the Bible, or
from his Indian Grammar; the Narragansett, from Roger Williams's Indian Key, and his published
letters; the Abnaki, from the Dictionary of Râle (Rasles), edited by Dr. Pickering; the Delaware,
from Zeisberger's Vocabulary and his Grammar; the Chippewa, from Schoolcraft (Sch.), Baraga's
Dictionary and Grammar (B.), and the Spelling Books published by the American Board of Commissioners
of Foreign Missions; and the Cree, from Howse's Grammar of that language.

The character [oo] (oo in 'food;' w in 'Wabash,' 'Wisconsin'), used by Eliot, has been substituted
in Abnaki words for the Greek [Greek: ou ligature] of Râle and the Jesuit missionaries, and
for the [Greek: omega] of Campanius. A small [n] placed above the line, shows that the vowel
which it follows is nasal,--and replaces the ñ employed for the same purpose by Râle, and the
short line or dash placed under a vowel, in Pickering's alphabet.

In Eliot's notation, oh usually represents the sound of o in order and in form,--that of broad
a; but sometimes it stands for short o, as in not.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Of names of the first class, in central and southern New England, some of the more common substantival
components or 'ground-words' are those which denote Land or Country, River, Water, Lake or
Pond, Fishing-place, Rock, Mountain, Inclosure, and Island.

1. The Massachusetts OHKE (Narr. aûke; Delaware, hacki; Chip. ahke; Abnaki, 'ki;) signifies
LAND, and in local names, PLACE or COUNTRY. The final vowel is sometimes lost in composition.
With the locative suffix, it becomes ohkit (Del. hacking; Chip. ahki[n]; Abn. kik;) at or in
a place or country.

To the Narragansetts proper, the country east of Narragansett Bay and Providence River was
wa[n]pan-auke, 'east land;' and its people were called by the Dutch explorers, Wapenokis, and
by the English, Wampanoags. The tribes of the upper St. Lawrence taught the French, and tribes
south of the Piscataqua taught the English, to give the name of East-landers--Abenaquis, or
Abinakis--to the Indians of Maine. The country of the Delawares was 'east land,' Wapanachki,
to Algonkin nations of the west.

The 'Chawwonock,' or 'Chawonocke,' of Capt. John Smith,--on what is now known as Chowan River,
in Virginia and North Carolina,--was, to the Powhattans and other Virginian tribes, the 'south
country,' or sowan-ohke, as Eliot wrote it, in Gen. xxiv. 62.

With the adjectival sucki, 'dark-colored,' 'blackish,' we have the aboriginal name of the South
Meadow in Hartford,--sucki-ohke, (written Sicaiook, Suckiaug, &c.), 'black earth.'

Wuskowhanan-auk-it, 'at the pigeon country,' was the name (as given by Roger Williams) of a
"place where these fowl breed abundantly,"--in the northern part of the Nipmuck country (now
in Worcester county, Mass.).

'Kiskatamenakook,' the name of a brook (but originally, of some locality near the brook) in
Catskill, N.Y.,[5] is kiskato-minak-auke, 'place of thin-shelled nuts' (or shag-bark hickory nuts).

[Footnote 5: Doc. Hist. of New York (4to), vol. iii. p. 656.]

2. RIVER. Seip or sepu (Del. sipo; Chip. s[=e]p[=e]; Abn. sip[oo];) the Algonkin word for 'river'
is derived from a root that means 'stretched out,' 'extended,' 'become long,' and corresponds
nearly to the English 'stream.' This word rarely, if ever, enters into the composition of local
names, and, so far as I know, it does not make a part of the name of any river in New England.
Mississippi is missi-sipu, 'great river;' Kitchi-sipi, 'chief river' or 'greatest river,' was
the Montagnais name of the St. Lawrence;[6] and Miste-shipu is their modern name for the Moise
or 'Great River' which flows from the lakes of the Labrador peninsula into the Gulf of St.
Lawrence.[7]

[Footnote 6: Jesuit Relations, 1633, 1636, 1640.]

[Footnote 7: Hind's Exploration of Labrador, i. 9, 32.]

Near the Atlantic seaboard, the most common substantival components of river names are (1)
-tuk and (2) -hanne, -han, or -huan. Neither of these is an independent word. They are inseparable
nouns-generic, or generic affixes.

-TUK (Abn. -teg[oo]é; Del. -ittuk;) denotes a river whose waters are driven in waves, by tides
or wind. It is found in names of tidal rivers and estuaries; less frequently, in names of broad
and deep streams, not affected by tides. With the adjectival missi, 'great,' it forms missi-tuk,--now
written Mystic,--the name of 'the great river' of Boston bay, and of another wide-mouthed tidal
river in the Pequot country, which now divides the towns of Stonington and Groton.

Near the eastern boundary of the Pequot country, was the river which the Narragansetts called
Paquat-tuk, sometimes written Paquetock, now Pawcatuck, 'Pequot river,'--the present eastern
boundary of Connecticut. Another adjectival prefix, pohki or pahke, 'pure,' 'clear,' found
in the name of several tidal streams, is hardly distinguishable from the former, in the modern
forms of Pacatock, Paucatuck, &c.

Quinni-tuk is the 'long tidal-river.' With the locative affix, Quinni-tuk-ut, 'on long river,'--now
Connecticut,--was the name of the valley, or lands both sides of the river. In one early deed
(1636), I find the name written Quinetucquet; in another, of the same year, Quenticutt. Roger
Williams (1643) has Qunnihticut, and calls the Indians of this region Quintik-óock, i.e. 'the
long river people.' The c in the second syllable of the modern name has no business there,
and it is difficult to find a reason for its intrusion.

'Lenapewihittuck' was the Delaware name of 'the river of the Lenape,' and 'Mohicannittuck,'
of 'the river of the Mohicans' (Hudson River).[8]

[Footnote 8: Heckewelder's Historical account, &c., p. 33. He was mistaken in translating "the
word hittuck," by "a rapid stream."]

Of Pawtucket and Pawtuxet, the composition is less obvious; but we have reliable Indian testimony
that these names mean, respectively, 'at the falls' and 'at the little falls.' Pequot and Narragansett
interpreters, in 1679, declared that Blackstone's River, was "called in Indian Pautuck (which
signifies, a Fall), because there the fresh water falls into the salt water."[9] So, the upper
falls of the Quinebaug river (at Danielsonville, Conn.) were called "Powntuck, which is a general
name for all Falls," as Indians of that region testified.[10] There was another Pautucket,
'at the falls' of the Merrimac (now Lowell); and another on Westfield River, Mass. Pawtuxet,
i.e. pau't-tuk-es-it, is the regularly formed diminutive of paut-tuk-it. The village of Pawtuxet,
four miles south of Providence, R.I., is "at the little falls" of the river to which their
name has been transferred. The first settlers of Plymouth were informed by Samoset, that the
place which they had chosen for their plantation was called 'Patuxet,'--probably because of
some 'little falls' on Town Brook.[11] There was another 'Pautuxet,' or 'Powtuxet,' on the
Quinebaug, at the lower falls; and a river 'Patuxet' (Patuxent), in Maryland. Or have you stood
on the mountain peak with the snows around you, and felt the grandeur of the unmoving nature
that shows out God as well as the human spirit? Ah, if you have known any of these peaceful
spots in life's desert, then you know how all-pervading is inspiration; how wondrous the beauty
and the power of God shown forth in man and in the world; then you know, if you never knew it
before, the truth of that great proclamation of Shrî Kṛiṣhṇa the Beloved: "Whatever is royal, good,
beautiful, and mighty, understand thou that to go forth from My Splendour";[3] all is the reflection
of that tejas[4] which is His and His alone. For as there is nought in the universe without His
love and life, so there is no beauty that is not His beauty, that is not a ray of the illimitable
splendour, one little beam from the unfailing source of life.

[Footnote 3: Bhagavad-Gîtâ, x. 41.]

[Footnote 4: Splendour, radiance.]

SECOND LECTURE.

BROTHERS:--You will remember that yesterday, in dividing the subject
under different heads, I put down certain questions which we would
take in order.

We dealt yesterday with the question: "What is an Avatâra?" The second question that we are to try
to answer, "What is the source of Avatâras?" is a question that leads us deep into the mysteries
of the kosmos, and needs at least an outline of kosmic growth and
evolution in order to give an intelligible answer.

I hope to-day to be able also to deal with the succeeding question, "How does the need for Avatâras
arise?" This will leave us for to-morrow the subject of the special Avatâras, and I shall endeavour,
if possible, during to-morrow's discourse, to touch on nine of the Avatâras out of the ten
recognised as standing out from all other manifestations of the Supreme. Then, if I am able to
accomplish that task, we shall still have one morning left, and that I propose to give entirely
to the study of the greatest of the Avatâras, the Lord Shrî Kṛiṣhṇa Himself, endeavouring, if possible,
to mark out the great characteristics of His life and His work, and, it may be, to meet and answer
some of the objections of the ignorant which, especially in these later days, have been levelled
against Him by those who understand nothing of His nature, nothing of the mighty work He came
to accomplish in the world.

Now we are to begin to-day by seeking an answer to the question, "What is the source of Avatâras?"
and it is likely that I am going to take a line of thought somewhat unfamiliar, carrying us, as
it does, outside the ordinary lines of our study which deals more with the evolution of man,
of the spiritual nature within him. It carries us to those far off times, almost incomprehensible
to us, when our universe was coming into manifestation, when its very foundations, as it were,
were being laid. In answering the question, however, the mere answer
is simple. It is recognised in all religions admitting divine incarnations--and
they include the great religions the world--it is admitted that the
source of Avatâras, the source of the Divine incarnations, is the
second or middle manifestation of the sacred Triad. It matters not
whether with Hindus we speak of the Trimûrti, or whether with Christians
we speak of the Trinity, the fundamental idea is one and the same. Râle translates ne-peské, "je vas dans le chemin qui
en coupe un autre:" peskahak[oo]n, "branche."

Piscataqua, Pascataqua, &c., represent the Abn. peské-teg[oo]é, 'divided tidal-river.' The
word for 'place' (ohke, Abn. 'ki,) being added, gives the form Piscataquak or -quog. There
is another Piscataway, in New Jersey,--not far below the junction of the north and south branches
of the Raritan,--and a Piscataway river in Maryland, which empties into the Potomac; a Piscataquog
river, tributary to the Merrimac, in New Hampshire; a Piscataquis (diminutive) in Maine, which
empties into the Penobscot. Pasquotank, the name of an arm of Albemarle Sound and of a small
river which flows into it, in North Carolina, has probably the same origin.

The adjectival peské, or piské, is found in many other compound names besides those which are
formed with -tuk or -hanne: as in Pascoag, for peské-auké, in Burrilville, R.I., 'the dividing
place' of two branches of Blackstone's River; and Pesquamscot, in South Kingston, R.I., which
(if the name is rightly given) is "at the divided (or cleft) rock,"--peské-ompsk-ut,--perhaps
some ancient land-mark, on or near the margin of Worden's Pond.

Nôeu-tuk (Nóahtuk, Eliot), 'in the middle of the river,' may be, as Mr. Judd[14] and others
have supposed, the name which has been variously corrupted to Norwottock, Nonotuck, Noatucke,
Nawottok, &c. If so, it probably belonged, originally to one of the necks or peninsulas of
meadow, near Northampton,--such as that at Hockanum, which, by a change in the course of the
river at that point, has now become an island.

[Footnote 14: History of Hadley, pp. 121, 122.]

Tetiquet or Titicut, which passes for the Indian name of Taunton, and of a fishing place on
Taunton River in the north-west part of Middleborough, Mass., shows how effectually such names
may be disguised by phonetic corruption and mutilation. Kehte-tuk-ut (or as Eliot wrote it
in Genesis xv. 18, Kehteihtukqut) means 'on the great river.' In the Plymouth Colony Records
we find the forms 'Cauteeticutt' and 'Coteticutt,' and elsewhere, Kehtehticut,--the latter,
in 1698, as the name of a place on the great river, "between Taunton and Bridgewater." But it is
more than history; the Avatâras acts out on the stage of the world
a mighty drama.

He is, as it were, a player on the world's stage, and He plays a
definite drama, and that drama is an exposition of spiritual truth.

 The other substantival component of river-names, -HANNE or -HAN (Abn. -ts[oo]a[n]n or
-ta[n]n; Mass. -tchuan;) denotes 'a rapid stream' or 'current;' primarily, 'flowing water.'
In the Massachusetts and Abnaki, it occurs in such compounds as anu-tchuan (Abn. ari'ts[oo]a[n]n),
'it over-flows:' kussi-tchuan (Abn. kesi'ts[oo]a[n]n), 'it swift flows,' &c.

In Pennsylvania and Virginia, where the streams which rise in the highlands flow down rapidly
descending slopes, -hanné is more common than -tuk or sepu in river names. Keht-hanné (kittan,
Zeisb.; kithanne, Hkw.) was a name given to the Delaware River as 'the principal or greatest
stream' of that region: and by the western Delawares, to the Ohio.[16] With the locative termination,
Kittanning (Penn.) is a place 'on the greatest stream.' The Schuylkill was Ganshow-hanné, 'noisy
stream;' the Lackawanna, Lechau-hanné, 'forked stream' or 'stream that forks:'[17] with affix,
Lechauhannak or Lechauwahannak, 'at the river-fork,'--for which Hendrick Aupamut, a Muhhekan,
wrote (with dialectic exchange of n for Delaware l) 'Naukhuwwhnauk,' 'The Forks' of the Miami.[18]
The same name is found in New England, disguised as Newichawanock, Nuchawanack, &c., as near
Berwick, Me., 'at the fork' or confluence of Cocheco and Salmon Fall rivers,--the 'Neghechewanck'
of Wood's Map (1634). Not only to teach a lesson for all time to kings and rulers, that if they
would not govern aright they should not govern at all; but also to
lay India open to the world.

How strange that sounds! To lay her open to invasion? He who loved
her to lay her open to conquest?

He who had consecrated her, He who had hallowed her plains and forests by His treading, and
whose voice had rung through her land? Aye, for He judges not as man judges, and He sees the end
from the beginning. India as she was of old, kept isolated from all the world, was so kept that
she might have the treasure of spiritual knowledge poured into her and make a vessel for the
containing. But when you fill the vessel, you do not then put that
vessel high away on a shelf, and leave men thirsting for the liquid
that it contains. [or [oo]lakhanne[oo], as Eliot
would have written it,] with the free translation, "a fine River, without Falls." The name
was indeed more likely to belong to rivers 'without falls' or other obstruction to the passage
of canoes, but its literal meaning is, as its composition shows, "best rapid-stream," or "finest
rapid-stream;" "La Belle Riviere" of the French, and the Oue-yo´ or O hee´ yo Gä-hun´-dä, "good
river" or "the beautiful river," of the Senecas.[20] For this translation of the name we have
very respectable authority,--that of Christian Frederick Post, a Moravian of Pennsylvania,
who lived seventeen years with the Muhhekan Indians and was twice married among them, and whose
knowledge of the Indian languages enabled him to render important services to the colony, as
a negotiator with the Delawares and Shawanese of the Ohio, in the French war. In his "Journal
from Philadelphia to the Ohio" in 1758,[21] after mention of the 'Alleghenny' river, he says:
"The Ohio, as it is called by the Sennecas. Alleghenny is the name of the same river in the
Delaware language. Both words signify the fine or fair river." La Metairie, the notary of La
Salle's expedition, "calls the Ohio, the Olighinsipou, or Aleghin; evidently an Algonkin name,"--as
Dr. Shea remarks.[22] Heckewelder says that the Delawares "still call the Allegany (Ohio) river,
Alligéwi Sipu,"--"the river of the Alligewi" as he chooses to translate it. In one form, we
have wulik-hannésipu, 'best rapid-stream long-river;' in the other, wuliké-sipu, 'best long-river.'
Heckewelder's derivation of the name, on the authority of a Delaware legend, from the mythic
'Alligewi' or 'Talligewi,'--"a race of Indians said to have once inhabited that country," who,
after great battles fought in pre-historic times, were driven from it by the all-conquering
Delawares,[23]--is of no value, unless supported by other testimony. The identification of
Alleghany with the Seneca "De o´ na gä no, cold water" [or, cold spring,[24]] proposed by a
writer in the Historical Magazine (vol. iv. p. 184), though not apparent at first sight, might
deserve consideration if there were any reason for believing the name of the river to be of
Iroquois origin,--if it were probable that an Iroquois name would have been adopted by Algonkin
nations,--or, if the word for 'water' or 'spring' could be made, in any American language,
the substantival component of a river name.

