At the intersection of two streets they were held up for a time; the scattered drift of people
became congested. Gliding slowly across the mass came an electric tram, an entirely unbattered
tram with even its glass undamaged, and then another and another. Strikers, with the happy
expression of men who have found something expressive to do, were escorting the trams off the
street. They were being meticulously careful with them. Never was there less mob violence in
a riot. They walked by the captured cars almost deferentially, like rough men honoured by a
real lady's company. And when White and Benham reached the Power House the marvel grew. The
rioters were already in possession and going freely over the whole place, and they had injured
nothing. They had stopped the engines, but they had not even disabled them. Here too manifestly
a majority of the people were, like White and Benham, merely lookers-on.

"But this is the most civilized rioting," said Benham. "It isn't rioting; it's drifting. Just
as things drifted in Moscow. Because nobody has the rudder....

"What maddens me," he said, "is the democracy of the whole thing. White! I HATE this modern
democracy. Democracy and inequality! Was there ever an absurder combination? What is the good
of a social order in which the men at the top are commoner, meaner stuff than the men underneath,
the same stuff, just spoilt, spoilt by prosperity and opportunity and the conceit that comes
with advantage? This trouble wants so little, just a touch of aristocracy, just a little cultivated
magnanimity, just an inkling of responsibility, and the place might rise instantly out of all
this squalor and evil temper.... What does all this struggle here amount to? On one side unintelligent
greed, unintelligent resentment on the other; suspicion everywhere....

"And you know, White, at bottom THEY ALL WANT TO BE DECENT!

"If only they had light enough in their brains to show them how. It's such a plain job they
have here too, a new city, the simplest industries, freedom from war, everything to make a
good life for men, prosperity, glorious sunshine, a kind of happiness in the air. And mismanagement,
fear, indulgence, jealousy, prejudice, stupidity, poison it all. A squabble about working on
a Saturday afternoon, a squabble embittered by this universal shadow of miner's phthisis that
the masters were too incapable and too mean to prevent.

"Oh, God!" cried Benham, "when will men be princes and take hold of life? When will the kingship
in us wake up and come to its own?... Look at this place! Look at this place!... The easy,
accessible happiness! The manifest prosperity. The newness and the sunshine. And the silly
bitterness, the rage, the mischief and miseries!..."

And then: "It's not our quarrel...."

"It's amazing how every human quarrel draws one in to take sides. Life is one long struggle
against the incidental. I can feel my anger gathering against the Government here in spite
of my reason. I want to go and expostulate. I have a ridiculous idea that I ought to go off
to Lord Gladstone or Botha and expostulate.... What good would it do? They move in the magic
circles of their own limitations, an official, a politician--how would they put it?--'with
many things to consider....'

"It's my weakness to be drawn into quarrels. It's a thing I have to guard against....

"What does it all amount to? It is like a fight between navvies in a tunnel to settle the position
of the Pole star. It doesn't concern us.... Oh! it doesn't indeed concern us. It's a scuffle
in the darkness, and our business, the business of all brains, the only permanent good work
is to light up the world.... There will be mischief and hatred here and suppression and then
forgetfulness, and then things will go on again, a little better or a little worse...."

"I'm tired of this place, White, and of all such places. I'm tired of the shouting and running,
the beating and shooting. I'm sick of all the confusions of life's experience, which tells
only of one need amidst an endless multitude of distresses. I've seen my fill of wars and disputes
and struggles. I see now how a man may grow weary at last of life and its disorders, its unreal
exacting disorders, its blunders and its remorse. No! I want to begin upon the realities I
have made for myself. For they are the realities. I want to go now to some quiet corner where
I can polish what I have learnt, sort out my accumulations, be undisturbed by these transitory
symptomatic things....

"What was that boy saying? They are burning the STAR office.... Well, let them...."

And as if to emphasize his detachment, his aversion, from the things that hurried through the
night about them, from the red flare in the sky and the distant shouts and revolver shots and
scuffling flights down side streets, he began to talk again of aristocracy and the making of
greatness and a new great spirit in men. All the rest of his life, he said, must be given to
that. He would say his thing plainly and honestly and afterwards other men would say it clearly
and beautifully; here it would touch a man and there it would touch a man; the Invisible King
in us all would find himself and know himself a little in this and a little in that, and at
last a day would come, when fair things and fine things would rule the world and such squalor
as this about them would be as impossible any more for men as a Stone Age Corroboree....

Late or soon?

Benham sought for some loose large measure of time.

"Before those constellations above us have changed their shapes....

"Does it matter if we work at something that will take a hundred years or ten thousand years?
It will never come in our lives, White. Not soon enough for that. But after that everything
will be soon--when one comes to death then everything is at one's fingertips--I can feel that
greater world I shall never see as one feels the dawn coming through the last darkness...."

16

The attack on the Rand Club began while Benham and White were at lunch in the dining-room at
the Sherborough on the day following the burning of the STAR office. The Sherborough dining-room
was on the first floor, and the Venetian window beside their table opened on to a verandah
above a piazza. As they talked they became aware of an excitement in the street below, shouting
and running and then a sound of wheels and the tramp of a body of soldiers marching quickly.
White stood up and looked. "They're seizing the stuff in the gunshops," he said, sitting down
again. "It's amazing they haven't done it before."

They went on eating and discussing the work of a medical mission at Mukden that had won Benham's
admiration....

A revolver cracked in the street and there was a sound of glass smashing. Then more revolver
shots. "That's at the big club at the corner, I think," said Benham and went out upon the verandah.

Up and down the street mischief was afoot. Outside the Rand Club in the cross street a considerable
mass of people had accumulated, and was being hustled by a handful of khaki-clad soldiers.
Down the street people were looking in the direction of the market-place and then suddenly
a rush of figures flooded round the corner, first a froth of scattered individuals and then
a mass, a column, marching with an appearance of order and waving a flag. It was a poorly disciplined
body, it fringed out into a swarm of sympathizers and spectators upon the side walk, and at
the head of it two men disputed. They seemed to be differing about the direction of the whole
crowd. Suddenly one smote the other with his fist, a blow that hurled him sideways, and then
turned with a triumphant gesture to the following ranks, waving his arms in the air. He was
a tall lean man, hatless and collarless, greyhaired and wild-eyed. On he came, gesticulating
gauntly, past the hotel.

And then up the street something happened. Benham's attention was turned round to it by a checking,
by a kind of catch in the breath, on the part of the advancing procession under the verandah.

The roadway beyond the club had suddenly become clear. Across it a dozen soldiers had appeared
and dismounted methodically and lined out, with their carbines in readiness. The mounted men
at the club corner had vanished, and the people there had swayed about towards this new threat.
Quite abruptly the miscellaneous noises of the crowd ceased. Understanding seized upon every one.

These soldiers were going to fire....

The brown uniformed figures moved like automata; the rifle shots rang out almost in one report....

There was a rush in the crowd towards doorways and side streets, an enquiring pause, the darting
back of a number of individuals into the roadway and then a derisive shouting. Nobody had been
hit. The soldiers had fired in the air.

"But this is a stupid game," said Benham. "Why did they fire at all?"

The tall man who had led the mob had run out into the middle of the road. His commando was
a little disposed to assume a marginal position, and it had to be reassured. He was near enough
for Benham to see his face. For a time it looked anxious and thoughtful. Then he seemed to
jump to his decision. He unbuttoned and opened his coat wide as if defying the soldiers. "Shoot,"
he bawled, "Shoot, if you dare!"

A little uniform movement of the soldiers answered him. The small figure of the officer away
there was inaudible. The coat of the man below flapped like the wings of a crowing cock before
a breast of dirty shirt, the hoarse voice cracked with excitement, "Shoot, if you dare. Shoot,
if you dare! See!"

Came the metallic bang of the carbines again, and in the instant the leader collapsed in the
road, a sprawl of clothes, hit by half a dozen bullets. It was an extraordinary effect. As
though the figure had been deflated. It was incredible that a moment before this thing had
been a man, an individual, a hesitating complicated purpose.

"Good God!" cried Benham, "but--this is horrible!"

The heap of garments lay still. The red hand that stretched out towards the soldiers never
twitched.

The spectacular silence broke into a confusion of sounds, women shrieked, men cursed, some
fled, some sought a corner from which they might still see, others pressed forward. "Go for
the swine!" bawled a voice, a third volley rattled over the heads of the people, and in the
road below a man with a rifle halted, took aim, and answered the soldiers' fire. "Look out!"
cried White who was watching the soldiers, and ducked. "This isn't in the air!"

Came a straggling volley again, like a man running a metal hammer very rapidly along iron corrugations,
and this time people were dropping all over the road. One white-faced man not a score of yards
away fell with a curse and a sob, struggled up, staggered for some yards with blood running
abundantly from his neck, and fell and never stirred again. Another went down upon his back
clumsily in the roadway and lay wringing his hands faster and faster until suddenly with a
movement like a sigh they dropped inert by his side. A straw-hatted youth in a flannel suit
ran and stopped and ran again. He seemed to be holding something red and strange to his face
with both hands; above them his eyes were round and anxious. Blood came out between his fingers.
He went right past the hotel and stumbled and suddenly sprawled headlong at the opposite corner.
The majority of the crowd had already vanished into doorways and side streets. But there was
still shouting and there was still a remnant of amazed and angry men in the roadway--and one
or two angry women. They were not fighting. Indeed they were unarmed, but if they had had weapons
now they would certainly have used them.

"But this is preposterous!" cried Benham. "Preposterous. Those soldiers are never going to
shoot again! This must stop."

He stood hesitating for a moment and then turned about and dashed for the staircase. "Good
Heaven!" cried White. "What are you going to do?"

Benham was going to stop that conflict very much as a man might go to stop a clock that is
striking unwarrantably and amazingly. He was going to stop it because it annoyed his sense
of human dignity.

White hesitated for a moment and then followed, crying "Benham!"

But there was no arresting this last outbreak of Benham's all too impatient kingship. He pushed
aside a ducking German waiter who was peeping through the glass doors, and rushed out of the
hotel. With a gesture of authority he ran forward into the middle of the street, holding up
his hand, in which he still held his dinner napkin clenched like a bomb. White believes firmly
that Benham thought he would be able to dominate everything. He shouted out something about
"Foolery!"

Haroun al Raschid was flinging aside all this sublime indifference to current things....

But the carbines spoke again.

Benham seemed to run unexpectedly against something invisible. He spun right round and fell
down into a sitting position. He sat looking surprised.

After one moment of blank funk White drew out his pocket handkerchief, held it arm high by
way of a white flag, and ran out from the piazza of the hotel.

17

"Are you hit?" cried White dropping to his knees and making himself as compact as possible.
"Benham!"

Benham, after a moment of perplexed thought answered in a strange voice, a whisper into which
a whistling note had been mixed.

"It was stupid of me to come out here. Not my quarrel. Faults on both sides. And now I can't
get up. I will sit here a moment and pull myself together. Perhaps I'm--I must be shot. But
it seemed to come--inside me.... If I should be hurt. Am I hurt?... Will you see to that book
of mine, White? It's odd. A kind of faintness.... What?"

"I will see after your book," said White and glanced at his hand because it felt wet, and was
astonished to discover it bright red. He forgot about himself then, and the fresh flight of
bullets down the street.

The immediate effect of this blood was that he said something more about the book, a promise,
a definite promise. He could never recall his exact words, but their intention was binding.
He conveyed his absolute acquiescence with Benham's wishes whatever they were. His life for
that moment was unreservedly at his friend's disposal....

White never knew if his promise was heard. Benham had stopped speaking quite abruptly with
that "What?"

He stared in front of him with a doubtful expression, like a man who is going to be sick, and
then, in an instant, every muscle seemed to give way, he shuddered, his head flopped, and White
held a dead man in his arms.

THE END