PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY

                                 AS A

                       PHILOSOPHER AND REFORMER.

                                  BY

                           CHARLES SOTHERAN.

                    INCLUDING AN ORIGINAL SONNET

                                  BY

                        CHARLES W. FREDERICKSON

                             TOGETHER WITH

             A PORTRAIT OF SHELLEY AND A VIEW OF HIS TOMB.

    "Let us See the Truth, whatever that may be."--Shelley, 1822.

                              NEW YORK.

                CHARLES P. SOMERBY, 139 EIGHTH STREET.

                                 1876.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1876,

by Charles Sotheran,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO

CHARLES WILLIAM FREDERICKSON,

OF NEW YORK.

DEAR FRIEND:

As in ancient times, none were allowed participation in the Higher Mysteries, without having
proved their fitness for the reception of esoteric truth, so in these days only those seem
to be permitted to breathe the hidden essence in Shelley, who have realized the acute phases
of spiritality. Among the few who have enjoyed these bi-fold gifts, none have had more fortuitous
experience than yourself, to whom I now take the liberty of dedicating this volume.

Yours fraternally,

CHARLES SOTHERAN.

December, 1875.

To the Memory

OF

PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY,

BY

CHARLES W. FREDERICKSON.

    Amid the ruins of majestic Rome,
    That told the story of its countless years,
    I stood, and wondered by the silent dust
    Of the "Eternal Child." Oh, Shelley!
    To me it was not given to know thy face,
    Save through the mirrored pages of thy works;
    Those whisper'd words of wood and wave, are to mine ears,
    Sweet as the music of ocean's roar, that breaks on sheltered shores.
    Thy sterner words of Justice, Love and Truth,
    Will to the struggling soul a beacon prove,
    And barrier against the waves of tyranny and craft.
    Then rest, "Cor Cordium," and though thy life
    Was brief in point of years, its memory will outlive
    The column'd monuments around thy tomb.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK, Nov. 25, 1875.

MY DEAR SOTHERAN:--

The copy of the lines on our Beloved-Poet, which you requested, are entirely at your service--make
what use of them you please.

Yours, sincerely,

C.W. FREDERICKSON.

PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY, AS A PHILOSOPHER AND REFORMER.

A PAPER READ BEFORE THE NEW YORK LIBERAL CLUB, ON FRIDAY, AUGUST 6TH, 1875.

    "Let us see the Truth, whatever that may be."--SHELLEY, 1822.

Mr. Vice-President and Members of the Liberal Club:

"The Blood of the Martyr is the Seed of the Church." Persecution ever fails in accomplishing
its desired ends, and as a rule lays the foundations broad and deep for the triumph of the
objects of and principles inculcated by the persecuted.

Driven from their homes by fanatical tyranny, not permitted to worship as they thought fit,
a band of noble and earnest, yet on some points mistaken men, were, a little over two hundred
and fifty years ago, landed on this continent from the good ship "Mayflower." The "Pilgrim
Fathers" were, in their native land, refused liberty of conscience and freedom of discussion;
their apparent loss was our gain, for if it had not been for that despotism, and the corresponding
re-action, which made those stern old zealots give to others many of the inalienable rights
of liberty denied to themselves, you and I could not to-night perhaps be allowed to meet face
to face, without fear, to discuss metaphysical and social questions in their broadest aspects,
without the civil or theological powers intervening to close our mouths.

Excommunicated by a mercenary and abject priesthood, cast off by a
savage father, the admirer of that gloomy theology founded by the
murderer of Michael Servetus, and charged by his jealous brother
writers as one of the founders of a Satanic School, for neither
immorality of life nor breach of the parental relation, but for
heterodoxy to an expiring system of dogmatism, and for acting on and
asserting the right of man to think and judge for himself, a father
was to have two children torn from him, in the sacred name of law and
justice, by the principal adviser of a dying madman, "Defender of the
Faith, by Law Established," and by us despised as the self-willed
tyrant, who lost America and poured out human blood like water to
gratify his lust of power. O slave!
        If thou could'st quench the earth consuming hell
     Of which thou art a demon, on thy grave
        This curse should be a blessing. Fare thee well."

Sad as it is to contemplate any human being in his agony making use of such language to another;
and however much we may sympathize with the poet, yet we cannot but have inwardly a feeling
of rejoicing; for, if it had not been for this unheard of villainy, we should probably never
have had the other magnificent poetry and prose of Percy Bysshe Shelley composed during his
self-imposed ostracism, and which furnish such glorious thoughts for the philosopher, and keen
trenchant weapons for the reformer.

Have any of my hearers ever stood, in the calm of a summer evening, in Shelley's native land,
listening to the lovely warble of the nightingale, making earth joyful with its unpremeditated
strains, and the woods re-echo with its melody? Such was the poetry of Shelley; and as the
music of the nightingale or the skylark is far exceeding in excellence that of the other members
of the feathered kingdom, so does Shelley rank as a poet far above all other poets, making
even the poet of nature, the great Wordsworth himself, confess that Shelley was indeed the
master of harmonious verse in our modern literature. It is broadly laid down in the Marvinian
theory that all poets are insane. I would much like to break a lance with the learned Professor
of Psychology and Medical Jurisprudence; but as the overthrow of this dogma does not come within
the scope of my essay, I would suggest to those who may have been influenced by that paper
to read Shelley's "Defence of Poetry." I shall quote two extracts therefrom, each pertinent
to my subject.

I have no hesitation in saying that for treating Shelley as a philosopher, I shall be attacked
with great "positivism" by the disciples[A] of manufacturers of bran-new Brummagen philosophies
dug out of Aristotelian and other depths to which are added new thoughts, not their own. The
reason which David Masson offers in his "Recent British Philosophy" for placing Alfred Tennyson
among the same class is equally applicable now:

[Footnote A: If Diogenes or Socrates, leaving High Olympus and sweet converse with the immortals,
were to condescend to visit New York some Friday evening. I am sadly afraid they would be astounded
at many of their would-be brothers in philosophy. On seeing the travestie of ancient academies
and groves where the schools used to congregate, the dialogues consisting of bald atheism under
sheep's clothing to trap the unwary, and termed "The Religion of Humanity," of abuse and personality
in lieu of argument, of buffoonery called wit, of airing pet hobbies alien to the subject instead
of disputating, of shouting vulgar claptrap instead of rhetoric, etc.--I sadly fear these stout
old Greeks, having power for the nonce, would, throwing philosophy to the dogs in a moment
of paroxysmal indignation, despite physiognomies trained to resemble their own, have these
fellows casked up in tubs without lanterns, but with the appropriate "snuffers," fit emblems
of their faiths, and dropped far outside Sandy Hook. A proper finale to the vapid utterance
made by one of these gentry that all "Reformers should be annihilated," Imagine Plato or Epicurus
offering such a suggestion. O tempora! O mores!]

"To those who are too strongly possessed with our common habit of classifying writers into
kinds, as historians, poets, scientific and speculative writers, and so on, it may seem strange
to include Mr. Tennyson in this list. But as I have advisedly referred to Wordsworth as one
of the representatives and powers of British philosophy in the age immediately past, so I advisedly
named Tennyson as succeeding him in the same character. Though it is not power of speculative
reason alone that constitutes a poet, is it not felt that the worth of a poet essentially is
measured by the depth and amount of his speculative reason? Even popularly, do we not speak
of every great poet as the exponent of the spirit of his age? What else can this mean than
that the philosophy of his age, its spirit and heart in relation to all the great elemental
problems, find expression in his verse? Hence I ought to include other poets in this list,
and more particularly Mr. Browning and Mrs. Browning, and the late Mr. Clough. But let the
mention of Mr. Tennyson suggest such other names, and stand as a sufficient protest against
our absurd habit of omitting such in a connection like the present. As if, forsooth, when a
writer passed into verse, he were to be abandoned as utterly out of calculable relationship
to all on this side of the boundary, and no account were to be taken of his thoughts and doings,
except in a kind of curious appendix at the end of the general register? What if philosophy,
at a certain extreme range, and of a certain kind, tends of necessity to pass into poesy, and
can hardly help being passionate and metrical? If so, might not the omission of poets, purely
as being such, from a conspectus of the speculative writers of any time, lead to erroneous
conclusions, by giving an undue prominence in the estimate of all such philosophizing as could
most easily, by its nature, refrain from passionate or poetic expression? Thus, would philosophy,
or one kind of philosophy in comparison with another, have seemed to had been in such a diminished
condition in Britain about the year 1830, if critics had been in the habit of counting Wordsworth
in the philosophic list as well as Coleridge, Mackintosh, Bentham, and James Mill? Was there
not more of what you might call Spinozaism in Wordsworth than even in Coleridge, who spoke
more of Spinoza? But that hardly needs all this justification, so far as Mr. Tennyson is concerned,
of our reckoning him in the present list. He that would exclude In "Memoriam" (1850) and "Maud"
(1855) from the conspectus of the philosophical literature of our time, has yet to learn what
philosophy is. Whatever else "In Memoriam" may be, it is a manual for many of the latest hints
and questions in British Metaphysics."

The soi-disant philosophers and classifiers of the sciences and arts who will not permit such
poets as Shelley and Tennyson to be put in the category of philosophers, remind one very forcibly
of the passage in Macbeth: "The earth has bubbles, as the water has, and these are of them!"

As a poet and not as a poet, as an acknowledged legislator for the
race, as a philosopher, (a searcher after, or lover of wisdom) and as
a political and social reformer, it is my intention to treat Shelley
this evening, and having finished my prefatory remarks, will now
regard him in those attributes which peculiarly should enshrine him in
your hearts and mine.
        Thus, power and hope were strengthen'd more and more
        Within me, till there came upon my mind
    A sense of loneliness, a thirst with which I pined."

The fruits born of this seed are discernible in every line of his works. While having all reverence
for his college companions, Aristotle, Aeschylus, and Demosthenes, his mind instinctively turns
towards the deemed heretical works of the later French philosophers, D'Holbach, Condillac,
La Place, Rousseau, the encyclopaedists, and other members of that school.

It is desirable to call attention to the great minds from whom the student of the early part
of this century could only cull his knowledge--he had no Spencer and no Mill, at whose feet
to sit--he had in science none of the conclusions of Darwin, of Huxley, of Tyndall, of Murchison,
of Lyell, to refer to, and yet I think, that the careful reader will, like myself, find prefigured
in Shelley's works much of that of which the world is in full possession to-day, and which
the mystical Occultists, Rosicrucians, and Cabalists have now, and have ever had, conjoined
to a mysterious command over the active hidden material and spiritual powers in the infinite
domain of nature.

The idea of the Supreme Power or God, as emanating from Shelley, is one of the most sublime
to be found in the pages of metaphysical learning at the command of ordinary mortals. By many
it may be considered only a vague pantheism; yet, rightly regarded in a reconciliative spirit,
it is of such an universal character as to harmonize with not only Deism, Theism and Polytheism,
but even Atheistical Materialism. Listen to the following, which I select out of numerous examples,
as a finger-post for others who seek the living springs of undefiled truth, as in Shelley:

     "Whosoever is free from the contamination of luxury and
     license may go forth to the fields and to the woods,
     inhaling joyous renovation from the breath of Spring, and
     catching from the odors and sounds of autumn some diviner
     mood of sweetest sadness, which improves the softened heart.
     Whosoever is no deceiver and destroyer of his fellow-men--no
     liar, no flatterer, no murderer--may walk among his species,
     deriving, from the communion with all which they contain of
     beautiful or majestic, some intercourse with the Universal
     God. Whosoever has maintained with his own heart the
     strictest correspondence of confidence, who dares to examine
     and to estimate every imagination which suggests itself to
     his mind--whosoever is that which he designs to become,
     and only aspires to that which the divinity of his own
     nature shall consider and approve--he has already seen God."

Can any one cavil with these beautiful expressions, this outpouring of genius? If such there
be, his heart and understanding must be sadly warped, any appeal would be in vain, for him
the Veil of Isis could never be lifted. After a careful study of Shelley's works I can find
nothing to warrant the execration formerly levelled at his head, not even in the "Refutation
of Deism," that remarkable argument in the Socratic style between Eusebes and Theosophus in
which, as in all his prose works, is displayed keen discernment, logical acuteness, and close
analytical reasoning not surpassed by the greatest philosophers--most certainly his notions
of God were not in unison with the current theological ideas, and it was this daring rebellion
against the popular faith, the chief support of custom which caused all the trouble.

Not to be compared with the far different eternal and infinite.

For you to better understand the exact position in which Shelley placed himself, it is elsewhere
thus admirably expressed:

     "The thoughts which the word 'God' suggest to the human mind
     are susceptible of as many variations as human minds
     themselves. The Stoic, the Platonist, and the Epicurean, the
     Polytheist, the Dualist, and the Trinitarian, differ entirely
     in their conceptions of its meaning. They agree only in
     considering it the most awful and most venerable of names,
     as a common term to express all of mystery, or majesty, or
     power, which the invisible world contains. And not only has
     every sect distinct conceptions of the application of this
     name, but scarcely two individuals of the same sect, which
     exercise in any degree the freedom of their judgment, or
     yield themselves with any candor of feeling to the
     influences of the visible world, find perfect coincidence of
     opinion to exist between them.... God is neither the Jupiter
     who sends rain upon the earth; nor the Venus through whom
     all living things are produced; nor the Vulcan who presides
     over the terrestrial element of fire; nor the Vesta that
     preserves the light which is enshrined in the sun, the moon,
     and the stars. He is neither the Proteus nor the Pan of the
     material world. But the word 'God' unites all the attributes
     which these denominations contain and is the (inter-point)
     and over-ruling spirit of all the energy and wisdom included
     within the circle of existing things."

Of these attributes generally supposed to appertain to Deity, he writes:

     "There is no attribute of God which is not either borrowed
     from the passions and powers of the human mind, or which is
     not a negation. Omniscience, omnipotence, omnipresence,
     infinity, immutability, incomprehensibility, and
     immateriality, are all words which designate properties and
     powers peculiar to organized beings, with the addition of
     negations, by which the idea of limitation is excluded."

There is no other writer, I think, who seems to grasp so clearly as Shelley the everlasting
and immutable laws of Naturismus, or who believed so fully in the divine mission of man, and
the religion of humanity. Ever soaring into the ideal, philosophizing by the aid of his emotional
impulses, Shelley possessed, like all true Hermetists and Theosophists imbued with mysticism,
a wonderful power of continued abstraction in the contemplation of the Supreme Power. His mentality,
described by one of his critics as essentially Greek, "simple, not complex, imaginative rather
than fanciful, abstract not concrete, intellectual not emotional," contributed its share to
his belief in a pantheistic philosophy, making him find Supreme Intelligence permeated through
the whole of infinite and interminable Nature. Regarding the universe as an abstract whole,
he endorsed the fundamental metaphysics of Plato, and believed that "passing phenomena are
types of eternal archetypes, embodiments of eternal realities."

In making use of this quotation do not let it be presumed that I wish to endorse Materialism;
my desire is to add the authority of a great mind like that of the Elizabethan philosopher,
to the fact that superstition is so hateful that even blank, bald atheism is preferable thereto.
I should state that Bacon in extension of the extract I have quoted, speaking of this soul-destroying
incubus on humanity observes that:--"A little philosophy inclineth men's minds to atheism;
but depth in philosophy bringeth men's minds to religion."

No amount of mere reasoning, or argument a priori or a posteriori, can prove the existence
of the Most High or destroy the same; in every breast is implanted an innate belief in Deity,
the inner consciousness of the race, by the "Vox Dei" speaking within, has throughout all time,
the past and the present revelled in this sublimity, and will continue to do so in the future,
notwithstanding the insane and insensate efforts of pseudo scientists or iconoclastic materialists--the
brain and the heart must act in harmony to consolidate a pure philosophy, for mere intellect
alone is an untrustworthy guide. By logic Whately proved apparently indisputably the non-existence
of Napoleon Bonaparte, at the time when there was no doubt in any reasonable mind that he was
actually living in the flesh, by the same means one can disprove one's own being, and so by
this unsafe method have I frequently heard the God idea very learnedly overthrown. On such
occasions I have simply taken the words of the logicians for what all their idle wind is worth--ZERO.

The Immortality of the Soul has ever been a subject of primary importance to all philosophers--the
last dying efforts of Socrates, noblest of Greece's sons, as Plato has shown us in the Phaedo,
were expended in a discussion on the pros and cons of an argument in favor of a future life.
Many of the highest intelligences since his day have been endeavoring to prove this satisfactorily
without the aid of theological revelation. All mankind, from sage to peasant, from the most
learned Brahmin on the banks of the Ganges to the untutored red Indian beside the Mississippi,
has the question, "is there an existence after death," been approached with the most earnest
hopes to solve as one of the greatest mysteries. Shelley devoted a vast amount of energy to
the elucidation of this occult, yet overt, truth; and in one place remarks:

     "The desire to be forever as we are; the reluctance to a
     violent and unexperienced change, which is common to all;
     the animate and inanimate combinations of the universe, is,
     indeed, the secret persuasion which has (among other
     reasons) given birth to a belief in a future state."

Full well he knew, that independent of matter, there was a power,
which has been denominated by some, Spirit; by others, simply mind,
force, or intelligence; and by metaphysical philosophers, soul. The crown
is circular and is made in the same way as the circular mat, taking
two stitches of web and sewing them into one stitch of the crown
already sewed to keep it flat. When it is of the desired size, begin
the side
     by sewing one stitch of the web into one of the crown,
     at the same time holding the web to be sewed directly under the last
row in the crown.

Make the side twice as long as the desired height of the hat.

For instance, if the desired height is to be three and a half inches, make the side seven inches
long, as one-half of this measurement is turned up.

     Two colors may be used, one color for the crown and one
     for the side.

Red and black or red and white are pretty combinations.

A doll's hat of the same style, the crown three and a half inches in diameter, requires five yards
of round web.

Child's Muffler

This is a combination of flat and round web. Knit ten inches of flat web, change to round web
by bringing the yarn across the center of the hole in the knitter to the opposite post, and knit
ten inches, or the number of inches necessary to go around the neck.

Change again to flat web, knit ten inches and clip off.

Make seven such pieces and sew them together to form the muffler. The round web will form the
neck part.

Do not remove from the knitter while changing from flat to round web.

     
     
     Child's Hood
     This is made much in the same way as the doll's hood. Make the back
of the hood five inches in diameter, then turn the web and form the
side. Sew around to within four inches of the place of turning on
the opposite side and turn again. So continue until the side is sufficiently
wide to cover the child's head. Extend this side three inches beyond
the desired width, widening on each row of the extended part to give
fulness. This widening may be omitted, and the extended part turned
back, leaving it perfectly plain, if desired. Trim with rosettes or
pompons made of the same material as the hood.

Turn back the extended
part and tack to the hood. Sew a pompon or a rosette of yarn over
the top of the sewing stitch. For tie-strings, use cord and tassel,
or ribbon.

The hood requires from twenty-five to thirty yards.

Little
Girl's Hat

This requires twenty-five yards of round web. Measure
the child's head for the size of the hat. Start the crown in the same
way as the circular mat. When it is five inches in diameter, gradually
turn the crown, while sewing the next five or six rows.
     Surely, if any spot in the world be sacred, it is that in
     which grief ceases, and for which, if the voice within our
     hearts mocks us not with an everlasting lie, we spring upon
     the untiring wings of a pangless and seraphic life--those
     whom we love around us--our nature, universal intelligence,
     our atmosphere, eternal love."

It must appear impossible to any rational mind, that, with the full evidence before their eyes,
materialists can attempt to claim Shelley as endorsing their doctrines, for even in the "Queen
Mab," which has been considered by those not understanding it as a most atheistical poem, he
speaks of--

                            "the remembrance
    With which the happy spirit contemplates
    Its well-spent pilgrimage on earth."

Positive dogmatists are tyrannically endeavoring to crush the belief in a soul, that All which
makes the-present life happy on earth, the hope of our heritage in a future state. To them
the fact that the race from the dawn of history, and through the ages has knelt down in abnegation
before this inscrutable truth is nothing. This glorious belief evolved from the primaeval Cabala,
taught in ancient Egypt, found contemporaneously in India, enunciated by scholarly Rabbis,
ever present before the Chaldaean and Assyrian Magi, and laid down as axioms in the philosophical
schools of Greece and Rome, not only to be discovered a fundamental in the Egyptian, the Hebraistic,
the Brahminical, the Buddhistic, the Vedic, but also in all the sacred books of every nation,
and handed down and perpetuated to these days as a sacred legacy from the past, by both Mohammed
and Christ. This, the great co-mystery of all the ancient mysteries, shall remain ever present
through all futurity like "the existing order of the Universe, or rather, of the part of it
known to us," to use the phraseology of John Stuart Mill. Nations may rise and fall, theologies
may flourish and decay, but this glorious and divine inheritance shall never pass away.

Shelley was ever calling attention to the fact that either from ignorance or the casuistical
sophistries of mal-interested teachers who have distorted the divine pristine truths for their
own base ends, emanated superstition, the taint of all it looked upon; and with no unsparing
hand he flagellated the professors of the numerous false faiths, bastardized from their original
purity, which have in their decay, darkened the earth, and with all the force of his powerful
pen, mightier than any sword, he ridiculed these gross theologies existant among men, as in
the following:

     "Barbarous and uncivilized nations have uniformly adored,
     under various names, a God of which themselves were the
     model: revengeful, blood-thirsty, groveling and capricious.
     The idol of a savage is a demon that delights in carnage.
     The steam of slaughter, the dissonance of groans, the flames
     of a desolated land, are the offerings which he deems
     acceptable, and his innumerable votaries throughout the
     world have made it a point of duty to worship him to his
     taste. The Phoenicians, the Druids and the Mexicans have
     immolated hundreds at the shrines of their divinity, and the
     high and holy name of God has been in all ages the watchword
     of the most unsparing massacres, the sanction of the most
     atrocious perfidies."

Of the treatment Judaism, the foster mother of Christianity, received at the poet's hands,
I will now recite two examples.

With the enlightenment of the present century in every department of knowledge, so has a corresponding
degree of advancement been thrown on the science of history, which Shelley only partially apprehended.
An enormous amount of new information is now to be gleaned from the writings of Ewald, Fergusson,
Bunsen, Deutsch, Max Muller, Baring-Gould, Stanley, and other scholars of Orientation, which
shows that the Hebrews, like every other nation, passed through the various phases of Nomadism
and Pastoralism, to that of offensive and defensive war. The same as other races, they came
through the usual steps in religious progress--Fetishism, Astrolatry, Polytheism and Monotheism.
During phases in their history they participated in the various forms of tree and serpent,
Phallic, or fire-worship. They had, as the Talmud, Targums, and the Old Testament show, a knowledge
of the Egyptian or Chaldaic account of the creation and fall, the latter still to be seen on
the walls of the temple of Osiris at Philae. They had much knowledge of the Cabala, through
their great prophet Moses, who was "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians," and, like
Pythagoras, had been initiated into their mysteries, and who both imparted the knowledge in
part to their compatriots, on which they both founded systems.

A great traveler, and most learned modern writer on Occultism, who claims, on good grounds,
to have been received into the ancient branch of the Rosie Cross in the far East, Madame Helena
P. de Blavatsky, imparts the following particulars: "The first Cabala in which a mortal man
ever dared to explain the greatest mysteries of the universe, and show the keys to those masked
doors in the ramparts of Nature, through which no mortal can ever pass without rousing dread
sentries never seen upon this side her wall, was compiled by a certain Simeon Ben Jochai, who
lived at the time of the second temple's destruction. Only about thirty years after the death
of this renowned Cabalist, his MSS. and written explanations, which had till then remained
in his possession as a most precious secret, were used by his son, Rabbi Elizzar, and other
learned men. Making a compilation of the whole, they so produced the famous work called Zohar
(God's splendor). This book proved an inexhaustible mine for all the subsequent Cabalists,
their source of information and knowledge, and all more recent and genuine Cabalas were all
more or less carefully copied from the former. Before that, all the mysterious doctrines had
come down in an unbroken line of merely oral tradition as far back as man could trace himself
on earth. They were scrupulously and jealously guarded by the wise men of Chaldea, India, Persia
and Egypt, and passed from one initiate to another, in the same purity of form as when handed
down to the first man by the angels, students of God's great Theosophic seminary."

Many Free Thinkers, in their anxiety to crush everything belonging to Christianity, often forget
that, in throwing aside the Hebrew records as utterly worthless, they are getting rid of one
of the most ancient literatures in the world. They also do not remember the history of a peculiar
nation, strangely preserved amid the fluctuations of time, the purity and excellence of the
Book of Job, the Psalms, and others which I could name. They cast unmerited contempt on these
compilations, when, at the same time, they will throw themselves, with almost Fetish reverence,
and apparently rapt adoration, before the Institutes of Menu, the Bhagvat-Geeta, the morals
of Chaoung-Fou-Tszee, the Zend-Avesta, the Rig-Veda, the Oracles of Zoroaster, the Book of
the Dead, the Puranas, the Shastras, and the like.

Well may the Sons of Israel be proud of their ancient descent. They suffered through Christian
persecutions uncomplainingly--the torture, the rack, the auto-da-fe--and yet they bowed their
heads in submission to the will of Adonai. To-day they stand upright and united, as in olden
times. They have gained the victory over the false disciples of the Nazarene, who, in days
gone by, forgot their erudition, their medical knowledge, their commercial activity, and general
culture. Pre-eminent in wealth and learning, they are found on the lecture-platform, in the
fields of literature and science, in the councils of rulers, on the exchange, in the legislature--everywhere.
When Greece and Rome were in their infancy, this extraordinary people was in middle age; and
when our Saxon forefathers were in the lowest stage of barbarism, they were in a state of high
civilization; and to-day, although scattered, they show a compact front, firmly knit in the
bonds of brotherly love, a model for Christians. The great reform movement now agitating Judaism,
as well as every other species of political and metaphysical thought, will eventually aid to
consolidate all the races into one race--Humanity. 

Buttons are made by braiding yarn and sewing it in the form of buttons.

A cord for fastening is made by braiding, or twisting and folding the yarn. It is then sewed into
loops or used as cord and tassel for tying.

Bootees
Knit two yards of round web for each bootee.

Start two inches from
the end of the web for the first turn. Sew into an elliptical form
three and one-half inches long for the sole. Sew two more rows without
widening for the sides of the foot; then sew two rows across the front
for the toe; the third row bring all around the top to complete the
foot.

The leg of the bootee is made by bringing the web directly
upward three inches before making the first turn. Make each row three
inches high and catch each row into the top of the foot while sewing. I must
not, while here, forget that many advanced metaphysicians agree that they cannot satisfactorily
prove the historical existence of Christ, and that they have to winnow through a vast amount
of chaff to get at his presumed philosophy, and the facts in his life, which like that of Buddha
is wrapped up in traditional fable.

For the Man Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, the carpenter's carnate son, the mystical Essene and
occultist, Shelley exceeded in love and reverence many of the most earnest Christians, and
in no theological writings can there be discovered such beautiful sentiments concerning the
"The Regenerator of the World," and the "Meek Reformer," of whom he speaks as contemplating
that mysterious principle called God, the fundamental of all good, and the source of all happiness,
as every true poet and philosopher must have done. It is impossible to turn to any page of
his works, where, in speaking of Christ, he fails in this--he expatiates with as great fervor
as Renan, Seeley, or Strauss, on Christ's exposing with earnest eloquence, like all true members
of the brotherhood of Illuminati, to which he belonged, the panic fears and hateful superstitions
which have enslaved mankind for ages, and extols

     "His extraordinary genius, the wide and rapid effects of his
     unexampled doctrines, his invincible gentleness and
     benignity, (and) the devoted love borne to him by his
     adherents."

For the God Christ, as depicted by the Sacerdotal order, he had the greatest contempt. It was
impossible for a mind constituted like his to tamely rest contented with the incredible story
forced on mankind's intelligence, that the Supreme Power could or would for any wise purpose
be transformed into a dove, and re-enact the mythical part of Jupiter with a Christian Leda,
the Jew carpenter's wife, Mary, under the disguise of a bird. Such a story and the theory on
which it rests Shelley summarised as follows:

