Shortly after, I met an old tramp with his pack, and handed him over to my liaison officer.
We could not very well detain him as he had already in his possession a Czech and a French
passport, but afterwards I much regretted that I had not perforated his papers with a bullet
as they rested in his breast pocket. He tramped along the road, and my sentries deflected his
course away from the trenches, but he saw my men scattered about in the wood behind, and at
daybreak the enemy artillery began to spatter the wood with a plentiful supply of shrapnel
and shells. One dropped within twenty yards of myself and officers whilst at breakfast; pitching
just under a tree, it lifted it into the air in a truly surprising manner. The number of shells--some
of which were German make--the enemy wasted on that wood proclaimed an abundant supply of ammunition.
To this persistent shelling we had nothing to reply, and at last from sheer exhaustion the
enemy fire died down. With darkness he began again, and the feeble reply of three small mountain
guns, which we knew were with the Runovka Cossack outpost, indicated that an attack was developing
in that direction.

The unequal duel continued intermittently until 2 A.M., when a field telephone message informed
me that Runovka had been abandoned, that the Czech company was retiring across our front, and
that Kalmakoff's Cossacks were retiring over the river lower down and taking up a position
at Antonovka on our extreme right rear. This meant that our whole defensive positions were
completely turned, and the next enemy move would place him near our lines of communication.

This, however, was not our only difficulty. Until two days previous we had been able to give
an occasional shot in return for the many sent towards us; then the Bolshevik gunners found
the mark on the two guns whose duty it was to prevent an advance along the railway, and our
two and only field guns were called in to fill the gap, leaving the infantry without any artillery
protection. I cabled to Commodore Payne, R.N., who commanded H.M.S. Suffolk, at Vladivostok,
informing him of our critical position and asked him to send such artillery assistance as was
possible. The commodore was as prompt as is expected of the Navy. In an incredibly short space
of time he fitted up an armoured train with two 12-pounder Naval guns and two machine guns,
and dispatched it at express speed to my assistance, with a second similar train following
behind, the whole being under the command of Captain Bath, R.M.L.I. It is scarcely possible
to describe the feeling of relief with which our exhausted and attenuated forces welcomed this
timely aid from our ever-ready Navy. It enabled us to bring the two Czech guns into position
to keep down the fire of the enemy, and gave us a sense of security in that our rear was safe
in case retirement should be forced upon us. It put new heart into the men, though they never
showed the slightest sign of depression in spite of their many discomforts. The British soldier
certainly offers the most stolid indifference to the most unfavourable situations.

The Bolshevik leaders were not long in showing their hand. They remained silent during the
following day, but at night they began to shell us from their new position in Runovka itself,
selecting as the site for their two batteries the hill on which the Orthodox church stood,
and using the Greek tower as their post of observation.

About 9.30 A.M. an enemy armoured train moved slowly forward from Shmakovka, followed by four
others, which directed a flank fire at my position. The shells all plunked into the marsh about
four hundred yards short, affording much amusement and causing many caustic Cockney comments.
Next came a troop train which gave us great hopes of a real attack developing on our front,
but our Naval 12-pounders on the Suffolk's armoured train began to do good practice, and a
shot registered on the front enemy engine caused volumes of steam to burst from her sides,
and great consternation suddenly appeared amongst the trains' personnel. The Naval gunners
did not seem inclined to lose the mark, and so the whole attempt fizzled out, and the trains
steamed back to shelter.

The two old Czech field guns, which had been repaired by H.M.S. Suffolk's artificers at "Vlady,"
wheeled into position behind a fold in the ground on our right rear and began a duel with the
two enemy batteries at Runovka. This duel was most entertaining. The enemy artillery searched
our wood and works, and the line of trees occupied by the French was plentifully sprayed with
shrapnel, but they failed to locate our guns, or get anywhere near them, or indeed to cause
a single casualty either to man or horse. During the night a peasant gave the guns' position
away, and in the early morning exchanges one gun came to grief. The remaining gun changed position,
and the duel became still more interesting. By skilful manoeuvring the gun was got much nearer,
and at once the range was obtained to a nicety. Every shot was placed so near the mark as to
rouse the infantry's obvious excitement to fever heat, and finally a shell was planted right
into the enemy observation tower, setting it on fire and burning it to the ground. By placing
four shells near to hand, and working like Trojans, the Czech gunners fired four shots so rapidly
as to deceive the enemy into the belief that four guns were now opposing them, and after about
two hours of this relay work the enemy batteries were beaten to a frazzle, and retired from
the unequal contest with two guns out of action. It was simply magnificent as a display of
real efficient gunnery. There is no doubt the enemy had intended to make an effort to cross
the river at Runovka and that his artillery had been placed with a view to protecting the passage
of his troops. The young Czech gunnery lieutenant by his stratagem with one solitary field-piece
had made this plan appear impossible to the enemy commander. Never was deception more complete. 

He neither turned nor spoke, but passed swiftly out into the darkness of the night, and the bewildered
sexton soon lost sight of him.
Despoiled of his kingly garments, breathless and splashed with mire,
King Robert rushed on till he came to the palace gates. He saw that, though he offered the most tempting bait,
we made no effort to move forward to snap it up, and doubtless came to the conclusion that
we were chained to our positions by either dearth of numbers or military incapacity. In the
last stage of his movement his communications stretched for twenty-three miles along our flank,
with three posts of just over one hundred men to protect his supply trains. If the commander
of that force is still alive he probably has a poor opinion of the ability of his opponents.
We were ready to deal him a death-blow at any moment from the day he occupied Uspenkie until
he crossed the river before Antonovka. He and his column were only saved by orders from Vladivostok.

For two days no movement was observable in the enemy lines, and it began to look as though
he would or could not take full advantage of his extremely favourable position.

