(22) Where a subclass with a generic title has indented thereunder a species type-subclass
bearing the title of the generic subclass qualified by a difference, any patent which claims
an invention falling within the genus subclass and discloses the qualification of the species
type-subclass should be classified in the latter whether or not the entire disclosure is claimed.
(See Rule 19.)

   Example:

        Class 29.--METAL WORKING.
      Machine chucks and tool sockets--
         Cam closing--
   126.    Scroll--
   127.      Bevel pinion or ring.

   If a patent claimed only the scroll of a scroll-chuck, but
   disclosed it in connection with a bevel pinion and ring, it
   should be classified in subclass 127, Bevel pinion and
   ring, and not in subclass 126, Scroll, although if there
   were no disclosure of the bevel pinion and ring it would go
   in subclass 126. Any search for scrolls must be prosecuted
   through all subclasses that include "Scroll" in the title.

(23) Where, as in the case of patents that show and claim a combination that as matter of common
knowledge is not new except in one of its elements, to classify a patent strictly in accordance
with rule would result in placing the patent where it would serve no useful purpose as a reference
and having to cross-reference it to a class where it would serve a useful purpose, it is best
to classify the patent in the class to which the element would take it. (See Rule 19.)

   Example: A patent claiming a wheeled vehicle, broadly, in
   combination with an internal-combustion engine comprising a
   cylinder, a crank-case, a piston and suitably-connected
   crank, a valve opening into the crank-case, and a valve in
   the piston opening into the cylinder, may be advantageously
   classified as an internal-combustion engine notwithstanding
   the alleged invention is for a motor vehicle.

(24) In order to meet the situation respecting the classification of those patents that indiscriminately
claim an article of manufacture defined only by the material of which it is made and those
patents that claim those materials, leaving to the specification information regarding the
designed uses, patents for articles defined only by their ingredients specifically set forth
may be placed in the composition of matter or material class. No one exhausts them.

   Every one seeks his ideal chiefly in the unknown. It matters
   not so much what ideal he seeks, but only that he does seek
   one. Effort itself, not the object of effort, forms the basis
   of development. No seeker begins his journey with full knowledge
   of the goal. Only after much circulation in the
   philosophic egg and only after much passing through the prism
   of colors does that light dawn which gives us the faint intimation
   of the outline of the prototype of all lesser ideals.
   

(25) An alleged process of utilizing a specifically-defined composition or material which consists
in merely applying it to the use it was designed for may be classified as a composition or
material rather than as a process. (See Rule 19.)

   Example: A process of painting the bottom of a marine
   vessel which consists in applying thereto a composition
   consisting of sulphate of copper, powdered metallic zinc,
   chlorid of antimony, and hyposulphite of soda, in a vehicle
   of linseed oil, would be more usefully classified as an
   antifouling paint than as a ship, as the invention would
   hardly be distinguishable from a paint claimed as such and
   described for use on submarine surfaces.

(26) An alleged process consisting merely in the use of a particularly-defined machine or similar
instrument operating according to its law of action will ordinarily be classified in the class
or subclass where the machine belongs. But if in addition to defining the operation of a particular
machine the claim also specifies acts not performed by the machine, the classification should
be in the class or subclass in which the process belongs. (See Rule 19.)

   Example: Thus a claim for a method of rolling an iron plate
   which consists in passing an iron blank between a pair of
   rolls arranged horizontally in juxtaposition one above the
   other and geared together so as to rotate in opposite
   directions, and causing an idle roll supported in bearings
   on the roll-housings to bear against the central portion of
   the surface of one of the first pair of rolls on the upper
   side thereof, should be classified as a rolling-mill, while
   if to that claim were added the steps of doubling the sheet
   after one passage between the rolls, again passing between
   the rolls, again doubling, and then passing the now
   four-ply pack between the rolls sidewise or turned 90 per
   cent to the direction in which it had previously been fed,
   the classification should be with processes of sheet-metal
   manufacture.

(27) In the absence of settled rules defining permissible joinder of inventions, there may
be in one patent claims for one or more or all of the classes of invention named in the statute,
to wit, machine, art, manufacture, and composition of matter. There may also be claims to several
more or less related inventions in the same statutory class of invention but each belonging
to a different industrial art. (1) Where different main classes are involved, the patent will
be classified by the most intensive invention, without regard to the statutory class to which
it belongs. (2) Where different subclasses of the same class are involved, the patent will
be classified in that one of the several subclasses defined to receive the several inventions
which stands highest in the schedule of subclasses.

(28) Where a patent contains claims for all or a plurality less than all of the statutory classes,
the general rule of preference or superiority of the several classes of subclasses is that
represented by the following order, to wit: (1) Machine (or other operative instrument); (2)
Art; (3) Manufacture; (4) Composition of matter. This order is, in a general way, the order
of intensiveness of the several kinds of invention. (See Rules 29-35.)

   Example: An automatic screw-machine, peculiarly adapted to
   carry out a process of making a novel form of machine-screw
   out of a new iron alloy, and having a claim to the machine,
   to the process, to the screw, and to the alloy, would be
   assigned to Metal-Working, Combined machines, and, if all
   claims were allowed, cross-referenced to Bolt and
   rivet-making processes, to Bolts, and to Alloys. If the
   claim to any one or two of the subjects were eliminated,
   the order of preference or superiority and the order of
   cross-referencing would remain the same.

(29) Patents containing a plurality of claims for several different statutory kinds of invention
that are classifiable in different main classes, and wherein the rule of relative intensiveness
varies from the order Machine, Art, Manufacture, and Composition of matter, may be diagnosed
and classified as directed in the following paragraphs (30 to 35).

(30) Where a patent contains claims for a process and for an apparatus susceptible of use as
an instrument in carrying out the process, but not peculiar to that use, or for an apparatus
adapted to carry out but one step or only a part of the process, the process claim, being in
this instance the more intensive, would control the classification. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: In a patent containing a claim for a process of
   roasting ore and then collecting the fumes, and another
   claim for a roasting furnace that is a mere
   material-heating furnace, the process claim would control;
   whereas, if one claim were for a method of roasting ores
   consisting of stirring the ore, applying heat to the same,
   and collecting the solids from the fumes, and the other
   claim, were for a heating furnace having a stirrer and a
   fume arrester, the apparatus claim would control. And if a
   patent contained claims for a process of roasting ores, and
   other claims for a furnace susceptible of use in carrying
   out the process but equally useful in annealing glass or
   steel articles, the process claim would control.

(31) Where a patent claims a specified article of manufacture or other product, and also an
instrument for making a part only of that specified article or other product, the product claim,
being more intensive, should control the classification; so also in case of a claim for a product
and a claim for an instrument performing any minor act with respect thereto. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: Where a patent claims a particular construction of
   a riveted joint, and also a tool for calking the rivet, and
   where a patent claims a particular construction of shoe,
   and also a buttonhook for buttoning said shoe, the article
   and not the tool claims control.

(32) Where a patent contains claims to a process and a product, the process claims govern the
classification in those cases where search among machines for making the product would have
to be made, and such processes would be classifiable on the basis of the mode of operation,
usually in the same class with machines for practicing such processes. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: A patent having a claim for a process of making
   bifocal lenses, consisting in grinding the surface of one
   piece of glass to form a convex lens, heating another piece
   of glass until it is plastic, then forcing the ground
   surface of the first-named piece into the body of the
   latter and gradually cooling the lens-blank thus formed;
   and also a claim for a bifocal lens composed of two pieces
   of glass weld-united, would be classified in
   Glass-manufacture and cross-referenced into lenses. Or a
   patent having a claim to a process of making a metal plate
   with elongated perforations, consisting in forming round
   perforations in the plate and subsequently rolling the
   plate, thereby thinning and elongating the plate and
   elongating the openings, and also a claim to a metallic
   plate having relatively long and narrow perforations, would
   be classified on the basis of the process claim.

(33) Where a patent claims both process and product, and the alleged process is disclosed in
the product, so that search would have to be made in the appropriate class of products, the
product will be adopted as the basis of classification, and classification will be in the appropriate
product class. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: A claim for a process of making a pencil
   consisting in assembling a core of graphite with a
   sheathing of wood, and attaching a cap of
   rubber-composition to one end, would be classified as a
   pencil rather than as a process, became conception of the
   article is inseparable from the process and search must be
   made in the article class.

(34) Where a patent claims a process of making a composition of matter, and also the composition
of matter, the claims will be classified in general in accordance with the classification of
the composition of matter in all cases where the process is peculiarly adapted to produce the
composition, as by setting forth the introduction or assemblage of particular ingredients,
since those processes that include the selection of particular ingredients necessitate search
among compositions having such ingredients. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: A patent having a claim for a composition
   consisting of a mixture of caoutchouc and casein, and a
   claim for the process of preparing a rubberlike substance
   which consists in adding undissolved raw caoutchouc to
   casein and thoroughly mixing and kneading the mass, would
   be classified according to the composition.

(35) Where a patent claims a product such as a specific article of manufacture, or a specific
composition of matter, and also claims a process of general application for making one of the
parts of the article or one of the ingredients of the composition, the product claim should
control the classification. (See Rule 28.)

   Example: If a patent claimed a woven textile fabric having
   the yarns interlaced in a defined relation, and a process
   of spinning a yarn utilized in the fabric; or if a patent
   claimed a varnish composed of shellac, dissolved in wood
   alcohol, and a pigment, and also contained a claim for
   distilling wood to obtain the alcohol, the product claim
   would control the classification in each instance, and the
   process would be cross-referenced.

[1] All terms have a meaning in extension and in intension. The meaning of a term in extension
consists of the objects to which the term may be applied; its meaning in intension consists
of the qualities necessarily possessed by objects bearing that name. The term "motors" in extension
means all motors--electric, gas, water, spring, weight, etc. "Motors" in intension means instruments
to convert some form or manifestation of energy into periodical or cyclical motion of a body.
As the intension increases the extension decreases, and vice versa. There must be more motors
than there are electric motors, and electric motors have more qualifications than are common
to all motors. Comparison of arts and instruments with respect to their extension and intension
for classification purposes should be made between comparable qualities. A claim for a steam-engine
may be very specific while a claim for a reaper may be very broad; here there is no comparable
relationship, and the terms intensive and extensive do not have the relative significance most
useful in classification. (3) Memory. The mind has greater power to retain that which is given to it
than in the preceding period, though it holds these facts disconnectedly rather than related
into systematic knowledge, as they will be later.

But this power of retention must not be abused through storing memory
with a quantity of useless material.

That which is impressed upon the plastic, non-resisting cells of the child's brain ought to have some
immediate meaning and value for the life at a time when the intellectual and spiritual needs
are so many.

(4) Imagination. This is the power of the mind to make living and real that which is not present
to the senses. It is one of the most striking characteristics of the Primary period and one
of the most important as well. The imagination works only with concrete things in childhood, making
new objects out of the old, making the story and the mental picture as real as the tangible
experience, making Jesus an actual present Helper and Friend.

Later it will work with abstract ideas and ideals of life formed from the pictures it has cherished.

#13.
Opportunities of the Primary Age.#

(1) Character building through the mental picture. Abstract ideas about which the mind reasons
do not have power over the soul of the child. It is the vivid picture which imagination holds
that arouses the feeling and impels the action. So great is the power of the picture that the
teacher need not exhort and admonish concerning what ought to be
done.

   She only need set forth the action in a story that appeals,
   and imagination will do the rest. While very many of these
   pictures come unconsciously to the child from his environment,
   it is the privilege of the teacher definitely and
   carefully to provide the highest type of mental picture
   through the well-selected story, in order to secure the
   finest action.
   
   (2) Increased knowledge of Bible facts. The lesson
   may contain more than in the earlier period, because the
   child's interest in details has increased and he has greater
   power of attention. It is important to note, however,
   in what the increase may consist. It is not in the number
   of truths presented in the lesson, but in the number of details concerning
the one truth for which the lesson stands. Since the mind has developed
new power to hold the impressions which are made upon it, Scripture
verses containing fundamental truths, like God's love and care, the
duty of love toward him and others, and the necessity of obedience
may be given, with explanation, for memorizing.

(3) Write an approximate or tentative definition of the matter thus assembled in each bundle
and attach it to its appropriate bundle.

(4) Where it appears that the subject matter of any bundle formed from the patents of any subclass
is analogous to matter in other subclasses of the same class or in other classes, a note should
be added to that effect so that this matter may be given special consideration.

(5) When the same examiner or different examiners are working on different subclasses containing
analogous matter, parallel lines of subdivision should be followed wherever possible, in order
to effect an arrangement that will facilitate comparisons.

(6) When subdividing a group of more or less complex organized structures or mechanisms, note
should be taken of subcombinations that form or it is thought should form the basis of other
subclasses, either in the same or different classes, into which those details may be collected,
either classified therein originally or by cross-reference.

   Example: Assuming that the combination of press, folder,
   and wrapping mechanism, referred to in a preceding
   paragraph is to be classified in a class of Printing, on
   the entirety as a combination having the function of
   printing, plus other functions, and that folding and also
   wrapping are separately classified, then the particular
   type of press should be selected to be cross-referenced
   into a press-type subclass of the class of Printing, such
   as "Presses, rotary," while the folding mechanism and the
   wrapping mechanism would be noted for cross-reference to
   other appropriate classes. Also, any part of the printing
   press, such as the inking mechanism, specifically
   described, should be noted for cross-reference into a
   subclass of Printing designed to receive the inking
   mechanism as a part of the printing press.

(7) After a knowledge of the material of the class has been obtained by estimating the resemblances
between the individual patents that have been assembled in the several groups, comparison of
these groups, represented by the bundles of photolithographs, by the aid of the approximate
definitions and notes attached can be made. It can then be decided whether all of these groups
are to be retained in the proposed class, and the retained groups can be organized into a class
with the subclasses arranged so as to bring those subclasses having the strongest resemblances
in closest relation, and in such order as to comply with the conventions adopted in the official
classification. It will probably be necessary to have one subclass or group as broad as the
definition of the class, to take unclassifiable matter and to provide for possible future inventions.

(8) Up to this point, more or less cursory attention may be given individual patents; but when
an arrangement of subclasses shall have been tentatively adopted it will be necessary to consider
each patent carefully to ascertain whether it is properly placed.

(9) Patents that, considered as an entirety, cover means not peculiar to the class or subject-matter
being revised, should, in general, when assembled in groups as indicated, have a note attached
indicating not only want of limitation to the subject-matter of the class but also a more appropriate
class to receive them if such there be. Although a very large proportion of patents can be
accurately classified as indicated by their titles and stated uses, the mere fact that in a
patent found in a class the invention is called in the specification or claims by a name peculiar
to the class is not of itself a reason for considering it peculiar to the class. A gas and
liquid contact apparatus may be called a heater, a cooler, a gas-washer, a water-carbonator,
a condenser, a disinfecter, an air-moistener, and so on, depending upon accident of use. If
there are not elements in some claim to confine the means described distinctively to what it
is called, or if there are no functions necessarily implied in the means claimed peculiar to
the named use, the patent should not be kept in the class unless there is no other class in
the office that can receive it.

   Example: Where the matter claimed is a metal beam of
   peculiar cross-section, it should be classified with other
   metal beams, as in Class 189, Metallic Building Structures,
   even if it is named in the application as a beam of
   particular use, as a railroad-tie, car-sill, bridge-tie,
   etc. Should a mere dash-pot be found classified in Class
   171, Electricity, Generation, a note should be attached
   indicating that it belongs in the appropriate element
   class.

(10) In giving this final careful attention to the patents, each should also be scanned to
see whether it contains matter that should be cross-referenced. A few lines obscurely located
in a specification may contain a disclosure of a most valuable invention. No class can be deemed
complete until the disclosures appropriate to it found as parts of more complex inventions
in other classes, or disclosures of analogous matter in other classes, are either cross-referenced
into it or cross search-notes made.

(11) To indicate cross-references, from one subclass to another within the class or from the
class under consideration into another class, attach a small slip of paper to the patent and
mark on the slip the subclass number in which the cross-reference shall be mounted. If the
matter to be cross-referenced relates only to a portion of a voluminous patent, the portion
of the specification and drawing to be cross-referenced should be indicated. If the cross-reference
falls outside the class, the class number should be noted in addition to the subclass number.

(12) Should it be found that the handling of copies in making examinations detaches the cross-reference
slips, it may be advisable to mark lightly but legibly in pencil on the lower right-hand corner
of the examiner's photolithograph the number of the subclass or subclasses into which it is
to be cross-referenced, or the number of the class and subclass in case it is to be cross-referenced
to another class.

(13) Whether cross-reference notations are written on a separate slip or on the photolithograph,
the number of the class and subclass into which a patent is to be cross-referenced should always
be preceded by X (thus X 101-23) in order to distinguish the original classification notation
from the cross-reference notation and enable sorting and indexing to be done without confusion. 

He it was who carried out David's plan for a "magnifical" temple in Jerusalem, where he built the
most splendid temple that the world had so far seen. His prayer at the dedication of the temple
is a most remarkable one (1 Kings 8).


