"There were a great many people in Anne Arundel who did not believe in slavery and many free
colored people. These conditions caused conflicts between the free colored who many times were
charged with aiding the slaves and the whites who were not favorably impressed with slavery
and the others who believed in slavery. As a result, the patrollers were numerous. I remember
of seeing Jim Revell coming home very much battered and beaten up as a result of an encounter
with a number of free people and white people and those who were members of the patrollers.

"As a child I was very fond of dancing, especially the jig and buck. I made money as I stated
before, I played children's plays of that time, top, marbles and another game we called skinny.
Skinny was a game played on trees and grape vines.

"As a boy I was very healthy, I never had a doctor until I was over 50 years old. I don't know
anything about the medical treatment of that day, you never need medicine unless you are ailing
and I never ailed."

Maryland Sept. 27, 1937 Stansbury

"PARSON" REZIN WILLIAMS, ex-slave.
References: Baltimore Morning Sun, December 10, 1928.
            Registration Books of Board of Election Supervisors
            Baltimore Court House.

            Personal interviews with "Parson" Rezin Williams,
            on Thursday afternoon, September 18 and 24, 1937,
            at his home, 2610 Pierpont Street, Mount Winans,
            Baltimore, Md.

            Maryland Historical Magazine, Vol 1 (1906), p. 56.

            Buchholz: Governors of Maryland--pp. 57-63, 192-167.
            (P.L.G. 28 B 92.)

"Parson" Williams----

            Oldest living Negro Civil War veteran; now 116 years old.

            Oldest registered voter in Maryland and said to be the oldest
            "freeman" in the United States.

            Said to be oldest member of Negro family in America with sister
            and brother still living, more than a century old.

            Father worked for George Washington.

In 1864 when the State Constitution abolished slavery and freed about 83,000 Negro slaves in
Maryland, there was one, "Parson" Rezin Williams, already a freeman. He is now living at the
age of 116 years, in Baltimore City, Maryland, credited with being the oldest of his race in
the United States who served in the Civil War.

He was born March 11, 1822, at "Fairview", near Bowie, Prince Georges County, Maryland--a plantation
of 1000 acres, then belonging to Governor Oden Bowie's father. "Parson" Williams' father, Rezin
Williams, a freeman, was born at "Mattaponi", near Nottingham, Prince Georges County, the estate
of Robert Bowie of Revolutionary War fame, friend of Washington and twice Governor of Maryland. We
were together only during the few days the steamer took from Calcutta to Madras, but it became
quite evident that depth of friendship does not depend upon length
of acquaintance.

Within this short time he so drew me to him by his simple natural qualities of heart, that the previous
life-long gap in our acquaintance seemed always to have been filled with our friendship.

When Ashu came back from England he became one of us.[57] He had not as yet had time or opportunity
to pierce through all the barriers with which his profession is hedged in, and so become completely
immersed in it.

The money-bags of his clients had not yet sufficiently loosened the strings which held their
gold, and Ashu was still an enthusiast in gathering honey from various gardens of literature.
The spirit of literature which then saturated his being had nothing
of the mustiness of library morocco about it, but was fragrant with
the scent of unknown exotics from over the seas.

At his invitation I enjoyed many a picnic amidst the spring time of those distant woodlands.

He
had a special taste for the flavour of French literature. I was then writing the poems which
came to be published in the volume entitled Kadi o Komal, Sharps
and Flats.

Ashu could discern resemblances between many of my poems and old French poems he knew. According
to him the common element in all these poems was the attraction which the play of world-life
had for the poet, and this had found varied expression in each and every one of them. The
unfulfilled desire to enter into this larger life was the fundamental
motive throughout.

"I will arrange and publish these poems for you," said Ashu, and accordingly that task was entrusted
to him.

The poem beginning This world is sweet was the one he considered to be the keynote of the whole series
and so he placed it at the beginning of the volume.

Ashu was very possibly right. When in childhood I was confined to the house, I offered my heart in
my wistful gaze to outside nature in all its variety through the openings in the parapet of our inner
roof-terrace. In my youth the world of men in the same way exerted
a powerful attraction on me.

To that also I was then an outsider and looked out upon it from the roadside. My mind standing
on the brink called out, as it were, with an eager waving of hands
to the ferryman sailing away across the waves to the other side.

For Life longed to start on life's journey.

It is not true that my peculiarly isolated social condition was the bar to my plunging into
the midst of the world-life.

I see no sign that those of my countrymen who have been all their lives in the thick of society
feel, any more than I did, the touch of its living intimacy. The
life of our country has its high banks, and its flight of steps, and,
on its dark waters falls the cool shade of the ancient trees, while
from within the leafy branches over-head the koel cooes forth its
ravishing old-time song. But for all that it is stagnant water. The master gave the slave usually ten to ninety-nine lashes
for running off. What slaves feared most was what they called the "nine ninety-nine" or 99
lashes with a rawhide whip, and sometimes they were unmercifully flogged until unconcious.
Some cruel masters believed Negroes had no souls. The slaves at Bowie, however, declared "Parson"
Williams, were pretty well treated and usually respected the overseers. He said that the slaves
at Bowie mostly lived in cabins made of slabs running up and down and crudely furnished. Working
time was from sunrise until sunset. The slaves had no money to spend and few masters allowed
them to indulge in a religious meeting or even learn about the Bible.

Slaves received medical attention from a physician if they were seriously ill. When a death
occured, a rough box would be made of heavy slabs and the dead Negro buried the same day on
the plantation burying lot with a brief ceremony, if any. The grieving darkeys, relatives,
after he was "eased" in the ground, would sing a few spirituals and return to their cabins.

Familiar old spirituals were composed by "Parson" Williams, including Roll De Stones Away,
You'll Rise in De Skies, and Ezekiel, He'se Comin Home.

Following is one of Williams' spirituals:

  When dat are ole chariot comes,
  I'm gwine to lebe you:
  I'm bound for de promised land
  I'm gwine to lebe you.

Still another favorite of "Parson"

Interesting reminiscences are recalled by "Parson" Williams of his early life. He said that
he still remembers when Mr. Oden Bowie (later governor) left with the army of invasion of Mexico
(1846-1848), and of his being brought home ill after several years was nursed back to health
at "Fairview". Governor Bowie died on his plantation in 1894 and is buried in the family burying
ground there.

He was the first president of the Maryland Jockey Club. Governor Bowie raised a long string
of famous race horses that became known throughout the country. From the "Fairview" stables
went such celebrated horses as Dickens, Catespy, Crickmore, Commensation, Creknob, who carried
the Bowie colors to the front on many well-contested race courses. After Governor Bowie's death,
the estate became the property of his youngest son, W. Booth Bowie.

"Fairview" is located in the upper part of what was called the "Forest" of Prince Georges County,
a few miles southwest of Collington Station. It is a fine type of old Colonial mansion built
of brick, the place having been in the posession of the family for some time previous. "Fairview"
is one of the oldest and finest homes in Maryland. The mansion contains a wide hall and is
a typical Southern home.

Baruch Duckett married Kitty Bean, a granddaughter of John Bowie, Sr., the first of his name
to come to Prince Georges County. They had but one daughter, whose name was Kitty Bean Duckett,
and she married in 1800 William Bowie of Walter. Baruch Duckett outlived his wife and died
in 1810. He devised "Fairview" to his son-in-law and the latter's children, and it ultimately
became the property of his grandson, afterward known as Col. William B.[TR.?] Bowie, who made
it his home until 1880, when he gave it to his eldest son, Oden, who in 1868 became Governor
of Maryland. Governor Bowie was always identified with the Democratic Party.

"Parson" Williams' wife, Amelia Addison Williams died August 9, 1928, at the age of 94 years.
The aged negro is the father of 14 children, one still living,--Mrs. Amelia Besley, 67 years
old, 2010 Pierpont Street, Mount Winans, Baltimore, Maryland. His brother, Marcellus Williams,
and a single sister, Amelia Williams, both living, reside on Rubio street, Philidelphia, Pa.
According to "Parson" Williams, they are both more than a century old and are in fairly good
health. Besides his children and a brother and a sister, Williams has several grandchildren,
great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren living.

President Lincoln, Williams says, was looked upon by many slaves as a messenger from heaven.
Of course, many slave masters were kind and considerate, but to most slaves they were just
a driver and the slaves were work horses for them. Only once during his lifetime does Williams
recall tasting whisky, when his cousin bought a pint. It cost three cents in those days. He
said his mother used to make beer out of persimmons and cornhusks, but they don't make it any
more, so he doesn't even drink beer now. He would much rather have a good cigar. He has since
a boy, smoked a pipe.

By special permission of plantation owners in Prince Georges, St. Marys, Baltimore and other
counties in Maryland, he was often permitted to visit the darkeys and conduct a religious meeting
in their cabins. He usually wore a long-tailed black "Kentucky" suit with baggy trousers and
sported a cane.

Usually when servants or slaves in those days found themselves happy and contented, it was
because they were born under a lucky star. As for eating, they seldom got chicken, mostly they
ate red herring and molasses--they called black strap molasses. They were allowed a herring
a day as part of their food. Slaves as a rule preferred possums to rabbits. Some liked fish
best. Williams' favorite food was cornpone and fried liver.

"Once before de wah, I was ridin Lazy, my donkey, a few miles from de boss' place at Fairview,
when along came a dozen or more patrollers. Dey questioned me and decided I was a runaway slave
and dey wuz gwine to give me a coat of tar and feathers when de boss rode up and ordered my
release. He told dem dreaded white patrollers dat I was a freeman and a 'parson'."

When the slaves were made free, some of the overseers tooted horns, calling the blacks from
their toil in the fields. They were told they need no longer work for their masters unless
they so desired. Most of the darkeys quit "den and dar" and made a quick departure to other
parts, but some remained and to this day their descendants are still to be found working on
the original plantations, but of course for pay.

Describing the clothing worn in summer time by the slaves, he said they mostly went barefooted.
The men and boys wore homespun, three-quarter striped pants and sometimes a large funnel-shaped
straw hat. Some wore only a shirt as a covering for their body.

"In winter oxhide shoes were worn, much too large, and the soles contained several layers of
paper. We called them 'program' shoes, because the paper used for stuffing, consisted of discarded
programs. We gathered herbs from which we made medicine, snake root and sassafras bark being
a great remedy for many ailments."

Williams, though himself not a slave by virtue of the fact that his grandmother was an Indian,
was considered a good judge of healthy slaves, those who would prove profitable to their owners,
so he often accompanied slave purchasers to the Baltimore slave markets.

He told of having been taken by a certain slave master to the Baltimore wharf, boarded a boat
and after the slave dealer and the captain negotiated a deal, he, Williams, not realizing that
he was being used as a decoy, led a group of some thirty or forty blacks, men, women and children,
through a dark and dirty tunnel for a distance of several blocks to a slave market pen, where
they were placed on the auction block.

He was told to sort of pacify the black women who set up a wail when they were separated from
their husbands and children. It was a pitiful sight to see them, half naked, some whipped into
submission, cast into slave pens surrounded by iron bars. A good healthy negro man from 18
to 30 would bring from $200 to $800. Women would bring about half the price of the men. Often
when the women parted with their children and loved ones, they would never see them again.

Such conditions as existed in the Baltimore slave markets, which were considered the most important
in the country, and the subsequent ill treatment of the unfortunates, hastened the war between
the states.

The increasing numbers of free negroes also had much to do with causing the civil war. The
South was finding black slavery a sort of white elephant. Everywhere the question was what
to do with the freeman. Nobody wanted them. Some states declared they were a public nuisance.

