He had stood up and begun to walk to and fro, and had become in my waking dream a shuttle weaving
an immense purple web whose folds had begun to fill the room. The room seemed to have become
inexplicably silent, as though all but the web and the weaving were at an end in the world.
'They have come to us; they have come to us,' the voice began again; 'all that have ever been
in your reverie, all that you have met with in books. There is Lear, his head still wet with
the thunder-storm, and he laughs because you thought yourself an existence who are but a shadow,
and him a shadow who is an eternal god; and there is Beatrice, with her lips half parted in
a smile, as though all the stars were about to pass away in a sigh of love; and there is the
mother of the God of humility who cast so great a spell over men that they have tried to unpeople
their hearts that he might reign alone, but she holds in her hand the rose whose every petal
is a god; and there, O swiftly she comes! is Aphrodite under a twilight falling from the wings
of numberless sparrows, and about her feet are the grey and white doves.' In the midst of my
dream I saw him hold out his left arm and pass his right hand over it as though he stroked
the wings of doves. I made a violent effort which seemed almost to tear me in two, and said
with forced determination: 'You would sweep me away into an indefinite world which fills me
with terror; and yet a man is a great man just in so far as he can make his mind reflect everything
with indifferent precision like a mirror.' I seemed to be perfectly master of myself, and went
on, but more rapidly: 'I command you to leave me at once, for your ideas and phantasies are
but the illusions that creep like maggots into civilizations when they begin to decline, and
into minds when they begin to decay.' I had grown suddenly angry, and seizing the alembic from
the table, was about to rise and strike him with it, when the peacocks on the door behind him
appeared to grow immense; and then the alembic fell from my fingers and I was drowned in a
tide of green and blue and bronze feathers, and as I struggled hopelessly I heard a distant
voice saying: 'Our master Avicenna has written that all life proceeds out of corruption.' The
glittering feathers had now covered me completely, and I knew that I had struggled for hundreds
of years, and was conquered at last. I was sinking into the depth when the green and blue and
bronze that seemed to fill the world became a sea of flame and swept me away, and as I was
swirled along I heard a voice over my head cry, 'The mirror is broken in two pieces,' and another
voice answer, 'The mirror is broken in four pieces,' and a more distant voice cry with an exultant
cry, 'The mirror is broken into numberless pieces'; and then a multitude of pale hands were
reaching towards me, and strange gentle faces bending above me, and half wailing and half caressing
voices uttering words that were forgotten the moment they were spoken. I was being lifted out
of the tide of flame, and felt my memories, my hopes, my thoughts, my will, everything I held
to be myself, melting away; then I seemed to rise through numberless companies of beings who
were, I understood, in some way more certain than thought, each wrapped in his eternal moment,
in the perfect lifting of an arm, in a little circlet of rhythmical words, in dreaming with
dim eyes and half-closed eyelids. And then I passed beyond these forms, which were so beautiful
they had almost ceased to be, and, having endured strange moods, melancholy, as it seemed,
with the weight of many worlds, I passed into that Death which is Beauty herself, and into
that Loneliness which all the multitudes desire without ceasing. All things that had ever lived
seemed to come and dwell in my heart, and I in theirs; and I had never again known mortality
or tears, had I not suddenly fallen from the certainty of vision into the uncertainty of dream,
and become a drop of molten gold falling with immense rapidity, through a night elaborate with
stars, and all about me a melancholy exultant wailing. I fell and fell and fell, and then the
wailing was but the wailing of the wind in the chimney, and I awoke to find myself leaning
upon the table and supporting my head with my hands. I saw the alembic swaying from side to
side in the distant corner it had rolled to, and Michael Robartes watching me and waiting.
'I will go wherever you will,' I said, 'and do whatever you bid me, for I have been with eternal
things.' 'I knew,' he replied, 'you must need answer as you have answered, when I heard the
storm begin. You must come to a great distance, for we were commanded to build our temple between
the pure multitude by the waves and the impure multitude of men.'

III

I did not speak as we drove through the deserted streets, for my mind was curiously empty of
familiar thoughts and experiences; it seemed to have been plucked out of the definite world
and cast naked upon a shoreless sea. There were moments when the vision appeared on the point
of returning, and I would half-remember, with an ecstasy of joy or sorrow, crimes and heroisms,
fortunes and misfortunes; or begin to contemplate, with a sudden leaping of the heart, hopes
and terrors, desires and ambitions, alien to my orderly and careful life; and then I would
awake shuddering at the thought that some great imponderable being had swept through my mind.
It was indeed days before this feeling passed perfectly away, and even now, when I have sought
refuge in the only definite faith, I feel a great tolerance for those people with incoherent
personalities, who gather in the chapels and meeting-places of certain obscure sects, because
I also have felt fixed habits and principles dissolving before a power, which was hysterica
passio or sheer madness, if you will, but was so powerful in its melancholy exultation that
I tremble lest it wake again and drive me from my new-found peace.

When we came in the grey light to the great half-empty terminus, it seemed to me I was so changed
that I was no more, as man is, a moment shuddering at eternity, but eternity weeping and laughing
over a moment; and when we had started and Michael Robartes had fallen asleep, as he soon did,
his sleeping face, in which there was no sign of all that had so shaken me and that now kept
me wakeful, was to my excited mind more like a mask than a face. The fancy possessed me that
the man behind it had dissolved away like salt in water, and that it laughed and sighed, appealed
and denounced at the bidding of beings greater or less than man. 'This is not Michael Robartes
at all: Michael Robartes is dead; dead for ten, for twenty years perhaps,' I kept repeating
to myself. I fell at last into a feverish sleep, waking up from time to time when we rushed
past some little town, its slated roofs shining with wet, or still lake gleaming in the cold
morning light. I had been too pre-occupied to ask where we were going, or to notice what tickets
Michael Robartes had taken, but I knew now from the direction of the sun that we were going
westward; and presently I knew also, by the way in which the trees had grown into the semblance
of tattered beggars flying with bent heads towards the east, that we were approaching the western
coast. Since this was the mother could Bohush close the lids no more, it did not cry at
all in him: tears waiting behind it, and many tears And look. - It was at once so lively in the
room. Things to two poor people around got a shine, as they had never possessed, not even in
their princely days. Each jug, each glass in the rigid Etagère had suddenly be light and bragged
and wanted to play the star. As you can imagine that it was very
light in the room.

Then the clock struck, carefully, as they regretted having to do. But she hit it five times,
and was the mother.

"Where?" Feared the hunchback.

"I have to get the Frantishka.

Then came the Bohush everything again. He hesitated and then said, almost sadly: "Yes, so you
must get the Frantishka This was the farewell..

When the Bohun was alone, he resumed the nervous and restless below.

Here and there, as in passing, he put a little handle, the dust swept from the table and got unexpectedly
is to organize his writings and books. In this case it was quite warm. And when he found his
hot face somewhere in a mirror, he was astonished. He wore around his shoulders nestled, the
bright yellow silk cloth of the mother. That was funny. He wanted to laugh, but forgot it, and
with involuntary movements of comfort he buried his back even more in the gentle folds. He felt tired
and sat in the living room, heavy and wide, in the fall of the rigid geblumten cushion sofa, which
filled the oval table with just the center of the room. He pondered and pondered. The poor festive canapé
complained to him. Then he jumped up, smoothed with a certain tenderness to crochet Schutzdeckchen
and stayed in one of the chairs, which were at the part. His face, which was sometimes boyish
outdated now by the minute under the influence of his thinking hard, it was almost eaten by the
folds, which also hinkrochen einbohrten like caterpillars and sick in a fruit. Did he have also
all what he would say? A vague fear hanging over him. He felt so abandoned, dizzy, like one
that has been forgotten on a high tower. He groped for a hold. And
the next time he imagined that he was disturbing the order, the grand
order of the room, in that he was waiting for this place.
 A time will come
for these people also, and they will sacrifice a mullet to Artemis, or some other fish to some
new divinity, unless indeed their own divinities, the Dagda, with his overflowing cauldron,
Lug, with his spear dipped in poppy- juice lest it rush forth hot for battle. Aengus, with
the three birds on his shoulder, Bodb and his red swineherd, and all the heroic children of
Dana, set up once more their temples of grey stone. Their reign has never ceased, but only
waned in power a little, for the Sidhe still pass in every wind, and dance and play at hurley,
and fight their sudden battles in every hollow and on every hill; but they cannot build their
temples again till there have been martyrdoms and victories, and perhaps even that long-foretold
battle in the Valley of the Black Pig.'

Keeping close to the wall that went about the pier on the seaward side, to escape the driving
foam and the wind, which threatened every moment to lift us off our feet, we made our way in
silence to the door of the square building. Michael Robartes opened it with a key, on which
I saw the rust of many salt winds, and led me along a bare passage and up an uncarpeted stair
to a little room surrounded with bookshelves. A meal would be brought, but only of fruit, for
I must submit to a tempered fast before the ceremony, he explained, and with it a book on the
doctrine and method of the Order, over which I was to spend what remained of the winter daylight.
He then left me, promising to return an hour before the ceremony. I began searching among the
bookshelves, and found one of the most exhaustive alchemical libraries I have ever seen. There
were the works of Morienus, who hid his immortal body under a shirt of hair-cloth; of Avicenna,
who was a drunkard and yet controlled numberless legions of spirits; of Alfarabi, who put so
many spirits into his lute that he could make men laugh, or weep, or fall in deadly trance
as he would; of Lully, who transformed himself into the likeness of a red cock; of Flamel,
who with his wife Parnella achieved the elixir many hundreds of years ago, and is fabled to
live still in Arabia among the Dervishes; and of many of less fame. There were very few mystics
but alchemical mystics, and because, I had little doubt, of the devotion to one god of the
greater number and of the limited sense of beauty, which Robartes would hold an inevitable
consequence; but I did notice a complete set of facsimiles of the prophetical writings of William
Blake, and probably because of the multitudes that thronged his illumination and were 'like
the gay fishes on the wave when the moon sucks up the dew.' I noted also many poets and prose
writers of every age, but only those who were a little weary of life, as indeed the greatest
have been everywhere, and who cast their imagination to us, as a something they needed no longer
now that they were going up in their fiery chariots.

Presently I heard a tap at the door, and a woman came in and laid a little fruit upon the table.
I judged that she had once been handsome, but her cheeks were hollowed by what I would have
held, had I seen her anywhere else, an excitement of the flesh and a thirst for pleasure, instead
of which it doubtless was an excitement of the imagination and a thirst for beauty. I asked
her some question concerning the ceremony, but getting no answer except a shake of the head,
saw that I must await initiation in silence. When I had eaten, she came again, and having laid
a curiously wrought bronze box on the table, lighted the candles, and took away the plates
and the remnants. So soon as I was alone, I turned to the box, and found that the peacocks
of Hera spread out their tails over the sides and lid, against a background, on which were
wrought great stars, as though to affirm that the heavens were a part of their glory. "You can say yes, you did it, you...oh
God - well, you just went right over. Didn't you? Why couldn't you have left it alone? Many people
over there could have." Bohush stopped laughing. The book was written upon vellum, and
in beautiful clear letters, interspersed with symbolical pictures and illuminations, after
the manner of the Splendor Soils.

