It is only after he is fairly arrived and settled down in  his chosen corner, that the invalid
begins to understand the  change that has befallen him.  Everything about him is as he  had
remembered, or as he had anticipated.  Here, at his feet,  under his eyes, are the olive gardens
and the blue sea.   Nothing can change the eternal magnificence of form of the  naked Alps
behind Mentone; nothing, not even the crude curves  of the railway, can utterly deform the
suavity of contour of  one bay after another along the whole reach of the Riviera. (2) Standing
of the larger box on end with resulting failure because the child could not stand on the sloping
edges of the top of the box. (3) The larger box was turned on its side and the lighter box
drawn up opposite it and stood on end.  It is in vain that he spurs his
discouraged spirit; in  vain that he chooses out points of view, and stands there,  looking
with all his eyes, and waiting for some return of the  pleasure that he remembers in other
days, as the sick folk may  have awaited the coming of the angel at the pool of Bethesda. 
He is like an enthusiast leading about with him a stolid,  indifferent tourist.  There is some
one by who is out of  sympathy with the scene, and is not moved up to the measure of  the occasion;
and that some one is himself.  The world is  disenchanted for him.  He seems to himself to
touch things  with muffled hands, and to see them through a veil.  His life  becomes a palsied
fumbling after notes that are silent when he  has found and struck them.  He cannot recognise
that this  phlegmatic and unimpressionable body with which he now goes  burthened, is the same
that he knew heretofore so quick and  delicate and alive.

He is tempted to lay the blame on the very softness and  amenity of the climate, and to fancy
that in the rigours of  the winter at home, these dead emotions would revive and  flourish.
A longing for the brightness and silence of fallen  snow seizes him at such times. In the case of the
series of trials given on June 8, numbered 191 to 200, the method used was either that of the
first at the right and then the next, or direct choice of the right box.
Throughout the trials with this problem, the end boxes, numbers 1
and 9, were avoided.  And yet  the stuff of which these yearnings are made, is of the  flimsiest: if but the
thermometer fall a little below its  ordinary Mediterranean level, or a wind come down from
the  snow-clad Alps behind, the spirit of his fancies changes upon  the instant, and many a
doleful vignette of the grim wintry  streets at home returns to him, and begins to haunt his
memory.  The hopeless, huddled attitude of tramps in doorways;  the flinching gait of barefoot
children on the icy pavement;  the sheen of the rainy streets towards afternoon; the  meagreanatomy
of the poor defined by the clinging of wet  garments; the high canorous note of the North-easter
on days  when the very houses seem to stiffen with cold: these, and  such as these, crowd back
upon him, and mockingly substitute  themselves for the fanciful winter scenes with which he
had  pleased himself a while before.  He cannot be glad enough that  he is where he is.  If
only the others could be there also; if  only those tramps could lie down for a little in the
sunshine,  and those children warm their feet, this once, upon a kindlier  earth; if only there
were no cold anywhere, and no nakedness,  and no hunger; if only it were as well with all men
as it is  with him!

