Clara had her tea in her room that evening, and lived there the whole of the next day. The
family down-stairs was not comfortable. Sir Anthony could not be made to understand why his
guest kept her room,--which was not odd, as Lady Aylmer was very sparing in the information
she gave him; and Belinda found it to be impossible to sit at table, or to say a few words
to her father and mother, without showing at every moment her consciousness that a crisis had
occurred. By the next day's post the letter to Mrs Askerton was sent, and at the appointed
time Captain Aylmer arrived. About an hour after he entered the house, Belinda went up-stairs
with a message from him;--would Miss Amedroz see him? Miss Amedroz would see him, but made
it a condition of doing so that she should not be required to meet Lady Aylmer. She need not
be afraid,' said Lady Aylmer. 'Unless she sends me a full apology, with a promise that she
will have no further intercourse whatever with that woman, I will never willingly see her again.'
A meeting was therefore arranged between Captain Aylmer and Miss Amedroz in a sitting-room
upstairs.

'What is all this, Clara?' said Captain Aylmer, at once.

'Simply this that your mother has insulted me most wantonly.'

'She says that it is you who have been uncourteous to her.'

'Be it so you can of course believe whichever you please, and it is desirable, no doubt, that
you should prefer to believe your mother.'

'But I do not wish there to be any quarrel.'

'But there is a quarrel, Captain Aylmer, and I must leave your father's house. I cannot stay
here after what has taken place. Your mother told me I cannot tell you what she told me, but
she made against me just those accusations which she knew it would be the hardest for me to bear.'

'I'm sure you have mistaken her.'

'No; I have not mistaken her.'

'And where do you propose to go?'

'To Mrs Askerton.'

'Oh, Clara!'

'I have written to Mrs Askerton to ask her to receive me for awhile. Indeed, I may almost say
that I had no other choice.'

'If you go there, Clara, there will be an end to everything.'

'And there must be an end of what you call everything, Captain Aylmer,' said she, smiling.
'It cannot be for your good to bring into your family a wife of whom your mother would think
so badly as she thinks of me.'

There was a great deal said, and Captain Aylmer walked very often up and down the room, endeavouring
to make some arrangement which might seem in some sort to appease his mother. Would Clara only
allow a telegram to be sent to Mrs Askerton, to explain that she had changed her mind? But
Clara would allow no such telegram to be sent, and on that evening she packed up all her things.
Captain Aylmer saw her again and again, sending Belinda backwards and forwards, and making
different appointments up to midnight; but it was all to no purpose, and on the next morning
she took her departure alone in the Aylmer Park carriage for the railway station. Captain Aylmer
had proposed to go with her; but she had so stoutly declined his company that he was obliged
to abandon his intention. She saw neither of the ladies on that morning, but Sir Anthony came
out to say a word of farewell to her in the hall. 'I am very sorry for all this,' said he.
'It is a pity,' said Clara, 'but it cannot be helped. Good-bye, Sir Anthony.' 'I hope we may
meet again under pleasanter circumstances,' said the baronet. To this Clara made no reply,
and was then handed into the carriage by Captain Aylmer.

'I am so bewildered,' said he, 'that I cannot now say anything definite, but I shall write
to you, and probably follow you.'

'Do not follow me, pray, Captain Aylmer,' said she, Then she was driven to the station; and
as she passed through the lodges of the park entrance she took what she intended to be a final
farewell of Aylmer Park.

CHAPTER XXVII

ONCE MORE BACK TO BELTON

When the carriage was driven away, Sir Anthony and Captain Aylmer were left standing alone
at the ball door of the house. The servants had slunk off, and the father and son, looking
at each other, felt that they also must slink away, or else have some words together on the
subject of their guest's departure. The younger gentleman would have preferred that there should
be no words, but Sir Anthony was curious to know something of what had passed in the house
during the last few days. 'I'm afraid things are not going quite comfortable,' he said.

'It seems to me, sir,' said his son, 'that things very seldom do go quite comfortable.'

'But, Fred what is it all about? Your mother says that Miss Amedroz is behaving very badly.'

'And Miss Amedroz says that my mother is behaving very badly.'

'Of course that's only natural. And what do you say?'

'I say nothing, sir. The less said the soonest mended.'

'That's all very well; but it seems to me that you, in your position, must say something. The
long and the short of it is this. Is she to be your wife?'

'Upon my word, sir, I don't know.'

They were still standing out under the portico, and as Sir Anthony did not for a minute or
two ask any further questions, Captain Aylmer turned as though he were going into the house.
But his father had still a word or two to say. Stop a moment, Fred. I don't often trouble you
with advice.'

'I'm sure I'm always glad to hear it when you offer any.'

'I know very well that in most things your opinion is better than mine. You've had advantages
which I never had. But I've had more experience than you, my dear boy. It stands to reason
that in some things I must have had more experience than you.' There was a tone of melancholy
in the father's voice as he said this which quite touched his son, and which brought the two
closer together out in the porch. 'Take my word for it,' continued Sir Anthony, 'that you are
much better off as you are than you could be with a wife.'

'Do you mean to say that no man should marry?'

'No I don't mean to say that. An eldest son ought to marry, so that the property may have an
heir. And poor men should marry, I suppose, as they want wives to do for them. And sometimes,
no doubt, a man must marry when he has got to be very fond of a girl, and has compromised himself,
and all that kind of thing. I would never advise any man to sully his honour.' As Sir Anthony
said this he raised himself a little with his two sticks and spoke out in a bolder voice. The
voice however, sank again as he descended from the realms of honour to those of prudence. 'But
none of these cases are yours, Fred. To be sure you'll have the Perivale property; but that
is not a family estate, and you'll be much better off by turning it into money. And in the
way of comfort, you can be a great deal more comfortable without a wife than you can with one.
What do you want a wife for? And then, as to Miss Amedroz,--for myself I must say that I like
her uncommonly. She has been very pleasant in her ways with me. But somehow or another, I don't
think you are so much in love with her but what you can do without her.' Hereupon he paused
and looked his son full in the face. Fred had also been thinking of the matter in his own way,
and asking himself the same question,--whether he was in truth so much in love with Clara that
he could not live without her. 'Of course I don't know,' continued Sir Anthony, 'what has taken
place just now between you and her, or what between her and your mother; but I suppose the
whole thing might fall through without any further trouble to you,--or without anything unhandsome
on your part?' But Captain Aylmer still said nothing. The whole thing might, no doubt, fall
through, but he wished to be neither unjust nor ungenerous,--and he specially wished to avoid
anything unhandsome. After a further pause of a few minutes, Sir Anthony went on again, pouring
forth the words of experience. 'Of course marriage is all very well. I married rather early
in life, and have always found your mother to be a most excellent woman. A better woman doesn't
breathe. I'm as sure of that as I am of anything. But God bless me of course you can see. I
can't call anything my own. I'm tied down here and I can't move. I've never got a shilling
to spend, while all these lazy hounds about the place are eating me up. There isn't a clerk
with a hundred a year in London that isn't better off than I am as regards ready money. And
what comfort have I in a big house, and no end of gardens, and a place like this? What pleasures
do I get out of it? That comes of marrying and keeping up one's name in the county respectably!
What do I care for the county? D---- the county! I often wish that I'd been a younger son as
you are.'

Captain Aylmer had no answer to make to all this. It was, no doubt, the fact that age and good
living had made Sir Anthony altogether incapable of enjoying the kind of life which he desiderated,
and that he would probably have eaten and drunk himself into his grave long since had that
kind of life been within his reach. This, however, the son could not explain to the father.
But in fitting, as he endeavoured to do, his father's words to his own case, Captain Aylmer
did perceive that a bachelor's life might perhaps be the most suitable to his own peculiar
case. Only he would do nothing unhandsome. As to that he was quite resolved. Of course Clara
must show herself to be in some degree amenable to reason and to the ordinary rules of the
world; but he was aware that his mother was hot-tempered, and he generously made up his mind
that he would give Miss Amedroz even yet another chance.

At the hotel in London Clara found a short note from Mrs Askerton, in which she was warmly
assured that everything should be done to make her comfortable at the cottage as long as she
should wish to stay there. But the very warmth of affection thus expressed made her almost
shrink from what she was about to do. Mrs Askerton was no doubt anxious for her coming; but
would her Cousin Will Belton approve of the visit; and what would her Cousin Mary say about
it? If she was being driven into this step against her own approval, by the insolence of Lady
Aylmer if she was doing this thing simply because Lady Aylmer had desired her not to do it,
and was doing it in opposition to the wishes of the man she had promised to marry as well as
to her own judgment, there could not but be cause for shrinking. And yet she believed that
she was right. If she could only have had some one to tell her some one in whom she could trust
implicitly to direct her! She had hitherto been very much prone to rebel against authority.
Against her aunt she had rebelled, and against her father, and against her lover. But now she
wished with all her heart that there might be some one to whom she could submit with perfect
faith. If she could only know what her Cousin Will would think. In him she thought she could
have trusted with that perfect faith if only he would have been a brother to her.

But it was too late now for doubting, and on the next day she found herself getting out of
the old Redicote fly, at Colonel Askerton's door. He came out to meet her, and his greeting
was very friendly. Hitherto there had been no great intimacy between him and her, owing rather
to the manner of life adopted by him than to any cause of mutual dislike between them. Mrs
Askerton had shown herself desirous of some social intercourse since she had been at Belton,
but with Colonel Askerton there had been nothing of this. He had come there intending to live
alone, and had been satisfied to carry out his purpose. But now Clara had come to his house
as a guest, and he assumed towards her altogether a new manner. 'We are so glad to have you,'
he said, taking both her hands. Then she passed on into the cottage, and in a minute was in
her friend's arms.

'Dear Clara;--dearest Clara, I am so glad to have you here.'

'It is very good of you.'

'No, dear; the goodness is with you to come. But we won't quarrel about that. We will both
be ever so good. And he is so happy that you should be here. You'll get to know him now. But
come up-stairs. There's a fire in your room, and I'll be your maid for the occasion,--because
then we can talk.' Clara did as she was bid and went up-stairs; and as she sat over the fire
while her friend knelt beside her,--for Mrs Askerton was given to such kneelings,--she could
not but tell herself that Belton Cottage was much more comfortable than Aylmer Park. During
the whole time of her sojourn at Aylmer Park no word of real friendship had once greeted her
ears. Everything there had been cold and formal, till coldness and formality had given way
to violent insolence.

'And so you have quarrelled with her ladyship,' said Mrs Askerton. 'I knew you would.'

'I have not said anything about quarrelling with her.'

'But of course you have. Come, now; don't make yourself disagreeable. You have had a downright
battle have you not?'

'Something very like it, I'm afraid.'

'I am so glad,' said Mrs Askerton, rubbing her hands.

'That is ill-natured.'

'Very well. Let it be ill-natured. One isn't to be good-natured all round, or what would be
the use of it? And what sort of a woman is she?'

'Oh dear; I couldn't describe her. She is very large, and wears a great wig, and manages everything
herself, and I've no doubt she's a very good woman in her own way.'

'I can see her at once and a very pillar of virtue as regards morality and going to church.
Poor me! Does she know that you have come here?'

'I have no doubt she does. I did not tell her, nor would I tell her daughter; but I told Captain
Aylmer.'

'That was right. That was very right. I'm so glad of that. But who would doubt that you would
show a proper spirit? And what did he say?'

'Not much, indeed.'

'I won't trouble you about him. I don't in the least doubt but all that will come right. And
what sort of man is Sir Anthony?'

'A common-place sort of a man; very gouty, and with none of his wife's strength. I liked him
the best of them all.'

'Because you saw the least of him, I suppose.'

'He was kind in his manner to me.'

'And they were like she-dragons. I understand it all, and can see them just as though I had
been there. I felt that I knew what would come of it when you first told me that you were going
to Aylmer Park, I did, indeed. I could have prophesied it all.'

'What a pity you did not.'

'It would have done no good and your going there has done good. It has opened your eyes to
more than one thing, I don't doubt. But tell me have you told them in Norfolk that you were
coming here?'

'No I have not written to my cousin.'

'Don't be angry with me if I tell you something. I have.'

'Have what?'

'I have told Mr Belton that you were coming here. It was in this way. I had to write to him
about our continuing in the cottage. Colonel Askerton always makes me write if it's possible,
and of course we were obliged to settle something as to the place.'

'I'm sorry you said anything about me.'

'How could I help it? What would you have thought of me, or what would he have thought, if,
when writing to him, I had not mentioned such a thing as your visit? Besides, it's much better
that he should know.'

'I am sorry that you said anything about it.'

'You are ashamed that he should know that you are here,' said Mrs Askerton, in a tone of reproach.

'Ashamed! No; I am not ashamed. But I would sooner that he had not been told as yet. Of course
he would have been told before long.'

'But you are not angry with me?'

'Angry! How can I be angry with any one who is so kind to me?'

That evening passed by very pleasantly, and when she went again to her own room, Clara was
almost surprised to find how completely she was at home. On the next day she and Mrs Askerton
together went up to the house, and roamed through all the rooms, and Clara seated herself in
all the accustomed chairs. On the sofa, just in the spot to which Belton had thrown it, she
found the key of the cellar. She took it up in her band, thinking that she would give it to
the servant; but again she put it back upon the sofa. It was his key, and he had left it there,
and if ever there came an occasion she would remind him where he had put it. Then they went
out to the cow, who was at her ease in a little home paddock.

'Dear Bessy,' said Clara, 'see how well she knows me.' But I think the tame little beast would
have known any one else as well who had gone up to her as Clara did, with food in her hand.
'She is quite as sacred as any cow that ever was worshipped among the cow-worshippers,' said
Mrs Askerton. I suppose they milk her and sell the butter, but otherwise she is not regarded
as an ordinary cow at all.' 'Poor Bessy,' said Clara. 'I wish she had never come here. What
is to be done with her?' 'Done with her! She'll stay here till she dies a natural death, and
then a romantic pair of mourners will follow her to her grave, mixing their sympathetic tears
comfortably as they talk of the old days; and in future years, Bessy will grow to be a divinity
of the past, never to be mentioned without tenderest reminiscences. I have not the slightest
difficulty in prophesying as to Bessy's future life and posthumous honours.' They roamed about
the place the whole morning, through the garden and round the farm buildings, and in and out
of the house; and at every turn something was said about Will Belton. But Clara would not go
up to the rocks, although Mrs Askerton more than once attempted to turn in that direction.
He had said that he never would go there again except under certain circumstances. She knew
that those circumstances would never come to pass; but yet neither would she go there. She
would never go there till her cousin was married. Then, if in those days she should ever be
present at Belton Castle, she would creep up to the spot all alone, and allow herself to think
of the old days.

On the following morning there came to her a letter bearing the Downham post-mark but at the
first glance she knew that it was not from her Cousin Will. Will wrote with a bold round hand,
that was extremely plain and caligraphic when he allowed himself time for the work in hand,
as he did with the commencement of his epistles, but which would become confused and altogether
anti-caligraphic when he fell into a hurry towards the end of his performance as was his wont.
But the address of this letter was written in a pretty, small, female hand,--very careful in
the perfection of every letter, and very neat in every stroke. It was from Mary Briton, between
whom and Clara there had never hitherto been occasion for correspondence. The letter was as
follows:--

'Plaistow Hall, April, 186--.

'My Dear Cousin Clara,

'William has heard from your friends at Belton, who are tenants on the estate, and as to whom
there seems to be some question whether they are to remain. He has written, saying, I believe,
that there need be no difficulty if they wish to stay there. But we learn, also, from Mrs Askerton's
letter, that you are expected at the cottage, and therefore I will address this to Belton,
supposing that it may find you there.

'You and I have never yet known each other which has been a grief to me; but this grief, I
hope, may be cured some day before long. I myself, as you know, am such a poor creature that
I cannot go about the world to see my friends as other people do at least, not very well; and
therefore I write to you with the object of asking you to come and see me here. This is an
interesting old house in its way; and though I must not conceal from you that life here is
very, very quiet, I would do my best to make the days pass pleasantly with you. I had heard
that you were gone to Aylmer Park. Indeed, William told me of his taking you up to London.
Now it seems you have left Yorkshire, and I suppose you will not return there very soon. If
it be so, will it not be well that you should come to me for a short time?

'Both William and I feel that just for the present for a little time you would perhaps prefer
to be alone with me. He must go to London for awhile, and then on to Belton, to settle your
affairs and his. He intends to be absent for six weeks. If you would not be afraid of the dullness
of this house for so long a time, pray come to us. The pleasure to me would be very great,
and I hope that you have some of that feeling, which with me is so strong, that we ought not
to be any longer personally strangers to each other. You could then make up your mind as to
what you would choose to do afterwards. I think that by the end of that time that is, when
William returns my uncle and aunt from Sleaford will be with us. He is a clergyman, you know;
and if you then like to remain, they will be delighted to make your acquaintance.

'It seems to be a long journey for a young lady to make alone, from Belton to Plaistow; but
travelling is so easy now-a-days, and young ladies seem to be so independent, that you may
be able to manage it. Hoping to see you soon, I remain

'Your affectionate Cousin,

'MARY BELTON.'

This letter she received before breakfast, and was therefore able to read it in solitude, and
to keep its receipt from the knowledge of Mrs Askerton, if she should be so minded. She understood
at once all that it intended to convey a hint that Plaistow Hall would be a better resting
place for her than Mrs Askerton's cottage; and an assurance that if she would go to Plaistow
Hall for her convenience, no advantage should be taken of her presence there by the owner of
the house for his convenience. As she sat thinking of the offer which had been made to her
she fancied that she could see and hear her Cousin Will as he discussed the matter with his
sister, and with a half assumption of surliness declared his own intention of going away. Captain
Aylmer, after that interview in London, had spoken of Belton's conduct as being unpardonable;
but Clara had not only pardoned him, but had, in her own mind, pronounced his virtues to be
so much greater than his vices as to make him almost perfect. 'But I will not drive him out
of his own house,' she said. 'What does it matter where I go?'

'Colonel Askerton has had a letter from your cousin,' said Mrs Askerton as soon as the two
ladies were alone together.

'And what does he say?'

'Not a word about you.'

'So much the better. I have given him trouble enough, and am glad to think that he should be
free of me for awhile. Is Colonel Askerton to stay at the cottage?'

'Now, Clara, you are a hypocrite. You know that you are a hypocrite.'

'Very likely but I don't know why you should accuse me just now.'

'Yes, you do. Have not you heard from Norfolk also?'

'Yes;--I have.'

'I was sure of it. I knew he would never have written in that way, in answer to my letter,
ignoring your visit here altogether, unless he had written to you also.'

'But he has not written to me. My letter is from his sister. There it is.' Whereupon she handed
the letter to Mrs Askerton, and waited patiently while it was being read. Her friend returned
it to her without a word, and Clara was the first to speak again. 'It is a nice letter, is
it not? I never saw her, you know.'

'So she says.'

'But is it not a kind letter?'

'I suppose it is meant for kindness. It is not very complimentary to me. It presumes that such
a one as I may be treated without the slightest consideration. And so I may. It is only fit
that I should be so treated. If you ask my advice, I advise you to go at once at once.'

'But I have not asked your advice, dear; nor do I intend to ask it.'

'You would not have shown it me if you had not intended to go.'

'How unreasonable you are! You told me just now that I was a hypocrite for not telling you
of my letter, and now you are angry with me because I have shown it you.'

'I am not angry. I think you have been quite right to show it me. I don't know how else you
could have acted upon it.'

'But I do not mean to act upon it. I shall not go to Plaistow. There are two reasons against
it, each sufficient. I shall not leave you just yet unless you send me away; and I shall not
cause my cousin to be turned out of his own house.'

'Why should he be turned out? Why should you not go to him? You love him and as for him, he
is more in love than any man I ever knew. Go to Plaistow Hall, and everything will run smooth.'

'No, dear; I shall not do that.'

'Then you are foolish. I am bound to tell you so, as I have inveigled you here.'

'I thought I had invited myself.'

'No; I asked you to come, and when I asked you I knew that I was wrong. Though I meant to be
kind, I knew that I was unkind. I saw that my husband disapproved it, though he had not the
heart to tell me so. I wish he had. I wish he had.'

'Mrs Askerton, I cannot tell you how much you wrong yourself, and how you wrong me also. I
am more than contented to be here.'

'But you should not be contented to be here. It is just that. In learning to love me or rather,
perhaps, to pity me, you lower yourself. Do you think that I do not see it all, and know it
all? Of course it is bad to be alone, but I have no right not to be alone.' There was nothing
for Clara to do but to draw herself once again close to the poor woman, and to embrace her
with protestations of fair, honest, equal regard and friendship. 'Do you think I do not understand
that letter?' continued Mrs Askerton. 'If it had come from Lady Aylmer I could have laughed
at it, because I believe Lady Aylmer to be an overbearing virago, whom it is good to put down
in every way possible. But this comes from a pure-minded woman, one whom I believe to be little
given to harsh judgments on her fellow-sinners; and she tells you, in her calm wise way, that
it is bad for you to be here with me.'

'She says nothing of the kind.'

'But does she not mean it? Tell me honestly do you not know that she means it?'

'I am not to be guided by what she means.'

'But you are to be guided by what her brother means. It is to come to that, and you may as
well bend your neck at once. It is to come to that, and the sooner the better for you. It is
easy to see that you are badly off for guidance when you take up me as your friend.' When she
had so spoken Mrs Askerton got up and went to the door. 'No, Clara, do not come with me; not
now,' she said, turning to her companion, who had risen as though to follow her. 'I will come
to you soon, but I would rather be alone now. And, look here, dear; you must answer your cousin's
letter. Do so at once, and say that you will go to Plaistow. In any event it will be better
for you.'

Clara, when she was alone, did answer her cousin's letter, but she did not accept the invitation
that had been given her. She assured Miss Belton that she was most anxious to know her, and
hoped that she might do so before long, either at Plaistow or at Belton; but that at present
she was under an engagement to stay with her friend Mrs Askerton. In an hour or two Mrs Askerton
returned, and Clara handed to her the note to read. 'Then all I can say is you are very silly,
and don't know on which side your bread is buttered.' It was evident from Mrs Askerton's voice
that she had recovered her mood and tone of mind. 'I don't suppose it will much signify, as
it will all come right at last,' she said afterwards. And then, after luncheon, when she had
been for a few minutes with her husband in his own room, she told Clara that the colonel wanted
to speak to her. 'You'll find him as grave as a judge, for he has got something to say to you
in earnest. Nobody can be so stern as he is when he chooses to put on his wig and gown.' So
Clara went into the colonel's study, and seated herself in a chair which he had prepared for her.

She remained there for over an hour, and during the hour the conversation became very animated.
Colonel Askerton's assumed gravity had given way to ordinary eagerness, during which he walked
about the room in the vehemence of his argument; and Clara, in answering him, had also put
forth all her strength. She had expected that he also was going to speak to her on the propriety
of her going to Norfolk; but he made no allusion to that subject, although all that he did
say was founded on Will Belton's letter to himself. Belton, in speaking of the cottage, had
told Colonel Askerton that Miss Amedroz would be his future landlord, and had then gone on
to explain that it was his, Belton's, intention to destroy the entail, and allow the property
to descend from the father to the daughter. 'As Miss Amedroz is with you now,' he said, 'may
I beg you to take the trouble to explain the matter to her at length, and to make her understand
that the estate is now, at this moment, in fact her own. Her possession of it does not depend
on any act of hers or, indeed, upon her own will or wish in the matter.' On this subject Colonel
Askerton had argued, using all his skill to make Clara in truth perceive that she was her father's
heiress through the generosity undoubtedly of her cousin and that she had no alternative but
to assume the possession which was thus thrust upon her.

And so eloquent was the colonel that Clara was staggered, though she was not convinced. 'It
is quite impossible,' she said. 'Though he may be able to make it over to me, I can give it
back again.'

'I think not. In such a matter as this a lady in your position can only be guided by her natural
advisers her father's lawyer and other family friends.'

'I don't know why a young lady should be in any way different from an old gentleman.'

'But an old gentleman would not hesitate under such circumstances. The entail in itself was
a cruelty, and the operation of it on your poor brother's death was additionally cruel.'

'It is cruel that any one should be poor,' argued Clara; 'but that does not take away the right
of a rich man to his property.'

There was much more of this sort said between them, till Clara was at any rate convinced that
Colonel Askerton believed that she ought to be the owner of the property. And then at last
he ventured upon another argument which soon drove Clara out of the room. 'There is, I believe,
one way in which it can all be made right,' said he.

'What way? 'said Clara, forgetting in her eagerness the obviousness of the mode which her companion
was about to point out.

'Of course, I know nothing of this myself,' he said smiling; 'but Mary thinks that you and
your cousin might arrange it between you if you were together.'

'You must not listen to what she says about that, Colonel Askerton.' 'Must I not? Well; I will
not listen to more than I can help; but Mary, as you know, is a persistent talker. I, at any
rate, have done my commission.' Then Clara left him and was alone for what remained of the
afternoon.

It could not be, she said to herself, that the property ought to be hers. It would make her
miserable, were she once to feel that she had accepted it. Some small allowance out of it,
coming to her from the brotherly love of her cousin some moderate stipend sufficient for her
livelihood, she thought she could accept from him. It seemed to her that it was her destiny
to be dependent on charity to eat bread given to her from the benevolence of a friend; and
she thought that she could endure his benevolence better than that of any other. Benevolence
from Aylmer Park or from Perivale would be altogether unendurable.

But why should it not be as Colonel Askerton had proposed? That this cousin of hers loved her
with all his heart with a constancy for which she had at first given him no credit she was
well aware. And, as regarded herself, she loved him better than all the world beside. She had
at last become conscious that she could not now marry Captain Aylmer without sin without false
vows, and fatal injury to herself and him. To the prospect of that marriage, as her future
fate, an end must be put at any rate an end, if that which had already taken place was not
to be regarded as end enough. But yet she had been engaged to Captain Aylmer was engaged to
him even now. When last her cousin had mentioned to her Captain Aylmer's name she had declared
that she loved him still. How then could she turn round now, and so soon accept the love of
another man? How could she bring herself to let her cousin assume to himself the place of a
lover, when it was but the other day that she had rebuked him for expressing the faintest hope
in that direction?

But yet,--yet--! As for going to Plaistow, that was quite out of the question.

'So you are to be the heiress after all,' said Mrs Askerton to her that night in her bedroom.

'No; I am not to be the heiress after all,' said Clara, rising against her friend impetuously.

'You'll have to be lady of Belton in one way or the other at any rate,' said Mrs Askerton.

CHAPTER XXVIII

MISS AMEDROZ IS PURSUED

'I suppose now, my dear, it may be considered that everything is settled about that young lady,'
said Lady Aylmer to her son, on the same day that Miss Amedroz left Aylmer Park.

'Nothing is settled, ma'am,' said the captain.

'You don't mean to tell me that after what has passed you intend to follow her up any farther.'

'I shall certainly endeavour to see her again.'

'Then, Frederic, I must tell you that you are very wrong indeed almost worse than wrong. I
would say wicked, only I feel sure that you will think better of it. You cannot mean to tell
me that you would marry her after what has taken place?'

'The question is whether she would marry me.'

'That is nonsense, Frederic. I wonder that you, who are so generally so clear-sighted, cannot
see more plainly than that. She is a scheming, artful young woman, who is playing a regular
game to catch a husband.'

'If that were so, she would have been more humble to you, ma'am.'

'Not a bit, Fred. That's just it. That has been her cleverness. She tried that on at first,
and found that she could not get round me. Don't allow yourself to be deceived by that, I pray.
And then there is no knowing how she may be bound up with those horrid people, so that she
cannot throw them over, even if she would.'

'I don't think you understand her, ma'am.'

'Oh very well. But I understand this, and you had better understand it too that she will never
again enter a house of which I am the mistress; nor can I ever enter a house in which she is
received. If you choose to make her your wife after that, I have done.' Lady Aylmer had not
done, or nearly done; but we need hear no more of her threats or entreaties. Her son left Aylmer
Park immediately after Easter Sunday, and as he went, the mother, nodding her head, declared
to her daughter that that marriage would never come off, let Clara Amedroz be ever so sly,
or ever so clever.

'Think of what I have said to you, Fred,' said Sir Anthony, as he took his leave of his son.

'Yes, sir, I will.'

'You can't be better off than you are;--you can't, indeed.' With these words in his ears Captain
Aylmer started for London, intending to follow Clara down to Belton. He hardly knew his own
mind on this matter of his purposed marriage. He was almost inclined to agree with his father
that he was very well off as he was. He was almost inclined to agree with his mother in her
condemnation of Clara's conduct. He was almost inclined to think that he had done enough towards
keeping the promise made to his aunt on her deathbed,--but still he was not quite contented
with himself. He desired to be honest and true, as far as his ideas went of honesty and truth,
and his conscience told him that Clara had been treated with cruelty by his mother. I am inclined
to think that Lady Aylmer, in spite of her high experience and character for wisdom, had not
fought her battle altogether well. No man likes to be talked out of his marriage by his mother,
and especially not so when the talking takes the shape of threats. When she told him that under
no circumstances would she again know Clara Amedroz, he was driven by his spirit of manhood
to declare to himself that that menace from her should not have the slightest influence on
him. The word or two which his father said was more effective. After all it might be better
for him in his peculiar position to have no wife at all. He did begin to believe that he had
no need for a wife. He had never before thought so much of his father's example as he did now.
Clara was manifestly a hot-tempered woman,--a very hot-tempered woman indeed! Now his mother
was also a hot-tempered woman, and he could see the result in the present condition of his
father's life. He resolved that he would follow Clara to Belton, so that some final settlement
might be made between them; but in coming to this resolution he acknowledged to himself that
should she decide against him he would not break his heart. She, however, should have her chance.
Undoubtedly it was only right that she should have her chance.

But the difficulty of the circumstances in which he was placed was so great, that it was almost
impossible for him to make up his mind fixedly to any purpose in reference to Clara. As he
passed through London on his way to Belton he called at Mr Green's chambers with reference
to that sum of fifteen hundred pounds, which it was now absolutely necessary that he should
make over to Miss Amedroz, and from Mr Green he learned that William Belton had given positive
instructions as to the destination of the Belton estate. He would not inherit it, or have anything
to do with it under the entail from the effects of which he desired to be made entirely free.
Mr Green, who knew that Captain Aylmer was engaged to marry his client, and who knew nothing
of any interruption to that agreement, felt no hesitation in explaining all this to Captain
Aylmer. 'I suppose you had heard of it before,' said Mr Green. Captain Aylmer certainly had
heard of it, and had been very much struck by the idea; but up to this moment he had not quite
believed in it. Coming simply from William Belton to Clara Amedroz, such an offer might be
no more than a strong argument used in love-making. 'Take back the property, but take me with
it, of course.' That Captain Aylmer thought might have been the correct translation of Mr William
Belton's romance. But he was forced to look at the matter differently when he found that it
had been put into a lawyer's hands. 'Yes,' said he,' I have heard of it. Mr Belton mentioned
it to me himself.' This was not strictly true. Clara had mentioned it to him; but Belton had
come into the room immediately afterwards, and Captain Aylmer might probably have been mistaken.

'He's quite in earnest,' said Mr Green.

'Of course, I can say nothing, Mr Green, as I am myself so nearly interested in the matter.
It is a great question, no doubt, how far such an entail as that should be allowed to operate.'

'I think it should stand, as a matter of course. I think Belton is wrong,' said Mr Green.

'Of course I can give no opinion,' said the other.

'I'll tell you what you can do, Captain Aylmer. You can suggest to Miss Amedroz that there
should be a compromise. Let them divide it. They are both clients of mine, and in that way
I shall do my duty to each. Let them divide it. Belton has money enough to buy up the other
moiety, and in that way would still be Belton of Belton.'

Captain Aylmer had not the slightest objection to such a plan. Indeed, he regarded it as in
all respects a wise and salutary arrangement. The moiety of the Belton estate might probably
be worth twenty-five thousand pounds, and the addition of such a sum as that to his existing
means would make all the difference in the world as to the expediency of his marriage. His
father's arguments would all fall to the ground if twenty-five thousand pounds were to be obtained
in this way; and he had but little doubt that such a change in affairs would go far to mitigate
his mother's wrath. But he was by no means mercenary in his views so, at least, he assured
himself. Clara should have her chance with or without the Belton estate or with or without
the half of it. He was by no means mercenary. Had he not made his offer to her and repeated
it almost with obstinacy, when she had no prospect of any fortune? He could always remember
that of himself at least; and remembering that now, he could take a delight in these bright
money prospects without having to accuse himself in the slightest degree of mercenary motives.
This fortune was a godsend which he could take with clean hands if only he should ultimately
be able to take the lady who possessed the fortune!

From London he wrote to Clara, telling her that he proposed to visit her at Belton. His letter
was written before he had seen Mr Green, and was not very fervent in its expressions; but,
nevertheless, it was a fair letter, written with the intention of giving her a fair chance.
He had seen with great sorrow 'with heartfelt grief,' that quarrel between his mother and his
own Clara. Thinking, as he felt himself obliged to think, about Mrs Askerton, he could not
but feel that his mother bad cause for her anger. But he himself was unprejudiced, and was
ready, and anxious also the word anxious was underscored to carry out his engagement. A few
words between them might probably set everything right, and therefore be proposed to meet her
at the Belton Castle house, at such an hour, on such a day. He should run down to Perivale
on his journey, and perhaps Clara would let him have a line addressed to him there. Such was
his letter.

'What do you think of that?' said Clara, showing it to Mrs Askerton on the afternoon of the
day on which she had received it.

'What do you think of it?' said Mrs Askerton. 'I can only hope, that he will not come within
reach of my hands.'

'You are not angry with me for showing it to you?'

'No why should I be angry with you? Of course I knew it all without any showing. Do not tell
Colonel Askerton, or they will be killing each other.'

'Of course I shall not tell Colonel Askerton; but I could not help showing this to you.'

'And you will meet him?'

'Yes; I shall meet him. What else can I do?'

'Unless, indeed, you were to write and tell him that it would do no good.'

'It will be better that he should come.'

'If you allow him to talk you over you will be a wretched woman all your life.'

'It will be better that he should come,' said Clara again. And then she wrote to Captain Aylmer
at Perivale, telling him that she would be at the house at the hour he had named, on the day
he had named.

When that day came she walked across the park a little before the time fixed, not wishing to
meet Captain Aylmer before she had reached the house. It was now nearly the middle of April,
and the weather was soft and pleasant. It was almost summer again, and as she felt this, she
thought of all the events which had occurred since the last summer of their agony of grief
at the catastrophe which had closed her brother's life, of her aunt's death first, and then
of her father's following so close upon the other, and of the two offers of marriage made to
her as to which she was now aware that she had accepted the wrong man and rejected the wrong
man. She was steadily minded, now, at this moment, that before she parted from Captain Aylmer,
her engagement with him should be brought to a close. Now, at this coming interview, so much
at any rate should be done. She had tried to make herself believe that she felt for him that
sort of affection which a woman should have for the man she is to marry, but she had failed.
She hardly knew whether she had in truth ever loved him; but she was quite sure that she did
not love him now. No she had done with Aylmer Park, and she could feel thankful, amidst all
her troubles, that that difficulty should vex her no more. In showing Captain Aylmer's letter
to Mrs Askerton she had made no such promise as this, but her mind had been quite made up.
'He certainly shall not talk me over,' she said to herself as she walked across the park.

But she could not see her way so clearly out of that further difficulty with regard to her
cousin. It might be that she would be able to rid herself of the one lover with comparative
ease; but she could not bring herself to entertain the idea of accepting the other. It was
true that this man longed for her,--desired to call her his own, with a wearing, anxious, painful
desire which made his heart grievously heavy as though with lead hanging to its strings; and
it was true that Clara knew that it was so. It was true also that his spirit had mastered her
spirit, and that his persistence had conquered her resistance,--the resistance, that is, of
her feelings. But there remained with her a feminine shame, which made it seem to her to be
impossible that she should now reject Captain Aylmer, and as a consequence of that rejection,
accept Will Belton's hand. As she thought of this, she could not see her way out of her trouble
in that direction with any of that clearness which belonged to her in reference to Captain Aylmer.

She had been an hour in the house before he came, and never did an hour go so heavily with
her. There was no employment for her about the place, and Mrs Bunce, the old woman who now
lived there, could not understand why her late mistress chose to remain seated among the unused
furniture. Clara had of course told her that a gentleman was coming. 'Not Mr Will?' said the
woman. 'No; it is not Mr Will,' said Clara; 'his name is Captain Aylmer.' 'Oh, indeed.' And
then Mrs Bunce looked at her with a mystified look. Why on earth should not the gentleman call
on Miss Amedroz at Mrs Askerton's cottage? 'I'll be sure to show 'un up, when a comes, at any
rate,' said the old woman solemnly and Clara felt that it was all very uncomfortable.

At last the gentleman did come, and was shown up with all the ceremony of which Mrs Bunce was
capable. 'Here he be, mum.' Then Mrs Bunce paused a moment before she retreated, anxious to
learn whether the new corner was a friend or a foe. She concluded from the captain's manner
that he was a very dear friend, and then she departed.

'I hope you are not surprised at my coming,' said Captain Aylmer, still holding Clara by the hand.

'A little surprised,' she said, smiling.

'But not annoyed?'

'No;--not annoyed.'

'As soon as you had left Aylmer Park I felt that it was the right thing to do;--the only thing
to do,--as I told my mother.'

'I hope you have not come in opposition to her wishes,' said Clara, unable to control a slight
tone of banter as she spoke.

'In this matter I found myself compelled to act in accordance with my own judgment,' said he,
untouched by her sarcasm.

'Then I suppose that Lady Aylmer is,--is vexed with you for coming here. I shall be so sorry
for that;--so very sorry, as no good can come of it.'

'Well;--I am not so sure of that. My mother is a most excellent woman, one for whose opinions
on all matters I have the highest possible value a value so high, that--that--that--'

'That you never ought to act in opposition to it. That is what you really mean, Captain Aylmer;
and upon my word I think that you are right.'

'No, Clara; that is not what I mean not exactly that. Indeed, just at present I mean the reverse
of that. There are some things on which a man must act on his own judgment, irrespectively
of the opinions of any one else.'

'Not of a mother, Captain Aylmer?'

'Yes of a mother. That is to say, a man must do so. With a lady of course it is different.
I was very, very sorry that there should have been any unpleasantness at Aylmer Park.'

'It was not pleasant to me, certainly.'

'Nor to any of us, Clara.'

'At any rate, it need not be repeated.'

'I hope not.'

'No it certainly need not be repeated. I know now that I was wrong to go to Aylmer Park. I
felt sure beforehand that there were many things as to which I could not possibly agree with
Lady Aylmer, and I ought not to have gone.'

'I don't see that at all, Clara.'

'I do see it now.'

'I can't understand you. What things? Why should you be determined to disagree with my mother?
Surely you ought at any rate to endeavour to think as she thinks.'

'I cannot do that, Captain Aylmer.'

'I am sorry to hear you speak in this way. I have come here all the way from Yorkshire to try
to put things straight between us; but you receive me as though you would remember nothing
but that unpleasant quarrel.'

'It was so unpleasant,--so very unpleasant! I had better speak out the truth at once. I think
that Lady Aylmer ill-used me cruelly. I do. No one can talk me out of that conviction. Of course
I am sorry to be driven to say as much to you,--and I should never have said it, had you not
come here. But when you speak of me and your mother together, I must say what I feel. Your
mother and I, Captain Aylmer, are so opposed to each other, not only in feeling, but in opinions
also, that it is impossible that we should be friends;--impossible that we should not be enemies
if we are brought together.'

This she said with great energy, looking intently into his face as she spoke. He was seated
near her, on a chair from which he was leaning over towards her, holding his hat in both hands
between his legs. Now, as he listened to her, he drew his chair still nearer, ridding himself
of his hat, which he left upon the carpet, and keeping his eyes upon hers as though he were
fascinated. 'I am sorry to hear you speak like this,' he said.

'It is best to say the truth.'

'But, Clara, if you intend to be my wife--'

'Oh, no that is impossible now.'

'What is impossible?'

'Impossible that I should become your wife. Indeed I have convinced myself that you do not
wish it.'

'But I do wish it.'

'No no. If you will question your heart about it quietly, you will find that you do not wish it.'

'You wrong me, Clara.'

'At any rate it cannot be so.'

'I will not take that answer from you,' he said, getting up from his chair, and walking once
up and down the room. Then he returned to it, and repeated his words. 'I will not take that
answer from you. An engagement such as ours cannot be put aside like an old glove. You do not
mean to tell me that all that has been between us is to mean nothing.' There was something
now like feeling in his tone, something like passion in his gesture, and Clara, though she
had no thought of changing her purpose, was becoming unhappy at the idea of his unhappiness.

'It has meant nothing,' she said. 'We have been like children together, playing at being in
love. It is a game from which you will come out scatheless, but I have been scalded.'

'Scalded!'

'Well never mind. I do not mean to complain, and certainly not of you.'

'I have come here all the way from Yorkshire in order that things may be put right between us.'

'You have been very good,--very good to come, and I will not say that I regret your trouble.
It is best, I think, that we should meet each other once more face to face, so that we may
understand each other. There was no understanding anything during those terrible days at Aylmer
Park.' Then she paused, but as he did not speak at once she went on. 'I do not blame you for
anything that has taken place, but I am quite sure of this that you and I could never be happy
together as man and wife.'

'I do not know why you say so; I do not indeed.'

'You would disapprove of everything that I should do. You do disapprove of what I am doing now.'

'Disapprove of what?'

'I am staying with my friend, Mrs Askerton.'

He felt that this was hard upon him. As she had shown herself inclined to withdraw herself
from him, he had become more resolute in his desire to follow her up, and to hold by his engagement.
He was not employed now in giving her another chance as he had proposed to himself to do but
was using what eloquence he had to obtain another chance for himself. Lady Aylmer had almost
made him believe that Clara would be the suppliant, but now he was the suppliant himself. In
his anxiety to keep her he was willing even to pass over her terrible iniquity in regard to
Mrs Askerton that great sin which had led to all these troubles. He had once written to her
about Mrs Askerton, using very strong language, and threatening her with his mother's full
displeasure. At that time Mrs Askerton had simply been her friend. There had been no question
then of her taking refuge under that woman's roof. Now she had repelled Lady Aylmer's counsels
with scorn, was living as a guest in Mrs Askerton's house; and yet he was willing to pass over
the Askerton difficulty without a word. He was willing not only to condone past offences, but
to wink at existing iniquity! But she,--she who was the sinner, would not permit of this. She
herself dragged up Mrs Askerton's name, and seemed to glory in her own shame.

'I had not intended,' said he, 'to speak of your friend.'

'I only mention her to show how impossible it is that we should ever agree upon some subjects
as to which a husband and wife should always be of one mind. I knew this from the moment in
which I got your letter and only that I was a coward I should have said so then.'

'And you mean to quarrel with me altogether?'

'No why should we quarrel?'

'Why, indeed?' said he.

'But I wish it to be settled,--quite settled, as from the nature of things it must be, that
there shall be no attempt at renewal of our engagement. After what has passed, how could I
enter your mother's house?'

'But you need not enter it.' Now, in his emergency he was willing to give up anything,--everything.
He had been prepared to talk her over into a reconciliation with his mother, to admit that
there had been faults on both sides, to come down from his high pedestal and discuss the matter
as though Clara and his mother stood upon the same footing. Having recognized the spirit of
his lady-love, he had told himself that so much indignity as that must be endured. But now,
he had been carried so far beyond this, that he was willing, in the sudden vehemence of his
love, to throw his mother over altogether, and to accede to any terms which Clara might propose
to him. 'Of course, I would wish you to be friends,' he said, using now all the tones of a
suppliant; 'but if you found that it could not be so--'

'Do you think that I would divide you from your mother?'

'There need be no question as to that.'

'Ah there you are wrong. There must be such questions. I should have thought of it sooner.'

'Clara, you are more to me than my mother. Ten times more.' As he said this he came up and
knelt down beside her. 'You are everything to me. You will not throw me over.' He was a suppliant
indeed, and such supplications are very potent with women. Men succeed often by the simple
earnestness of their prayers. Women cannot refuse to give that which is asked for with so much
of the vehemence of true desire. 'Clara, you have promised to be my wife. You have twice promised;
and can have no right to go back because you are displeased with what my mother may have said.
I am not responsible for my mother. Clara, say that you will be my wife.' As he spoke he strove
to take her hand, and his voice sounded as though there were in truth something of passion
in his heart.

CHAPTER XXIX

THERE IS NOTHING TO TELL

Captain Aylmer had never before this knelt to Clara Amedroz. Such kneeling on the part of lovers
used to be the fashion because lovers in those days held in higher value than they do now that
which they asked their ladies to give or because they pretended to do so. The forms at least
of supplication were used; whereas in these wiser days Augustus simply suggests to Caroline
that they two might as well make fools of themselves together and so the thing is settled without
the need of much prayer. Captain Aylmer's engagement had been originally made somewhat after
this fashion. He had not, indeed, spoken of the thing contemplated as a folly, not being a
man given to little waggeries of that nature; but he had been calm, unenthusiastic, and reasonable.
He had not attempted to evince any passion, and would have been quite content that Clara should
believe that he married as much from obedience to his aunt as from love for herself, had he
not found that Clara would not take him at all under such a conviction. But though she had
declined to come to him after that fashion though something more than that had been needed
still she had been won easily, and, therefore, lightly prized. I fear that it is so with everything
that we value with our horses, our houses, our wines, and, above all, with our women. Where
is the man who has heart and soul big enough to love a woman with increased force of passion
because she has at once recognized in him all that she has herself desired? Captain Aylmer
having won his spurs easily, had taken no care in buckling them, and now found, to his surprise,
that he was like to lose them. He had told himself that he would only be too glad to shuffle
his feet free of their bondage; but now that they were going from him, he began to find that
they were very necessary for the road that he was to travel. 'Clara,' he said, kneeling by
her side,' you are more to me than my mother; ten times more!'

This was all new to her. Hitherto, though she had never desired that he should assume such
attitude as this, she had constantly been unconsciously wounded by his coldness by his cold
propriety and unbending self-possession. His cold propriety and unbending self-possession were
gone now, and he was there at her feet. Such an argument, used at Aylmer Park, would have conquered
her would have won her at once, in spite of herself; but now she was minded to be resolute.
She had sworn to herself that she would not peril herself, or him, by joining herself to a
man with whom she had so little sympathy, and who apparently had none with her. But in what
way was she to answer such a prayer as that which was now made to her? The man who addressed
her was entitled to use all the warmth of an accepted lover. He only asked for that which had
already been given to him.

'Captain Aylmer--' she began.

'Why is it to be Captain Aylmer? What have I done that you should use me in this way? It was
not I who,--who,--made you unhappy at Aylmer Park.'

'I will not go back to that. It is of no use. Pray get up. It shocks me to see you in this way.'

'Tell me, then, that it is once more all right between us. Say that, and I shall be happier
than I ever was before yes, than I ever was before. I know how much I love you now, how sore
it would be to lose you. I have been wrong. I had not thought enough of that, but I will think
of it now.'

She found that the task before her was very difficult,--so difficult that she almost broke
down in performing it. It would have been so easy and, for the moment, so pleasant to have
yielded. He had his hand upon her arm, having attempted to take her hand. In preventing that
she had succeeded, but she could not altogether make herself free from him without rising.
For a moment she had paused,--paused as though she were about to yield. For a moment, as he
looked into her eyes, he had thought that he would again be victorious. Perhaps there was something
in his glance, some too visible return of triumph to his eyes, which warned her of her danger.
'No!' she said, getting up and walking away from him; 'no!'

'And what does "no" mean, Clara?' Then he also rose, and stood leaning on the table. 'Does
it mean that you will be forsworn?'

'It means this that I will not come between you and your mother; that I will not be taken into
a family in which I am scorned; that I will not go to Aylmer Park myself or be the means of
preventing you from going there.'

'There need be no question of Aylmer Park.'

'There shall be none!'

'But, so much being allowed, you will be my wife?'

'No, Captain Aylmer no. I cannot be your wife. Do not press it further; you must know that
on such a subject I would think much before I answered you. I have thought much, and I know
that I am right.'

'And your promised word is to go for nothing?'

'If it will comfort you to say so, you may say it. If you do not perceive that the mistake
made between us has been as much your mistake as mine, and has injured me more than it has
injured you, I will not remind you of it,--will never remind you of it after this.'

'But there has been no mistake and there shall be no injury.'

'Ah, Captain Aylmer you do not understand; you cannot understand. I would not for worlds reproach
you; but do you think I suffered nothing from your mother?'

'And must I pay for her sins?'

'There shall be no paying, no punishment, and no reproaches. There shall be none at least from
me. But,--do not think that I speak in anger or in pride,--I will not marry into Lady Aylmer's
family.'

'This is too bad,--too bad! After all that is past, it is too bad!'

'What can I say? Would you advise me to do that which would make us both wretched?'

'It would not make me wretched. It would make me happy. It would satisfy me altogether.'

'It cannot be, Captain Aylmer. It cannot be. When I speak to you in that way, will you not
let it be final?'

He paused a moment before he spoke again, and then he turned sharp upon her. 'Tell me this,
Clara; do you love me? Have you ever loved me?' She did not answer him, but stood there, listening
quietly to his accusations. 'You have never loved me, and yet you have allowed yourself to
say that you did. Is not that true?' Still she did not answer. 'I ask you whether that is not
true?' But though he asked her, and paused for an answer, looking the while full into her face,
yet she did not speak. And now I suppose you will become your cousin's wife?' he said. 'It
will suit you to change, and to say that you love him.'

Then at last she spoke. 'I did not think that you would have treated me in this way, Captain
Aylmer! I did not expect that you would insult me!'

'I have not insulted you.'

'But your manner to me makes my task easier than I could have hoped it to be. You asked me
whether I ever loved you? I once thought that I did so; and so thinking, told you, without
reserve, all my feeling. When I came to find that I had been mistaken, I conceived myself bound
by my engagement to rectify my own error as best I could; and I resolved, wrongly as I now
think, very wrongly that I could learn as your wife to love you. Then came circumstances which
showed me that a release would be good for both of us, and which justified me in accepting
it. No girl could be bound by any engagement to a man who looked on and saw her treated in
his own home, by his own mother, as you saw me treated at Aylmer Park. I claim to be released
myself, and I know that this release is as good for you as it is for me.'

'I am the best judge of that.'

'For myself at any rate I will judge. For myself I have decided. Now I have answered the questions
which you asked me as to my love for yourself. To that other question which you have thought
fit to put to me about my cousin, I refuse to give any answer whatsoever.' Then, having said
so much, she walked out of the room, closing the door behind her, and left him standing there
alone.

We need not follow her as she went up, almost mechanically, into her own room the room that
used to be her own and then shut herself in, waiting till she should be assured, first by sounds
in the house, and then by silence, that he was gone. That she fell away greatly from the majesty
of her demeanour when she was thus alone, and descended to the ordinary ways of troubled females,
we may be quite sure. But to her there was no further difficulty. Her work for the day was
done. In due time she would take herself to the cottage, and all would be well, or, at any
rate, comfortable with her. But what was he to do? How was he to get himself out of the house,
and take himself back to London? While he had been in pursuit of her, and when he was leaving
his vehicle at the public-house in the village of Belton, he like some other invading generals
had failed to provide adequately for his retreat. When he was alone he took a turn or two about
the room, half thinking that Clara would return to him. She could hardly leave him alone in
a strange house him, who, as he had twice told her, had come all the way from Yorkshire to
see her. But she did not return, and gradually he came to understand that he must provide for
his own retreat without assistance. He was hardly aware, even now, how greatly he had transcended
his usual modes of speech and action, both in the energy of his supplication and in the violence
of his rebuke. He had been lifted for awhile out of himself by the excitement of his position,
and now that he was subsiding into quiescence, he was unconscious that he had almost mounted
into passion that he had spoken of love very nearly with eloquence. But he did recognize this
as a fact that Clara was not to be his wife, and that he had better get back from Belton to
London as quickly as possible. It would be well for him to teach himself to look back on the
result of his aunt's dying request as an episode in his life satisfactorily concluded. His
mother had undoubtedly been right. Clara, he could see now, would have led him a devil of a
life; and even had she come to him possessed of a moiety of the property a supposition as to
which he had very strong doubts still she might have been dear at the money. 'No real feeling,'
he said to himself, as he walked about the room 'none whatever; and then so deficient in delicacy!'
But still he was discontented because he had been rejected, and therefore tried to make himself
believe that he could still have her if he chose to persevere. 'But no,' he said, as he continued
to pace the room, 'I have done everything,--more than everything that honour demands. I shall
not ask her again. It is her own fault. She is an imperious woman, and my mother read her character
aright.' It did not occur to him, as he thus consoled himself for what he had lost, that his
mother's accusation against Clara had been altogether of a different nature. When we console
ourselves by our own arguments, we are not apt to examine their accuracy with much strictness.

But whether he were consoled or not, it was necessary that he should go, and in his going he
felt himself to be ill-treated. He left the room, and as he went down stairs was disturbed
and tormented by the creaking of his own boots. He tried to be dignified as he walked through
the hall, and was troubled at his failure, though he was not conscious of any one looking at
him. Then it was grievous that he should have to let himself out of the front door without
attendance. At ordinary times he thought as little of such things as most men, and would not
be aware whether he opened a door for himself or had it opened for him by another but now there
was a distressing awkwardness in the necessity for self-exertion. He did not know the turn
of the handle, and was unfamiliar with the manner of exit. He was being treated with indignity,
and before he had escaped from the house had come to think that the Amedroz and Belton people
were somewhat below him. He endeavoured to go out without a noise, but there was a slam of
the door, without which he could not get the lock to work; and Clara, up in her own room, knew
all about it.

'Carriage;--yes; of course I want the carriage,' he said to the unfortunate boy at the public-house.
'Didn't you hear me say that I wanted it?' He had come down with a pair of horses, and as he
saw them being put to the vehicle he wished he had been contented with one. As he was standing
there, waiting, a gentleman rode by, and the boy, in answer to his question, told him that
the horseman was Colonel Askerton. Before the day was over Colonel Askerton would probably
know all that had happened to him. 'Do move a little quicker; will you?' he said to the boy
and the old man who was to drive him. Then he got into the carriage, and was driven out of
Belton, devoutly purposing that he never would return; and as he made his way back to Perivale
he thought of a certain Lady Emily, who would, as he assured himself, have behaved much better
than Clara Amedroz had done in any such scene as that which had just taken place.

When Clara was quite sure that Captain Aylmer was off the premises, she, too, descended, but
she did not immediately leave the house. She walked through the room, and rang for the old
woman, and gave certain directions as to the performance of which she certainly was not very
anxious, and was careful to make Mrs Bunce understand that nothing had occurred between her
and the gentleman that was either exalting or depressing in its nature. 'I suppose Captain
Aylmer went out, Mrs Bunce?' 'Oh yes, miss, a went out. I stood and see'd un from the top of
the kitchen stairs.' 'You might have opened the door for him, Mrs Bunce.' 'Indeed then I never
thought of it, miss, seeing the house so empty and the like.' Clara said that it did not signify;
and then, after an hour of composure, she walked back across the park to the cottage.

'Well?' said Mrs Askerton as soon as Clara was inside the drawing-room.

'Well,' replied Clara.

'What have you got to tell? Do tell me what you have to tell.'

'I have nothing to tell.'

'Clara, that is impossible. Have you seen him? I know you have seen him, because he went by
from the house about an hour since.'

'Oh yes; I have seen him.'

'And what have you said to him?'

'Pray do not ask me these questions just now. I have got to think of it all to think what he
did say and what I said.'

'But you will tell me.'

'Yes; I suppose so.' Then Mrs Askerton was silent on the subject for the remainder of the day,
allowing Clara even to go to bed without another question. And nothing was asked on the following
morning nothing till the usual time for the writing of letters.

'Shall you have anything for the post?' said Mrs Askerton.

'There is plenty of time yet.'

'Not too much if you mean to go out at all. Come, Clara, you had better write to him at once.'

'Write to whom? I don't know that I have any letter to write at all.' Then there was a pause.
'As far as I can see,' she said, 'I may give up writing altogether for the future, unless some
day you may care to hear from me.'

'But you are not going away.'

'Not just yet if you will keep me. To tell you the truth, Mrs Askerton, I do not yet know where
on earth to take myself.'

'Wait here till we turn you out.'

'I have got to put my house in order. You know what I mean. The job ought not to be a troublesome
one, for it is a very small house.'

'I suppose I know what you mean.'

'It will not be a very smart establishment. But I must look it all in the face; must I not?
Though it were to be no house at all, I cannot stay here all my life.'

'Yes, you may. You have lost Aylmer Park because you were too noble not to come to us.'

'No,' said Clara, speaking aloud, with bright eyes almost with her hands clenched. 'No I deny
that.'

'I shall choose to think so for my own purposes. Clara, you are savage to me;--almost always
savage; but next to him I love you better than all the world beside. And so does he. "It's
her courage," he said to me the other day. "That she should dare to do as she pleases here,
is nothing; but to have dared to persevere in the fangs of that old dragon,"--it was just what
he said,--"that was wonderful!"'

'There is an end of the old dragon now, so far as I am concerned.'

'Of course there is and of the young dragon too. You wouldn't have had the heart to keep me
in suspense if you had accepted him again. You couldn't have been so pleasant last night if
that had been so.'

'I did not know I was very pleasant.'

'Yes, you were. You were soft and gracious gracious for you, at least. And now, dear, do tell
me about it. Of course I am dying to know.'

'There is nothing to tell.'

'That is nonsense. There must be a thousand things to tell. At any rate it is quite decided?'

'Yes; it is quite decided.'

'All the dragons, old and young, are banished into outer darkness.'

'Either that, or else they are to have all the light to themselves.'

'Such light as glimmers through the gloom of Aylmer Park. And was he contented? I hope not.
I hope you had him on his knees before he left you.'

'Why should you hope that? How can you talk such nonsense?'

'Because I wish that he should recognize what he has lost that he should know that he has been
a fool a mean fool.'

'Mrs Askerton, I will not have him spoken of like that. He is a man very estimable of estimable
qualities.'

'Fiddle-de-dee. He is an ape a monkey to be carried on his mother's organ. His only good quality
was that you could have carried him on yours. I can tell you one thing there is not a woman
breathing that will ever carry William Belton on hers. Whoever his wife may be, she will have
to dance to his piping.'

'With all my heart and I hope the tunes will be good.'

'But I wish I could have been present to have heard what passed hidden, you know, behind a
curtain. You won't tell me?'

'I will tell you not a word more.'

'Then I will get it out from Mrs Bunce. I'll be bound she was listening.'

'Mrs Bunce will have nothing to tell you; I do not know why you should be so curious.'

'Answer me one question at least when it came to the last, did he want to go on with it? Was
the final triumph with him or with you?'

'There was no final triumph. Such things, when they have to end, do not end triumphantly.'

'And is that to be all?' 'Yes that is to be all.'

'And you say that you have no letter to write.'

'None no letter; none at present; none about this affair. Captain Aylmer, no doubt, will write
to his mother, and then all those who are concerned will have been told.'

Clara Amedroz held her purpose and wrote no letter, but Mrs Askerton was not so discreet, or
so indiscreet as the case might be. She did write not on that day or on the next, but before
a week had passed by. She wrote to Norfolk, telling Clara not a word of her letter, and by
return of post the answer came. But the answer was for Clara, not for Mrs Askerton, and was
as follows:--

'Plaistow Hall, April, 186--.

'My dear Clara,

'I don't know whether I ought to tell you but I suppose I may as well tell you, that Mary has
had a letter from Mrs Askerton. It was a kind, obliging letter, and I am very grateful to her.
She has told us that you have separated yourself altogether from the Aylmer Park people. I
don't suppose you'll think I ought to pretend to be very sorry. I can't be sorry, even though
I know how much you have lost in a worldly point of view. I could not bring myself to like
Captain Aylmer, though I tried hard.' Oh Mr Belton, Mr Belton! 'He and I never could have been
friends, and it is no use my pretending regret that you have quarrelled with them. But that,
I suppose, is all over, and I will not say a word more about the Aylmers.

'I am writing now chiefly at Mary's advice, and because she says that something should be settled
about the estate. Of course it is necessary that you should feel yourself to be the mistress
of your own income, and understand exactly your own position. Mary says that this should be
arranged at once, so that you may be able to decide how and where you will live. I therefore
write to say that I will have nothing to do with your father's estate at Belton nothing, that
is, for myself. I have written to Mr Green to tell him that you are to be considered as the
heir. If you will allow me to undertake the management of the property as your agent, I shall
be delighted. I think I could do it as well as any one else: and, as we agreed that we would
always be dear and close friends, I think that you will not refuse me the pleasure of serving
you in this way.

'And now Mary has a proposition to make, as to which she will write herself tomorrow, but she
has permitted me to speak of it first. If you will accept her as a visitor, she will go to
you at Belton. She thinks, and I think too, that you ought to know each other. I suppose nothing
would make you come here, at present, and therefore she must go to you. She thinks that all
about the estate would be settled more comfortably if you two were together. At any rate, it
would be very nice for her and I think you would like my sister Mary. She proposes to start
about the 10th of May. I should take her as far as London and see her off, and she would bring
her own maid with her. In this way she thinks that she would get as far as Taunton very well.
She had, perhaps, better stay there for one night, but that can all be settled if you will
say that you will receive her at the house.

'I cannot finish my letter without saying one word for myself. You know what my feelings have
been, and I think you know that they still are, and always must be, the same. From almost the
first moment that I saw you I have loved you. When you refused me I was very unhappy; but I
thought I might still have a chance, and therefore I resolved to try again. Then, when I heard
that you were engaged to Captain Aylmer, I was indeed broken-hearted. Of course I could not
be angry with you. I was not angry, but I was simply broken-hearted. I found that I loved you
so much that I could not make myself happy without you. It was all of no use, for I knew that
you were to be married to Captain Aylmer. I knew it, or thought that I knew it. There was nothing
to be done only I knew that I was wretched. I suppose it is selfishness, but I felt, and still
feel, that unless I can have you for my wife, I cannot be happy or car for anything. Now you
are free again free, I mean, from Captain Aylmer and how is it possible that I should not again
have a hope? Nothing but your marriage or death could keep me from hoping.

'I don't know much about the Aylmers. I know nothing of what has made you quarrel with the
people at Aylmer Park nor do I want to know. To me you are once more that Clara Amedroz with
whom I used to walk in Belton Park, with your hand free to be given wherever your heart can
go with it. While it is free I shall always ask for it. I know that it is in many ways above
my reach. I quite understand that in education and habits of thinking you are my superior.
But nobody can love you better than I do. I sometimes fancy that nobody could ever love you
so well. Mary thinks that I ought to allow a time to go by before I say all this again but
what is the use of keeping it back? It seems to me to be more honest to tell you at once that
the only thing in the world for which I care one straw is that you should be my wife.

'Your most affectionate Cousin,

'WILLIAM BELTON.'

'Miss Belton is coming here, to the castle, in a fortnight,' said Clara that morning at breakfast.
Both Colonel Askerton and his wife were in the room, and she was addressing herself chiefly
to the former.

'Indeed, Miss Belton! And is he coming?' said Colonel Askerton.

'So you have heard from Plaistow?' said Mrs Askerton.

'Yes in answer to your letter. No, Colonel Askerton, my Cousin William is not coming. But his
sister purposes to be here, and I must go up to the house and get it ready.'

'That will do when the time comes,' said Mrs Askerton.

'I did not mean quite immediately.'

'And are you to be her guest, or is she to be yours? said Colonel Askerton.

'It's her brother's home, and therefore I suppose I must be hers. Indeed it must be so, as
I have no means of entertaining any one.'

'Something, no doubt, will be settled,' said the colonel.

'Oh, what a weary word that is,' said Clara; 'weary, at least, for a woman's ears! It sounds
of poverty and dependence, and endless trouble given to others, and all the miseries of female
dependence. If I were a young man I should be allowed to settle for myself.'

'There would be no question about the property in that case,' said the colonel.

'And there need be no question now,' said Mrs Askerton.

When the two women were alone together, Clara, of course, scolded her friend for having written
to Norfolk without letting it be known that she was doing so scolded her, and declared how
vain it was for her to make useless efforts for an unattainable end; but Mrs Askerton always
managed to slip out of these reproaches, neither asserting herself to be right, nor owning
herself to be wrong. 'But you must answer his letter,' she said.

'Of course I shall do that.'

'I wish I knew what he said.'

'I shan't show it you, if you mean that.'

'All the same I wish I knew what he said.'

Clara, of course, did answer the letter; but she wrote her answer to Mary, sending, however,
one little scrap to Mary's brother. She wrote to Mary at great length, striving to explain,
with long and laborious arguments, that it was quite impossible that she should accept the
Belton estate from her cousin. That subject, however, and the manner of her future life, she
would discuss with her dear Cousin Mary, when Mary should have arrived. And then Clara said
how she would go to Taunton to meet her cousin, and how she would prepare William's house for
the reception of William's sister; and how she would love her cousin when she should come to
know her. All of which was exceedingly proper and pretty. Then there was a little postscript,
'Give the enclosed to William.' And this was the note to William:

'Dear William,

'Did you not say that you would be my brother? Be my brother always. I will accept from your
hands all that a brother could do; and when that arrangement is quite fixed, I will love you
as much as Mary loves you, and trust you as completely; and I will be obedient, as a younger
sister should be.

'Your loving Sister,

'C. A.'

'It's all no good,' said William Belton, as he crunched the note in his hand. 'I might as well
shoot myself. Get out of the way there, will you?' And the injured groom scudded across the
farm-yard, knowing that there was something wrong with his master.

CHAPTER XXX

MARY BELTON

It was about the middle of the pleasant month of May when Clara Amedroz again made that often
repeated journey to Taunton, with the object of meeting Mary Belton. She had transferred herself
and her own peculiar belongings back from the cottage to the house, and had again established
herself there so that she might welcome her new friend. But she was not satisfied with simply
receiving her guest at Belton, and therefore she made the journey to Taunton, and settled herself
for the night at the inn. She was careful to get a bedroom for an 'invalid lady', close to
the sitting-room, and before she went down to the station she saw that the cloth was laid for
tea, and that the tea parlour had been made to look as pleasant as was possible with an inn
parlour.

She was very nervous as she stood upon the platform waiting for the new comer to show herself.
She knew that Mary was a cripple, but did not know how far her cousin was disfigured by her
infirmity; and when she saw a pale-faced little woman, somewhat melancholy, but yet pretty
withal, with soft, clear eyes, and only so much appearance of a stoop as to soften the hearts
of those who saw her, Clara was agreeably surprised, and felt herself to be suddenly relieved
of an unpleasant weight. She could talk to the woman she saw there, as to any other woman,
without the painful necessity of treating her always as an invalid. 'I think you are Miss Belton?'
she said, holding out her hand. The likeness between Mary and her brother was too great to
allow of Clara being mistaken.

'And you are Clara Amedroz? It is so good of you to come to meet me!'

'I thought you would be dull in a strange town by yourself.'

'It will be much nicer to have you with me.'

Then they went together up to the inn; and when they had taken their bonnets off, Mary Belton
kissed her cousin. 'You are very nearly what I fancied you,' said Mary.

'Am I? I hope you fancied me to be something that you could like.'

'Something that I could love very dearly. You are a little taller than what Will said; but
then a gentleman is never a judge of a lady's height. And he said you were thin.'

'I am not very fat.'

'No; not very fat; but neither are you thin. Of course, you know, I have thought a great deal
about you. It seems as though you had come to be so very near to us; and blood is thicker than
water, is it not? If cousins are not friends, who can be?'

In the course of that evening they became very confidential together, and Clara thought that
she could love Mary Belton better than any woman that she had ever known. Of course they were
talking about William, and Clara was at first in constant fear lest some word should be said
on her lover's behalf some word which would drive her to declare that she would not admit him
as a lover; but Mary abstained from the subject with marvellous care and tact. Though she was
talking through the whole evening of her brother, she so spoke of him as almost to make Clara
believe that she could not have heard of that episode in his life. Mrs Askerton would have
dashed at the subject at once; but then, as Clara told herself, Mary Bolton was better than
Mrs Askerton.

A few words were said about the estate, and they originated in Clara's declaration that Mary
would have to be regarded as the mistress of the house to which they were going. 'I cannot
agree to that,' said Mary.

'But the house is William's, you know,' said Clara.

'He says not.'

'But of course that must be nonsense, Mary.'

'It is very evident that you know nothing of Plaistow ways, or you would not say that anything
coming from William was nonsense. We are accustomed to regard all his words as law, and when
he says that a thing is to be so, it always is so.'

'Then he is a tyrant at home.'

'A beneficent despot. Some despots, you know, always were beneficent.'

'He won't have his way in this thing.'

'I'll leave you and him to fight about that, my dear. I am so completely under his thumb that
I always obey him in everything. You must not, therefore, expect to range me on your side.'

The next day they were at Belton Castle, and in a very few hours Clara felt that she was quite
at home with her cousin. On the second day Mrs Askerton came up and called according to an
arrangement to that effect made between her and Clara. I'll stay away if you like it,' Mrs
Askerton had said. But Clara had urged her to come, arguing with her that she was foolish to
be thinking always of her own misfortune. 'Of course I am always thinking of it,' she had replied,
and always thinking that other people are thinking of it. Your cousin, Miss Belton, knows all
my history, of course, But what matters? I believe it would be better that everybody should
know it. I suppose she's very straight-laced and prim.'She is not prim at all,' said Clara.
'Well, I'll come,' said Mrs Askerton, 'but I shall not be a bit surprised if I hear that she
goes back to Norfolk the next day.'

So Mrs Askerton came, and Miss Belton did not go back to Norfolk. Indeed, at the end of the
visit, Mrs Askerton had almost taught herself to believe that William Belton had kept his secret,
even from his sister. 'She's a dear little woman,' Mrs Askerton afterwards said to Clara.

'Is she not?'

'And so thoroughly like a lady.'

'Yes; I think she is a lady.'

'A princess among ladies! What a pretty little conscious way she has of asserting herself when
she has an opinion and means to stick to it! I never saw a woman who got more strength out
of her weakness. Who would dare to contradict her?'

'But then she knows everything so well,' said Clara.

'And how like her brother she is!'

'Yes there is a great family likeness.'

'And in character, too. I'm sure you'd find, if you were to try her, that she has all his personal
firmness, though she can't show it as he does by kicking out his feet and clenching his fist.'

'I'm glad you like her,' said Clara.

'I do like her very much.'

'It is so odd the way you have changed. You used to speak of him as though he was merely a
clod of a farmer, and of her as a stupid old maid. Now, nothing is too good to say of them.'

'Exactly, my dear and if you do not understand why, you are not so clever as I take you to be.'

Life went on very pleasantly with them at Belton for two or three weeks but with this drawback
as regarded Clara, that she had no means of knowing what was to be the course of her future
life. During these weeks she twice received letters from her Cousin Will, and answered both
of them. But these letters referred to matters of business which entailed no contradiction
to certain details of money due to the estate before the old squire's death, and to that vexed
question of Aunt Winterfield's legacy, which had by this time drifted into Belton's hands,
and as to which he was inclined to act in accordance with his cousin's wishes, though he was
assured by Mr Green that the legacy was as good a legacy as had ever been left by an old woman.
'I think,' he said in his last letter,' that we shall be able to throw him over in spite of
Mr Green.' Clara, as she read this, could not but remember that the man to be thrown over was
the man to whom she had been engaged, and she could not but remember also all the circumstances
of the intended legacy of her aunt's death, and of the scenes which had immediately followed
her death. It was so odd that William Belton should now be discussing with her the means of
evading all her aunt's intentions and that he should be doing so, not as her accepted lover.
He had, indeed, called himself her brother, but he was in truth her rejected lover.

From time to time during these weeks Mrs Askerton would ask her whether Mr Belton was coming
to Belton, and Clara would answer her with perfect truth that she did not believe that he had
any such intention. 'But he must come soon,' Mrs Askerton would say. And when Clara would answer
that she knew nothing about it, Mrs Askerton would ask further questions about Mary Belton.
'Your cousin must know whether her brother is coming to look after the property?' But Miss
Belton, though she heard constantly from her brother, gave no such intimation. If he had any
intention of coming, she did not speak of it. During all these days she had not as yet said
a word of her brother's love. Though his name was daily in her mouth and latterly, was frequently
mentioned by Clara there had been no allusion to that still enduring hope of which Will Belton
himself could not but speak when he had any opportunity of speaking at all. And this continued
till at last Clara was driven to suppose that Mary Belton knew nothing of her brother's hopes.

But at last there came a change a change which to Clara was as great as that which had affected
her when she first found that her delightful cousin was not sale against love-making. She had
made up her mind that the sister did not intend to plead for her brother that the sister probably
knew nothing of the brother's necessity for pleading that the brother probably had no further
need for pleading When she remembered his last passionate words, she could not but accuse herself
of hypocrisy when she allowed place in her thoughts to this latter supposition. He had been
so intently earnest! The nature of the man was so eager and true! But yet, in spite of all
that had been said, of all the fire in his eyes, and life in his words, and energy in his actions,
he had at last seen that his aspirations were foolish, and his desires vain. It could not otherwise
be that she and Mary should pass these hours in such calm repose without an allusion to the
disturbing subject! After this fashion, and with such meditations as these, had passed by the
last weeks and then at last there came the change.

'I have had a letter from William this morning,' said Mary.

'And so have not I,' said Clara, and yet I expect to hear from him.'

'He means to be here soon,' said Mary.

'Oh, indeed!'

'He speaks of being here next week.'

For a moment or two Clara had yielded to the agitation caused by her cousin's tidings; but
with a little gush she recovered her presence of mind, and was able to speak with all the hypocritical
propriety of a female. 'I am glad to hear it,' she said. 'It is only right that he should come.'

'He has asked me to say a word to you as to the purport of his journey.'

Then again Clara's courage and hypocrisy were so far subdued that they were not able to maintain
her in a position adequate to the occasion. 'Well,' she said laughing, 'what is the word? I
hope it is not that I am to pack up, bag and baggage, and take myself elsewhere. Cousin William
is one of those persons who are willing to do everything except what they are wanted to do.
He will go on talking about the Belton estate, when I want to know whether I may really look
for as much as twelve shillings a week to live upon.'

'He wants me to speak to you about--about the earnest love he bears for you.'

'Oh dear! Mary;--could you not suppose it all to be said? It is an old trouble, and need not
be repeated.'

