From Dubuque, on the western shore of the river, we passed over to Dunleath, in Illinois, and
went on from thence by railway to Dixon. I was induced to visit this not very flourishing town
by a desire to see the rolling prairie of Illinois, and to learn by eyesight something of the
crops of corn or Indian maize which are produced upon the land.  Had that gentleman told me
that we knew nothing of producing corn in England, he would have been nearer the mark; for
of corn, in the profusion in which it is grown here, we do not know much.  Better land than
the prairies of Illinois for cereal crops the world's surface probably cannot show.  And here
there has been no necessity for the long previous labor of banishing the forest. Enormous prairies
stretch across the State, into which the plow can be put at once.  The earth is rich with the
vegetation of thousands of years, and the farmer's return is given to him without delay. The
land bursts with its own produce, and the plenty is such that it creates wasteful carelessness
in the gathering of the crop.  It is not worth a man's while to handle less than large quantities.
Up in Minnesota I had been grieved by the loose manner in which wheat was treated.  I have
seen bags of it upset and left upon the ground.  The labor of collecting it was more than it
was worth. There wheat is the chief crop, and as the lands become cleared and cultivation spreads
itself, the amount coming down the Mississippi will be increased almost to infinity.  The price
of wheat in Europe will soon depend, not upon the value of the wheat in the country which grows
it, but on the power and cheapness of the modes which may exist for transporting it.  I have
not been able to obtain the exact prices with reference to the carriage of wheat from St. Paul
(the capital of Minnesota) to Liverpool, but I have done so as regards Indian-corn from the
State of Illinois.  The following statement will show what proportion the value of the article
at the place of its growth bears to the cost of the carriage; and it shows also how enormous
an effect on the price of corn in England would follow any serious decrease in the cost of
carriage:--

A bushel of Indian-corn at Bloomington, in Illinois,
 cost, in October, 1861                             10 cents.
Freight to Chicago                                  10   "
Storage                                              2   "
Freight from Chicago to Buffalo                     22   "
Elevating, and canal freight to New York            19   "
Transfer in New York and insurance                   3   "
Ocean freight                                       23   "
                                                    ---------
Cost of a bushel of Indian-corn at Liverpool        89 cents.

Thus corn which in Liverpool costs 3s. 10d. has been sold by the farmer who produced it for
5d.!  It is probable that no great reduction can be expected in the cost of ocean transit;
but it will be seen by the above figures that out of the Liverpool price of 3s. 10d., or 89
cents, considerably more than half is paid for carriage across the United States.  All or nearly
all this transit is by water; and there can, I think, be no doubt but that a few years will
see it reduced by fifty per cent.  In October last the Mississippi was closed, the railways
had not rolling stock sufficient for their work, the crops of the two last years had been excessive,
and there existed the necessity of sending out the corn before the internal navigation had
been closed by frost.  The parties who had the transit in their hands put their heads together,
and were able to demand any prices that they pleased.  It will be seen that the cost of carrying
a bushel of corn from Chicago to Buffalo, by the lakes, was within one cent of the cost of
bringing it from New York to Liverpool.