The Prince Royal was, at the time she was built, considered one of the most wonderful efforts
of human genius.  Mr. Charnock, in his 'Treatise on Marine Architecture,' speaks of her as
abounding in striking peculiarities.  Previous to the construction of this ship, vessels were
built in the style of the Venetian galley, which although well adapted for the quiet Mediterranean,
were not suited for the stormy northern ocean.  The fighting ships also of the time of Henry
VIII. and Elizabeth were too full of "top-hamper" for modern navigation.  They were oppressed
by high forecastles and poops.  Pett struck out entirely new ideas in the build and lines of
his new ship; and the course which he adopted had its effect upon all future marine structures.
The ship was more handy, more wieldy, and more convenient.  She was unquestionably the first
effort of English ingenuity in the direction of manageableness and simplicity.  "The vessel
in question," says Charnock, "may be considered the parent of the class of shipping which continues
in practice even to the present moment."

It is scarcely necessary to pursue in detail the further history of Phineas Pett.  We may briefly
mention the principal points. In 1612, the Prince Royal was appointed to convey the Princess
Elizabeth and her husband, The Palsgrave, to the Continent.  Pett was on board the ship, and
found that "it wrought exceedingly well, and was so yare of conduct that a foot of helm would
steer her." If Lord Cashel thinks you ought to give up the hounds, do it at once, Frank; anything
rather than quarrel with him. You could get them again, you know, when all's settled."

"I've given up quite as much as I intend for Lord Cashel."

"Now, Frank, don't be a fool, or you'll repent it all your life: what does it signify how much
you give up to such a man as Lord Cashel? You don't think, do you, that he objects to our being
at Kelly's Court? Because I'm sure we wouldn't stay a moment if we thought that."

"Mother, I wouldn't part with a cur dog out of the place to please Lord Cashel. But if I were
to do everything on earth at his beck and will, it would make no
difference: he will never let me marry Fanny Wyndham if he can help
it; but, thank God, I don't believe he can."

Pett fared much worse at the hands of Raleigh himself.  His great ship, the Destiny, was finished
and launched in December, 1616. "I delivered her to him," says Pett, "on float, in good order
and fashion; by which business I lost 700L., and could never get any recompense at all for
it; Sir Walter going to sea and leaving me unsatisfied."[29] Nor was this the only loss that
Pett met with this year.  The King, he states, "bestowed upon me for the supply of my present
relief the making of a knight-baronet," which authority Pett passed to a recusant, one Francis
Ratcliffe, for 700L.; but that worthy defrauded him, so that he lost 30L. by the bargain.

Next year, Pett was despatched by the Government to the New Forest in Hampshire, "where," he
says, "one Sir Giles Mompesson[30] had made a vast waste in the spoil of his Majesty's timber,
to redress which I was employed thither, to make choice out of the number of trees he had felled
of all such timber as was useful for shipping, in which business I spent a great deal of time,
and brought myself into a great deal of trouble."  About this period, poor Pett's wife and
two of his children lay for some time at death's door.  Then more enquiries took place into
the abuses of the dockyards, in which it was sought to implicate Pett. During the next three
years (1618-20) he worked under the immediate orders of the Commissioners in the New Dock at
Chatham.

In 1620, Pett's friend Sir Robert Mansell was appointed General of the Fleet destined to chastise
the Algerine pirates, who still continued their depredations on the shipping in the Channel,
and the King thereupon commissioned Pett to build with all dispatch two pinnaces, of 120 and
80 tons respectively.  "I was myself," he says, "to serve as Captain in the voyage"--being
glad, no doubt, to escape from his tormentors.  The two pinnaces were built at Ratcliffe, and
were launched on the 16th and 18th of October, 1620.  On the 30th, Pett sailed with the fleet,
and after driving the pirates out of the Channel, he returned to port after an absence of eleven
months.

His enemies had taken advantage of his absence from England to get an order for the survey
of the Prince Royal, his masterpiece; the result of which was, he says, that "they maliciously
certified the ship to be unserviceable, and not fit to continue--that what charges should be
bestowed upon her would be lost."  Nevertheless, the Prince Royal was docked, and fitted for
a voyage to Spain.  She was sent thither with Charles Prince of Wales and the Duke of Buckingham,
the former going in search of a Spanish wife.  Pett, the builder of the ship, was commanded
to accompany the young Prince and the Duke.

The expedition sailed on the 24th of August, 1623, and returned on the 14th of October.  Pett
was entertained on board the Prince Royal, and rendered occasional services to the officers
in command, though nothing of importance occurred during the voyage.

The Prince of Wales presented him with a valuable gold chain as a reward for his attendance.
In 1625, Pett, after rendering many important services to the Admiralty, was ordered again
to prepare the Prince Royal for sea.  She was to bring over the Prince of Wales's bride from
France.  While the preparations were making for the voyage, news reached Chatham of the death
of King James. Pett was afterwards commanded to go forward with the work of preparing the Prince
Royal, as well as the whole fleet, which was intended to escort the French Princess, or rather
the Queen, to England.  The expedition took place in May, and the young Queen landed at Dover
on the 12th of that month.

Pett continued to be employed in building and repairing ships, as well as in preparing new
designs, which he submitted to the King and the Commissioners of the Navy.  In 1626, he was
appointed a joint commissioner, with the Lord High Admiral, the Lord Treasurer Marlborough,
and others, "to enquire into certain alleged abuses of the Navy, and to view the state thereof,
and also the stores thereof," clearly showing that he was regaining his old position.  He was
also engaged in determining the best mode of measuring the tonnage of ships.[31] Four years
later he was again appointed a commissioner for making "a general survey of the whole navy
at Chatham."  For this and his other services the King promoted Pett to be a principal officer
of the Navy, with a fee of 200L. per annum.  His patent was sealed on the 16th of January,
1631.  In the same year the King visited Woolwich to witness the launching of the Vanguard,
which Pett had built; and his Majesty honoured the shipwright by participating in a banquet
at his lodgings.

From this period to the year 1637, Pett records nothing of particular importance in his autobiography.
He was chiefly occupied in aiding his son Peter--who was rapidly increasing his fame as a shipwright--in
repairing and building first-class ships of war.  As Pett had, on an early occasion in his
life, prepared a miniature ship for Prince Henry, eldest son of James I., he now proceeded
to prepare a similar model for the Prince of Wales, the King's eldest son, afterwards Charles
II. This model was presented to the Prince at St. James's, "who entertained it with great joy,
being purposely made to disport himself withal."  On the next visit of his Majesty to Woolwich,
he inspected the progress made with the Leopard, a sloop-of-war built by Peter Pett.  While
in the hold of the vessel, the King called Phineas to one side, and told him of his resolution
to have a great new ship built, and that Phineas must be the builder.  This great new ship
was The Sovereign of the Seas, afterwards built by Phineas and Peter Pett.  Some say that the
model was prepared by the latter; but Phineas says that it was prepared by himself, and finished
by the 29th of October, 1634.  As a compensation for his services, his Majesty renewed his
pension of 40L. (which had been previously stopped), with orders for all the arrears due upon
it to be paid.

To provide the necessary timber for the new ship, Phineas and his son went down into the North
to survey the forests.  They went first by water to Whitby; from thence they proceeded on horseback
to Gisborough and baited; then to Stockton, where they found but poor entertainment, though
they lodged with the Mayor, whose house "was only a mean thatched cottage!"  Middlesborough
and the great iron district of the North had not yet come into existence.

Newcastle, already of some importance, was the principal scene of their labours.  The timber
for the new ship was found in Chapley Wood and Bracepeth Park.  The gentry did all they could
to facilitate the object of Pett.  On his journey homewards (July, 1635), he took Cambridge
on his way, where, says he, "I lodged at the Falcon, and visited Emmanuel College, where I
had been a scholar in my youth."

The Sovereign of the Seas was launched on the 12th of October, 1637, having been about two
years in building.  Evelyn in his diary says of the ship (19th July, 1641):--"We rode to Rochester
and Chatham to see the Soveraigne, a monstrous vessel so called, being for burthen, defence,
and ornament, the richest that ever spread cloth before the wind.  She carried 100 brass cannon,
and was 1600 tons, a rare sailer, the work of the famous Phineas Pett."  Rear-Admiral Sir William
Symonds says that she was afterwards cut down, and was a safe and fast ship.[32]

The Sovereign continued for nearly sixty years to be the finest ship in the English service.
Though frequently engaged in the most injurious occupations, she continued fit for any services
which the exigencies of the State might require.  She fought all through the wars of the Commonwealth;
she was the leading ship of Admiral Blake, and was in all the great naval engagements with
France and Holland.  The Dutch gave her the name of The Golden Devil.  In the last fight between
the English and French, she encountered the Wonder of the World, and so warmly plied the French
Admiral, that she forced him out of his three-decked wooden castle, and chasing the Royal Sun,
before her, forced her to fly for shelter among the rocks, where she became a prey to lesser
vessels, and was reduced to ashes.  At last, in the reign of William III., the Sovereign became
leaky and defective with age; she was laid up at Chatham, and being set on fire by negligence
or accident, she burnt to the water's edge.

To return to the history of Phineas Pett.  As years approached, he retired from office, and
"his loving son," as he always affectionately designates Peter, succeeded him as principal
shipwright, Charles I. conferring upon him the honour of knighthood.  Phineas lived for ten
years after the Sovereign of the Seas was launched.  In the burial register of the parish of
Chatham it is recorded, "Phineas Pett, Esqe. and Capt., was buried 21st August, 1647."[33]

Sir Peter Pett was almost as distinguished as his father.  He was the builder of the first
frigate, The Constant Warwick.  Sir William Symonds says of this vessel:--"She was an incomparable
sailer, remarkable for her sharpness and the fineness of her lines; and many were built like
her."  Pett "introduced convex lines on the immersed part of the hull, with the studding and
sprit sails; and, in short, he appears to have fully deserved his character of being the best
ship architect of his time."[34] Sir Peter Pett's monument in Deptford Old Church fully records
his services to England's naval power.

The Petts are said to have been connected with shipbuilding in the Thames for not less than
200 years.  Fuller, in his 'Worthies of England,' says of them--"I am credibly informed that
that mystery of shipwrights for some descents hath been preserved faithfully in families, of
whom the Petts about Chatham are of singular regard.  Good success have they with their skill,
and carefully keep so precious a pearl, lest otherwise amongst many friends some foes attain
unto it."

The late Peter Bolt, member for Greenwich, took pride in being descended from the Petts; but
so far as we know, the name itself has died out.  In 1801, when Charnock's 'History of Marine
Architecture' was published, Mr. Pett, of Tovil, near Maidstone, was the sole representative
of the family.

Footnotes for Chapter I.

[1] This was not the first voyage of a steamer between England and America.  The Savannah made
the passage from New York to Liverpool as early as 1819; but steam was only used occasionally
during the voyage, In 1825, the Enterprise, with engines by Maudslay, made the voyage from
Falmouth to Calcutta in 113 days; and in 1828, the Curacoa made the voyage between Holland
and the Dutch West Indies.  But in all these cases, steam was used as an auxiliary, and not
as the one essential means of propulsion, as in the case of the Sirius and the Great Western,
which were steam voyages only.

[2] "In 1862 the steam tonnage of the country was 537,000 tons; in 1872, it was 1,537,000 tons;
and in 1882, it had reached 3,835,000 tons."--Mr. Chamberlain's speech, House of Commons, 19th
May, 1884.

[3] The last visit of the plague was in 1665.

[4] Roll of Edward the Third's Fleet.  Cotton's Library, British Museum.

[5] Charnock's History Of Marine Architecture, ii. 89.

[6] State Papers.  Henry VIII.  Nos. 3496, 3616, 4633.  The principal kinds of ordnance at
that time were these:--The "Apostles," so called from the head of an Apostle which they bore;
"Curtows," or "Courtaulx"; "Culverins" and "Serpents"; "Minions," and "Potguns"; "Nurembergers,"
and "Bombards" or mortars.

[7] The sum of all costs of the Harry Grace de Dieu and three small galleys, was 7708L. 5s.
3d.  (S.P.O. No. 5228, Henry VIII.)

[8] Charnock, ii. 47 (note).

[9] Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, ii. 126.

[10] The Huguenots: their Settlements, Churches, and Industries, in England and Ireland, ch. iv.

[11] Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, ii. 156.

[12] Ibid. ii. 85.

[13] Picton's Selections from the Municipal Archives and Records of Liverpool, p. 90.  About
a hundred years later, in 1757, the gross customs receipts of Liverpool had increased to 198,946L.;
whilst those of Bristol were as much as 351,211L.  In 1883, the amount of tonnage of Liverpool,
inwards and outwards, was 8,527,531 tons, and the total dock revenue for the year was 1,273,752L.!

[14] There were not only Algerine but English pirates scouring the seas.  Keutzner, the German,
who wrote in Elizabeth's reign, said, "The English are good sailors and famous pirates (sunt
boni nautae et insignis pyratae)."  Roberts, in his Social History of the Southern Counties
(p. 93), observes, "Elizabeth had employed many English as privateers against the Spaniard.
After the war, many were loth to lead an inactive life.  They had their commissions revoked,
and were proclaimed pirates.  The public looked upon them as gallant fellows; the merchants
gave them underhand support; and even the authorities in maritime towns connived at the sale
of their plunder.  In spite of proclamations, during the first five years after the accession
of James I., there were continual complaints.  This lawless way of life even became popular.
Many Englishmen furnished themselves with good ships and scoured the seas, but little careful
whom they might plunder."  It was found very difficult to put down piracy.  According to Oliver's
History of the city of Exeter, not less than "fifteen sail of Turks" held the English Channel,
snapping up merchantmen, in the middle of the seventeenth century!  The harbours in the south-west
were infested by Moslem pirates, who attacked and plundered the ships, and carried their crews
into captivity.  The loss, even to an inland port like Exeter, in ships, money, and men, was
enormous.

[15] Naval Tracts, p. 294.

[16] This poem is now very rare.  It is not in the British Museum.

[17] There are three copies extant of the autobiography, all of which are in the British Museum.
In the main, they differ but slightly from each other.  Not one of them has been published
in extenso.  In December, 1795, and in February, 1796, Dr. Samuel Denne communicated to the
Society of Antiquaries particulars of two of these MSS., and subsequently published copious
extracts from them in their transactions (Archae. xii. anno 1796), in a very irregular and
careless manner.  It is probable that Dr. Denne never saw the original manuscript, but only
a garbled copy of it.  The above narrative has been taken from the original, and collated with
the documents in the State Paper Office.

[18] See, for instance, the Index to the Journals of Records of the Corporation of the City
of London (No. 2, p. 346, 15901694) under the head of "Sir Walter Raleigh."  There is a document
dated the 15th November, 1593, in the 35th of Elizabeth, which runs as follows:--"Committee
appointed on behalf of such of the City Companies as have ventured in the late Fleet set forward
by Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight, and others, to join with such honourable personages as the Queen
hath appointed, to take a perfect view of all such goods, prizes, spices, jewels, pearls, treasures,
&c., lately taken in the Carrack, and to make sale and division (Jor. 23, p. 156).  Suit to
be made to the Queen and Privy Council for the buying of the goods, &c., lately taken at sea
in the Carrack; a committee appointed to take order accordingly; the benefit or loss arising
thereon to be divided and borne between the Chamber [of the Corporation of the City] and the
Companies that adventured (157).  The several Companies that adventured at sea with Sir Waiter
Raleigh to accept so much of the goods taken in the Carrack to the value of 12,000L. according
to the Queen's offer.  A committee appointed to acquaint the Lords of the Council with the
City's acceptance thereof (167).  Committee for sale of the Carrack goods appointed (174).
Bonds for sale to be sealed (196).... Committee to audit accounts of a former adventure (224 b.)."

[19] There were three sisters in all, the eldest of whom (Abigail) fell a victim to the cruelty
of Nunn, who struck her across the head with the fire-tongs, from the effects of which she
died in three days.  Nunn was tried and convicted of manslaughter.  He died shortly after.
Mrs. Nunn, Phineas's mother, was already dead.

[20] It would seem, from a paper hereafter to be more particularly referred to, that the government
encouraged the owners of ships and others to clear the seas of these pirates, agreeing to pay
them for their labours.  In 1622, Pett fitted out an expedition against these pests of navigation,
but experienced some difficulty in getting his expenses repaid.

[21] See grant S.P.O., 29th May, 1605.

[22] An engraving of this remarkable ship is given in Charnock's History of Marine Architecture,
ii. p. 199.

[23] The story of the Three, or rather Two Ravens, is as follows:--The body of St. Vincent
was originally deposited at the Cape, which still bears his name, on the Portuguese coast;
and his tomb, says the legend, was zealously guarded by a couple of ravens.  When it was determined,
in the 12th century, to transport the relics of the Saint to the Cathedral of Lisbon, the two
ravens accompanied the ship which contained them, one at its stem and the other at its stern.
The relics were deposited in the Chapel of St. Vincent, within the Cathedral, and there the
two ravens have ever since remained.  The monks continued to support two such birds in the
cloisters, and till very lately the officials gravely informed the visitor to the Cathedral
that they were the identical ravens which accompanied the Saint's relics to their city.  The
birds figure in the arms of Lisbon.

[24] The evidence taken by the Commissioners is embodied in a voluminous report.  State Paper
Office, Dom. James I., vol. xli. 1608.

[25] The Earl of Northampton, Privy Seal, was Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; hence his moving
in the matter.  Pett says he was his "most implacable enemy."  It is probable that the earl
was jealous of Pett, because he had received his commission to build the great ship directly
from the sovereign, without the intervention of his lordship.

[26] This Royal investigation took place at Woolwich on the 8th May, 1609.  The State Paper
Office contains a report of the same date, most probably the one presented to the King, signed
by six ship-builders and Captain Waymouth, and counter signed by Northampton and four others.
The Report is headed "The Prince Royal: imperfections found upon view of the new work begun
at Woolwich."  It would occupy too much space to give the results here.

[27] Alas! for the uncertainties of life!  This noble young prince--the hope of England and
the joy of his parents, from whom such great things were anticipated--for he was graceful,
frank, brave, active, and a lover of the sea,--was seized with a serious illness, and died
in his eighteenth year, on the 16th November, 1612.

[28] Pett says she was to be 500 tons, but when he turned her out her burthen was rated at
700 tons.

[29] This conduct of Raleigh's was the more inexcusable, as there is in the State Paper Office
a warrant dated 16th Nov., 1617, for the payment to Pett of 700 crowns "for building the new
ship, the Destiny of London, of 700 tons burthen."  The least he could have done was to have
handed over to the builder his royal and usual reward.  In the above warrant, by the way, the
title "our well-beloved subject," the ordinary prefix to such grants, has either been left
blank or erased (it is difficult to say which), but was very significant of the slippery footing
of Raleigh at Court.

[30] Sir Giles Overreach, in the play of "A new way to pay old debts," by Philip Massinger.
It was difficult for the poet, or any other person, to libel such a personage as Mompesson.

[31] Pett's method is described in a paper contained in the S.P.O., dated 21st Oct., 1626.
The Trinity Corporation adopted his method.

[32] Memoirs of the Life and Services of Rear-Admiral Sir William Symonds, Kt., p. 94.

[33] Pett's dwelling-house at Rochester is thus described in an anonymous history of that town
(p. 337, ed. 1817):--"Beyond the Victualling Office, on the same side of the High Street, at
Rochester, is an old mansion, now occupied by a Mr. Morson, an attorney, which formerly belonged
to the Petts, the celebrated ship-builders.  The chimney-piece in the principal room is of
wood, curiously carved, the upper part being divided into compartments by caryatydes.  The
central compartment contains the family arms, viz., Or, on a fesse, gu., between three pellets,
a lion passant gardant of the field.  On the back of the grate is a cast of Neptune, standing
erect in his car, with Triton blowing conches, &c., and the date 1650."

[34] Symonds, Memoirs of Life and Services, 94.

"The spirit of Paley's maxim that 'he alone discovers who proves,' is applicable to the history
of inventions and discoveries; for certainly he alone invents to any good purpose, who satisfies
the world that the means he may have devised have been found competent to the end proposed."--Dr.
Samuel Brown.

"Too often the real worker and discoverer remains unknown, and an invention, beautiful but
useless in one age or country, can be applied only in a remote generation, or in a distant
land. Mankind hangs together from generation to generation; easy labour is but inherited skill;
great discoveries and inventions are worked up to by the efforts of myriads ere the goal is
reached."--H. M. Hyndman.

Though a long period elapsed between the times of Phineas Pett and "Screw" Smith, comparatively
little improvement had been effected in the art of shipbuilding.  The Sovereign of the Seas
had not been excelled by any ship of war built down to the end of last century.[1] At a comparatively
recent date, ships continued to be built of timber and plank, and impelled by sails and oars,
as they had been for thousands of years before.

But this century has witnessed many marvellous changes.  A new material of construction has
been introduced into shipbuilding, with entirely new methods of propulsion.  Old things have
been displaced by new; and the magnitude of the results has been extraordinary.  The most important
changes have been in the use of iron and steel instead of wood, and in the employment of the
steam-engine in impelling ships by the paddle or the screw.

So long as timber was used for the construction of ships, the number of vessels built annually,
especially in so small an island as Britain, must necessarily have continued very limited.
Indeed, so little had the cultivation of oak in Great Britain been attended to, that all the
royal forests could not have supplied sufficient timber to build one line-of-battle ship annually;
while for the mercantile marine, the world had to be ransacked for wood, often of a very inferior
quality.

Take, for instance, the seventy-eight gun ship, the Hindostan, launched a few years ago.  It
would have required 4200 loads of timber to build a ship of that description, and the growth
of the timber would have occupied seventy acres of ground during eighty years.[2]  It would
have needed something like 800,000 acres of land on which to grow the timber for the ships
annually built in this country for commercial purposes. And timber ships are by no means lasting.
The average durability of ships of war employed in active service, has been calculated to be
about thirteen years, even when built of British oak. 

These may take the place of earlier ones, and the church may have had aisles at its first building.
If it had, I suspect that it lost them as Brixworth did, and was
without when the east part of the church was put into the form shown
on the plan.

That seems to have been about the beginning of the eleventh century, but it is certain that
there is earlier work in the west end and in the tower, and probable that there also is in
the side walls of the nave. The presbytery was round-ended and wide-arched, as at Worth, and
there is an arch in the east wall of the south transept leading to an altar place beyond. In the
corresponding position on the other side (i.e., in the north transept) is a doorway which has
led to some chamber outside.

"The openings from the tower to the transepts on the floor lines are very small doorways, but
there is an arch higher up on each side which looks as if it might have opened from an upper
floor or gallery.[31]

"To the end of the Saxon time it was usual to make living-rooms in the towers and roofs of the
churches, but the evidence of it is clearest in the fore-buildings of the early monastic churches.
That at Deerhurst gives more points than are found together in any
other single monument, but the parallels of all, except the division
of the two lower stories of the tower, may be found elsewhere, and
nearly all at Wearmouth and Brixworth.

"Here is a section of the tower of Deerhurst looking north, with later mediæval work left out,
and indications given of missing parts, of which those that remain supply the evidence.

"The tower is considerably larger from east to west than from north to south, and on the ground
and second stories is divided into two unequal parts, the eastern being the larger. The eastern
division has formed the usual porch of entrance from the fore-court, with an arch eastwards
towards the church, and two small doorways north and south from the covered walks of the fore-court.
These doorways were destroyed in the thirteenth century, or later, when the walls were cut away and
pointed arches as wide as the chamber itself inserted. On the west,
an arch rather lower than that towards the church leads to the western
division, which was not the baptistery, but a sort of vestibule to
it. The baptistery itself stood, in the usual way, west of the tower
and in the midst of the fore-court. A doorway of the thirteenth century
now fills up the arch between it and the tower, which gives us the
latest date up to which it can have stood.

When ships began to be built of iron, it was found that they could be increased without limit,
so long as coal, iron, machinery, and strong men full of skill and industry, were procurable.
The trade in shipbuilding returned to Britain, where iron ships are now made and exported in
large numbers; the mercantile marine of this country exceeding in amount and tonnage that of
all the other countries of the world put together.  The "wooden walls"[3] of England exist
no more, for iron has superseded wood.  Instead of constructing vessels from the forest, we
are now digging new navies out of the bowels of the earth, and our "walls," instead of wood,
are now of iron and steel.

The attempt to propel ships by other means than sails and oars went on from century to century,
and did not succeed until almost within our own time.  It is said that the Roman army under
Claudius Codex was transported into Sicily in boats propelled by wheels moved by oxen. Galleys,
propelled by wheels in paddles, were afterwards attempted. The Harleian MS. contains an Italian
book of sketches, attributed to the 15th century, in which there appears a drawing of a paddle-boat,
evidently intended to be worked by men.  Paddle-boats, worked by horse-power, were also tried.
Blasco Garay made a supreme effort at Barcelona in 1543. His vessel was propelled by a paddle-wheel
on each side, worked by forty men.  But nothing came of the experiment.

Many other efforts of a similar kind were made,--by Savery among others,[4]--until we come
down to Patrick Miller, of Dalswinton, who, in 1787, invented a double-hulled boat, which he
caused to be propelled on the Firth of Forth by men working a capstan which drove the paddles
on each side.  The men soon became exhausted, and on Miller mentioning the subject to William
Symington, who was then exhibiting his road locomotive in Edinburgh, Symington at once said,
"Why don't you employ steam-power?"

There were many speculations in early times as to the application of steam-power for propelling
vessels through the water.  David Ramsay in 1618, Dr. Grant in 1632, the Marquis of Worcester
in 1661, were among the first in England to publish their views upon the subject.  But it is
probable that Denis Papin, the banished Hugnenot physician, for some time Curator of the Royal
Society, was the first who made a model steam-boat.  Daring his residence in England, he was
elected Professor of Mathematics in the University of Marburg.  It was while at that city that
he constructed, in 1707, a small steam-engine, which he fitted in a boat--une petite machine
d'un, vaisseau a roues--and despatched it to England for the purpose of being tried upon the
Thames. The little vessel never reached England.  At Munden, the boatmen on the River Weser,
thinking that, if successful, it would destroy their occupation, seized the boat, with its
machine, and barbarously destroyed it.  Papin did not repeat his experiment, and died a few
years later.

The next inventor was Jonathan Hulls, of Campden, in Gloucestershire. He patented a steamboat
in 1736, and worked the paddle-wheel placed at the stern of the vessel by means of a Newcomen
engine.  He tried his boat on the River Avon, at Evesham, but it did not succeed, and the engine
was taken on shore again.  A local poet commemorated his failure in the following lines, which
were remembered long after his steamboat experiment had been forgotten:--

  "Jonathan Hull,
  With his paper skull,
  Tried hard to make a machine
  That should go against wind and tide;
  But he, like an ass,
  Couldn't bring it to pass,
  So at last was ashamed to be seen."

Nothing of importance was done in the direction of a steam-engine able to drive paddles, until
the invention by James Watt, in 1769, of his double-acting engine--the first step by which
steam was rendered capable of being successfully used to impel a vessel.  But Watt was indifferent
to taking up the subject of steam navigation, as well as of steam locomotion.  He refused many
invitations to make steam-engines for the propulsion of ships, preferring to confine himself
to his "regular established trade and manufacture," that of making condensing steam-engines,
which had become of great importance towards the close of his life.

Two records exist of paddle-wheel steamboats having been early tried in France--one by the
Comte d'Auxiron and M. Perrier in 1774, the other by the Comte de Jouffroy in 1783--but the
notices of their experiments are very vague, and rest on somewhat doubtful authority.

The idea, however, had been born, and was not allowed to die. When Mr. Miller of Dalswinton
had revived the notion of propelling vessels by means of paddle-wheels, worked, as Savery had
before worked them, by means of a capstan placed in the centre of the vessel, and when he complained
to Symington of the fatigue caused to the men by working the capstan, and Symington had suggested
the use of steam, Mr. Miller was impressed by the idea, and proceeded to order a steam-engine
for the purpose of trying the experiment.  The boat was built at Edinburgh, and removed to
Dalswinton Lake.  It was there fitted with Symington's steam-engine, and first tried with success
on the 14th of October, 1788, as has been related at length in Mr. Nasmyth's 'Autobiography.'
The experiment was repeated with even greater success in the charlotte Dundas in 1801, which
was used to tow vessels along the Forth and Clyde Canal, and to bring ships up the Firth of
Forth to the canal entrance at Grangemouth.

The progress of steam navigation was nevertheless very slow. Symington's experiments were not
renewed.  The Charlotte Dundas was withdrawn from use, because of the supposed injury to the
banks of the Canal, caused by the swell from the wheel.  The steamboat was laid up in a creek
at Bainsford, where it went to ruin, and the inventor himself died in poverty.  Among those
who inspected the vessel while at work were Fulton, the American artist, and Henry Bell, the
Glasgow engineer.  The former had already occupied himself with model steamboats, both at Paris
and in London; and in 1805 he obtained from Boulton and Watt, of Birmingham, the steam-engine
required for propelling his paddle steamboat on the Hudson.  The Clermont was first started
in August, 1807, and attained a speed of nearly five miles an hour. Five years later, Henry
Bell constructed and tried his first steamer on the Clyde.

It was not until 1815 that the first steamboat was seen on the Thames. This was the Richmond
packet, which plied between London and Richmond. The vessel was fitted with the first marine
engine Henry Maudslay ever made.  During the same year, the Margery, formerly employed on the
Firth of Forth, began plying between Gravesend and London; and the Thames, formerly the Argyll,
came round from the Clyde, encountering rough seas, and making the voyage of 758 miles in five
days and two hours.  This was thought extraordinarily rapid--though the voyage of about 3000
miles, from Liverpool to New York, can now be made in only about two days' more time.

In nearly all seagoing vessels, the Paddle has now almost entirely given place to the Screw.
It was long before this invention was perfected and brought into general use.  It was not the
production of one man, but of several generations of mechanical inventors.  A perfected invention
does not burst forth from the brain like a poetic thought or a fine resolve.  It has to be
initiated, laboured over, and pursued in the face of disappointments, difficulties, and discouragements.

Sometimes the idea is born in one generation, followed out in the next, and perhaps perfected
in the third.  In an age of progress, one invention merely paves the way for another.  What
was the wonder of yesterday, becomes the common and unnoticed thing of to-day.

The first idea of the screw was thrown out by James Watt more than a century ago.  Matthew
Boulton, of Birmingham, had proposed to move canal boats by means of the steam-engine; and
Dr. Small, his friend, was in communication with James Watt, then residing at Glasgow, on the
subject.  In a letter from Watt to Small, dated the 30th September, 1770, the former, after
speaking of the condenser, and saying that it cannot be dispensed with, proceeds: "Have you
ever considered a spiral oar for that purpose [propulsion of canal boats], or are you for two
wheels?"  Watt added a pen-and-ink drawing of his spiral oar, greatly resembling the form of
screw afterwards patented.  Nothing, however, was actually done, and the idea slept.

It was revived again in 1785, by Joseph Bramah, a wonderful projector and inventor.[5]  He
took out a patent, which included a rotatory steam-engine, and a mode of propelling vessels
by means either of a paddle-wheel or a "screw propeller."  This propeller was "similar to the
fly of a smoke-jack"; but there is no account of Bramah having practically tried this method
of propulsion.

Austria, also, claims the honour of the invention of the screw steamer. At Trieste and Vienna
are statues erected to Joseph Ressel, on whose behalf his countrymen lay claim to the invention;
and patents for some sort of a screw date back as far as 1794.

Patents were also taken out in England and America--by W. Lyttleton in 1794; by E. Shorter
in 1799; by J. C. Stevens, of New Jersey, in 1804; by Henry James in 1811--but nothing practical
was accomplished. Richard Trevethick, the anticipator of many things, also took out a patent
in 1815, and in it he describes the screw propeller with considerable minuteness. Millington,
Whytock, Perkins, Marestier, and Brown followed, with no better results.

The late Dr. Birkbeck, in a letter addressed to the 'Mechanics' Register,' in the year 1824,
claimed that John Swan, of 82, Mansfield Street, Kingsland Road, London, was the practical
inventor of the screw propeller.  John Swan was a native of Coldingham, Berwickshire.  He had
removed to London, and entered the employment of Messrs. Gordon, of Deptford.  Swan fitted
up a boat with his propeller, and tried it on a sheet of water in the grounds of Charles Gordon,
Esq., of Dulwich Hill. "The velocity and steadiness of the motion," said Dr. Birkbeck in his
letter, "so far exceeded that of the same model when impelled by paddle-wheels driven by the
same spring, that I could not doubt its superiority; and the stillness of the water was such
as to give the vessel the appearance of being moved by some magical power."

Then comes another claimant--Mr. Robert Wilson, then of Dunbar (not far from Coldingham), but
afterwards of the Bridgewater Foundry, Patricroft.  In his pamphlet, published a few years
ago, he states that he had long considered the subject, and in 1827 he made a small model,
fitted with "revolving skulls," which he tried on a sheet of water in the presence of the Hon.
Capt. Anthony Maitland, son of the Earl of Lauderdale.  The experiment was successful--so successful,
that when the "stern paddles" were in 1828 used at Leith in a boat twenty-five feet long, with
two men to work the machinery, the boat was propelled at an average speed of about ten miles
an hour; and the Society of Arts afterwards, in October, 1882, awarded Mr. Wilson their silver
medal for the "description, drawing, and models of stern paddles for propelling steamboats,
invented by him."  The subject was, in 1833, brought by Sir John Sinclair under the consideration
of the Board of Admiralty; but the report of the officials (Oliver Lang, Abethell, Lloyd, and
Kingston) was to the effect that "the plan proposed (independent of practical difficulties)
is objectionable, as it involves a greater loss of power than the common mode of applying the
wheels to the side."  And here ended the experiment, so far as Mr. Wilson's "stern paddles"
were concerned.

It will be observed, from what has been said, that the idea of a screw propeller is a very
old one.  Watt, Bramah, Trevethick, and many more, had given descriptions of the screw.  Trevethick
schemed a number of its forms and applications, which have been the subject of many subsequent
patents.  It has been so with many inventions.  It is not the man who gives the first idea
of a machine who is entitled to the merit of its introduction, or the man who repeats the idea,
and re-repeats it, but the man who is so deeply impressed with the importance of the discovery,
that he insists upon its adoption, will take no denial, and at the risk of fame and fortune,
pushes through all opposition, and is determined that what he thinks he has discovered shall
not perish for want of a fair trial.  And that this was the case with the practical introducer
of the screw propeller will be obvious from the following statement.

Francis Pettit Smith was born at Hythe, in the county of Kent, in 1808. His father was postmaster
of the town, and a person of much zeal and integrity.  The boy was sent to school at Ashford,
and there received a fair amount of education, under the Rev. Alexander Power.  Young Smith
displayed no special characteristic except a passion for constructing models of boats.  When
he reached manhood, he adopted the business of a grazing farmer on Romney Marsh.  He afterwards
removed to Hendon, north of London, where he had plenty of water on which to try his model
boats. The reservoir of the Old Welsh Harp was close at hand--a place famous for its water-birds
and wild fowl.

Smith made many models of boats, his experiments extending over many years.  In 1834, he constructed
a boat propelled by a wooden screw driven by a spring, the performance of which was thought
extraordinary. Where he had got his original idea is not known. It was floating about in many
minds, and was no special secret. Smith, however, arrived at the conclusion that his method
of propelling steam vessels by means of a screw was much superior to paddles--at that time
exclusively employed.  In the following year, 1835, he constructed a superior model, with which
he performed a number of experiments at Hendon.  In May 1836, he took out a patent for propelling
vessels by means of a screw revolving beneath the water at the stern.  He then openly exhibited
his invention at the Adelaide Gallery in London.  Sir John Barrow, Secretary to the Admiralty,
inspected the model, and was much impressed by its action.  During the time it was publicly
exhibited, an offer was made to purchase the invention for the Pacha of Egypt; but the offer
was declined.

At this stage of his operations, Smith was joined by Mr. Wright, banker, and Mr. C. A. Caldwell,
who had the penetration to perceive that the invention was one of much promise, and were desirous
of helping its introduction to general use.  They furnished Smith with the means of constructing
a more complete model.  In the autumn of 1836, a small steam vessel of 10 tons burthen and
six horse-power was built, further to test the advantages of the invention.  This boat was
fitted with a wooden screw of two whole turns.  On the 1st of November the vessel was exhibited
to the public on the Paddington Canal, as well as on the Thames, where she continued to ply
until the month of September 1837.

During the trips upon the Thames, a happy accident occurred, which first suggested the advantage
of reducing the length of the screw.  The propeller having struck upon some obstacle in the
water, about one-half of the length of the screw was broken off, and it was found that; the
vessel immediately shot ahead and attained a much greater speed than before.  In consequence
of this discovery, a new screw of a single turn was fitted to her, after which she was found
to work much better.

Having satisfied himself as to the eligibility of the propeller in smooth water, Mr. Smith
then resolved to take his little vessel to the open sea, and breast the winds and the waves.
Accordingly, one Saturday in the month of September 1837, he proceeded in his miniature boat,
down the river, from Blackwall to Gravesend.  There he took a pilot on board, and went on to
Ramsgate.  He passed through the Downs, and reached Dover in safety.  A trial of the vessel's
performance was made there in the presence of Mr. Wright, the banker, and Mr. Peake, the civil
engineer.  From Dover the vessel went on to Folkestone and Hythe, encountering severe weather.
Nevertheless, the boat behaved admirably, and attained a speed of over seven miles an hour.

Though the weather had become stormy and boisterous, the little vessel nevertheless set out
on her return voyage to London. Crowds of people assembled to witness her departure, and many
nautical men watched her progress with solicitude as she steamed through the waves under the
steep cliffs of the South Foreland. The courage of the undertaking, and the unexpected good
performance of the little vessel, rendered her an object of great interest and excitement as
she "screwed" her way along the coast.

The tiny vessel reached her destination in safety.  Surely the difficulty of a testing trial,
although with a model screw, had at length been overcome.  But no!  The paddle still possessed
the ascendency; and a thousand interests--invested capital, use and wont, and conservative
instincts--all stood in the way.

Some years before--indeed, about the time that Smith took out his patent--Captain Ericsson,
the Swede, invented a screw propeller. Smith took out his patent in May, 1836; and Ericsson
in the following July. Ericsson was a born inventor.  While a boy in Sweden, he made saw mills
and pumping engines, with tools invented by himself.  He learnt to draw, and his mechanical
career began.  When only twelve years old, he was appointed a cadet in the Swedish corps of
mechanical engineers, and in the following year he was put in charge of a section of the Gotha
Ship Canal, then under construction.  Arrived at manhood, Ericsson went over to England, the
great centre of mechanical industry.  He was then twenty-three years old.  He entered into
partnership with John Braithwaite, and with him constructed the Novelty, which took part in
the locomotive competition at Rainhill on the 6th October, 1829.  The prize was awarded to
Stephenson's Rocket on the 14th; but it was acknowledged by The Times of the day that the Novelty
was Stephenson's sharpest competitor.

Ericsson had a wonderfully inventive brain, a determined purpose, and a great capacity for
work.  When a want was felt, he was immediately ready with an invention.  The records of the
Patent Office show his incessant activity.  He invented pumping engines, steam engines, fire
engines, and caloric engines.  His first patent for a "reciprocating propeller" was taken out
in October 1834.  To exhibit its action, he had a small boat constructed of only about two
feet long.  It was propelled by means of a screw; and was shown at work in a circular bath
in London.  It performed its voyage round the basin at the rate of about three miles an hour.
His patent for a "spiral propeller," was taken out in July 1836.  This was the invention, to
exhibit which he had a vessel constructed, of about 40 feet long, with two propellers, each
of 5 feet 3 inches diameter.

This boat, the Francis B. Ogden, proved extremely successful. She moved at a speed of about
ten miles an hour.  She was able to tow vessels of 140 tons burthen at the rate of seven miles
an hour.  Perceiving the peculiar and admirable fitness of the screw-propeller for ships of
war, Ericsson invited the Lords of the Admiralty to take an excursion in tow of his experimental
boat.  "My Lords" consented; and the Admiralty barge contained on this occasion, Sir Charles
Adam, senior Lord, Sir William Symonds, surveyor, Sir Edward Parry, of Polar fame, Captain
Beaufort, hydrographer, and other men of celebrity.  This distinguished company embarked at
Somerset House, and the little steamer, with her precious charge, proceeded down the river
to Limehouse at the rate of about ten miles an hour.  After visiting the steam-engine manufactory
of Messrs. Seawood, where their Lordships' favourite apparatus, the Morgan paddle-wheel, was
in course of construction, they re-embarked, and returned in safety to Somerset House.

The experiment was perfectly successful, and yet the result was disappointment.  A few days
later, a letter from Captain Beaufort informed Mr. Ericsson that their Lordships had certainly
been "very much disappointed with the result of the experiment."  The reason for the disappointment
was altogether inexplicable to the inventor.  It afterwards appeared, however, that Sir William
Symonds, then Surveyor to the Navy, had expressed the opinion that "even if the propeller had
the power of propelling a vessel, it would be found altogether useless in practice, because
the power being applied at the stern, it would be absolutely impossible to make the vessel
steer!"  It will be remembered that Francis Pettit Smith's screw vessel went to sea in the
course of the same year; and not only faced the waves, but was made to steer in a perfectly
successful manner.

Although the Lords of the Admiralty would not further encourage the screw propeller of Ericsson,
an officer of the United States Navy, Capt. R. F. Stockton, was so satisfied of its success,
that after making a single trip in the experimental steamboat from London Bridge to Greenwich,
he ordered the inventor to build for him forthwith two iron boats for the United States, with
steam machinery and a propeller on the same plan.  One of these vessels--the Robert F. Stockton--seventy
feet in length, was constructed by Laird and Co., of Birkenhead, in 1838, and left England
for America in April 1839.  Capt. Stockton so fully persuaded Ericsson of his probable success
in America, that the inventor at once abandoned his professional engagements in England, and
set out for the United States.  It is unnecessary to mention the further important works of
this great engineer.

We may, however, briefly mention that in 1844, Ericsson constructed for the United States Government
the Princeton screw steamer--though he was never paid for his time, labour, and expenditure.[6]
Undeterred by their ingratitude, Ericsson nevertheless constructed for the same government,
when in the throes of civil war, the famous Monitor, the iron-clad cupola vessel, and was similarly
rewarded!  He afterwards invented the torpedo ship--the Destroyer--the use of which has fortunately
not yet been required in sea warfare.  Ericsson still lives--constantly planning and scheming--in
his house in Beach Street, New York.  He is now over eighty years old having been born in 1803.
He is strong and healthy.  How has he preserved his vigorous constitution?  The editor of Scribner
gives the answer: "The hall windows of his house are open, winter and summer, and none but
open grate-fires are allowed.  Insomnia never troubles him, for he falls asleep as soon as
his head touches the pillow.  His appetite and digestion are always good, and he has not lost
a meal in ten years. What an example to the men who imagine it is hard work that is killing
them in this career of unremitting industry!"

To return to "Screw" Smith, after the successful trial of his little vessel at sea in the autumn
of 1837.  He had many difficulties yet to contend with.  There was, first, the difficulty of
a new invention, and the fact that the paddle-boat had established itself in public estimation.
The engineering and shipbuilding world were dead against him.  They regarded the project of
propelling a vessel by means of a screw as visionary and preposterous.  There was also the
official unwillingness to undertake anything novel, untried, and contrary to routine. There
was the usual shaking of the head and the shrugging of the shoulders, as if the inventor were
either a mere dreamer or a projector eager to lay his hands upon the public purse.  The surveyor
of the navy was opposed to the plan, because of the impossibility of making a vessel steer
which was impelled from the stern.  "Screw" Smith bided his time; he continued undaunted, and
was determined to succeed. He laboured steadily onward, maintaining his own faith unshaken,
and upholding the faith of the gentlemen who had become associated with him in the prosecution
of the invention.

At the beginning of 1838 the Lords of the Admiralty requested Mr. Smith to allow his vessel
to be tried under their inspection. Two trials were accordingly made, and they gave so much
satisfaction that the adoption of the propeller for naval purposes was considered as a not
improbable contingency.  Before deciding finally upon its adoption, the Lords of the Admiralty
were anxious to see an experiment made with a vessel of not less than 200 tons.  Mr. Smith
had not the means of accomplishing this by himself, but with the improved prospects of the
invention, capitalists now came to his aid.  One of the most effective and energetic of these
was Mr. Henry Currie, banker; and, with the assistance of others, the "Ship Propeller Company"
was formed, and proceeded to erect the test ship proposed by the Admiralty.

The result was the Archimedes, a wooden vessel of 237 tons burthen. She was designed by Mr.
Pasco, laid down by Mr. Wimshurst in the spring of 1838, was launched on the 18th of October
following, and made her first trip in May 1839.  She was fitted with a screw of one turn placed
in the dead wood, and propelled by a pair of engines of 80-horse power. The vessel was built
under the persuasion that her performance would be considered satisfactory if a speed was attained
of four or five knots an hour, where as her actual speed was nine and a half knots.  The Lords
of the Admiralty were invited to inspect the ship.  At the second trial Sir Edward Parry, Sir
William Symonds, Captain Basil Hall, and other distinguished persons were present.

The results were again satisfactory.  The success of the Archimedes astonished the engineering
world.  Even the Surveyor of the Royal Navy found that the vessel could steer!  The Lords of
the Admiralty could no longer shut their eyes.  But the invention could not at once be adopted.
It must be tested by the best judges.  The vessel was sent to Dover to be tried with the best
packets between Dover and Calais.  Mr. Lloyd, the chief engineer of the Navy, conducted the
investigation, and reported most favourably as to the manner of her performance.  Yet several
years elapsed before the screw was introduced into the service.

In 1840 the Archimedes was placed at the disposal of Captain Chappell, of the Royal Navy, who,
accompanied by Mr. Smith, visited every principal port in Great Britain.  She was thus seen
by shipowners, marine engineers, and shipbuilders in every part of the kingdom.  They regarded
her with wonder and admiration; yet the new mode of navigation was not speedily adopted.  The
paddle-wheel still held its own.  The sentiment, if not the plant and capital, of the engineering
world, were against the introduction of the screw.  After the vessel had returned from her
circumnavigation of Great Britain, she was sent to Oporto, and performed the voyage in sixty-eight
and a half hours, then held to be the quickest voyage on record.  She was then sent to the
Texel at the request of the Dutch Government.  She went through the North Holland Canal, visited
Amsterdam, Antwerp, and other ports; and everywhere left the impression that the screw was
an efficient and reliable power in the propulsion of vessels at sea.

Shipbuilders, however, continued to "fight shy" of the screw. The late Isambard Kingdon Brunel
is entitled to the credit of having first directed the attention of shipbuilders to this important
invention.  He was himself a man of original views, free from bias, and always ready to strike
out a fresh path in engineering works.  He was building a large new iron steamer at Bristol,
the Great Britain, for passenger traffic between England and America.  He had intended to construct
her as a paddle steamer; but hearing of the success of the Archimedes, he inspected the vessel,
and was so satisfied with the performance of the screw that he recommended his directors to
adopt this method for propelling the Great Britain.  His advice was adopted, and the vessel
was altered so as to adapt her for the reception of the screw.  The vessel was found perfectly
successful, and on her first voyage to London she attained the speed of ten knots an hour,
though the wind and balance of tides were against her.  A few other merchant ships were built
and fitted with the screw; the Princess Royal at Newcastle in 1840, the Margaret and Senator
at Hull, and the Great Northern at Londonderry, in 1841.

The Lords of the Admiralty made slow progress in adapting the screw for the Royal Navy.  Sir
William Symonds, the surveyor and principal designer of Her Majesty's ships, was opposed to
all new projects.  He hated steam power, and was utterly opposed to iron ships.  He speaks
of them in his journal as "monstrous."[7]  So long as he remained in office everything was
done in a perfunctory way.  A small vessel named the Bee was built at Chatham in 1841, and
fitted with both paddles and the screw for the purposes of experiment.  In the same year the
Rattier, the first screw vessel built for the navy, was laid down at Sheerness.  Although of
only 888 tons burthen, she was not launched until the spring of 1843.  She was then fitted
with the same kind of screw as the Archimedes, that is, a double-headed screw of half a convolution.
Experiments went on for about three years, so as to determine the best proportions of the screw,
and the proportions then ascertained have since been the principal guides of engineering practice.

The Rattler was at length tried in a water tournament with the paddle-steamer Alecto, and signally
defeated her.  Francis Pettit Smith, like Gulliver, may be said to have dragged the whole British
fleet after him.  Were the paddle our only means of propulsion, our whole naval force would
be reduced to a nullity. Hostile gunners would wing a paddle-steamer as effectually as a sportsman
wings a bird, and all the plating in the world would render such a ship a mere helpless log
on the water.

The Admiralty could no longer defer the use of this important invention.  Like all good things,
it made its way slowly and by degrees.  The royal naval authorities, who in 1833 backed the
side paddles, have since adopted the screw in most of the ships-of-war.  In all long sea-going
voyages, also, the screw is now the favourite mode of propulsion.  Screw ships of prodigious
size are now built and launched in all the ship-building ports of Britain, and are sent out
to navigate in every part of the world.

The introduction of iron as the material for shipbuilding has immensely advanced the interests
of steam navigation, as it enables the builders to construct vessels of great size with the
finest lines, so as to attain the highest rates of speed.

One might have supposed that Francis Pettit Smith would derive some substantial benefit from
his invention, or at least that the Ship Propeller Company would distribute large dividends
among their proprietors.  Nothing of the kind.  Smith spent his money, his labour, and his
ingenuity in conferring a great public benefit without receiving any adequate reward; and the
company, instead of distributing dividends, lost about 50,000L. in introducing this great invention;
after which, in 1856, the patent-right expired.  Three hundred and twenty-seven ships and vessels
of all classes in the Royal Navy had then been fitted with the screw propeller, and a much
larger number in the merchant service; but since that time the number of screw propellers constructed
is to be counted by thousands.

In his comparatively impoverished condition it was found necessary to do something for the
inventor.  The Civil Engineers, with Robert Stephenson, M.P., in the chair, entertained him
at a dinner and presented him with a handsome salver and claret jug. And that he might have
something to put upon his salver and into his claret jug, a number of his friends and admirers
subscribed over 2000L. as a testimonial. The Government appointed him Curator of the Patent
Museum at South Kensington; the Queen granted him a pension on the Civil List for 200L. a year;
he was raised to the honour of knighthood in 1871, and three years later he died.

Francis Pettit Smith was not a great inventor.  He had, like many others, invented a screw
propeller.  But, while those others had given up the idea of prosecuting it to its completion,
Smith stuck to his invention with determined tenacity, and never let it go until he had secured
for it a complete triumph.  As Mr. Stephenson observed at the engineer's meeting:  "Mr. Smith
had worked from a platform which might have been raised by others, as Watt had done, and as
other great men had done; but he had made a stride in advance which was almost tantamount to
a new invention. It was impossible to overrate the advantages which this and other countries
had derived from his untiring and devoted patience in prosecuting the invention to a successful
issue."  Baron Charles Dupin compared the farmer Smith with the barber Arkwright: "He had the
same perseverance and the same indomitable courage. These two moral qualities enabled him to
triumph over every obstacle."  This was the merit of "Screw" Smith--that he was determined
to realize what his predecessors had dreamt of achieving; and he eventually accomplished his
great purpose.

Footnotes for Chapter II.

[1] In the Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects for 1860, it was pointed out
that the general dimensions and form of bottom of this ship were very similar to the most famous
line-of-battle ships built down to the end of last century, some of which were then in existence.

[2] According to the calculation of Mr. Chatfield, of Her Majesty's dockyard at Plymouth, in
a paper read before the British Association in 1841 on shipbuilding.

[3] The phrase "wooden walls" is derived from the Greek.  When the city of Athens was once
in danger of being attacked and destroyed, the oracle of Delphi was consulted.  The inhabitants
were told that there was no safety for them but in their "wooden walls,"--that is their shipping.
As they had then a powerful fleet, the oracle gave them rational advice, which had the effect
of saving the Athenian people.

[4] An account of these is given by Bennet Woodcraft in his Sketch of the Origin and Progress
of Steam Navigation, London, 1848.

[5] See Industrial Biography, pp. 183-197,

[6] The story is told in Scribner's Monthly Illustrated Magazine, for April 1879.  Ericsson's
modest bill was only $15,000 for two years' labour.  He was put off from year to year, and
at length the Government refused to pay the amount.  "The American Government," says the editor
of Scribner, "will not appropriate the money to pay it, and that is all.  It is said to be
the nature of republics to be ungrateful; but must they also be dishonest?"

CHAPTER III.[1]

JOHN HARRISON: INVENTOR OF THE MARINE CHRONOMETER.

"No man knows who invented the mariner's compass, or who first hollowed out a canoe from a
log.  The power to observe accurately the sun, moon, and planets, so as to fix a vessel's actual
position when far out of sight of land, enabling long voyages to be safely made; the marvellous
improvements in ship-building, which shortened passages by sailing vessels, and vastly reduced
freights even before steam gave an independent force to the carrier--each and all were done
by small advances, which together contributed to the general movement of mankind....  Each
owes all to the others.  The forgotten inventors live for ever in the usefulness of the work
they have done and the progress they have striven for."--H. M. Hyndman.

One of the most extraordinary things connected with Applied Science is the method by which
the Navigator is enabled to find the exact spot of sea on which his ship rides.  There may
be nothing but water and sky within his view; he may be in the midst of the ocean, or gradually
nearing the land; the curvature of the globe baffles the search of his telescope; but if he
have a correct chronometer, and can make an astronomical observation, he may readily ascertain
his longitude, and know his approximate position--how far he is from home, as well as from
his intended destination.  He is even enabled, at some special place, to send down his grappling-irons
into the sea, and pick up an electrical cable for examination and repair.

This is the result of a knowledge of Practical Astronomy.  "Place an astronomer," says Mr.
Newcomb, "on board a ship; blindfold him; carry him by any route to any ocean on the globe,
whether under the tropics or in one of the frigid zones; land him on the wildest rock that
can be found; remove his bandage, and give him a chronometer regulated to Greenwich or Washington
time, a transit instrument with the proper appliances, and the necessary books and tables,
and in a single clear night he can tell his position within a hundred yards by observations
of the stars. This, from a utilitarian point of view, is one of the most important operations
of Practical Astronomy."[2]

The Marine Chronometer was the outcome of the crying want of the sixteenth century for an instrument
that should assist the navigator to find his longitude on the pathless ocean.  Spain was then
the principal naval power; she was the most potent monarchy in Europe, and held half America
under her sway.  Philip III. offered 100,000 crowns for any discovery by means of which the
longitude might be determined by a better method than by the log, which was found very defective.
Holland next became a great naval power, and followed the example of Spain in offering 30,000
florins for a similar discovery.  But though some efforts were made, nothing practical was
done, principally through the defective state of astronomical instruments.  England succeeded
Spain and Holland as a naval power; and when Charles II. established the Greenwich Observatory,
it was made a special point that Flamsteed, the Astronomer-Royal, should direct his best energies
to the perfecting of a method for finding the longitude by astronomical observations.  But
though Flamsteed, together with Halley and Newton, made some progress, they were prevented
from obtaining ultimate success by the want of efficient chronometers and the defective nature
of astronomical instruments.

Nothing was done until the reign of Queen Anne, when a petition was presented to the Legislature
on the 25th of May, 1714, by "several captains of Her Majesty's ships, merchants in London,
and commanders of merchantmen, in behalf of themselves, and of all others concerned in the
navigation of Great Britain," setting forth the importance of the accurate discovery of the
longitude, and the inconvenience and danger to which ships were subjected from the want of
some suitable method of discovering it.  The petition was referred to a committee, which took
evidence on the subject.  It appears that Sir Isaac Newton, with his extraordinary sagacity,
hit the mark in his report.  "One is," he said, "by a watch to keep time exactly; but, by reason
of the motion of a ship, and the variation of heat and cold, wet and dry, and the difference
of gravity in different latitudes, such a watch hath not yet been made."

An Act was however passed in the Session of 1714, offering a very large public reward to inventors:
10,000L. to any one who should discover a method of determining the longitude to one degree
of a great circle, or 60 geographical miles; 15,000L. if it determined the same to two-thirds
of that distance, or 40 geographical miles; and 20,000L. if it determined the same to one-half
of the same distance, or 30 geographical miles.  Commissioners were appointed by the same Act,
who were instructed that "one moiety or half part of such reward shall be due and paid when
the said commissioners, or the major part of them, do agree that any such method extends to
the security of ships within 80 geographical miles of the shore, which are places of the greatest
danger; and the other moiety or half part when a ship, by the appointment of the said commissioners,
or the major part of them, shall actually sail over the ocean, from Great Britain to any such
port in the West Indies as those commissioners, or the major part of them, shall choose or
nominate for the experiment, without losing the longitude beyond the limits before mentioned."

The terms of this offer indicate how great must have been the risk and inconvenience which
it was desired to remedy.  Indeed, it is almost inconceivable that a reward so great could
be held out for a method which would merely afford security within eighty geographical miles!

This splendid reward for a method of discovering the longitude was offered to the world--to
inventors and scientific men of all countries--without restriction of race, or nation, or language.
As might naturally be expected, the prospect of obtaining it stimulated many ingenious men
to make suggestions and contrive experiments; but for many years the successful construction
of a marine time-keeper seemed almost hopeless.  At length, to the surprise of every one, the
prize was won by a village carpenter--a person of no school, or university, or college whatever.

Even so distinguished an artist and philosopher as Sir Christopher Wren was engaged, as late
in his life as the year 1720, in attempting to solve this important problem.  As has been observed,
in the memoir of him contained in the 'Biographia Britannica,'[3] "This noble invention, like
some others of the most useful ones to human life, seems to be reserved for the peculiar glory
of an ordinary mechanic, who, by indefatigable industry, under the guidance of no ordinary
sagacity, hath seemingly at last surmounted all difficulties, and brought it to a most unexpected
degree of perfection."  Where learning and science failed, natural genius seems to have triumphed.

The truth is, that the great mechanic, like the great poet, is born, not made; and John Harrison,
the winner of the famous prize, was a born mechanic.  He did not, however, accomplish his object
without the exercise of the greatest skill, patience, and perseverance.  His efforts were long,
laborious, and sometimes apparently hopeless. Indeed, his life, so far as we can ascertain
the facts, affords one of the finest examples of difficulties encountered and triumphantly
overcome, and of undaunted perseverance eventually crowned by success, which is to be found
in the whole range of biography.

No complete narrative of Harrison's career was ever written. Only a short notice of him appears
in the 'Biographia Britannica,' published in 1766, during his lifetime'--the facts of which
were obtained from himself.  A few notices of him appear in the 'Annual Register,' also published
during his lifetime. The final notice appeared in the volume published in 1777, the year after
his death.  No Life of him has since appeared.  Had he been a destructive hero, and fought
battles by land or sea, we should have had biographies of him without end.  But he pursued
a more peaceful and industrious course.  His discovery conferred an incalculable advantage
on navigation, and enabled innumerable lives to be saved at sea; it also added to the domains
of science by its more exact measurement of time.  But his memory has been suffered to pass
silently away, without any record being left for the benefit and advantage of those who have
succeeded him.  The following memoir includes nearly all that is known of the life and labours
of John Harrison.

He was born at Foulby, in the parish of Wragby, near Pontefract, Yorkshire, in March, 1693.
His father, Henry Harrison, was carpenter and joiner to Sir Rowland Winn, owner of the Nostell
Priory estate. The present house was built by the baronet on the site of the ancient priory.
Henry Harrison was a sort of retainer of the family, and long continued in their Service.

Little is known of the boy's education.  It was certainly of a very inferior description. 
Like George Stephenson, Harrison always had a great difficulty in making himself understood,
either by speech or writing.  Indeed, every board-school boy now receives a better education
than John Harrison did a hundred and eighty years ago.  But education does not altogether come
by reading and writing.  The boy was possessed of vigorous natural abilities.  He was especially
attracted by every machine that moved upon wheels.  The boy was 'father to the man.' When six
years old, and lying sick of small-pox, a going watch was placed upon his pillow, which afforded
him infinite delight.

When seven years old he was taken by his father to Barrow, near Barton-on-Humber, where Sir
Rowland Winn had another residence and estate.  Henry Harrison was still acting as the baronet's
carpenter and joiner.  In course of time young Harrison joined his father in the workshop,
and proved of great use to him.  His opportunities for acquiring knowledge were still very
few, but he applied his powers of observation and his workmanship upon the things which were
nearest him. He worked in wood, and to wood he first turned his attention.

He was still fond of machines going upon wheels.  He had enjoyed the sight of the big watch
going upon brass wheels when he was a boy; but, now that he was a workman in wood, he proposed
to make an eight-day clock, with wheels of this material.  He made the clock in 1713, when
he was twenty years old,[4] so that he must have made diligent use of his opportunities.  He
had of course difficulties to encounter, and nothing can be accomplished without them; for
it is difficulties that train the habits of application and perseverance.  But he succeeded
in making an effective clock, which counted the time with regularity. This clock is still in
existence.  It is to be seen at the Museum of Patents, South Kensington; and when we visited
it a few months ago it was going, and still marking the moments as they passed. It is contained
in a case about six feet high, with a glass front, showing a pendulum and two weights.  Over
the clock is the following inscription:

"This clock was made at Barrow, Lincolnshire, in the year 1715, by John Harrison, celebrated
as the inventor of a nautical timepiece,  or chronometer, which gained the reward of 20,000L.,
offered by the Board of Longitude, A.D. 1767.

"This clock strikes the hour, indicates the day of the month, and with one exception (the escapement)
the wheels are entirely made of wood."

This, however, was only a beginning.  Harrison proceeded to make better clocks; and then he
found it necessary to introduce metal, which was more lasting.  He made pivots of brass, which
moved more conveniently in sockets of wood with the use of oil.  He also caused the teeth of
his wheels to run against cylindrical rollers of wood, fixed by brass pins, at a proper distance
from the axis of the pinions; and thus to a considerable extent removed the inconveniences
of friction.

In the meantime Harrison eagerly improved every incident from which he might derive further
information.  There was a clergyman who came every Sunday to the village to officiate in the
neighbourhood; and having heard of the sedulous application of the young carpenter, he lent
him a manuscript copy of Professor Saunderson's discourses.  That blind professor had prepared
several lectures on natural philosophy for the use of his students, though they were not intended
for publication. Young Harrison now proceeded to copy them out, together with the diagrams.
Sometimes, indeed, he spent the greater part of the night in writing or drawing.

As part of his business, he undertook to survey land, and to repair clocks and watches, besides
carrying on his trade of a carpenter.  He soon obtained a considerable knowledge of what had
been done in clocks and watches, and was able to do not only what the best professional workers
had done, but to strike out entirely new lights in the clock and watch-making business.  He
found out a method of diminishing friction by adding a joint to the pallets of the pendulum,
whereby they were made to work in the nature of rollers of a large radius, without any sliding,
as usual, upon the teeth of the wheel.  He constructed a clock on the recoiling principle,
which went perfectly, and never lost a minute within fourteen years.  Sir Edmund Denison Beckett
says that he invented this method in order to save himself the trouble of going so frequently
to oil the escapement of a turret clock, of which he had charge; though there were other influences
at work besides this.

But his most important invention, at this early period of his life, was his compensation pendulum.
Every one knows that metals expand with heat and contract by cold.  The pendulum of the clock
therefore expanded in summer and contracted in winter, thereby interfering with the regular
going of the clock.  Huygens had by his cylindrical checks removed the great irregularity arising
from the unequal lengths of the oscillations; but the pendulum was affected by the tossing
of a ship at sea, and was also subject to a variation in weight, depending on the parallel
of latitude.  Graham, the well-known clock-maker, invented the mercurial compensation pendulum,
consisting of a glass or iron jar filled with quicksilver and fixed to the end of the pendulum
rod.  When the rod was lengthened by heat, the quicksilver and the jar which contained it were
simultaneously expanded and elevated, and the centre of oscillation was thus continued at the
same distance from the point of suspension.

But the difficulty, to a certain extent, remained unconquered until Harrison took the matter
in hand.  He observed that all rods of metal do not alter their lengths equally by heat, or,
on the contrary, become shorter by cold, but some more sensibly than others.  After innumerable
experiments Harrison at length composed a frame somewhat resembling a gridiron, in which the
alternate bars were of steel and of brass, and so arranged that those which expanded the most
were counteracted by those which expanded the least.  By this means the pendulum contained
the power of equalising its own action, and the centre of oscillation continued at the same
absolute distance from the point of suspension through all the variations of heat and cold
during the year.[5]

Thus by the year 1726, when he was only thirty-three years old, Harrison had furnished himself
with two compensation clocks, in which all the irregularities to which these machines were
subject, were either removed or so happily balanced, one metal against the other, that the
two clocks kept time together in different parts of his house, without the variation of more
than a single second in the month.  One of them, indeed, which he kept by him for his own use,
and constantly compared with a fixed star, did not vary so much as one whole minute during
the ten years that he continued in the country after finishing the machine.[6]

Living, as he did, not far from the sea, Harrison next endeavoured to arrange his timekeeper
for purposes of navigation.

He tried his clock in a vessel belonging to Barton-on-Humber; but his compensating pendulum
could there be of comparatively little use; for it was liable to be tossed hither or thither
by the sudden motions of the ship.  He found it necessary, therefore, to mount a chronometer,
or portable timekeeper, which might be taken from place to place, and subjected to the violent
and irregular motion of a ship at sea, without affecting its rate of going.  It was evident
to him that the first mover must be changed from a weight and pendulum to a spring wound up
and a compensating balance.

He now applied his genius in this direction.  After pondering over the subject, he proceeded
to London in 1728, and exhibited his drawings to Dr. Halley, then Astronomer-Royal.  The Doctor
referred him to Mr. George Graham, the distinguished horologer, inventor of the dead-beat escapement
and the mercurial pendulum. After examining the drawings and holding some converse with Harrison,
Graham perceived him to be a man of uncommon merit, and gave him every encouragement.  He recommended
him, however, to make his machine before again applying to the Board of Longitude.

Harrison returned home to Barrow to complete his task, and many years elapsed before he again
appeared in London to present his first chronometer.

The remarkable success which Harrison had achieved in his compensating pendulum could not but
urge him on to further experiments.  He was no doubt to a certain extent influenced by the
reward of 20,000L. which the English Government had offered for an instrument that should enable
the longitude to be more accurately determined by navigators at sea than was then possible;
and it was with the object of obtaining pecuniary assistance to assist him in completing his
chronometer that Harrison had, in 1728, made his first visit to London to exhibit his drawings.

The Act of Parliament offering this superb reward was passed in 1714, fourteen years before,
but no attempt had been made to claim it.  It was right that England, then rapidly advancing
to the first position as a commercial nation, should make every effort to render navigation
less hazardous.  Before correct chronometers were invented, or good lunar tables were prepared,[7]
the ship, when fairly at sea, out of sight of land, and battling with the winds and tides,
was in a measure lost.  No method existed for accurately ascertaining the longitude.  The ship
might be out of its course for one or two hundred miles, for anything that the navigator knew;
and only the wreck of his ship on some unknown coast told of the mistake that he had made in
his reckoning.

It may here be mentioned that it was comparatively easy to determine the latitude of a ship
at sea every day when the sun was visible.  The latitude--that is, the distance of any spot
from the equator and the pole--might be found by a simple observation with the sextant.  The
altitude of the sun at noon is found, and by a short calculation the position of the ship can
be ascertained.

The sextant, which is the instrument universally used at sea, was gradually evolved from similar
instruments used from the earliest times.  The object of this instrument has always been to
find the angular distance between two bodies--that is to say, the angle contained by two straight
lines, drawn from those bodies to meet in the observer's eye.  The simplest instrument of this
kind may be well represented by a pair of compasses.  If the hinge is held to the eye, one
leg pointed to the distant horizon, and the other leg pointed to the sun, the position of the
two legs will show the angular distance of the sun from the horizon at the moment of observation.

Until the end of the seventeenth century, the instrument used was of this simple kind.  It
was generally a large quadrant, with one or two bars moving on a hinge,--to all intents and
purposes a huge pair of compasses.  The direction of the sight was fixed by the use of a slit
and a pointer, much as in the ordinary rifle. This instrument was vastly improved by the use
of a telescope, which not only allowed fainter objects to be seen, but especially enabled the
sight to be accurately directed to the object observed.

The instruments of the pre-telescopic age reached their glory in the hands of Tycho Brahe.
He used magnificent instruments of the simple "pair of compasses" kind--circles, quadrants,
and sextants.  These were for the most part ponderous fixed instruments of little or no use
for the purposes of navigation. But Tycho Brahe's sextant proved the forerunner of the modern
instrument.  The general structure is the same; but the vast improvement of the modern sextant
is due, firstly, to the use of the reflecting mirror, and, secondly, to the use of the telescope
for accurate sighting.  These improvements were due to many scientific men--to William Gascoigne,
who first used the telescope, about 1640; to Robert Hooke, who, in 1660, proposed to apply
it to the quadrant; to Sir Isaac Newton, who designed a reflecting quadrant;[8] and to John
Hadley, who introduced it. The modern sextant is merely a modification of Newton's or Badley's
quadrant, and its present construction seems to be perfect.

It therefore became possible accurately to determine the position of a ship at sea as regarded
its latitude.  But it was quite different as regarded the longitude that is, the distance of
any place from a given meridian, eastward or westward.  In the case of longitude there is no
fixed spot to which reference can be made.  The rotation of the earth makes the existence of
such a spot impossible.  The question of longitude is purely a question of TIME.  The circuit
of the globe, east and west, is simply represented by twenty-four hours.  Each place has its
own time. It is very easy to determine the local time at any spot by observations made at that
spot.  But, as time is always changing, the knowledge of the local time gives no idea of the
actual position; and still less of a moving object--say, of a ship at sea.  But if, in any
locality, we know the local time, and also the local time of some other locality at that moment--say,
of the Observatory at Greenwich we can, by comparing the two local times, determine the difference
of local times, or, what is the same thing, the difference of longitude between the two places.
It was necessary therefore for the navigator to be in possession of a first-rate watch or chronometer,
to enable him to determine accurately the position of his ship at sea, as respected the longitude.

Before the middle of the eighteenth century good watches were comparatively unknown.  The navigator
mainly relied, for his approximate longitude, upon his Dead Reckoning, without any observation
of the heavenly bodies.  He depended upon the accuracy of the course which he had steered by
the compass, and the mensuration of the ship's velocity by an instrument called the Log, as
well as by combining and rectifying all the allowances for drift, lee-way, and so on, according
to the trim of the ship; but all of these were liable to much uncertainty, especially when
the sea was in a boisterous condition. There was another and independent course which might
have been adopted--that is, by observation of the moon, which is constantly moving amongst
the stars from west to east.  But until the middle of the eighteenth century good lunar tables
were as much unknown as good watches.

Hence a method of ascertaining the longitude, with the same degree of accuracy which is attainable
in respect of latitude, had for ages been the grand desideratum for men "who go down to the
sea in ships."  Mr. Macpherson, in his important work entitled 'The Annals of Commerce,' observes,
"Since the year 1714, when Parliament offered a reward of 20,000L. for the best method of ascertaining
the longitude at sea, many schemes have been devised, but all to little or no purpose, as going
generally upon wrong principles, till that heaven-taught artist Mr. John Harrison arose;" and
by him, as Mr. Macpherson goes on to say, the difficulty was conquered, having devoted to it
"the assiduous studies of a long life."

The preamble of the Act of Parliament in question runs as follows: "Whereas it is well known
by all that are acquainted with the art of navigation that nothing is so much wanted and desired
at sea as the discovery of the longitude, for the safety and quickness of voyages, the preservation
of ships and the lives of men," and so on.  The Act proceeds to constitute certain persons
commissioners for the discovery of the longitude, with power to receive and experiment upon
proposals for that purpose, and to grant sums of money not exceeding 2000L. to aid in such
experiments.

It will, in these days, be scarcely believed that little more than a hundred and fifty years
ago a prize of not less than ten thousand pounds should have been offered for a method of determining
the longitude within sixty miles, and that double the amount should have been offered for a
method of determining it within thirty miles! There are two windows of three lights.

This chapel has become the museum for the storage of many interesting fragments of destroyed
portions of the fabric. Some of the coloured fragments are under glass, others are grouped
against the eastern wall. It is to be regretted that no list is hung up in the cases. The larger
of the two cases contains in one division pieces of the broken upper part of the sedilia, all finely
coloured.

In the other division are fragments from the Warwick Chapel and other mutilated tombs in the
choir. Most of these were found buried in the choir at the restoration in 1875. There are some
iron rings which belonged to the coffin of Sir Hugh le Despenser. They were removed when the tomb
was inspected in 1875.

Portions of figures of the De Clares are also in the case--one with an inverted torch, representing
Gilbert de Clare, who died, the last male of his line, at the battle
of Bannockburn, 1314.

Three bases of figures contain inscriptions as follows:

1. Rob^s. Consull Filius Regis 2. Willelm^s. Comes Gloces^r. 3. . . . . . e Regis.

Another portion of a figure, in a blue mantle, is said to be Thomas Lord Despenser, the last
Earl of Gloucester. It has upon it the arms of Despenser and Clare.

On the wall are some swords which recall the panic caused in 1803 by Napoleon's projected invasion
and humiliation of England. It is difficult to see why they or the
colours of the Volunteers were removed to this position from the Town
Hall.

Against the eastern wall are portions of a beautiful frieze, with ball-flower ornament, and
many shields bearing traces of rich colour. There is a fine head, and a curiosity in the form
of a coffin of an infant, a portion of a cluster of marble columns, and a figure in camelskin
and leather girdle representing St. John the Baptist.

Across this chapel is the tomb of Abbot Cheltenham, who died in 1509 (vide p. 95).

=The Vestry.=--The third of the chapels is the most regular in shape, and is used, as it was
in monastic times, as a Vestiarium or vestry. The arch is closed entirely by masonry, built upon
the original wall which formed the outer wall of the Norman church. In the walled-up space
that corresponds to what is the entrance in the case of the other chapels are a fine tomb and the
doorway into the vestry. A description of the tomb will be found on p. 97. The tomb of the Abbot
may have been removed from a grave outside the building, but it is not known who was buried
in it. Willis ascribed it to Robert Fortington, who died in 1253. A fine doorway, richly decorated,
with three elaborately wrought brackets for images over it, gives access to the Clergy Vestry.
The door is of oak, plated with roughly wrought metal plates, of which tradition has it that
they were made by the monks out of swords and armour found in and
around the precincts after the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471.

This chapel is profusely enriched with ball-flower moulding, both inside and on the side next
the ambulatory. It will be noticed that the windows are small and placed, for the sake of the
security of the sacristy, high up in the south wall. In the south wall is a piscina, and close
by on the south-east wall must have stood an altar. The window nearer to this has richer detail
than the other two. In the south-west wall a small recess is formed
inside a buttress.

This may have been used as a safe for plate and other valuables in the charge of the sacristan.

A
special staircase in the north-west corner, entered from the ambulatory, gives access to the
room over the vestry. In this room, which has a fireplace, the sacristan probably slept. He
was able from the windows on the stairs to see into the Vestiarium or Diaconum Magnum, and
also into the choir. In fact, this view is one of the most interesting in the church. Two large
square modern windows give light to this room, and a doorway in the east wall communicates with
the space over the vaulting of the ambulatory and chapels. The room had originally a low timbered
roof, as will be seen by the holes once occupied by the beams.

There are two tombs of interest built into the wall between the vestry door and the south transept,
and space for them has been cut out of the original Norman solid wall. One is quite plain and
simple Early English work [M], and contains the remains of Abbot Alan, a man of learning and
of considerable note, as he was a friend of Thomas Ã Becket, the great Archbishop of Canterbury. This
is the only tomb of that period now surviving in the church, and
it has been thought that he was the first of the abbots who was honoured
with an intramural tomb.

Close to Abbot Alan's tomb is another recess which now is without its coffin. The arch is pointed
and crocketed with pinnacles at the sides. In the absence of a tomb the chief interest consists
in the old encaustic tiles which have been transferred here from other parts of the building,
a few of them having been found in 1875 under the then stone pavement
of the choir.

They are now safe here from the destroying power of the ubiquitous tourist's foot.

On the south-east tower pier is a marble tablet in Renaissance style, erected in 1890 to the
memory of Mrs. Craik, the author of "John Halifax, Gentleman," who is said to have written
her story whilst staying at the ancient "Bell Inn" near the Abbey gate. The memorial was designed
by Mr. H.H. Armstead, R.A., and is gracefully carried out entirely
in white marble.

The only fault in the memorial is that there is too much work in proportion to the size of
the tablet. The topmost portion above the projecting cornice is a charming piece of work, illustrating
Charity, but too high above the ordinary visitor's head to be seen or appreciated as it should, and
the group rather overweights the memorial.

=South Transept.=--(Dimensions 40 feet 8 inches by 32 feet 10 inches.) This transept has vaulting
of the same character as the other, and a large west window, rebuilt in 1820, filled with glass
in memory of Thomas Collins, of Tewkesbury.

Beneath this window is a deeply recessed doorway (now blocked up) which once gave access to
the cloisters. In this recess are to be found some of the old tiles which formerly were in the
choir. In the south wall too, like the north wall of the other transept, there are recessed
Norman arches with two windows--enlarged later--under the roof. The doorway in this wall formerly
communicated with the Chapter House. One of Tewkesbury's glories, the old organ, forms the north
boundary of the transept. On the east side there are four large Norman arches. Of these the first
is the archway which gives access to the south ambulatory, with a triangular window (of fourteenth
century work) over it, occupying the position once taken by the arch
of the triforium of the Norman choir.

In 1893 this window was glazed with stained glass by Rev. W.H.F. Hepworth in memory of his mother,
the subject of the window being Faith, Hope, and Charity.

To the south of this is the large arch which gives access to the Norman chapel with its early
Norman groined roof. This chapel will give the student an idea of the original plan of the north
transept before the alterations in 1237 and in 1246.

The east window was perforce blocked up when the ambulatory chapels were built, and to give light
to the chapel the south-east window was inserted in the apse, no other position for a window
being possible, as will easily be seen by reference to the plan.

An anonymous donor presented the Salviati mosaic now in the filling of the east window, but the effect
is not good, as too strong a light falls upon the gold background. Probably the work will look
better when the south transept is entirely glazed with coloured glass. The subject is our Lord enthroned,
bearing a book in one hand, and having the other raised as in blessing. The glass in this
window was formerly in the east window of the ambulatory of the choir, and was removed to its
present position in 1887. It is a memorial to Mr. A. Sprowle, a former resident of Tewkesbury.
The glass is by Clayton and Bell, but the window is very poor and uninteresting.

This Norman chapel[19] was at one time used as the Baptistery, and the font, now in one of the
two north-east chapels, was in use here up to the time of the restoration in 1875. After this
restoration the altar from the choir was transferred to this chapel, and the various guilds
connected with the church subscribed towards the cost of fitting
the chapel for special devotional use.

It is used for the daily morning services in the week.

There are remains of a piscina in this chapel, but very much battered. It is to be hoped that
money will not be frittered away on any attempt at polychrome decoration of the ordinary kind
in the chapel as has been done at Gloucester in the chapel of St. Andrew. Mr. Blunt has thrown
out the suggestion as a possible ideal, but the simplicity of the present chapel is far preferable.

Immediately
above it is a large vaulted room, similar in shape, but less lofty, open to the transept.
Its roof shows traces of having been at one time elaborately painted with frescoes, and the room formerly
communicated with the original Norman triforium of the choir.

This room has at various times had absurd names given to it, perhaps the most absurd being
that of the Nun's Prison. As Mr. Blunt in "Tewkesbury and its Associations" says, there are
many people who cannot hear about monks without immediately thinking of nuns. It would seem
that the room communicated with the dorter or dormitory, and was designed for invalid monks,
who from it might hear mass sung in the church without going downstairs. In the south-east
corner of the transept a staircase gives access to this chamber, and communicates with the triforium
of the transept, the clerestory of the choir, the vaulting of the
ambulatory as well as that of the tower.

Before 1875 a gallery filled up the south transept and two bays of the south aisle, and communicated
by means of the organ screen with the similar gallery in the north transept.

In the west wall is a recess, formerly a doorway of Early English work. On the south wall is
a brass tablet from the choir pavement, to the memory of Prince Edward.

At the corner of the south transept and the south aisle is a curious recess in the masonry hidden
by a curtain.

At the extreme east end of the south aisle, near the niche or recess
just mentioned, is a rudely carved head which no doubt served as a
cresset.

THE CHOIR.

This part of the building is usually entered from the south ambulatory by the entrance opposite
to the door of the clergy vestry.

The screen-work at this entrance to the choir was in a ruinous state in the early part of this century,
and has been most carefully repaired, and in part renewed.

It is a choir of great beauty, and though at first sight small and low, its proportions are admirable
in every way, the length being almost exactly twice the breadth.

From the centre of the eastern tower-piers to the back of the altar the choir measures 63 feet,
but the total length from the present oak-screen to the altar is 103 feet. The breadth in its widest
part is 33 feet.[20]

The upper part of the choir was reconstructed in the early part of
the fourteenth century in its present polygonal form, the Norman pillars
being carried up three feet, and fitted on the choir side with Decorated
capitals.

The curious effect of the carrying up of the columns will be seen from the fact that the arches
which spring from the Decorated capitals do not correspond in pitch with the vaulting in the ambulatory.
The latter springs from the original Norman capitals on the columns in the choir (see illustration,
p. 52).

The moulding of these arches of the choir is exceedingly rich, and the outer ones on the north
side contain a double moulding of quatrefoil flower ornament.

The easternmost arch is somewhat stilted; the bare wall thus left exposed having originally been
concealed by the reredos, or at any rate decorated in some way.

In these alterations to the choir here the Norman triforium had to be sacrificed; and those
who wish to see on a larger scale what the original triforium was like must study that at Gloucester.
In fact the two choirs alone will form the basis of much interesting study, the Gloucester choir
having been left comparatively intact below the clerestory, and veiled over with richly wrought Perpendicular
stonework.

The windows and the roof are of about the same date, i.e., early fourteenth century; the roof
is anticipatively Perpendicular. A great feature of the choir is the skilful way in which the work
of different times has been so effectively combined, and brought into a harmonious whole.

It is interesting to compare the ground-plans of Gloucester and Tewkesbury, and to see how the
two originally Norman choirs have been treated. At Gloucester the apsidal formation has been
destroyed, traces only of it being left under the present reredos, but there the actual removal
of Norman work stopped. The Norman piers of the choir and presbytery and the Norman triforium
of the choir are all there, though they are partly concealed by the later Perpendicular casing.
The choir at Tewkesbury has lost its distinctively Norman character, as nearly all the original
outside wall of the church to the east of the tower was removed, but it has retained its apsidal
formation.

Beautiful as the choir is, it owes much of its effect to its vaulted
roof, which is a fine specimen of early Decorated work.

The vaulting ribs spring from small engaged shafts, which are carried up the face of the wall
from the main piers, and then radiate from very ornate capitals over the vault. A fine colour effect
must have been presented by the original ceiling painted and frescoed.

The bosses are less elaborate and less varied than those in the choir at Gloucester, but are
well carved, consisting for the most part of vine-leaves delicately treated. All this roof was
colour-washed in 1828, when so much restoration was done in the church.

The suns[21] in the centre are supposed to have been put up by command of Edward IV. after the
battle of Tewkesbury. The suns were a device which was appropriated by the Yorkists after
the downfall of the Lancastrian party. Those in the tower vaulting are modern copies of these
original suns. The modern painting of the vaulting is subdued in tone.

The vault of the tower is a lierne vault, and from the occurrence of the arms of Sir Guy de Brien,
once quartered with those of Montacute (i.e., of his wife), the vaulting has been credited to
his exertions. The Despenser fret is to be found twice.

In front of the altar-rails is the large boss from which used to hang the sanctuary lamp, the
sacred flame of which was kept ever trimmed and bright, as a sign that "the house was evermore watching
to God."

=Altar.=--The Purbeck marble altar is supposed by some to have been the altar mentioned in the Abbey
Chronicles of 1239, but any Early English features have been destroyed beyond recognition.
It is reputed to be the largest altar in England, but, at any rate, it may be said to be the longest.
Originally set up in its present situation, it seems to have been buried in the choir by the
monks, perhaps by some who were not so mercenary as the rest.

Sixty-eight years afterwards it was found, and its purpose being recognised, it was set up in
the middle of the choir as a Communion table. In 1730 it was transferred to the aisle, the
churchwardens' accounts stating that 12s. was paid for so doing, and that 2s. 6d. was given
"to the men that did it for working all night." The "large entire blue stone" was then cut into
two lengthwise, and was further desecrated by being converted into seats for the north porch.[22] Earl
Beauchamp, at his own expense, had the two slabs restored to their
original use.

Considering what the marble has gone through, its size has been well maintained. It is supported
by a massive framing of oak.

=Sedilia.=--These are on the south side in the canted bay of the apse. These sadly mutilated remains
of a once glorious work are especially interesting. Originally they were decorated with rich colour
and gold, much of which still in parts remains. The canopy of tabernacle work has been ruthlessly
destroyed, together with the major part of the easternmost section.

All the shafting is very richly moulded with a great number of diminutive mouldings, principally
ogee and hollow. Foliage work of rare beauty and representations
of grotesque animals form the greater part of the ornament. There
are interesting remains of diaper work in the wall which forms the
back. The plinth and seats are probably modern work. At the top are
placed some pieces of battlement work, of which there is a great amount
in different parts of the building. It seems a pity that the remains
of the sedilia which lie elsewhere in the church cannot be placed
together in position here--not "restored," but honestly pieced as
well as may be done with care and patience.

The north-east pier that
supports the tower bears a plain corbel, supporting what is supposed
to be the remains of an oak case for the Saunce-bell or Sanctus-bell.

=Tiles.=--During
the wholesale restoration of 1875 and following years some old tiles
were found, after the pattern of which the present tiles were made.
The fashion of paving buildings of the age of Tewkesbury Abbey with
glazed and glossy machine-made tiles, all cut mathematically true,
is much to be deprecated. Time has done much, and will do more, to
remove the glaze, but nothing will ever remove the stiff printed look
of the pattern. The black patches of tiles are rather heavy in appearance,
but the pavement looks better so than it would if broken up with streaky
slabs and squares of glaring white marble incised with more or less
pictorial designs relieved with a background of black cement. The
choir of Tewkesbury in this respect has fared better than that of
Gloucester, though a little more might have been made of the graves
of the illustrious dead who are known to have been buried underneath.

=Windows
of the Choir.=--These fourteenth century windows are the chief glory
of the choir. There are seven in all, and though they have suffered
much from wilful damage and neglect, there are perhaps no others in
England containing quite so much glass of the same date, and in such
good condition as a whole.[23] Every one must rejoice that in 1828
lack of funds prevented these windows from being thoroughly restored.

The
windows nearest to the tower have four lights each, and the tracery
is comparatively simple though flowing and free. The next two on either
side of the choir are slightly more elaborate and contain five lights
each, while the east window is quite different from the rest. It has
five lights, and the head of the window contains a fine Catharine-wheel.

In
the north-west window (i.e., immediately over the Warwick Chapel)
are--1. Fitz-Hamon; 2. Robert Fitzroy; 3. Hugh le Despenser; 4. Gilbert
de Clare (third), the tenth Earl of Gloucester. In the south-west
window, i.e., the one exactly opposite to the last mentioned, are--1.
Gilbert de Clare (the first of the name); 2. Lord de la Zouch; 3.
Richard de Clare; 4. Gilbert de Clare (the second). These knights
are all in armour, and are valuable as giving accurate representation
of the armour and knightly gear of their time. Above the knights are
represented canopies, and in the heads of the windows are scrolls
of vine-leaves.

The bodies of the De Clares lie below the choir pavement,
almost in a line with these two windows.

The other windows on either
side contain Scripture subjects, many of them very fragmentary: Daniel,
David, Abraham, Jeremiah, Solomon, and Joel are, however, easily to
be found.

The east window represents the Last Judgment. In the centre
Christ is depicted with uplifted hands, on which are the stigmata
of the Passion. The side lights, from their unsymmetrical arrangement,
would seem to have been rearranged, or rather disarranged, at some
time. The Apostles would naturally be grouped on either side, in the
outer lights. The other two lights represent St. John and the Blessed
Virgin. Of these figures the heads, which are modern, were put in
(free of charge) in 1828 by a London glass-painter named Collins.
In the five panels below the figures are groups of persons arising
from their graves; one group represents an angel disputing with the
evil one for the possession of three persons bound with a chain. At
the bottom are armorial bearings.

In the floor of the choir there
are graves in which many notable persons, who made their mark in history,
were buried.

Exactly under the central point of the vaulting of the
tower is the site of the grave of Prince Edward, son of Henry VI.
and Margaret Anjou. He died on the 4th of May, 1471, and with him
the last hope of the Red Rose party was finally crushed.  During the same year in which
the above resolution was passed, the Sardinian minister ordered four of Harrison's timekeepers
at the price of 1000L. each, at the special instance of the King of Sardinia "as an acknowledgement
of Mr. Harrison's ingenuity, and as some recompense for the time spent by him for the general
good of mankind."  This grateful attention was all the more praiseworthy, as Sardinia could
not in any way be regarded as a great maritime power.

Harrison was now becoming old and feeble.  He had attained the age of seventy-four.  He had
spent forty long years in working out his invention.  He was losing his eyesight, and could
not afford to wait much longer.  Still he had to wait.

But Harrison had not lost his spirit.  On May 30th, 1765, he addressed another remonstrance
to the Board, containing much stronger language than he had yet used.  "I cannot help thinking,"
he said, "that I am extremely ill-used by gentlemen from whom I might have expected a different
treatment; for, if the Act of the 12th of Queen Anne be deficient, why have I so long been
encouraged under it, in order to bring my invention to perfection?  And, after the completion,
why was my son sent twice to the West Indies?  Had it been said to my son, when he received
the last instruction, 'There will, in case you succeed, be a new Act on your return, in order
to lay you under new restrictions, which were not thought of in the Act of the 12th of Queen
Anne,'--I say, had this been the case, I might have expected some such treatment as that I
now meet with.

"It must be owned that my case is very hard; but I hope I am the first, and for my country's
sake I hope I shall be the last, to suffer by pinning my faith upon an English Act of Parliament.
Had I received my just reward--for certainly it may be so called after forty years' close application
of the talent which it has pleased God to give me--then my invention would have taken the course
which all improvements in this world do; that is, I must have instructed workmen in its principles
and execution, which I should have been glad of an opportunity of doing. But how widely different
this is from what is now proposed, viz., for me to instruct people that I know nothing of,
and such as may know nothing of mechanics; and, if I do not make them understand to their satisfaction,
I may then have nothing!

"Hard fate indeed to me, but still harder to the world, which may be deprived of this my invention,
which must be the case, except by my open and free manner in describing all the principles
of it to gentlemen and noblemen who almost at all times have had free recourse to my instruments.
And if any of these workmen have been so ingenious as to have got my invention, how far you
may please to reward them for their piracy must be left for you to determine; and I must set
myself down in old age, and thank God I can be more easy in that I have the conquest, and though
I have no reward, than if I had come short of the matter and by some delusion had the reward!"

The Right Honourable the Earl of Egmont was in the chair of the Board of Longitude on the day
when this letter was read--June 13, 1765.  The Commissioners were somewhat startled by the
tone which the inventor had taken.  Indeed, they were rather angry.  Mr. Harrison, who was
in waiting, was called in.  After some rather hot speaking, and after a proposal was made to
Harrison which he said he would decline to accede to "so long as a drop of English blood remained
in his body," he left the room.  Matters were at length arranged.  The Act of Parliament (5
Geo. III. cap. 20) awarded him, upon a full discovery of the principles of his time-keeper,
the payment of such a sum, as with the 2500L. he had already received, would make one half
of the reward; and the remaining half was to be paid when other chronometers had been made
after his design, and their capabilities fully proved.  He was also required to assign his
four chronometers--one of which was styled a watch--to the use of the public.

Harrison at once proceeded to give full explanations of the principles of his chronometer to
Dr. Maskelyne, and six other gentlemen, who had been appointed to receive them.  He took his
timekeeper to pieces in their presence, and deposited in their hands correct drawings of the
same, with the parts, so that other skilful makers might construct similar chronometers on
the same principles.  Indeed, there was no difficulty in making them; after his explanations
and drawings had been published.  An exact copy of his last watch was made by the ingenious
Mr. Kendal; and was used by Captain Cook in his three years' circumnavigation of the world,
to his perfect satisfaction.

England had already inaugurated that series of scientific expeditions which were to prove so
fruitful of results, and to raise her naval reputation to so great a height.  In these expeditions,
the officers, the sailors, and the scientific men, were constantly brought face to face with
unforeseen difficulties and dangers, which brought forth their highest qualities as men. There
was, however, some intermixture of narrowness in the minds of those who sent them forth.  For
instance, while Dr. Priestley was at Leeds, he was asked by Sir Joseph Banks to join Captain
Cook's second expedition to the Southern Seas, as an astronomer. Priestley gave his assent,
and made arrangements to set out.  But some weeks later, Banks informed him that his appointment
had been cancelled, as the Board of Longitude objected to his theology. Priestley's otherwise
gentle nature was roused.  "What I am, and what they are, in respect of religion," he wrote
to Banks, in December, 1771, "might easily have been known before the thing was proposed to
me at all.  Besides, I thought that this had been a business of philosophy, and not of divinity.
If, however, this be the case, I shall hold the Board of Longitude in extreme contempt."

Captain Cook was appointed to the command of the Resolution, and Captain Wallis to the command
of the Adventure, in November, 1771.  The expedition left Deptford in April, 1772; and shortly
afterwards sailed for the South Seas.  "Mr. Kendal's watch" is the subject of frequent notices
in Captain Cook's account.  At the Cape of Good Hope, it is said to have "answered beyond all
expectation."  From this time, complete reliance was placed upon Harrison's chronometer.  It
may be observed, that at the beginning of the voyage, observations were made by the lunar tables;
but these, being found unreliable, were eventually discontinued.

To return to Harrison.  He continued to be worried by official opposition.  His claims were
still unsatisfied.  His watch at home underwent many more trials.  Dr. Maskelyne, the Royal
Astronomer, was charged with being unfavourable to the success of chronometers, being deeply
interested in finding the longitude by lunar tables; although this method is now almost entirely
superseded by the chronometer. Harrison accordingly could not get the certificate of what was
due to him under the Act of Parliament.  Years passed before he could obtain the remaining
amount of his reward.  It was not until the year 1773, or forty-five years after the commencement
of his experiments, that he succeeded in obtaining it.  The following is an entry in the list
of supplies granted by Parliament in that year: "June 14. To John Harrison, as a further reward
and encouragement over and above the sums already received by him, for his invention of a timekeeper
for ascertaining the longitude at sea, and his discovery of the principles upon which the same
was constructed, 8570 pounds 0s. 0d."

John Harrison did not long survive the settlement of his claims; for he died on the 24th of
March, 1776, at the age of eighty-three.  He was buried at the south-west corner of Hampstead
parish churchyard, where a tombstone was erected to his memory, and an inscription placed upon
it commemorating his services.  His wife survived him only a year; she died at seventy-two,
and was buried in the same tomb.  His son, William Harrison, F.R.S., a deputy-lientenant of
the counties of Monmouth and Middlesex, died in 1815, at the ripe age of eighty-eight, and
was also interred there.  The tomb having stood for more than a century, became somewhat dilapidated;
when the Clock-makers' Company of the City of London took steps in 1879 to reconstruct it,
and recut the inscriptions.  An appropriate ceremony took place at the final uncovering of
the tomb.

But perhaps the most interesting works connected with John Harrison and the great labour of
his life, are the wooden clock at the South Kensington Museum, and the four chronometers made
by him for the Government, which are still preserved at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. 
The three early ones are of great weight, and can scarcely be moved without some bodily labour.
But the fourth, the marine chronometer or watch, is of small dimensions, and is easily handled.
It still possesses the power of going accurately; as does "Mr. Kendal's watch," which was made
exactly after it.  These will always prove the best memorials of this distinguished workman.

Before concluding this brief notice of the life and labours of John Harrison, it becomes me
to thank most cordially Mr. Christie, Astronomer-Royal, for his kindness in exhibiting the
various chronometers deposited at the Greenwich Observatory, and for his permission to inspect
the minutes of the Board of Longitude, where the various interviews between the inventor and
the commissioners, extending over many years, are faithfully but too procrastinatingly recorded.
It may be finally said of John Harrison, that by his invention of the chronometer--the ever-sleepless
and ever-trusty friend of the mariner--he conferred an incalculable benefit on science and
navigation, and established his claim to be regarded as one of the greatest benefactors of mankind.

POstscript.--In addition to the information contained in this chapter, I have been recently
informed by the Rev. Mr. Sankey, vicar of Wragby, that the family is quite extinct in the parish,
except the wife of a plumber, who claims relationship with Harrison.  The representative of
the Winn family was created Lord St. Oswald in 1885.  Harrison is not quite forgotten at Foulby.
The house in which he was born was a low thatched cottage, with two rooms, one used as a living
room, and the other as a sleeping room.  The house was pulled down about forty years ago; but
the entrance door, being of strong, hard wood, is still preserved. The vicar adds that young
Harrison would lie out on the grass all night in summer time, studying the details of his wooden
clock.

Footnotes to Chapter III.

[1] Originally published in Longmam's Magazine, but now rewritten and enlarged.

[2] Popular Astronomy.  By Simon Newcomb, LL.D., Professor U.S. Naval Observatory.

[3] Biographia Britannica, vol. vi. part 2, p. 4375.  This volume was published in 1766, before
the final reward had been granted to Harrison.

[4] This clock is in the possession of Abraham Riley, of Bromley, near Leeds.  He informs us
that the clock is made of wood throughout, excepting the escapement and the dial, which are
made of brass.  It bears the mark of "John Harrison, 1713."

[5] Harrison's compensation pendulum was afterwards improved by Arnold, Earnshaw, and other
English makers.  Dent's prismatic balance is now considered the best.

[6] See Mr. Folkes's speech to the Royal Soc., 30th Nov., 1749.

[7] No trustworthy lunar tables existed at that time.  It was not until the year 1753 that
Tobias Mayer, a German, published the first lunar tables which could be relied upon.  For this,
the British Government afterwards awarded to Mayer's widow the sum of 5000L.

[8] Sir Isaac Newton gave his design to Edmund Halley, then Astronomer-Royal.  Halley laid
it on one side, and it was found among his papers after his death in 1742, twenty-five years
after the death of Newton.  A similar omission was made by Sir G. B. Airy, which led to the
discovery of Neptune being attributed to Leverrier instead of to Adams.

"By Commerce are acquired the two things which wise men accompt of all others the most necessary
to the well-being of a Commonwealth: That is to say, a general Industry of Mind and Hardiness
of Body, which never fail to be accompanyed with Honour and Plenty.  So that, questionless,
when Commerce does not flourish, as well as other Professions, and when Particular Persons
out of a habit of Laziness neglect at once the noblest way of employing their time and the
fairest occasion for advancing their fortunes, that Kingdom, though otherwise never so glorious,
wants something of being compleatly happy."--A Treatise touching the East India Trade (1695).

Industry puts an entirely new face upon the productions of nature.  By labour man has subjugated
the world, reduced it to his dominion, and clothed the earth with a new garment.  The first
rude plough that man thrust into the soil, the first rude axe of stone with which he felled
the pine, the first rude canoe scooped by him from its trunk to cross the river and reach the
greener fields beyond, were each the outcome of a human faculty which brought within his reach
some physical comfort he had never enjoyed before.

Material things became subject to the influence of labour.  From the clay of the ground, man
manufactured the vessels which were to contain his food.  Out of the fleecy covering of sheep,
he made clothes for himself of many kinds; from the flax plant he drew its fibres, and made
linen and cambric; from the hemp plant he made ropes and fishing nets; from the cotton pod
he fabricated fustians, dimities, and calicoes. From the rags of these, or from weed and the
shavings of wood, he made paper on which books and newspapers were printed.  Lead was formed
by him into printer's type, for the communication of knowledge without end.

But the most extraordinary changes of all were made in a heavy stone containing metal, dug
out of the ground.  With this, when smelted by wood or coal, and manipulated by experienced
skill, iron was produced. From this extraordinary metal, the soul of every manufacture, and
the mainspring perhaps of civilised society--arms, hammers, and axes were made; then knives,
scissors, and needles; then machinery to hold and control the prodigious force of steam; and
eventually railroads and locomotives, ironclads propelled by the screw, and iron and steel
bridges miles in length.

The silk manufacture, though originating in the secretion of a tiny caterpillar, is perhaps
equally extraordinary.  Hundreds of thousands of pounds weight of this slender thread, no thicker
than the filaments spun by a spider, give employment to millions of workers throughout the
world.  Silk, and the many textures wrought from this beautiful material, had long been known
in the East; but the period cannot be fixed when man first divested the chrysalis of its dwelling,
and discovered that the little yellow ball which adhered to the leaf of the mulberry tree,
could be evolved into a slender filament, from which tissues of endless variety and beauty
could be made.  The Chinese were doubtless among the first who used the thread spun by the
silkworm for the purposes of clothing.  The manufacture went westward from China to India and
Persia, and from thence to Europe.  Alexander the Great brought home with him a store of rich
silks from Persia Aristotle and Pliny give descriptions of the industrious little worm and
its productions.  Virgil is the first of the Roman writers who alludes to the production of
silk in China; and the terms he employs show how little was then known about the article. 
It was introduced at Rome about the time of Julius Caesar, who displayed a profusion of silks
in some of his magnificent theatrical spectacles.  Silk was so valuable that it was then sold
for an equal weight of gold.  Indeed, a law was passed that no man should disgrace himself
by wearing a silken garment. The Emperor Heliogabalus despised the law, and wore a dress composed
wholly of silk.  The example thus set was followed by wealthy citizens. A demand for silk from
the East soon became general.

It was not until about the middle of the sixth century that two Persian monks, who had long
resided in China, and made themselves acquainted with the mode of rearing the silkworm, succeeded
in carrying the eggs of the insect to Constantinople.  Under their direction they were hatched
and fed.  A sufficient number of butterflies were saved to propagate the race, and mulberry
trees were planted to afford nourishment to the rising generations of caterpillars.  Thus the
industry was propagated.  It spread into the Italian peninsula; and eventually manufactures
of silk velvet, damask, and satin became established in Venice, Milan, Florence, Lucca, and
other places.

Indeed, for several centuries the manufacture of silk in Europe was for the most part confined
to Italy.  The rearing of silkworms was of great importance in Modena, and yielded a considerable
revenue to the State. The silk produced there was esteemed the best in Lombardy.  Until the
beginning of the sixteenth century, Bologna was the only city which possessed proper "throwing"
mills, or the machinery requisite for twisting and preparing silken fibres for the weaver.
Thousands of people were employed at Florence and Genoa about the same time in the silk manufacture.
And at Venice it was held in such high esteem, that the business of a silk factory was considered
a noble employment.[1]

It was long before the use of silk became general in England. "Silk," said an old writer, "does
not immediately come hither from the Worm that spins and makes it, but passes many a Climate,
travels many a Desert, employs many a Hand, loads many a Camel, and freights many a Ship before
it arrives here; and when at last it comes, it is in return for other manufactures, or in exchange
for our money."[2]  It is said that the first pair of silk stockings was brought into England
from Spain, and presented to Henry VIII.  He had before worn hose of cloth. In the third year
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, her tiring woman, Mrs. Montagu, presented her with a pair of black
silk stockings as a New Year's gift; whereupon her Majesty asked if she could have any more,
in which case she would wear no more cloth stockings.  When James VI. of Scotland received
the ambassadors sent to congratulate him upon his accession to the throne of Great Britain,
he asked one of his lords to lend him his pair of silken hose, that he "might not appear a
scrub before  strangers."  From these circumstances it will be observed how rare the wearing
of silk was in England.

Shortly after becoming king, James I. endeavoured to establish the silk manufacture in England,
as had already been successfully done in France.  He gave every encouragement to the breeding
of silkworms.  He sent circular letters to all the counties of England, strongly recommending
the inhabitants to plant mulberry trees.  The trees were planted in many places, but the leaves
did not ripen in sufficient time for the sustenance of the silkworms.

The same attempt was made at Inneshannon, near Bandon, in Ireland, by the Hugnenot refugees,
but proved abortive.  The climate proved too cold or damp for the rearing of silkworms with
advantage.  All that remains is "The Mulberry Field," which still retains its name. Nevertheless
the Huguenots successfully established the silk manufacture at London and Dublin, obtaining
the spun silk from abroad.

Down to the beginning of last century, the Italians were the principal producers of organzine
or thrown silk; and for a long time they succeeded in keeping their art a secret.  Although
the silk manufacture, as we have seen, was introduced into this country by the Huguenot artizans,
the price of thrown silk was so great that it interfered very considerably with its progress.
Organzine was principally made within the dominions of Savoy, by means of a large and curious
engine, the like of which did not exist elsewhere.  The Italians, by the most severe laws,
long preserved the mystery of the invention.  The punishment prescribed by one of their laws
to be inflicted upon anyone who discovered the secret, or attempted to carry it out of the
Sardinian dominions, was death, with the forfeiture of all the goods the delinquent possessed;
and the culprit was "to be afterwards painted on the outside of the prison walls, hanging to
the gallows by one foot, with an inscription denoting the name and crime of the person, there
to be continued for a perpetual mark of infamy."[3]

Nevertheless, a bold and ingenious man was found ready to brave all this danger in the endeavour
to discover the secret.  It may be remembered with what courage and determination the founder
of the Foley family introduced the manufacture of nails into England.  He went into the Danemora
mine district, near Upsala in Sweden, fiddling his way among the miners; and after making two
voyages, he at last wrested from them the secret of making nails, and introduced the new industry
into the Staffordshire district.[4]  The courage of John Lombe, who introduced the thrown-silk
industry into England, was equally notable. He was a native of Norwich.  Playfair, in his 'Family
Antiquity' (vii. 312), says his name "may have been taken from the French Lolme, or de Lolme,"
as there were many persons of French and Flemish origin settled at Norwich towards the close
of the sixteenth century; but there is no further information as to his special origin.

John Lombe's father, Henry Lombe, was a worsted weaver, and was twice married.  By his first
wife he had two sons, Thomas and Henry; and by his second, he had also two sons, Benjamin and
John.  At his death in 1695, he left his two brothers his "supervisors," or trustees, and directed
them to educate his children in due time to some useful trade. Thomas, the eldest son, went
to London.  He was apprenticed to a trade, and succeeded in business, as we find him Sheriff
of London and Middlesex in 1727, when in his forty-second year.  He was also knighted in the
same year, most probably on the accession of George II. to the throne.

John, the youngest son of the family, and half-brother of Thomas, was put an apprentice to
a trade.  In 1702, we find him at Derby, working as a mechanic with one Mr. Crotchet.  This
unfortunate gentleman started a small silk-mill at Derby, with the object of participating
in the profits derived from the manufacture.

"The wear of silks," says Hutton, in his 'History of Derby,' "was the taste of the ladies,
and the British merchant was obliged to apply to the Italian with ready money for the article
at an exorbitant price." Crotchet did not succeed in his undertaking. "Three engines were found
necessary for the process:  he had but one.  An untoward trade is a dreadful sink for money;
and an imprudent tradesman is still more dreadful.  We often see instances where a fortune
would last a man much longer if he lived upon his capital, than if he sent it into trade. Crotchet
soon became insolvent."

John Lombe, who had been a mechanic in Crotchet's silk mill, lost his situation accordingly.
But he seems to have been possessed by an intense desire to ascertain the Italian method of
silk-throwing.  He could not learn it in England.  There was no other method but going to Italy,
getting into a silk mill, and learning the secret of the Italian art.  He was a good mechanic
and a clever draughtsman, besides being intelligent and fearless.

But he had not the necessary money wherewith to proceed to Italy.

His half-brother Thomas, however, was doing well in London, and was willing to help him with
the requisite means.  Accordingly, John set out for Italy, not long after the failure of Crotchet.

John Lombe succeeded in getting employment in a silk mill in Piedmont, where the art of silk-throwing
was kept a secret.  He was employed as a mechanic, and had thus an opportunity, in course of
time, of becoming familiar with the operation of the engine.  Hutton says that he bribed the
workmen; but this would have been a dangerous step, and would probably have led to his expulsion,
if not to his execution.  Hutton had a great detestation of the first silk factory at Derby,
where he was employed when a boy; and everything that he says about it must be taken cum grano
salis.  When the subject of renewing the patent was before Parliament in 1731, Mr. Perry, who
supported the petition of Sir Thomas Lombe, said that "the art had been kept so secret in Piedmont,
that no other nation could ever yet come at the invention, and that Sir Thomas and his brother
resolved to make an attempt for the bringing of this invention into their own country.  They
knew that there would be great difficulty and danger in the undertaking, because the king of
Sardinia had made it death for any man to discover this invention, or attempt to carry it out
of his dominions.  The petitioner's brother, however, resolved to venture his person for the
benefit and advantage of his native country, and Sir Thomas was resolved to venture his money,
and to furnish his brother with whatever sums should be necessary for executing so bold and
so generous a design.  His brother went accordingly over to Italy; and after a long stay and
a great expense in that country, he found means to see this engine so often, and to pry into
the nature of it so narrowly, that he made himself master of the whole invention and of all
the different parts and motions belonging to it."

John Lombe was absent from England for several years.  While occupied with his investigations
and making his drawings, it is said that it began to be rumoured that the Englishman was prying
into the secret of the silk mill, and that he had to fly for his life.  However this may be,
he got on board an English ship, and returned to England in safety. He brought two Italian
workmen with him, accustomed to the secrets of the silk trade.  He arrived in London in 1716,
when, after conferring with his brother, a specification was prepared and a patent for the
organzining of raw silk was taken out in 1718.  The patent was granted for fourteen years.

In the meantime, John Lombe arranged with the Corporation of the town of Derby for taking a
lease of the island or swamp on the river Derwent, at a ground rental of 8L. a year.  The island,
which was well situated for water-power, was 500 feet long and 52 feet wide. Arrangements were
at once made for erecting a silk mill thereon, the first large factory in England.  It was
constructed entirely at the expense of his brother Thomas.  While the building was in progress,
John Lombe hired various rooms in Derby, and particularly the Town Hall, where he erected temporary
engines turned by hand, and gave employment to a large number of poor people.

At length, after about three years' labour, the great silk mill was completed.  It was founded
upon huge piles of oak, from 16 to 20 feet long, driven into the swamp close to each other
by an engine made for the purpose.  The building was five stories high, contained eight large
apartments, and had no fewer than 468 windows.  The Lombes must have had great confidence in
their speculation, as the building and the great engine for making the organzine silk, together
with the other fittings, cost them about 30,000L.

One effect of the working of the mill was greatly to reduce the price of the thrown-silk, and
to bring it below the cost of the Italian production.  The King of Sardinia, having heard of
the success of the Lombe's undertaking, prohibited the exportation of Piedmontese raw silk,
which interrupted the course of their prosperity, until means were taken to find a renewed
supply elsewhere.

And now comes the tragic part of the story, for which Mr. Hutton, the author of the 'History
of Derby,' is responsible.  As he worked in the silk mill when a boy, from 1730 to 1737, he
doubtless heard it from the mill-hands, and there may be some truth in it, though mixed with
a little romance.  It is this:--

Hutton says of John Lombe, that he "had not pursued this lucrative commerce more than three
or four years when the Italians, who felt the effects from their want of trade, determined
his destruction, and hoped that that of his works would follow.  An artful woman came over
in the character of a friend, associated with the parties, and assisted in the business.  She
attempted to gain both the Italian workmen, and succeeded with one.  By these two slow poison
was supposed, and perhaps justly, to have been administered to John Lombe, who lingered two
or three years in agony, and departed.  The Italian ran away to his own country; and Madam
was interrogated, but nothing transpired, except what strengthened suspicion."  A strange story,
if true.

Of the funeral, Hutton says:--"John Lombe's was the most superb ever known in Derby.  A man
of peaceable deportment, who had brought a beneficial manufactory into the place, employed
the poor, and at advanced wages, could not fail meeting with respect, and his melancholy end
with pity.  Exclusive of the gentlemen who attended, all the people concerned in the works
were invited. The procession marched in pairs, and extended the length of Full Street, the
market-place, and Iron-gate; so that when the corpse entered All Saints, at St. Mary's Gate,
the last couple left the house of the deceased, at the corner of Silk-mill Lane."

Thus John Lombe died and was buried at the early age of twenty-nine; and Thomas, the capitalist,
continued the owner of the Derby silk mill. Hutton erroneously states that William succeeded,
and that he shot himself.  The Lombes had no brother of the name of William, and this part
of Hutton's story is a romance.

The affairs of the Derby silk mill went on prosperously.  Enough thrown silk was manufactured
to supply the trade, and the weaving of silk became a thriving business.  Indeed, English silk
began to have a European reputation.  In olden times it was said that "the stranger buys of
the Englishman the case of the fox for a groat, and sells him the tail again for a shilling."
But now the matter was reversed, and the saying was, "The Englishman buys silk of the stranger
for twenty marks, and sells him the same again for one hundred pounds."

But the patent was about to expire.  It had been granted for only fourteen years; and a long
time had elapsed before the engine could be put in operation, and the organzine manufactured.
It was the only engine in the kingdom.  Joshua Gee, writing in 1731, says:  "As we have but
one Water Engine in the kingdom for throwing silk, if that should be destroyed by fire or any
other accident, it would make the continuance of throwing fine silk very precarious; and it
is very much to be doubted whether all the men now living in the kingdom could make another."
Gee accordingly recommended that three or four more should be erected at the public expense,
"according to the model of that at Derby."[5]

The patent expired in 1732.  The year before, Sir Thomas Lombe, who had been by this time knighted,
applied to Parliament for a prolongation of the patent.  The reasons for his appeal were principally
these: that before he could provide for the full supply of other silk proper for his purpose
(the Italians having prohibited the exportation of raw silk), and before he could alter his
engine, train up a sufficient number of workpeople, and bring the manufacture to perfection,
almost all the fourteen years of his patent right would have expired. "Therefore," the petition
to Parliament concluded, "as he has not hitherto received the intended benefit of the aforesaid
patent, and in consideration of the extraordinary nature of this undertaking, the very great
expense, hazard, and difficulty he has undergone, as well as the advantage he has thereby procured
to the nation at his own expense, the said Sir Thomas Lombe humbly hopes that Parliament will
grant him a further term for the sole making and using his engines, or such other recompense
as in their wisdom shall seem meet."[6]

The petition was referred to a Committee.  After consideration, they recommended the House
of Commons to grant a further term of years to Sir Thomas Lombe.  The advisers of the King,
however, thought it better that the patent should not be renewed, but that the trade in silk
should be thrown free to all.  Accordingly the Chancellor of the Exchequer acquainted the House
(14th March, 1731) that "His Majesty having been informed of the case of Sir Thomas Lombe,
with respect to his engine for making organzine silk, had commanded him to acquaint this House,
that His Majesty recommended to their consideration the making such provision for a recompense
to Sir Thomas Lombe as they shall think proper."

The result was, that the sum of 14,000L. was voted and paid to Sir Thomas Lombe as "a reward
for his eminent services done to the nation, in discovering with the greatest hazard and difficulty
the capital Italian engines, and introducing and bringing the same to full perfection in this
kingdom, at his own great expense."[7]  The trade was accordingly thrown open.  Silk mills
were erected at Stockport and elsewhere; Hutton says that divers additional mills were erected
in Derby; and a large and thriving trade was established.  In 1850, the number employed in
the silk manufacture exceeded a million persons. The old mill has recently become disused.
Although supported by strong wooden supports, it showed signs of falling; and it was replaced
by a larger mill, more suitable to modern requirements.

Footnotes for Chapter IV.

[1] "This was equally the case with two other trades;--those of glass-maker and druggist, which
brought no contamination upon nobility in Venice.  In a country where wealth was concentrated
in the hands of the powerful, it was no doubt highly judicious thus to encourage its employment
for objects of public advantage. A feeling, more or less powerful, has always existed in the
minds of the high-born, against the employment of their time and wealth to purposes of commerce
or manufactures.  All trades, save only that of war, seem to have been held by them as in some
sort degrading, and but little comporting with the dignity of aristocratic blood." Cabinet
Cyclopedia--Silk Manufacture, p. 20.

[2] A Brief State of the Inland or Home Trade. (Pamphlet.) 1730.

[3] A Brief State of the Case relating to the Machine erected at Derby for making Italian Organzine
Silk, which was discovered and brought into England with the utmost difficulty and hazard,
and at the Sole Expense of Sir Thomas Lombe.  House of Commons Paper, 28th January, 1731.

[4] Self-Help, p. 205.

[5] The Trade and Navigation of Great Britain considered, p. 94.

[6] The petition sets forth the merits of the machine at Derby for making Italian organzine
silk--"a manufacture made out of fine raw silk, by reducing it to a hard twisted fine and even
thread.  This silk makes the warp, and is absolutely necessary to mix with and cover the Turkey
and other coarser silks thrown here, which are used for Shute,--so that, without a constant
supply of this fine Italian organzine silk, very little of the said Turkey or other silks could
be used, nor could the silk weaving trade be carried on in England.  This Italian organzine
(or thrown) silk has in all times past been bought with our money, ready made (or worked) in
Italy, for want of the art of making it here.  Whereas now, by making it ourselves out of fine
Italian raw silk, the nation saves near one-third part; and by what we make out of fine China
raw silk, above one-half of the price we pay for it ready worked in Italy.  The machine at
Derby contains 97,746 wheels, movements, and individual parts (which work day and night), all
which receive their motion from one large water-wheel, are governed by one regulator, and it
employs about 300 persons to attend and supply it with work." In Bees Cyclopaedia (art. 'Silk
Manufacture') there is a full description of the Piedmont throwing machine introduced to England
by John Lombe, with a good plate of it.

[7] Sir Thomas Lombe died in 1738.  He had two daughters.  The first, Hannah, was married to
Sir Robert Clifton, of Clifton, co. Notts; the second, Mary Turner, was married to James, 7th
Earl of Lauderdale.  In his will, he "recommends his wife, at the conclusion of the Darby concern,"
to distribute among his "principal servants or managers five or six hundred pounds."

CHAPTER V.

WILLIAM MURDOCK: HIS LIFE AND INVENTIONS.

"Justice exacts, that those by whom we are most benefited Should be most admired."--Dr. Johnson.

At the middle of last century, Scotland was a very poor country. It consisted mostly of mountain
and moorland; and the little arable land it contained was badly cultivated.  Agriculture was
almost a lost art. "Except in a few instances," says a writer in the 'Farmers' Magazine' of
1803, "Scotland was little better than a barren waste."  Cattle could with difficulty be kept
alive; and the people in some parts of the country were often on the brink of starvation. 
The people were hopeless, miserable, and without spirit, like the Irish in their very worst
times.  After the wreck of the Darien expedition, there seemed to be neither skill, enterprise,
nor money left in the country.  What resources it contained were altogether undeveloped.  There
was little communication between one place and another, and such roads as existed were for
the greater part of the year simply impassable.

There were various opinions as to the causes of this frightful state of things.  Some thought
it was the Union between England and Scotland; and Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, "The Patriot,"
as he was called, urged its Repeal. But he could not get the people to combine.  There were
others who held a different opinion.  They thought that something might be done by the people
themselves to extricate the country from its miserable condition.

It still possessed some important elements of prosperity.  The inhabitants of Scotland, though
poor, were strong and able to work. The land, though cold and sterile, was capable of cultivation.

Accordingly, about the middle of last century, some important steps were taken to improve the
general condition of things.  A few public-spirited landowners led the way, and formed themselves
into a society for carrying out improvements in agriculture. They granted long leases of farms
as a stimulus to the most skilled and industrious, and found it to their interest to give the
farmer a more permanent interest in his improvements than he had before enjoyed.  Thus stimulated
and encouraged, farming made rapid progress, especially in the Lothians; and the example spread
into other districts.  Banks were established for the storage of capital.  Roads were improved,
and communications increased between one part of the country and another.  Hence trade and
commerce arose, by reason of the facilities afforded for the interchange of traffic.  The people,
being fairly educated by the parish schools, were able to take advantage of these improvements.
Black and Robison, of Glasgow, were the precursors of James Watt, whose invention of the condensing
steam-engine was yet to produce a revolution in industrial operations, the like of which had
never before been known.  Watt had hit upon his great idea while experimenting with an old
Newcomen model which belonged to the University of Glasgow.  He was invited by Mr. Roebuck
of Kinneil to make a working steam-engine for the purpose of pumping water from the coal-pits
at Boroughstoness; but his progress was stopped by want of capital, as well as by want of experience.
It was not until the brave and generous Matthew Boulton of Birmingham took up the machine,
and backed Watt with his capital and his spirit, that Watt's enterprise had the remotest chance
of success.  Even after about twelve years' effort, the condensing steam-engine was only beginning,
though half-heartedly, to be taken up and employed by colliery proprietors and cotton manufacturers.
In developing its powers, and extending its uses, the great merits of William Murdock can never
be forgotten.  Watt stands first in its history, as the inventor; Boulton second, as its promoter
and supporter; and Murdock third, as its developer and improver.

William Murdock was born on the 21st of August, 1754, at Bellow Mill, in the parish of Auchinleck,
Ayrshire.  His father, John, was a miller and millwright, as well as a farmer.  His mother's
maiden name was Bruce, and she used to boast of being descended from Robert Bruce, the deliverer
of Scotland.  The Murdocks, or Murdochs--for the name was spelt in either way--were numerous
in the neighbourhood, and they were nearly all related to each other.  They are supposed to
have originally come into the district from Flanders, between which country and Scotland a
considerable intercourse existed in the middle ages.  Some of the Murdocks took a leading part
in the construction of the abbeys and cathedrals of the North;[2] others were known as mechanics;
but the greater number were farmers.

One of the best known members of the family was John Murdock, the poet Burns' first teacher.
Burns went to his school at Alloway Mill, when he was six years old.  There he learnt to read
and write.  When Murdock afterwards set up a school at Ayr, Burns, who was then fifteen, went
to board with him.  In a letter to a correspondent, Murdock said:  "In 1773, Robert Burns came
to board and lodge with me, for the purpose of revising his English grammar, that he might
be better qualified to instruct his brothers and sisters at home.  He was now with me day and
night, in school, at all meals, and in all my walks."  The pupil even shared the teacher's
bed at night.  Murdock lent the boy books, and helped the cultivation of his mind in many ways.
Burns soon revised his English grammar, and learnt French, as well as a little Latin. Some
time after, Murdock removed to London, and had the honour of teaching Talleyrand English during
his residence as an emigrant in this country.  He continued to have the greatest respect for
his former pupil, whose poetry commemorated the beauties of his native district.

It may be mentioned that Bellow Mill is situated on the Bellow Water, near where it joins the
river Lugar.  One of Burns' finest songs begins:--

   "Behind yon hills where Lugar flows."

That was the scene of William Murdock's boyhood.  When a boy, he herded his father's cows along
the banks of the Bellow; and as there were then no hedges, it was necessary to have some one
to watch the cattle while grazing.  The spot  is still pointed out where the boy, in the intervals
of his herding, hewed a square compartment out of the rock by the water side, and there burnt
the splint coal found on the top of the Black Band ironstone. That was one of the undeveloped
industries of Scotland; for the Scotch iron trade did not arrive at any considerable importance
until about a century later.[3]  The little cavern in which Murdock burnt the splint coal was
provided with a fireplace and vent, all complete.  It is possible that he may have there derived,
from his experiments, the first idea of Gas as an illuminant.

Murdock is also said to have made a wooden horse, worked by mechanical power, which was the
wonder of the district.  On this mechanical horse he rode to the village of Cumnock, about
two miles distant.  His father's name is, however, associated with his own in the production
of this machine.  Old John Murdock had a reputation for intelligence and skill of no ordinary
kind. When at Carron ironworks, in 1760, he had a pinton cast after a pattern which he had
prepared.  This is said to have been the first piece of iron-toothed gearing ever used in mill
work.  When I last saw it, the pinton was placed on the lawn in front of William Murdock's
villa at Handsworth.

The young man helped his father in many ways.  He worked in the mill, worked on the farm, and
assisted in the preparation of mill machinery. In this way he obtained a considerable amount
of general technical knowledge.  He even designed and constructed bridges.  He was employed
to build a bridge over the river Nith, near Dumfries, and it stands there to this day, a solid
and handsome structure.  But he had an ambition to be something more than a country mason.
He had heard a great deal about the inventions of James Watt; and he determined to try whether
he could not get "a job" at the famous manufactory at Soho.  He accordingly left his native
place in the year 1777, in the twenty-third year of his age; and migrated southward.  He left
plenty of Murdocks behind him.  There was a famous staff in the family, originally owned by
William Murdock's grandfather, which bore the following inscription: "This staff I leave in
pedigree to the oldest Murdock after me, in the parish of Auchenleck, 1745."  This staff was
lately held by Jean Murdock, daughter of the late William Murdock, joiner, cousin of the subject
of this biography.

When William arrived at Soho in 1777 he called at the works to ask for employment.  Watt was
then in Cornwall, looking after his pumping engines; but he saw Boulton, who was usually accessible
to callers of every rank.  In answer to Murdock's enquiry whether he could have a job, Boulton
replied that work was very slack with them, and that every place was filled up.  During the
brief conversation that took place, the blate young Scotchman, like most country lads in the
presence of strangers, had some difficulty in knowing what to do with his hands, and unconsciously
kept twirling his hat with them.  Boulton's attention was attracted to the twirling hat, which
seemed to be of a peculiar make.  It was not a felt hat, nor a cloth hat, nor a glazed hat:
but it seemed to be painted, and composed of some unusual material.  "That seems to be a curious
sort of hat," said Boulton, looking at it more closely; "what is it made of?" "Timmer, sir,"
said Murdock, modestly. "Timmer?  Do you mean to say that it is made of wood?"  "'Deed it is,
sir."  "And pray how was it made?"  "I made it mysel, sir, in a bit laithey of my own contrivin'."
"Indeed!"

Boulton looked at the young man again.  He had risen a hundred degrees in his estimation. 
William was a good-looking fellow--tall, strong, and handsome--with an open intelligent countenance.
Besides, he had been able to turn a hat for himself with a lathe of his own construction. 
This, of itself, was a sufficient proof that he was a mechanic of no mean skill. "Well!" said
Boulton, at last, "I will enquire at the works, and see if there is anything we can set you
to. Call again, my man."

"Thank you, sir," said Murdock, giving a final twirl to his hat.

Such was the beginning of William Murdock's connection with the firm of Boulton and Watt. 
When he called again he was put upon a trial job, and then, as he was found satisfactory, he
was engaged for two years at 15s. a week when at home, 17s. when in the country, and 18s. when
in London.  Boulton's engagement of Murdock was amply justified by the result.  Beginning as
an ordinary mechanic, he applied himself diligently and conscientiously to his work, and gradually
became trusted.  More responsible duties were confided to him, and he strove to perform them
to the best of his power.  His industry, skilfulness, and steady sobriety, soon marked him
for promotion, and he rose from grade to grade until he became Boulton and Watt's most trusted
co-worker and adviser in all their mechanical undertakings of importance.

Watt himself had little confidence in Scotchmen as mechanics.  He told Sir Waiter Scott that
though many of them sought employment at his works, he could never get any of them to become
first-rate workmen. They might be valuable as clerks and book-keepers, but they had an insuperable
aversion to toiling long at any point of mechanism, so as to earn the highest wages paid to
the workmen.[4]  The reason no doubt was, that the working-people of Scotland were then only
in course of education as practical mechanics; and now that they have had a century's discipline
of work and technical training, the result is altogether different, as the engine-shops and
shipbuilding-yards of the Clyde abundantly prove.  Mechanical power and technical ability are
the result of training, like many other things.

When Boulton engaged Murdock, as we have said, Watt was absent in Cornwall, looking after the
pumping-engines which had been erected at several of the mines throughout that county.  The
partnership had only been in existence for three years, and Watt was still struggling with
the difficulties which he had to surmount in getting the steam engine into practical use. 
His health was bad, and he was oppressed with frightful headaches. He was not the man to fight
the selfishness of the Cornish adventurers.  "A little more of this hurrying and vexation,"
he said, "will knock me up altogether."  Boulton went to his help occasionally, and gave him
hope and courage.  And at length William Murdock, after he had acquired sufficient knowledge
of the business, was able to undertake the principal management of the engines in Cornwall.

We find that in 1779, when he was only twenty-five years old, he was placed in this important
position.  When he went into Cornwall, he gave himself no rest until he had conquered the defects
of the engines, and put them into thorough working order.

He devoted himself to his duties with a zeal and ability that completely won Watt's heart.
When he had an important job in hand, he could scarcely sleep.  One night at his lodgings at
Redruth, the people were disturbed by a strange noise in his room.  Several heavy blows were
heard upon the floor.  They started from their beds, rushed to Murdock's room, and found him
standing in his shirt, heaving at the bedpost in his sleep, shouting "Now she goes, lads! now
she goes!"

Murdock became a most popular man with the mine owners.  He also became friendly with the Cornish
workmen and engineers.  Indeed, he fought his way to their affections.  One day, some half-dozen
of the mining captains came into his engine-room at Chacewater, and began to bully him.  This
he could not stand.  He stript, selected the biggest, and put himself into a fighting attitude.
They set to, and in a few minutes Murdock's powerful bones and muscles enabled him to achieve
the victory.  The other men, who had looked on fairly, without interfering, seeing the temper
and vigour of the man they had bullied, made overtures of reconciliation.  William was quite
willing to be friendly. Accordingly they shook hands all round, and parted the best of friends.
It is also said that Murdock afterwards fought a duel with Captain Trevethick, because of a
quarrel between Watt and the mining engineer, in which Murdock conceived his master to have
been unfairly and harshly treated.[5]

The uses of Watt's steam-engine began to be recognised as available for manufacturing purposes.
It was then found necessary to invent some method by which continuous rotary motion should
be secured, so as to turn round the moving machinery of mills.  With this object Watt had invented
his original wheel-engine.  But no steps were taken to introduce it into practical use.  At
length he prepared a model, in which he made use of a crank connected with the working beam
of the engine, so as to produce the necessary rotary motion.

There was no originality in this application.  The crank was one of the most common of mechanical
appliances.  It was in daily use in every spinning wheel, and in every turner's and knife-grinder's
foot-lathe. Watt did not take out a patent for the crank, not believing it to be patentable.
But another person did so, thereby anticipating Watt in the application of the crank for producing
rotary motion.   He had therefore to employ some other method, and in the new contrivance he
had the valuable help of William Murdock.  Watt devised five different methods of securing
rotary motion without using the crank, but eventually he adopted the "Sun-and-planet motion,"
the invention of Murdock. This had the singular property of going twice round for every stroke
of the engine, and might be made to go round much oftener without additional machinery.  The
invention was patented in February, 1782, five Years after Murdock had entered the service
of Boulton and Watt.

Murdock continued for many years busily occupied in superintending the Cornish steam-engines.
We find him described by his employers as "flying from mine to mine," putting the engines to
rights.  If anything went wrong, he was immediately sent for.  He was active, quick-sighted,
shrewd, sober, and thoroughly trustworthy.  Down to the year 1780, his wages were only a pound
a week; but Boulton made him a present of ten guineas, to which the owners of the United Mines
added another ten, in acknowledgment of the admirable manner in which he bad erected their
new engine, the chairman of the company declaring that he was "the most obliging and industrious
workman he had ever known."  That he secured the admiration of the Cornish engineers may be
obvious from the fact of Mr. Boaze having invited him to join in an engineering partnership;
but Murdock remained loyal to the Birmingham firm, and in due time he had his reward.

He continued to be the "right hand man" of the concern in Cornwall. Boulton wrote to Watt,
towards the end of 1782: "Murdock hath been indefatigable ever since he began.  He has scarcely
been in bed or taken necessary food.  After slaving night and day on Thursday and Friday, a
letter came from Wheal Virgin that he must go instantly to set their engine to work, or they
would let out the fire.  He went and set the engine to work; it worked well for the five or
six hours he remained.  He left it, and returned to the Consolidated Mines about eleven at
night, and was employed about the engines till four this morning, and then went to bed.  I
found him at ten this morning in Poldice Cistern, seeking for pins and castors that had jumped
out, when I insisted on his going home to bed."

On one occasion, when an engine superintended by Murdock stopped through some accident, the
water rose in the mine, and the workmen were "drowned out."  Upon this occurring, the miners
went "roaring at him" for throwing them out of work, and threatened to tear him to pieces.
Nothing daunted, he went through the midst of the men, repaired the invalided engine, and started
it afresh.

When he came out of the engine-house, the miners cheered him vociferously and insisted upon
carrying him home upon their shoulders in triumph!

Steam was now asserting its power everywhere.  It was pumping water from the mines in Cornwall
and driving the mills of the manufacturers in Lancashire.  Speculative mechanics began to consider
whether it might not be employed as a means of land locomotion.  The comprehensive mind of
Sir Isaac Newton had long before, in his 'Explanation of the Newtonian Philosophy,' thrown
out the idea of employing steam for this purpose; but no practical experiment was made.  Benjamin
Franklin, while agent in London for the United Provinces of America, had a correspondence with
Matthew Boulton, of Birmingham, and Dr. Darwin, of Lichfield, on the same subject.  Boulton
sent a model of a fire-engine to London for Franklin's inspection; but Franklin was too much
occupied at the time by grave political questions to pursue the subject further. Erasmus Darwin's
speculative mind was inflamed by the idea of a "fiery chariot," and he urged his friend Boulton
to prosecute the contrivance of the necessary steam machinery.[6]

Other minds were at work.  Watt, when only twenty-three years old, at the instigation of his
friend Robison, made a model locomotive, provided with two cylinders of tin plate; but the
project was laid aside, and was never again taken up by the inventor.  Yet, in his patent of
1784, Watt included an arrangement by means of which steam-power might be employed for the
purposes of locomotion.  But no further model of the contrivance was made.

Meanwhile, Cugnot, of Paris, had already made a road engine worked by steam power.  It was
first tried at the Arsenal in 1769; and, being set in motion, it ran against a stone wall in
its way and threw it down. The engine was afterwards tried in the streets of Paris.  In one
of the experiments it fell over with a crash, and was thenceforward locked up in the Arsenal
to prevent its doing further mischief.  This first locomotive is now to be seen at the Conservatoire
des Arts et Metiers at Paris.

Murdock had doubtless heard of Watt's original speculations, and proceeded, while at Redruth,
during his leisure hours, to construct a model locomotive after a design of his own.  This
model was of small dimensions, standing little more than a foot and a half high, though it
was sufficiently large to demonstrate the soundness of the principle on which it was constructed.
It was supported on three wheels, and carried a small copper boiler, heated by a spirit lamp,
with a flue passing obliquely through it.  The cylinder, of 3/4 inch diameter and 2-inch stroke,
was fixed in the top of the boiler, the piston-rod being connected with the vibratory beam
attached to the connecting-rod which worked the crank of the driving-wheel.  This little engine
worked by the expansive force of steam only, which was discharged into the atmosphere after
it had done its work of alternately raising and depressing the piston in the cylinder.

Mr. Murdock's son, while living at Handsworth, informed the present writer that this model
was invented and constructed in 1781; but, after perusing the correspondence of Boulton and
Watt, we infer that it was not ready for trial until 1784.  The first experiment was made in
Murdock's own house at Redruth, when the little engine successfully hauled a model waggon round
the room,--the single wheel, placed in front of the engine and working in a swivel frame, enabling
it to run round in a circle.

Another experiment was made out of doors, on which occasion, small though the engine was, it
fairly outran the speed of its inventor.  One night, after returning from his duties at the
mine at Redruth, Murdock went with his model locomotive to the avenue leading to the church,
about a mile from the town.  The walk was narrow, straight, and level. Having lit the lamp,
the water soon boiled, and off started the engine with the inventor after it.

When Watt was informed of Murdock's experiments, he feared that they might interfere with his
regular duties, and advised their discontinuance.  Should Murdock still resolve to continue
them, Watt urged his partner Boulton, then in Cornwall, that, rather than lose Murdock's services,
they should advance him 100L.; and, if he succeeded within a year in making an engine capable
of drawing a post-chaise carrying two passengers and the driver, at the rate of four miles
an hour, that a locomotive engine business should be established, with Murdock as a partner.
The arrangement, however, never proceeded any further.  Perhaps a different attraction withdrew
Murdock from his locomotive experiments.   He was then paying attention to a young lady, the
daughter of Captain Painter; and in 1785 he married her, and brought her home to his house
in Cross Street, Redruth.

In the following year,--September, 1786--Watt says, in a letter to Boulton, "I have still the
same opinion concerning the steam carriage, but, to prevent more fruitless argument about it,
I have one of some size under hand.  In the meantime, I wish William could be brought to do
as we do, to mind the business in hand, and let such as Symington and Sadler throw away their
time and money in hunting shadows."  In a subsequent letter Watt expressed his gratification
at finding "that William applies to his business."  From that time forward, Murdock as well
as Watt, dropped all further speculation on the subject, and left it to others to work out
the problem of the locomotive engine. Murdock's model remained but a curious toy, which he
took pleasure in exhibiting to his intimate friends; and, though he long continued to speculate
about road locomotion, and was persuaded of its practicability, he abstained from embodying
his ideas of the necessary engine in any complete working form.

Murdock nevertheless continued inventing, for the man who is given to invent, and who possesses
the gift of insight, cannot rest.  He lived in the midst of inventors.  Watt and Boulton were
constantly suggesting new things, and Murdock became possessed by the same spirit.  In 1791
he took out his first patent.  It was for a method of preserving ships' bottoms from foulness
by the use of a certain kind of chemical paint. Mr. Murdock's grandson informs us that it was
recently re-patented and was the cause of a lawsuit, and that Hislop's patent for revivifying
gas-lime would have been an infringement, if it had not expired.

Murdock is still better known by his invention of gas for lighting purposes.  Several independent
inquirers into the constituents of Newcastle coal had arrived at the conclusion that nearly
one-third of the substance was driven off in vapour by the application of heat, and that the
vapour so driven off was inflammable.  But no suggestion had been made to apply this vapour
for lighting purposes until Murdock took the matter in hand.  Mr. M. S. Pearse has sent us
the following interesting reminiscence: "Some time since, when in the West of Cornwall, I was
anxious to find out whether any one remembered Murdock. I discovered one of the most respectable
and intelligent men in Camborne, Mr. William Symons, who not only distinctly remembered Murdock,
but had actually been present on one of the first occasions when gas was used.  Murdock, he
says, was very fond of children, and not unfrequently took them into his workshop to show them
what he was doing.  Hence it happened that on one occasion this gentleman, then a boy of seven
or eight, was standing outside Murdock's door with some other boys, trying to catch sight of
some special mystery inside, for Dr. Boaze, the chief doctor of the place, and Murdock had
been busy all the afternoon.  Murdock came out, and asked my informant to run down to a shop
near by for a thimble.  On returning with the thimble, the boy pretended to have lost it, and,
whilst searching in every pocket, he managed to slip inside the door of the workshop, and then
produced the thimble.  He found Dr. Boaze and Murdock with a kettle filled with coal.  The
gas issuing from it had been burnt in a large metal case, such as was used for blasting purposes.
Now, however, they had applied a much smaller tube, and at the end of it fastened the thimble,
through the small perforations made in which they burned a continuous jet for some time."[7]

After numerous experiments, Murdock had his house in Cross Street fitted up in 1792 for being
lit by gas.  The coal was subjected to heat in an iron retort, and the gas was conveyed in
pipes to the offices and the different rooms of the house, where it was burned at proper apertures
or burners.[8]  Portions of the gas were also confined in portable vessels of tinned iron,
from which it was burned when required, thus forming a moveable gas-light. Murdock had a gas
lantern in regular use, for the purpose of lighting himself home at night across the moors,
from the mines where he was working, to his home at Redruth.  This lantern was formed by filling
a bladder with gas and fixing a jet to the mouthpiece at the bottom of a glass lantern, with
the bladder hanging underneath.

Having satisfied himself as to the superior economy of coal gas, as compared with oils and
tallow, for the purposes of artificial illumination, Murdock mentioned the subject to Mr. James
Watt, jun., during a brief visit to Soho in 1794, and urged the propriety of taking out a patent.
Watt was, however, indifferent to taking out any further patents, being still engaged in contesting
with the Cornish mine-owners his father's rights to the user of the condensing steam-engine.
Nothing definite was done at the time.  Murdock returned to Cornwall and continued his experiments.
At the end of the same year he exhibited to Mr. Phillips and others, at the Polgooth mine,
his apparatus for extracting gases from coal and other substances, showed it in use, lit the
gas which issued from the burner, and showed its "strong and beautiful light."  He afterwards
exhibited the same apparatus to Tregelles and others at the Neath Abbey Company's ironworks
in Glamorganshire.

Murdock returned to Soho in 1798, to take up his permanent residence in the neighbourhood.
When the mine owners heard of his intention to leave Cornwall, they combined in offering him
a handsome salary provided he would remain in the county; but his attachment to his friends
at Soho would not allow him to comply with their request.  He again urged the firm of Boulton
and Watt to take out a patent for the use of gas for lighting purposes. But being still embroiled
in their tedious and costly lawsuit, they were naturally averse to risk connection with any
other patent.  Watt the younger, with whom Murdock communicated on the subject, was aware that
the current of gas obtained from the distillation of coal in Lord Dundonald's tar-ovens had
been occasionally set fire to, and also that Bishop Watson and others had burned gas from coal,
after conducting it through tubes, or after it had issued from the retort.  Mr. Watt was, however,
quite satisfied that Murdock was the first person who had suggested its economical application
for public and private uses.

But he was not clear, after the legal difficulties which had been raised as to his father's
patent rights, that it would be safe to risk a further patent for gas.

Mr. Murdock's suggestion, accordingly, was not acted upon.  But he went on inventing in other
directions.  He thenceforward devoted himself entirely to mechanical pursuits.  Mr. Buckle
has said of him:--"The rising sun often found him, after a night spent in incessant labour,
still at the anvil or turning-lathe; for with his own hands he would make such articles as
he would not intrust to unskilful ones."  In 1799 he took out a patent (No. 2340), embodying
some very important inventions.  First, it included the endless screw working into a toothed-wheel,
for boring steam-cylinders, which is still in use. Second, the casting of a steam-jacket in
one cylinder, instead of being made in separate segments bolted together with caulked joints,
as was previously done.  Third, the new double-D slide-valve, by which the construction and
working of the steam-engine was simplified, and the loss of steam saved, as well as the cylindrical
valve for the same purpose.  And fourth, improved rotary engines.  One of the latter was set
to drive the machines in his private workshop, and continued in nearly constant work and in
perfect use for about thirty years.

In 1801, Murdock sent his two sons William and John to the Ayr Academy, for the benefit of
Scotch education.  In the summer-time they spent their vacation at Bellow Mill, which their
grandfather still continued to occupy.  They fished in the river, and "caught a good many trout."
The boys corresponded regularly with their father at Birmingham.  In 1804, they seem to have
been in a state of great excitement about the expected landing of the French in Scotland. 
The volunteers of Ayr amounted to 300 men, the cavalry to 150, and the riflemen to 50.  "The
riflemen," says John, "go to the seashore every Saturday to shoot at a target.  They stand
at 70 paces distant, and out of 100 shots they often put in 60 bullets!"  William says, "Great
preparations are still making for the  reception of the French.  Several thousand of pikes
are carried through the town every week; and all the volunteers and riflemen have received
orders to march at a moment's warning." The alarm, however, passed away.  At the end of 1804,
the two boys received prizes; William got one in arithmetic and another in the Rector's composition
class; and John also obtained two, one in the mathematical class, and the other in French.

To return to the application of gas for lighting purposes.  In 1801, a plan was proposed by
a M. Le Blond for lighting a part of the streets of Paris with gas.  Murdock actively resumed
his experiments; and on the occasion of the Peace of Amiens in March, 1802, he made the first
public exhibition of his invention.  The whole of the works at Soho were brilliantly illuminated
with gas.

The sight was received with immense enthusiasm.  There could now be no doubt as to the enormous
advantages of this method of producing artificial light, compared with that from oil or tallow.
In the following year the manufacture of gas-making apparatus was added to the other branches
of Boulton and Watts' business, with which Murdock was now associated,--and as much as from
4000L. to 5000L. of capital were invested in the new works. The new method of lighting speedily
became popular amongst manufacturers, from its superior safety, cheapness, and illuminating
power.  The mills of Phillips and Lee of Manchester were fitted up in 1805; and those of Burley
and Kennedy, also of Manchester, and of Messrs. Gott, of Leeds, in subsequent years.

Though Murdock had made the uses of gas-lighting perfectly clear, it was some time before it
was proposed to light the streets by the new method.  The idea was ridiculed by Sir Humphry
Davy, who asked one of the projectors if he intended to take the dome of St. Paul's for a gasometer!
Sir Waiter Scott made many clever jokes about those who proposed to "send light through the
streets in pipes;" and even Wollaston, a well known man of science, declared that they "might
as well attempt to light London with a slice from the moon."  It has been so with all new projects--with
the steamboat, the locomotive, and the electric telegraph. As John Wilkinson said of the first
vessel of iron which he introduced, "it will be only a nine days' wonder, and afterwards a
Columbus's egg."

On the 25th of February, 1808, Murdock read a paper before the Royal Society "On the Application
of Gas from Coal to economical purposes." He gave a history of the origin and progress of his
experiments, down to the time when he had satisfactorily lit up the premises of Phillips and
Lee at Manchester.  The paper was modest and unassuming, like everything he did.

It concluded:--"I believe I may, without presuming too much, claim both the first idea of applying,
and the first application of this gas to economical purposes."[9]  The Royal Society awarded
Murdock their large Rumford Gold Medal for his communication.

In the following year a German named Wintzer, or Winsor, appeared as the promotor of a scheme
for obtaining a royal charter with extensive privileges, and applied for powers to form a joint-stock
company to light part of London and Westminster with gas.  Winsor claimed for his method of
gas manufacture that it was more efficacious and profitable than any then known or practised.
The profits, indeed, were to be prodigious.  Winsor made an elaborate calculation in his pamphlet
entitled 'The New Patriotic Imperial and National Light and Heat Company,' from which it appeared
that the net annual profits "agreeable to the official experiments" would amount to over two
hundred and twenty-nine millions of pounds!--and that, giving over nine-tenths of that sum
towards the redemption of the National Debt, there would still remain a total profit of 570L.
to be paid to the subscribers for every 5L. of deposit!  Winsor took out a patent for the invention,
and the company, of which he was a member, proceeded to Parliament for an Act. Boulton and
Watt petitioned against the Bill, and James Watt, junior, gave evidence on the subject.  Henry
Brougham, who was the counsel for the petitioners, made great fun of Winsor's absurd speculations,[10]
and the Bill was thrown out.

In the following year the London and Westminster Chartered Gas Light and Coke Company succeeded
in obtaining their Act.  They were not very successful at first.  Many prejudices existed against
the employment of the new light.  It was popularly supposed that the gas was carried along
the pipes on fire, and that the pipes must necessarily be intensely hot.  When it was proposed
to light the House of Commons with gas, the architect insisted on the pipes being placed several
inches from the walls, for fear of fire; and, after the pipes had been fixed, the members might
be seen applying their gloved hands to them to ascertain their temperature, and afterwards
expressing the greatest surprise on finding that they were as cool as the adjoining walls.

The Gas Company was on the point of dissolution when Mr. Samuel Clegg came to their aid.  Clegg
had been a pupil of Murdock's, at Soho.  He knew all the arrangements which Murdock had invented.
He had assisted in fitting up the gas machinery at the mills of Phillips & Lee, Manchester,
as well as at Lodge's Mill, Sowerby Bridge, near Halifax. He was afterwards employed to fix
the apparatus at the Catholic College of Stoneyhurst, in Lancashire, at the manufactory of
Mr. Harris at Coventry, and at other places.  In 1813 the London and Westminster Gas Company
secured the services of Mr. Clegg, and from that time forwards their career was one of prosperity.
In 1814 Westminster Bridge was first lighted with gas, and shortly after the streets of St.
Margaret's, Westminster.  Crowds of people followed the lamplighter on his rounds to watch
the sudden effect of his flame applied to the invisible stream of gas which issued from the
burner.  The lamplighters became so disgusted with the new light that they struck work, and
Clegg himself had for a time to act as lamplighter.

The advantages of the new light, however, soon became generally recognised, and gas companies
were established in most of the large towns.  Glasgow was lit up by gas in 1817, and Liverpool
and Dublin in the following year.  Had Murdock in the first instance taken out a patent for
his invention, it could not fail to have proved exceedingly remunerative to him; but he derived
no advantage from the extended use of the new system of lighting except the honour of having
invented it.[11] He left the benefits of his invention to the public, and returned to his labours
at Soho, which more than ever completely engrossed him.

Murdock now became completely identified with the firm of Boulton & Watt.  He assigned to them
his patent for the slide-valve, the rotary engine, and other inventions "for a good and valuable
consideration." Indeed his able management was almost indispensable to the continued success
of the Soho foundry.  Mr. Nasmyth, when visiting the works about thirty years after Murdock
had taken their complete management in hand, recalled to mind the valuable services of that
truly admirable yet modest mechanic. He observed the admirable system, which he had invented,
of transmitting power from one central engine to other small vacuum engines attached to the
several machines which they were employed to work.  "This vacuum method," he says, "of transmitting
power dates from the time of Papin; but it remained a dead contrivance for about a century
until it received the masterly touch of Murdock."

"The sight which I obtained" (Mr. Nasmyth proceeds) "of the vast series of workshops of that
celebrated establishment, fitted with evidences of the presence and results of such master
minds in design and execution, and the special machine tools which I believe were chiefly to
be ascribed to the admirable inventive power and common-sense genius of William Murdock, made
me feel that I was indeed on classic ground in regard to everything connected with the construction
of steam-engine machinery.  The interest was in no small degree enhanced by coming every now
and then upon some machine that had every historical claim to be regarded as the prototype
of many of our modern machine tools. All these had William Murdock's genius stamped upon them,
by reason of their common-sense arrangements, which showed that he was one of those original
thinkers who had the courage to break away from the trammels of traditional methods, and take
short cuts to accomplish his objects by direct and simple means."

We have another recollection of William Murdock, from one who knew him when a boy.  This is
the venerable Charles Manby, F.R.S., still honorary secretary of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
He says (writing to us in September 1883), "I see from the public prints that you have been
presiding at a meeting intended to do honour to the memory of William Murdock--a most worthy
man and an old friend of mine. When he found me working the first slide valve ever introduced
into an engine-building establishment at Horsley, he patted me on the head, and said to my
father, 'Neighbour Manby, this is not the way to bring up a good workman--merely turning a
handle, without any shoulder work.'  He evidently did not anticipate any great results from
my engineering education.  But we all know what machine tools are doing now,--and where should
we be without them?"

Watt withdrew from the firm in 1800, on the expiry of his patent for the condensing steam-engine;
but Boulton continued until the year 1809, when he died full of years and honours.  Watt lived
on until 1819.  The last part of his life was the happiest.  During the time that he was in
the throes of his invention, he was very miserable, weighed down with dyspepsia and sick headaches.
But after his patent had expired, he was able to retire with a moderate fortune, and began
to enjoy life. Before, he had "cursed his inventions," now he could bless them.  He was able
to survey them, and find out what was right and what was wrong.  He used his head and his hands
in his private workshop, and found many means of employing both pleasantly.  Murdock continued
to be his fast friend, and they spent many agreeable hours together. They made experiments
and devised improvements in machines.  Watt wished to make things more simple.   He said to
Murdock, "it is a great thing to know what to do without.  We must have a book of blots--things
to be scratched out."  One of the most interesting schemes of Watt towards the end of his life
was the contrivance of a sculpture-making machine; and he proceeded so far with it as to to
able to present copies of busts to his friends as "the productions of a young artist just entering
his eighty-third year."  The machine, however, remained unfinished at his death, and the remarkable
fact is that it was Watt's only unfinished work.

The principle of the machine was to carry a guide-point at one side over the bust or alto-relievo
to be copied, and at the other side to carry a corresponding cutting-tool or drill over the
alabaster, ivory, jet, or plaster of Paris to be executed.  The machine worked, as it were,
with two hands, the one feeling the pattern, the other cutting the material into the required
form. Many new alterations were necessary for carrying out this ingenious apparatus, and Murdock
was always at hand to give his old friend and master his best assistance. We have seen many
original letters from Watt to Murdock, asking for counsel and help.  In one of these, written
in 1808, Watt says: "I have revived an idea which, if it answers, will supersede the frame
and upright spindle of the reducing machine, but more of this when we meet. Meanwhile it will
be proper to adhere to the frame, etc., at present, until we see how the other alterations
answer."  In another he says: "I have done a Cicero without any plaits--the different segments
meeting exactly.  The fitting the drills into the spindle by a taper of 1 in 6 will do.  They
are perfectly stiff and will not unscrew easily.  Four guide-pullies answer, but there must
be a pair for the other end, and to work with a single hand, for the returning part is always
cut upon some part or other of the frame."

These letters are written sometimes in the morning, sometimes at noon, sometimes at night.
There was a great deal of correspondence about "pullies," which did not seem to answer at first.
"I have made the tablets," said Watt on one occasion, "slide more easily, and can counterbalance
any part of their weight which may be necessary; but the first thing to try is the solidity
of the machine, which cannot be done till the pullies are mounted."  Then again: "The bust-making
must be given up until we get a more solid frame.  I have worked two days at one and spoiled
it, principally from the want of steadiness."  For Watt, it must be remembered, was now a very
old man.

He then proceeded to send Murdock the drawing of a "parallel motion for the machine," to be
executed by the workmen at Soho. The truss braces and the crosses were to be executed of steel,
according to the details he enclosed.  "I have warmed up," he concludes, "an old idea, and
can make a machine in which the pentagraph and the leading screw will all be contained in the
beam, and the pattern and piece to be cut will remain at rest fixed upon a lath of cast iron
or stout steel."  Watt is very particular in all his details: "I am sorry," he says in one
note, "to trouble you with so many things; but the alterations on this spindle and socket [he
annexes a drawing] may wait your convenience." In a further note, Watt says.  "The drawing
for the parallel lathe is ready; but I have been sadly puzzled about the application of the
leading screws to the cranes in the other. I think, however, I have now got the better of the
difficulties, and made it more certain, as well as more simple, than it was.  I have done an
excellent head of John Hunter in hard white in shorter time than usual.  I want to show it
you before I repair it."

At last Watt seems to have become satisfied: "The lathe," he says, "is very much improved,
and you seem to have given the finishing blow to the roofed frame, which appears perfectly
stiff.  I had some hours' intense thinking upon the machine last night, and have made up my
mind on it at last.  The great difficulty was about the application of the band, but I have
settled it to be much as at present."

Watt's letters to Murdock are most particular in details, especially as to screws, nuts, and
tubes, with strengths and dimensions, always illustrated with pen-and-ink drawings.  And yet
all this was done merely for mechanical amusement, and not for any personal pecuniary advantage.
While Watt was making experiments as to the proper substances to be carved and drilled, he
also desired Murdock to make similar experiments.  "The nitre," he said in one note, "seems
to do harm; the fluor composition seems the best and hardest.  Query, what would some calcined
pipe-clay do?  If you will calcine some fire-clay by a red heat and pound it,--about a pound,--and
send it to me, I shall try to make you a mould or two in Henning's manner to cast this and
the sulphur acid iron in.  I have made a screwing tool for wood that seems to answer; also
one of a one-tenth diameter for marble, which does very well."  In another note, Watt says:
"I find my drill readily makes 2400 turns per minute, even with the large drill you sent last;
if I bear lightly, a three-quarter ferril would run about 3000, and by an engine that might
be doubled."

The materials to be drilled into medallions also required much consideration.  "I am much obliged
to you," said Watt, "for the balls, etc., which answer as well as can be expected.  They make
great progress in cutting the crust (Ridgways) or alabaster, and also cut marble, but the harder
sorts soon blunt them.  At any rate, marble does not do for the medallions, as its grain prevents
its being cut smooth, and its semi-transparence hurts the effect.  I think Bristol lime, or
shell lime, pressed in your manner, would have a good effect.  When you are at leisure, I shall
thank you for a few pieces, and if some of them are made pink or flesh colour, they will look
well.  I used the ball quite perpendicular, and it cut well, as most of the cutting is sideways.
I tried a fine whirling point, but it made little progress; another with a chisel edge did
almost as well as the balls, but did not work so pleasantly.  I find a triangular scraping
point the best, and I think from some trials it should be quite a sharp point.  The wheel runs
easier than it did, but has still too much friction.  I wished to have had an hour's consultation
with you, but have been prevented by sundry matters among others by that plaguey stove, which
is now in your hands."

Watt was most grateful to Murdock for his unvarying assistance. In January, 1813, when Watt
was in his seventy-seventh year, he wrote to Murdock, asking him to accept a present of a lathe
"I have not heard from you," he says, "in reply to my letter about the lathe; and, presuming
you are not otherwise provided, I have bought it, and request your acceptance of it.  At present,
an alteration for the better is making in the oval chuck, and a few additional chucks, rest,
etc., are making to the lathe.  When these are finished, I shall have it at Billinger's until
you return, or as you otherwise direct.  I am going on with my drawings for a complete machine,
and shall be glad to see you here to judge of them."

The drawings were made, but the machine was never finished. "Invention," said Watt, "goes on
very slowly with me now."  Four years later, he was still at work; but death put a stop to
his "diminishing-machine." It is a remarkable testimony to the skill and perseverance of a
man who had already accomplished so much, that it is almost his only unfinished work.  Watt
died in 1819, in the eighty-third year of his age, to the great grief of Murdock, his oldest
and most attached friend and correspondent.

Meanwhile, the firm of Boulton and Watt continued.  The sons of the two partners carried it
on, with Murdock as their Mentor.  He was still full of work and inventive power.  In 1802,
he applied the compressed air of the Blast Engine employed to blow the cupolas of the Soho
Foundry, for the purpose of driving the lathe in the pattern shop.  It worked a small engine,
with a 12-inch cylinder and 18-inch stroke, connected with the lathe, the speed being regulated
as required by varying the admission of the blast.  This engine continued in use for about
thirty-five years.

In 1803 Murdock experimented on the power of high-pressure steam in propelling shot, and contrived
a steam-engine with which he made many trials at Soho, thereby anticipating the apparatus contrived
by Mr. Perkins many years later.

In 1810 Murdock took out a patent for boring steam-pipes for water, and cutting columns out
of solid blocks of stone, by means of a cylindrical crown saw.  The first machine was used
at Soho, and afterwards at Mr. Rennie's Works in London, and proved quite successful.  Among
his other inventions were a lift worked by compressed air, which raised and lowered the castings
from the boring-mill to the level of the foundry and the canal bank.  He used the same kind
of power to ring the bells in his house at Sycamore Hill, and the contrivance was afterwards
adopted by Sir Walter Scott in his house at Abbotsford.

Murdock was also the inventor of the well-known cast-iron cement, so extensively used in engine
and machine work.  The manner in which he was led to this invention affords a striking illustration
of his quickness of observation.  Finding that some iron-borings and sal-ammoniac had got accidently
mixed together in his tool-chest, and rusted his saw-blade nearly through, he took note of
the circumstance, mixed the articles in various proportions, and at length arrived at the famous
cement, which eventually became an article of extensive manufacture at the Soho Works.

Murdock's ingenuity was constantly at work, even upon matters which lay entirely outside his
special vocation.  The late Sir William Fairbairn informed us that he contrived a variety of
curious machines for consolidating peat moss, finely ground and pulverised, under immense pressure,
and which, when consolidated, could be moulded into beautiful medals, armlets, and necklaces.
The material took the most brilliant polish and had the appearance of the finest jet.

Observing that fish-skins might be used as an economical substitute for isinglass, he went
up to London on one occasion in order to explain to brewers the best method of preparing and
using them.  He occupied handsome apartments, and, little regarding the splendour of the drawing-room,
he hung the fish-skins up against the walls.  His landlady caught him one day when he was about
to bang up a wet cod's skin!  He was turned out at once, with all his fish.  While in town
on this errand, it occurred to him that a great deal of power was wasted in treading the streets
of London!  He conceived the idea of using the streets and roadways as a grand tread-mill,
under which the waste power might be stored up by mechanical methods and turned to account.
He had also an idea of storing up the power of the tides, and of running water, in the same
way.  The late Charles Babbage, F.R.S., entertained a similar idea about using springs of Ischia
or of the geysers of Iceland as a power necessary for condensing gases, or perhaps for the
storage of electricity.[12] The latter, when perfected, will probably be the greatest invention
of the next half century.

Another of Murdock's' ingenious schemes, was his proposed method of transmitting letters and
packages through a tube exhausted by an air-pump.  This project led to the Atmospheric Railway,
the success of which, so far as it went, was due to the practical ability of Murdock's pupil,
Samuel Clegg.  Although the atmospheric railway was eventually abandoned, it is remarkable
that the original idea was afterwards revived and practised with success by the London Pneumatic
Dispatch Company.

In 1815, while Murdock was engaged in erecting an apparatus of his own invention for heating
the water for the baths at Leamington, a ponderous cast-iron plate fell upon his leg above
his ankle, and severely injured him.  He remained a long while at Leamington, and when it was
thought safe to remove him, the Birmingham Canal Company kindly placed their excursion boat
at his disposal, and he was conveyed safely homeward.  So soon as he was able, he was at work
again at the Soho factory.

Although the elder Watt had to a certain extent ignored the uses of steam as applied to navigation,
being too much occupied with developing the powers of the pumping and rotary engine, the young
partners, with the stout aid of Murdock, took up the question. They supplied Fulton in 1807
with his first engine, by means of which the Clermont made her first voyage along the Hudson
river. They also supplied Fulton and Livingston with the next two engines for the Car of Neptune
and the Paragon.  From that time forward, Boulton and Watt devoted themselves to the manufacture
of engines for steamboats.  Up to the year 1814, marine engines had been all applied singly
in the vessel; but in this year Boulton and Watt first applied two condensing engines, connected
by cranks set at right angles on the shaft, to propel a steamer on the Clyde.  Since then,
nearly all steamers are fitted with two engines. In making this important improvement, the
firm were materially aided by the mechanical genius of William Murdock, and also of Mr. Brown,
then an assistant, but afterwards a member of the firm.

In order to carry on a set of experiments with respect to the most improved form of marine
engine, Boulton and Watt purchased the Caledonia, a Scotch boat built on the Clyde by James
Wood and Co., of Port Glasgow.  The engines and boilers were taken out. The vessel was fitted
with two side lever engines, and many successive experiments were made with her down to August,
1817, at an expense of about 10,000L.  This led to a settled plan of construction, by which
marine engines were greatly improved. James Watt, junior, accompanied the Caledonia to Holland
and up the Rhine.  The vessel was eventually sold to the Danish Government, and used for carrying
the mails between Kiel and Copenhagen.  It is, however, unnecessary here to venture upon the
further history of steam navigation.

In the midst of these repeated inventions and experiments, Murdock was becoming an old man.
Yet he never ceased to take an interest in the works at Soho.  At length his faculties experienced
a gradual decay, and he died peacefully at his house at Sycamore Hill, on the 15th of November,1839,
in his eighty-fifth year.  He was buried near the remains of the great Boulton and Watt; and
a bust by Chantrey served to perpetuate the remembrance of his manly and intelligent countenance.

Footnotes for Chapter V.

[1] Fletcher's Political Works, London, 1737, p. 149,

[2] One of the Murdocks built the cathedral at Glasgow, as well as others in Scotland.  The
famous school of masonry at Antwerp sent out a number of excellent architects during the 11th,
12th, and 13th centuries.  One of these, on coming into Scotland, assumed the name of Murdo.
He was a Frenchman, born in Paris, as we learn from the inscription left on Melrose Abbey,
and he died while building that noble work: it is as follows:--

"John Murdo sumtyme cait was I And born in Peryse certainly, An' had in kepyng all mason wark
Sanct Andrays, the Hye Kirk o' Glasgo, Melrose and Paisley, Jedybro and Galowy.  Pray to God
and Mary baith, and sweet Saint John, keep this Holy Kirk frae scaith."

[4] Note to Lockhart's Life of Scott.

[5] This was stated to the present writer some years ago by William Murdock's son; although
there is no other record of the event.

[6] See Lives of Engineers (Boulton and Watt), iv. pp. 182-4. Small edition, pp. 130-2.

[7] Mr. Pearse's letter is dated 23rd April, 1867, but has not before been published.  He adds
that "others remembered Murdock, one who was an apprentice with him, and lived with him for
some time--a Mr. Vivian, of the foundry at Luckingmill."

[8] Murdock's house still stands in Cross Street, Redruth; those still live who saw the gas-pipes
conveying gas from the retort in the little yard to near the ceiling of the room, just over
the table; a hole for the pipe was made in the window frame.  The old window is now replaced
by a new frame."--Life of Richard Trevithick, i. 64.

[9] Philosophical Transactions, 1808, pp. 124-132.

[10] Winsor's family evidently believed in his great powers; for I am informed by Francis Galton,
Esq., F.R.S., that there is a fantastical monument on the right-hand side of the central avenue
of the Kensal Green Cemetery, about half way between the lodge and the church, which bears
the following inscription:--"Tomb of Frederick Albert Winsor, son of the late Frederick Albert
Winsor, originator of public Gas-lighting, buried in the Cemetery of Pere la Chaise, Paris.
At evening time it shall be light."--Zachariah xiv. 7.  "I am come a light into the world,
that whoever believeth in Me shall not abide in darkness."--John xii. 46.

[11] Mr. Parkes, in his well known Chemical Essays (ed. 1841, p. 157), after referring to the
successful lighting up by Murdock of the manufactory of Messrs. Phillips and Lee at Manchester
in 1805, "with coal gas issuing from nearly a thousand burners," proceeds, "This grand application
of the new principle satisfied the public mind, not only of the practicability, but also of
the economy of the application; and as a mark of the high opinion they entertained of his genius
and perseverance, and in order to put the question of priority of the discovery beyond all
doubt, the Council of the Royal Society in 1808 awarded to Mr. Murdock the Gold Medal founded
by the late Count Rumford."

"The honest projector is he who, having by fair and plain principles of sense, honesty, and
ingenuity, brought any contrivance to a suitable perfection, makes out what he pretends to,
picks nobody's pocket, puts his project in execution, and contents himself with the real produce
as the profit of his invention."--De Foe.

I published an article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' for December, 1869, under the above title.
The materials were principally obtained from William and Frederick Koenig, sons of the inventor.

Since then an elaborate life has been published at Stuttgart, under the title of "Friederich
Koenig und die Erfindung Der Schnellpresse, Ein Biographisches Denkmal.  Von Theodor Goebel."
The author, in sending me a copy of the volume, refers to the article published in 'Macmillan,'
and says, "I hope you will please to accept it as a small acknowledgment of the thanks, which
every German, and especially the sons of Koenig, in whose name I send the book as well as in
mine, owe to you for having bravely taken up the cause of the much wronged inventor, their
father--an action all the more praiseworthy, as you had to write against the prejudices and
the interests of your own countrymen."

I believe it is now generally admitted that Koenig was entitled to the merit of being the first
person practically to apply the power of steam to indefinitely multiplying the productions
of the printing-press; and that no one now attempts to deny him this honour.  It is true others,
who followed him, greatly improved upon his first idea; but this was the case with Watt, Symington,
Crompton, Maudslay, and many more.  The true inventor is not merely the man who registers an
idea and takes a patent for it, or who compiles an invention by borrowing the idea of another,
improving upon or adding to his arrangements, but the man who constructs a machine such as
has never before been made, which executes satisfactorily all the functions it was intended
to perform.  And this is what Koenig's invention did, as will be observed from the following
brief summary of his life and labours.

Frederick Koenig was born on the 17th of April, 1774, at Eisleben, in Saxony, the birthplace
also of a still more famous person, Martin Luther.  His father was a respectable peasant proprietor,
described by Herr Goebel as Anspanner.  But this word has now gone out of use.  In feudal times
it described the farmer who was obliged to keep draught cattle to perform service due to the
landlord.  The boy received a solid education at the Gymnasium, or public school of the town.
At a proper age he was bound apprentice for five years to Breitkopf and Hartel, of Leipzig,
as compositor and printer; but after serving for four and a quarter years, he was released
from his engagement because of his exceptional skill, which was an unusual occurrence.

During the later years of his apprenticeship, Koenig was permitted to attend the classes in
the University, more especially those of Ernst Platner, a physician, philosopher, and anthropologist.
After that he proceeded to the printing-office of his uncle, Anton F. Rose, at Greifswald,
an old seaport town on the Baltic, where he remained a few years.  He next went to Halle as
a journeyman printer,--German workmen going about from place to place, during their wanderschaft,
for the purpose of learning their business.  After that, he returned to Breitkopf and Hartel,
at Leipzig, where he had first learnt his trade. During this time, having saved a little money,
he enrolled himself for a year as a regular student at the University of Leipzig.

According to Koenig's own account, he first began to devise ways and means for improving the
art of printing in the year 1802, when he was twenty-eight years old.  Printing large sheets
of paper by hand was a very slow as well as a very laborious process.  One of the things that
most occupied the young printer's mind was how to get rid of this "horse-work," for such it
was, in the business of printing.  He was not, however, over-burdened with means, though he
devised a machine with this object.  But to make a little money, he made translations for the
publishers.  In 1803 Koenig returned to his native town of Eisleben, where he entered into
an arrangement with Frederick Riedel, who furnished the necessary capital for carrying on the
business of a printer and bookseller.  Koenig alleges that his reason for adopting this step
was to raise sufficient money to enable him to carry out his plans for the improvement of printing.

The business, however, did not succeed, as we find him in the following year carrying on a
printing trade at Mayence.  Having sold this business, he removed to Suhl in Thuringia.  Here
he was occupied with a stereotyping process, suggested by what he had read about the art as
perfected in England by Earl Stanhope.  He also contrived an improved press, provided with
a moveable carriage, on which the types were placed, with inking rollers, and a new mechanical
method of taking off the impression by flat pressure.

Koenig brought his new machine under the notice of the leading printers in Germany, but they
would not undertake to use it.  The plan seemed to them too complicated and costly.  He tried
to enlist men of capital in his scheme, but they all turned a deaf ear to him.  He went from
town to town, but could obtain no encouragement whatever.  Besides, industrial enterprise in
Germany was then in a measure paralysed by the impending war with France, and men of capital
were naturally averse to risk their money on what seemed a merely speculative undertaking.

Finding no sympathisers or helpers at home, Koenig next turned his attention abroad.  England
was then, as now, the refuge of inventors who could not find the means of bringing out their
schemes elsewhere; and to England he wistfully turned his eyes. In the meantime, however, his
inventive ability having become known, an offer was made to him by the Russian Government to
proceed to St. Petersburg and organise the State printing-office there.  The invitation was
accepted, and Koenig proceeded to St. Petersburg in the spring of 1806.  But the official difficulties
thrown in his way were very great, and so disgusted him, that he decided to throw up his appointment,
and try his fortune in England.  He accordingly took ship for London, and arrived there in
the following November, poor in means, but rich in his great idea, then his only property.

As Koenig himself said, when giving an account of his invention:--"There is on the Continent
no sort of encouragement for an enterprise of this description. The system of patents, as it
exists in England, being either unknown, or not adopted in the Continental States, there is
no inducement for industrial enterprise; and projectors are commonly obliged to offer their
discoveries to some Government, and to so licit their encouragement.  I need hardly add that
scarcely ever is an invention brought to maturity under such circumstances. The well-known
fact, that almost every invention seeks, as it were, refuge in England, and is there brought
to perfection, though the Government does not afford any other protection to inventors beyond
what is derived from the wisdom of the laws, seems to indicate that the Continent has yet to
learn from her the best manner of encouraging the mechanical arts.  I had my full share in
the ordinary disappointments of Continental projectors; and after having lost in Germany and
Russia upwards of two years in fruitless applications, I at last resorted to England."[1]

After arriving in London, Koenig maintained himself with difficulty by working at his trade,
for his comparative ignorance of the English language stood in his way.  But to work manually
at the printer's "case," was not Koenig's object in coming to England.  His idea of a printing
machine was always uppermost in his mind, and he lost no opportunity of bringing the subject
under the notice of master printers likely to take it up.  He worked for a time in the printing
office of Richard Taylor, Shoe Lane, Fleet Street, and mentioned the matter to him.  Taylor
would not undertake the invention himself, but he furnished Koenig with an introduction to
Thomas Bensley, the well-known printer of Bolt Court, Fleet Street.  On the 11th of March,
1807, Bensley invited Koenig to meet him on the subject of their recent conversation about
"the discovery;" and on the 31st of the same month, the following agreement was entered into
between Koenig and Bensley:--

"Mr. Koenig, having discovered an entire new Method of Printing by Machinery, agrees to communicate
the same to Mr. Bensley under the following conditions:--that, if Mr. Bensley shall be satisfied
the Invention will answer all the purposes Mr. Koenig has stated in the Particulars he has
delivered to Mr. Bensley, signed with his name, he shall enter into a legal Engagement to purchase
the Secret from Mr. Koenig, or enter into such other agreement as may be deemed mutually beneficial
to both parties; or, should Mr. Bensley wish to decline having any concern with the said Invention,
then he engages not to make any use of the Machinery, or to communicate the Secret to any person
whatsoever, until it is proved that the Invention is made use of by any one without restriction
of Patent, or other particular agreement on the part of Mr. Koenig, under the penalty of Six
Thousand Pounds.

  "(Signed) T. Bensley,
  "Friederich Konig.
  "Witness--J. Hunneman."

Koenig now proceeded to put his idea in execution.  He prepared his plans of the new printing
machine.  It seems, however, that the progress made by him was very slow.  Indeed, three years
passed before a working model could be got ready, to show his idea in actual practice.  In
the meantime, Mr. Walter of The Times had been seen by Bensley, and consulted on the subject
of the invention.  On the 9th of August, 1809, more than two years after the date of the above
agreement, Bensley writes to Koenig: "I made a point of calling upon Mr. Walter yesterday,
who, I am sorry to say, declines our proposition altogether, having (as he says) so many engagements
as to prevent him entering into more."

It may be mentioned that Koenig's original plan was confined to an improved press, in which
the operation of laying the ink on the types was to be performed by an apparatus connected
with the motions of the coffin, in such a manner as that one hand could be saved.  As little
could be gained in expedition by this plan, the idea soon suggested itself of moving the press
by machinery, or to reduce the several operations to one rotary motion, to which the first
mover might be applied.  Whilst Koenig was in the throes of his invention, he was joined by
his friend Andrew F. Bauer, a native of Stuttgart, who possessed considerable mechanical power,
in which the inventor himself was probably somewhat deficient.  At all events, these two together
proceeded to work out the idea, and to construct the first actual working printing machine.

A patent was taken out, dated the 29th of March, 1810, which describes the details of the invention.
The arrangement was somewhat similar to that known as the platen machine; the printing being
produced by two flat plates, as in the common hand-press.  It also embodied an ingenious arrangement
for inking the type.  Instead of the old-fashioned inking balls, which were beaten on the type
by hand labour, several cylinders covered with felt and leather were used, and formed part
of the machine itself.  Two of the cylinders revolved in opposite directions, so as to spread
the ink, which was then transferred by two other inking cylinders alternately applied to the
"forme" by the action of spiral springs.  The movement of all the parts of the machine were
to be derived from a steam-engine, or other first mover.

"After many obstructions and delays," says Koenig himself, in describing the history of his
invention, "the first printing machine was completed exactly upon the plan which I have described
in the specification of my first patent.  It was set to Work in April, 1811. The sheet (H)
of the new Annual Register for 1810, 'Principal Occurrences,' 3000 copies, was printed with
it; and is, I have no doubt, the first part of a book ever printed with a machine.  The actual
use of it, however, soon suggested new ideas, and led to the rendering it less complicated
and more powerful"[2]

Of course!  No great invention was ever completed at one effort. It would have been strange
if Koenig had been satisfied with his first attempt.  It was only a beginning, and he naturally
proceeded with the improvement of his machine.  It took Watt more than twenty years to elaborate
his condensing steam-engine; and since his day, owing to the perfection of self-acting tools,
it has been greatly improved.  The power of the Steamboat and the Locomotive also, as well
as of all other inventions, have been developed by the constantly succeeding improvements of
a nation of mechanical engineers.

Koenig's experiment was only a beginning, and he naturally proceeded with the improvement of
his machine.  Although the platen machine of Koenig's has since been taken up a new, and perfected,
it was not considered by him sufficiently simple in its arrangements as to be adapted for common
use; and he had scarcely completed it, when he was already revolving in his mind a plan of
a second machine on a new principle, with the object of ensuring greater speed, economy, and
simplicity.

By this time, other well-known London printers, Messrs. Taylor and Woodfall, had joined Koenig
and Bensley in their partnership for the manufacture and sale of printing machines.  The idea
which now occurred to Koenig was, to employ a cylinder instead of a flat Platen machine, for
taking the impressions off the type, and to place the sheet round the cylinder, thereby making
it, as it were, part of the periphery.  As early as the year 1790, one William Nicholson had
taken out a patent for a machine for printing "on paper, linen, cotton, woollen, and other
articles," by means of "blocks, forms, types, plates, and originals," which were to be "firmly
imposed upon a cylindrical surface in the same manner as common letter is imposed upon a flat
stone."[3]  From the mention of "colouring cylinder," and "paper-hangings, floor-cloths, cottons,
linens, woollens, leather, skin, and every other flexible material," mentioned in the specification,
it would appear as if Nicholson's invention were adapted for calico-printing and paper-hangings,
as well as for the printing of books.  But it was never used for any of these purposes.  It
contained merely the register of an idea, and that was all.  It was left for Adam Parkinson,
of Manchester, to invent and make practical use of the cylinder printing machine for calico
in the year 1805, and this was still further advanced by the invention of James Thompson, of
Clitheroe, in 1813; while it was left for Frederick Koenig to invent and carry into practical
operation the cylinder printing press for newspapers.

After some promising experiments, the plans for a new machine on the cylindrical principle
were proceeded with.  Koenig admitted throughout the great benefit he derived from the assistance
of his friend Bauer. "By the judgment and precision," he said, "with which he executed my plans,
he greatly contributed to my success."  A patent was taken out on October 30th, 1811; and the
new machine was completed in December, 1812.  The first sheets ever printed with an entirely
cylindrical press, were sheets G and X of Clarkson's 'Life of Penn.' The papers of the Protestant
Union were also printed with it in February and March, 1813.  Mr. Koenig, in his account of
the invention, says that "sheet M of Acton's 'Hortus Kewensis,' vol. v., will show the progress
of improvement in the use of the invention.  Altogether, there are about 160,000 sheets now
in the hands of the public, printed with this machine, which, with the aid of two hands, takes
off 800 impressions in the hour"[4]

Koenig took out a further patent on July 23rd, 1813, and a fourth (the last) on the 14th of
March, 1814.  The contrivance of these various arrangements cost the inventor many anxious
days and nights of study and labour.  But he saw before him only the end he wished to compass,
and thought but little of himself and his toils.  It may be mentioned that the principal feature
of the invention was the printing cylinder in the centre of the machine, by which the impression
was taken from the types, instead of by flat plates as in the first arrangement.  The forme
was fixed in a cast-iron plate which was carried to and fro on a table, being received at either
end by strong spiral springs.  A double machine, on the same principle,--the forme alternately
passing under and giving an impression at one of two cylinders at either end of the press,--was
also included in the patent of 1811.

How diligently Koenig continued to elaborate the details of his invention will be obvious from
the two last patents which he took out, in 1813 and 1814.  In the first he introduced an important
improvement in the inking arrangement, and a contrivance for holding and carrying on the sheet,
keeping it close to the printing cylinder by means of endless tapes; while in the second, he
added the following new expedients: a feeder, consisting of an endless web,--an improved arrangement
of the endless tapes by inner as well as outer friskets,--an improvement of the register (that
is, one page falling exactly on the back of another), by which greater accuracy of impression
was also secured; and finally, an arrangement by which the sheet was thrown out of the machine,
printed by the revolving cylinder on both sides.

The partners in Koenig's Patents had established a manufactory in Whitecross Street for the
production of the new machines.  The workmen employed were sworn to secrecy.  They entered
into an agreement by which they were liable to forfeit 100L. if they communicated to others
the secret of the machines, either by drawings or description, or if they told by whom or for
whom they were constructed.  This was to avoid the hostility of the pressmen, who, having heard
of the new invention, were up in arms against it, as likely to deprive them of their employment.
And yet, as stated by Johnson in his 'Typographia,' the manual labour of the men who worked
at the hand press, was so severe and exhausting, "that the stoutest constitutions fell a sacrifice
to it in a few years." The number of sheets that could be thrown off was also extremely limited.

With the improved press, perfected by Earl Stanhope, about 250 impressions could be taken,
or 125 sheets printed on both sides in an hour.  Although a greater number was produced in
newspaper printing offices by excessive labour, yet it was necessary to have duplicate presses,
and to set up duplicate forms of type, to carry on such extra work; and still the production
of copies was quite inadequate to satisfy the rapidly increasing demand for newspapers.  The
time was therefore evidently ripe for the adoption of such a machine as that of Koenig.  Attempts
had been made by many inventors, but every one of them had failed. Printers generally regarded
the steam-press as altogether chimerical.

Such was the condition of affairs when Koenig finished his improved printing machine in the
manufactory in Whitecross Street.  The partners in the invention were now in great hopes. When
the machine had been got ready for work, the proprietors of several of the leading London newspapers
were invited to witness its performances.  Amongst them were Mr. Perry of the Morning chronicle,
and Mr. Walter of The Times.  Mr. Perry would have nothing to do with the machine; he would
not even go to see it, for he regarded it as a gimcrack.[5]  On the contrary, Mr. Walter, though
he had five years before declined to enter into any arrangement with Bensley, now that he heard
the machine was finished, and at work, decided to go and inspect it.  It was thoroughly characteristic
of the business spirit of the man.  He had been very anxious to apply increased mechanical
power to the printing of his newspaper.  He had consulted Isambard Brunel--one of the cleverest
inventors of the day--on the subject; but Brunel, after studying the subject, and labouring
over a variety of plans, finally gave it up.  He had next tried Thomas Martyn, an ingenious
young compositor, who had a scheme for a self-acting machine for working the printing press.
But, although Mr. Walter supplied him with the necessary funds, his scheme never came to anything.
Now, therefore, was the chance for Koenig!

After carefully examining the machine at work, Mr. Walter was at once satisfied as to the great
value of the invention.  He saw it turning out the impressions with unusual speed and great
regularity.  This was the very machine of which he had been in search.  But it turned out the
impressions printed on one side only.  Koenig, however, having briefly explained the more rapid
action of a double machine on the same principle for the printing of newspapers, Mr. Walter,
after a few minutes' consideration, and before leaving the premises, ordered two double machines
for the printing of The Times newspaper.  Here, at last, was the opportunity for a triumphant
issue out of Koenig's difficulties.

The construction of the first newspaper machine was still, however, a work of great difficulty
and labour.  It must be remembered that nothing of the kind had yet been made by any other
inventor.  The single-cylinder machine, which Mr. Walter had seen at work, was intended for
bookwork only.  Now Koenig had to construct a double-cylinder machine for printing newspapers,
in which many of the arrangements must necessarily be entirely new.  With the assistance of
his leading mechanic, Bauer, aided by the valuable suggestions of Mr. Walter himself, Koenig
at length completed his plans, and proceeded with the erection of the working machine.  The
several parts were prepared at the workshop in Whitecross Street, and taken from thence, in
as secret a way as possible, to the premises in Printing House Square, adjoining The Times
office, where they were fitted together and erected into a working machine.  Nearly two years
elapsed before the press was ready for work.  Great as was the secrecy with which the operations
were conducted, the pressmen of The Times office obtained some inkling of what was going on,
and they vowed vengeance to the foreign inventor who threatened their craft with destruction.
There was, however, always this consolation: every attempt that had heretofore been made to
print newspapers in any other way than by manual labour had proved an utter failure!

At length the day arrived when the first newspaper steam-press was ready for use.  The pressmen
were in a state of great excitement, for they knew by rumour that the machine of which they
had so long been apprehensive was fast approaching completion.  One night they were told to
wait in the press-room, as important news was expected from abroad. At six o'clock in the morning
of the 29th November, 1814, Mr. Walter, who had been watching the working of the machine all
through the night, suddenly appeared among the pressmen, and announced that "The Times is already
printed by steam!"  This proved satisfactory so far, and he proceeded to distribute several
copies of the newspaper amongst them--the first newspaper printed by steam! That paper contained
the following memorable announcement:--

"Our Journal of this day presents to the Public the practical result of the greatest improvement
connected with printing since the discovery of the art itself.  The reader of this paragraph
now holds in his hand one of the many thousand impressions of The Times newspaper which were
taken off last night by a mechanical apparatus.  A system of machinery almost organic has been
devised and arranged, which, while it relieves the human frame of its most laborious' efforts
in printing, far exceeds all human powers in rapidity and dispatch.  That the magnitude of
the invention may be justly appreciated by its effects, we shall inform the public, that after
the letters are placed by the compositors, and enclosed in what is called the forme, little
more remains for man to do than to attend upon and to watch this unconscious agent in its operations.
The machine is then merely supplied with paper: itself places the forme, inks it, adjusts the
paper to the forme newly inked, stamps the sheet, and gives it forth to the hands of the attendant,
at the same time withdrawing the forme for a fresh coat of ink, which itself again distributes,
to meet the ensuing sheet now advancing for impression; and the whole of these complicated
acts is performed with such a velocity and simultaneousness of movement, that no less than
1100 sheets are impressed in one hour.

"That the completion of an invention of this kind, not the effect of chance, but the result
of mechanical combinations methodically arranged in the mind of the artist, should be attended
with many obstructions and much delay, may be readily imagined.  Our share in this event has,
indeed, only been the application of the discovery, under an agreement with the patentees,
to our own particular business; yet few can conceive--even with this limited interest--the
various disappointments and deep anxiety to which we have for a long course of time been subjected.

"Of the person who made this discovery we have but little to add. Sir Christopher Wren's noblest
monument is to be found in the building which he erected; so is the best tribute of praise
which we are capable of offering to the inventor of the printing machine, comprised in the
preceding description, which we have feebly sketched, of the powers and utility of his invention.
It must suffice to say further, that he is a Saxon by birth; that his name is Koenig; and that
the invention has been executed under the direction of his friend and countryman, Bauer."

The machine continued to work steadily and satisfactorily, notwithstanding the doubters, the
unbelievers, and the threateners of vengeance.  The leading article of The Times for December
3rd, 1814, contains the following statement:--

"The machine of which we announced the discovery and our adoption a few days ago, has been
whirling on its course ever since, with improving order, regularity, and even speed.  The length
of the debates on Thursday, the day when Parliament was adjourned, will have been observed;
on such an occasion the operation of composing and printing the last page must commence among
all the journals at the same moment; and starting from that moment, we, with our infinitely
superior circulation, were enabled to throw off our whole impression many hours before the
other respectable rival prints.  The accuracy and clearness of the impression will likewise
excite attention.

"We shall make no reflections upon those by whom this wonderful discovery has been opposed,--the
doubters and unbelievers,--however uncharitable they may have been to us; were it not that
the efforts of genius are always impeded by drivellers of this description, and that we owe
it to such men as Mr. Koenig and his Friend, and all future promulgators of beneficial inventions,
to warn them that they will have to contend with everything that selfishness and conceited
ignorance can devise or say; and if we cannot clear their way before them, we would at least
give them notice to prepare a panoply against its dirt and filth.

"There is another class of men from whom we receive dark and anonymous threats of vengeance
if we persevere in the use of this machine.  These are the Pressmen.  They well know, at least
should well know, that such menace is thrown away upon us.  There is nothing that we will not
do to assist and serve those whom we have discharged.  They themselves can seethe greater rapidity
and precision with which the paper is printed. What right have they to make us print it slower
and worse for their supposed benefit? A little reflection, indeed, would show them that it
is neither in their power nor in ours to stop a discovery now made, if it is beneficial to
mankind; or to force it down if it is useless. They had better, therefore, acquiesce in a result
which they cannot alter; more especially as there will still be employment enough for the old
race of pressmen, before the new method obtains general use, and no new ones need be brought
up to the business; but we caution them seriously against involving themselves and their families
in ruin, by becoming amenable to the laws of their country.  It has always been matter of great
satisfaction to us to reflect, that we encountered and crushed one conspiracy; and we should
be sorry to find our work half done.

"It is proper to undeceive the world in one particular; that is, as to the number of men discharged.
We in fact employ only eight fewer workmen than formerly; whereas more than three times that
number have been employed for a year and a half in building the machine."

On the 8th of December following, Mr. Koenig addressed an advertisement "To the Public" in
the columns of The Times, giving an account of the origin and progress of his invention.  We
have already cited several passages from the statement.  After referring to his two last patents,
he says: "The machines now printing The Times and Mail are upon the same principle; but they
have been contrived for the particular purpose of a newspaper of extensive circulation, where
expedition is the great object.

"The public are undoubtedly aware, that never, perhaps, was a new invention put to so severe
a trial as the present one, by being used on its first public introduction for the printing
of newspapers, and will, I trust, be indulgent with respect to the many defects in the performance,
though none of them are inherent in the principle of the machine; and we hope, that in less
than two months, the whole will be corrected by greater adroitness in the management of it,
so far at least as the hurry of newspaper printing will at all admit.

"It will appear from the foregoing narrative, that it was incorrectly stated in several newspapers,
that I had sold my interest to two other foreigners; my partners in this enterprise being at
present two Englishmen, Mr. Bensley and Mr. Taylor; and it is gratifying to my feelings to
avail myself of this opportunity to thank those gentlemen publicly for the confidence which
they have reposed in me, for the aid of their practical skill, and for the persevering support
which they have afforded me in long and very expensive experiments; thus risking their fortunes
in the prosecution of my invention.

"The first introduction of the invention was considered by some as a difficult and even hazardous
step.  The Proprietor of The Times having made that his task, the public are aware that it
is in good hands."

One would think that Koenig would now feel himself in smooth water, and receive a share of
the good fortune which he had so laboriously prepared for others.  Nothing of the kind!  His
merits were disputed; his rights were denied; his patents were infringed; and he never received
any solid advantages for his invention, until he left the country and took refuge in Germany.
It is true, he remained for a few years longer, in charge of the manufactory in Whitecross
Street, but they were years to him of trouble and sorrow.

In 1816, Koenig designed and superintended the construction of a single cylinder registering
machine for book-printing.  This was supplied to Bensley and Son, and turned out 1000 sheets,
printed on both sides, in the hour.  Blumenbach's 'Physiology' was the first entire book printed
by steam, by this new machine.  It was afterwards employed, in 1818, in working off the Literary
Gazette.  A machine of the same kind was supplied to Mr. Richard Taylor for the purpose of
printing the 'Philosophical Magazine,' and books generally.  This was afterwards altered to
a double machine, and employed for printing the Weekly Dispatch.

But what about Koenig's patents?  They proved of little use to him. They only proclaimed his
methods, and enabled other ingenious mechanics to borrow his adaptations.  Now that he had
succeeded in making machines that would work, the way was clear for everybody else to follow
his footsteps.  It had taken him more than six years to invent and construct a successful steam
printing press; but any clever mechanic, by merely studying his specification, and examining
his machine at work, might arrive at the same results in less than a week.

The patents did not protect him.  New specifications, embodying some modification or alteration
in detail, were lodged by other inventors and new patents taken out.  New printing machines
were constructed in defiance of his supposed legal rights; and he found himself stripped of
the reward that he had been labouring for during so many long and toilsome years.  He could
not go to law, and increase his own vexation and loss.  He might get into Chancery easy enough;
but when would he get out of it, and in what condition?

It must also be added, that Koenig was unfortunate in his partner Bensley.  While the inventor
was taking steps to push the sale of his book-printing machines among the London printers,
Bensley, who was himself a book-printer, was hindering him in every way in his negotiations.
Koenig was of opinion that Bensley wished to retain the exclusive advantage which the possession
of his registering book machine gave him over the other printers, by enabling him to print
more quickly and correctly than they could, and thus give him an advantage over them in his
printing contracts.

When Koenig, in despair at his position, consulted counsel as to the infringement of his patent,
he was told that he might institute proceedings with the best prospect of success; but to this
end a perfect agreement by the partners was essential. When, however, Koenig asked Bensley
to concur with him in taking proceedings in defence of the patent right, the latter positively
refused to do so.  Indeed, Koenig was under the impression that his partner had even entered
into an arrangement with the infringers of the patent to share with them the proceeds of their
piracy.

Under these circumstances, it appeared to Koenig that only two alternatives remained for him
to adopt.  One was to commence an expensive, and it might be a protracted, suit in Chancery,
in defence of his patent rights, with possibly his partner, Bensley, against him; and the other,
to abandon his invention in England without further struggle, and settle abroad.  He chose
the latter alternative, and left England finally in August, 1817.

Mr. Richard Taylor, the other partner in the patent, was an honourable man; but he could not
control the proceedings of Bensley.  In a memoir published by him in the 'Philosophical Magazine,'
"On the Invention and First Introduction of Mr. Koenig's Printing Machine," in which he honestly
attributes to him the sole merit of the invention, he says, "Mr. Koenig left England, suddenly,
in disgust at the treacherous conduct of Bensley, always shabby and overreaching, and whom
he found to be laying a scheme for defrauding his partners in the patents of all the advantages
to arise from them.  Bensley, however, while he destroyed the prospects of his partners, outwitted
himself, and grasping at all, lost all, becoming bankrupt in fortune as well as in character."[6]

Koenig was badly used throughout.  His merits as an inventor were denied.  On the 3rd of January,
1818, after he had left England, Bensley published a letter in the Literary Gazette, in which
he speaks of the printing machine as his own, without mentioning a word of Koenig.  The 'British
Encyclopaedia,' in describing the inventors of the printing machine, omitted the name of Koenig
altogether.  The 'Mechanics Magazine,' for September, 1847, attributed the invention to the
Proprietors of The Times, though Mr. Walter himself had said that his share in the event had
been "only the application of the discovery;" and the late Mr. Bennet Woodcroft, usually a
fair man, in his introductory chapter to 'Patents for Inventions in Printing,' attributes the
merit to William Nicholson's patent (No. 1748), which, he said, "produced an entire revolution
in the mechanism of the art." In other publications, the claims of Bacon and Donkin were put
forward, while those of the real inventor were ignored.  The memoir of Koenig by Mr. Richard
Taylor, in the 'Philosophical Magazine,' was honest and satisfactory; and should have set the
question at rest.

It may further be mentioned that William Nicholson,--who was a patent agent, and a great taker
out of patents, both in his own name and in the names of others,--was the person employed by
Koenig as his agent to take the requisite steps for registering his invention.  When Koenig
consulted him on the subject, Nicholson observed that "seventeen years before he had taken
out a patent for machine printing, but he had abandoned it, thinking that it wouldn't do; and
had never taken it up again."  Indeed, the two machines were on different principles.  Nor
did Nicholson himself ever make any claim to priority of invention, when the success of Koenig's
machine was publicly proclaimed by Mr. Walter of The Times some seven years later.

When Koenig, now settled abroad, heard of the attempts made in England to deny his merits as
an inventor, he merely observed to his friend Bauer, "It is really too bad that these people,
who have already robbed me of my invention, should now try to rob me of my reputation."  Had
he made any reply to the charges against him, it might have been comprised in a very few words:
"When I arrived in England, no steam printing machine had ever before been seen; when I left
it, the only printing machines in actual work were those which I had constructed."  But Koenig
never took the trouble to defend the originality of his invention in England, now that he had
finally abandoned the field to others.

There can be no question as to the great improvements introduced in the printing machine by
Mr. Applegath and Mr. Cowper; by Messrs. Hoe and Sons, of New York; and still later by the
present Mr. Walter of The Times, which have brought the art of machine printing to an extraordinary
degree of perfection and speed.  But the original merits of an invention are not to be determined
by a comparison of the first machine of the kind ever made with the last, after some sixty
years' experience and skill have been applied in bringing it to perfection. Were the first
condensing engine made at Soho--now to be seen at the Museum in South Kensington--in like manner
to be compared with the last improved pumping-engine made yesterday, even the great James Watt
might be made out to have been a very poor contriver.  It would be much fairer to compare Koenig's
steam-printing machine with the hand-press newspaper printing machine which it superseded.
Though there were steam engines before Watt, and steamboats before Fulton, and steam locomotives
before Stephenson, there were no steam printing presses before Koenig with which to compare
them, Koenig's was undoubtedly the first, and stood unequalled and alone.

The rest of Koenig's life, after he retired to Germany, was spent in industry, if not in peace
and quietness.  He could not fail to be cast down by the utter failure of his English partnership,
and the loss of the fruits of his ingenious labours.  But instead of brooding over his troubles,
he determined to break away from them, and begin the world anew.  He was only forty-three when
he left England, and he might yet be able to establish himself prosperously in life.  He had
his own head and hands to help him.

Though England was virtually closed against him, the whole continent of Europe was open to
him, and presented a wide field for the sale of his printing machines.

While residing in England, Koenig had received many communications from influential printers
in Germany.  Johann Spencer and George Decker wrote to him in 1815, asking for particulars
about his invention; but finding his machine too expensive,[7] the latter commissioned Koenig
to send him a Stanhope printing press--the first ever introduced into Germany--the price of
which was 95L.  Koenig did this service for his friend, for although he stood by the superior
merits of his own invention, he was sufficiently liberal to recognise the merits of the inventions
of others.  Now that he was about to settle in Germany, he was able to supply his friends and
patrons on the spot.

The question arose, where was he to settle?  He made enquiries about sites along the Rhine,
the Neckar, and the Main.  At last he was attracted by a specially interesting spot at Oberzell
on the Main, near Wurzburg.  It was an old disused convent of the Praemonstratensian monks.
The place was conveniently situated for business, being nearly in the centre of Germany.  The
Bavarian Government, desirous of giving encouragement to so useful a genius, granted Koenig
the use of the secularised monastery on easy terms; and there accordingly he began his operations
in the course of the following year.  Bauer soon joined him, with an order from Mr. Walter
for an improved Times machine; and the two men entered into a partnership which lasted for life.

The partners had at first great difficulties to encounter in getting their establishment to
work.  Oberzell was a rural village, containing only common labourers, from whom they had to
select their workmen. Every person taken into the concern had to be trained and educated to
mechanical work by the partners themselves.  With indescribable patience they taught these
labourers the use of the hammer, the file, the turning-lathe, and other tools, which the greater
number of them had never before seen, and of whose uses they were entirely ignorant. The machinery
of the workshop was got together with equal difficulty piece by piece, some of the parts from
a great distance,--the mechanical arts being then at a very low ebb in Germany, which was still
suffering from the effects of the long continental war.

At length the workshop was fitted up, the old barn of the monastery being converted into an
iron foundry.

Orders for printing machines were gradually obtained.  The first came from Brockhaus, of Leipzig.
By the end of the fourth year two other single-cylinder machines were completed and sent to
Berlin, for use in the State printing office.  By the end of the eighth year seven double-cylinder
steam presses had been manufactured for the largest newspaper printers in Germany.  The recognised
excellence of Koenig and Bauer's book-printing machines--their perfect register, and the quality
of the work they turned out--secured for them an increasing demand, and by the year 1829 the
firm had manufactured fifty-one machines for the leading book printers throughout Germany.
The Oberzell manufactory was now in full work, and gave regular employment to about 120 men.

A period of considerable depression followed.  As was the case in England, the introduction
of the printing machine in Germany excited considerable hostility among the pressmen.  In some
of the principal towns they entered into combinations to destroy them, and several printing
machines were broken by violence and irretrievably injured. But progress could not be stopped;
the printing machine had been fairly born, and must eventually do its work for mankind.  These
combinations, however, had an effect for a time.  They deterred other printers from giving
orders for the machines; and Koenig and Bauer were under the necessity of suspending their
manufacture to a considerable extent.  To keep their men employed, the partners proceeded to
fit up a paper manufactory, Mr. Cotta, of Stuttgart, joining them in the adventure; and a mill
was fitted up, embodying all the latest improvements in paper-making.

Koenig, however, did not live to enjoy the fruits or all his study, labour, toil, and anxiety;
for, while this enterprise was still in progress, and before the machine trade had revived,
he was taken ill, and confined to bed.  He became sleepless; his nerves were unstrung; and
no wonder.  Brain disease carried him off on the 17th of January, 1833; and this good, ingenious,
and admirable inventor was removed from all further care and trouble.

He died at the early age of fifty-eight, respected and beloved by all who knew him.

His partner Bauer survived to continue the business for twenty years longer.  It was during
this later period that the Oberzell manufactory enjoyed its greatest prosperity.  The prejudices
of the workmen gradually subsided when they found that machine printing, instead of abridging
employment, as they feared it would do, enormously increased it; and orders accordingly flowed
in from Berlin, Vienna, and all the leading towns and cities of Germany, Austria, Denmark,
Russia, and Sweden.  The six hundredth machine, turned out in 1847, was capable of printing
6000 impressions in the hour.  In March, 1865, the thousandth machine was completed at Oberzell,
on the occasion of the celebration of the fifty years' jubilee of the invention of the steam
press by Koenig.

The sons of Koenig carried on the business; and in the biography by Goebel, it is stated that
the manufactory of Oberzell has now turned out no fewer than 3000 printing machines.  The greater
number have been supplied to Germany; but 660 were sent to Russia, 61 to Asia, 12 to England,
and 11 to America.  The rest were despatched to Italy, Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Holland,
and other countries.

It remains to be said that Koenig and Bauer, united in life, were not divided by death.  Bauer
died on February 27, 1860, and the remains of the partners now lie side by side in the little
cemetery at Oberzell, close to the scene of their labours and the valuable establishment which
they founded.

Footnotes for Chapter VI.

[1] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814

[2] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814.

[3] Date of Patent, 29th April, 1790, No. 1748,

[4] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814.

[5] Mr. Richard Taylor, one of the partners in the patent, says, "Mr. Perry declined, alleging
that he did not consider a newspaper worth so many years' purchase as would equal the cost
of the machine."

[6] Mr. Richard Taylor, F.S.A., memoir in 'Philosophical Magazine' for October 1847, p. 300.

[7] The price of a single cylinder non-registering machine was advertised at 900L.; of a double
ditto, 1400L.; and of a cylinder registering machine, 2000L.; added to which was 250L., 350L.,
and 500L. per annum for each of these machines so long as the patent lasted, or an agreed sum
to be paid down at once.

CHAPTER VII.

THE WALTERS OF THE TIMES: INVENTION OF THE WALTER PRESS.

"Intellect and industry are never incompatible.  There is  more wisdom, and will be more benefit,
in combining them than scholars like to believe, or than the common world imagine.  Life has
time enough for both, and its happiness will be increased by the union."--SHARON TURNER. HENRY
TAYLOR--Philip van Artevelde.

The late John Walter, who adopted Koenig's steam printing press in printing The Times, was
virtually the inventor of the modern newspaper. The first John Walter, his father, learnt the
art of printing in the office of Dodsley, the proprietor of the 'Annual Register.' He afterwards
pursued the profession of an underwriter, but his fortunes were literally shipwrecked by the
capture of a fleet of merchantmen by a French squadron. Compelled by this loss to return to
his trade, he succeeded in obtaining the publication of 'Lloyd's List,' as well as the printing
of the Board of Customs.  He also established himself as a publisher and bookseller at No.
8, Charing Cross.  But his principal achievement was in founding The Times newspaper.

The Daily Universal Register was started on the 1st of January, 1785, and was described in
the heading as "printed logographically."  The type had still to be composed, letter by letter,
each placed alongside of its predecessor by human fingers.  Mr. Walter's invention consisted
in using stereotyped words and parts of words instead of separate metal letters, by which a
certain saving of time and labour was effected. The name of the 'Register' did not suit, there
being many other publications bearing a similar title.  Accordingly, it was re-named The Times,
and the first number was issued from Printing House Square on the 1st of January, 1788.

The Times was at first a very meagre publication.  It was not much bigger than a number of
the old 'Penny Magazine,' containing a single short leader on some current topic, without any
pretensions to excellence; some driblets of news spread out in large type; half a column of
foreign intelligence, with a column of facetious paragraphs under the heading of "The Cuckoo;"
while the rest of each number consisted of advertisements. Notwithstanding the comparative
innocence of the contents of the early numbers of the paper, certain passages which appeared
in it on two occasions subjected the publisher to imprisonment in Newgate.  The extent of the
offence, on one occasion, consisted in the publication of a short paragraph intimating that
their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York had "so demeaned themselves
as to incur the just disapprobation of his Majesty!"  For such slight offences were printers
sent to gaol in those days.

Although the first Mr. Walter was a man of considerable business ability, his exertions were
probably too much divided amongst a variety of pursuits to enable him to devote that exclusive
attention to The Times which was necessary to ensure its success.

He possibly regarded it, as other publishers of newspapers then did, mainly as a means of obtaining
a profitable business in job-printing. Hence, in the elder Walter's hands, the paper was not
only unprofitable in itself, but its maintenance became a source of gradually increasing expenditure;
and the proprietor seriously contemplated its discontinuance.

At this juncture, John Walter, junior, who had been taken into the business as a partner, entreated
his father to entrust him with the sole conduct of the paper, and to give it "one more trial."
This was at the beginning of 1803.  The new editor and conductor was then only twenty-seven
years of age.  He had been trained to the manual work of a printer "at case," and passed through
nearly every department in the office, literary and mechanical.  But in the first place, he
had received a very liberal education, first at Merchant Taylors' School, and afterwards at
Trinity College, Oxford, where he pursued his classical studies with much success.  He was
thus a man of well-cultured mind; he had been thoroughly disciplined to work; he was, moreover,
a man of tact and energy, full of expedients, and possessed by a passion for business.  His
father, urged by the young man's entreaties, at length consented, although not without misgivings,
to resign into his hands the entire future control of The Times.

Young Walter proceeded forthwith to remodel the establishment, and to introduce improvements
into every department, as far as the scanty capital at his command would admit.  Before he
assumed the direction, The Times did not seek to guide opinion or to exercise political influence.
It was a scanty newspaper--nothing more, Any political matters referred to were usually introduced
in "Letters to the Editor," in the form in which Junius's Letters first appeared in the Public
Advertiser. But, as I was saying, if the fox breaks well away from the gorse, you'll have the best
run you've seen this season; but if he dodges back into the plantation,
you'll have enough to do to make him break at all; and when he does,
he'll go away towards Ballyhaunis, through as cross a country as ever
a horse put a shoe into."

And having uttered this scientific prediction, which was listened to with the greatest deference
by Peter Dillon, the Rev. Joseph Armstrong turned his attention to the ham and tea.

The three ladies were all smiles to meet their guests; Mrs O'Kelly, dressed in a piece of satin
turk, came forward to shake hands with the General, but Sophy and Guss kept their positions,
beneath the coffee-pot and tea-urn, at each end of the long table, being very properly of opinion
that it was the duty of the younger part of the community to come forward, and make their
overtures to them. Bingham Blake, the cynosure on whom the eyes of the beauty of county Mayo
were most generally placed, soon found his seat beside Guss, rather to Sophy's mortification;
but Sophy was good-natured, and when Peter Dillon placed himself
at her right hand, she was quite happy, though Peter's father was
still alive, and Bingham's had been dead this many a year and Castletown
much in want of a mistress.

"Now, Miss O'Kelly," said Bingham, "do let me manage the coffee-pot; the cream-jug and sugar-tongs
will be quite enough for your energies."
"Indeed and I won't, Mr Blake; you're a great deal too awkward, and
a great deal too hungry. But believing that the reparation of the injury in
this manner was likely to be considered as a favour, entitling those who granted it to a certain
degree of influence over the politics of the journal, Walter refused to sign it, or to have
any concern in presenting the memorial. He did more; he wrote to those from whom the restoration
of the employment was expected to come, disavowing all connection with the proceeding.  The
matter then dropped, and the Customs printing was never restored to the office.

This course was so unprecedented, and, as his father thought, was so very wrong-headed, that
young Walter had for some time considerable difficulty in holding his ground and maintaining
the independent position he had assumed.  But with great tenacity of purpose he held on his
course undismayed.  He was a man who looked far ahead,--not so much taking into account the
results at the end of each day or of each year, but how the plan he had laid down for conducting
the paper would work out in the long run. And events proved that the high-minded course he
had pursued with so much firmness of purpose was the wisest course after all.

Another feature in the management which showed clear-sightedness and business acuteness, was
the pains which the Editor took to ensure greater celerity of information and dispatch in printing.
The expense which he incurred in carrying out these objects excited the serious displeasure
of his father, who regarded them as acts of juvenile folly and extravagance.  Another circumstance
strongly roused the old man's wrath.  It appears that in those days the insertion of theatrical
puffs formed a considerable source of newspaper income; and yet young Walter determined at
once to abolish them.  It is not a little remarkable that these earliest acts of Mr. Walter--which
so clearly marked his enterprise and high-mindedness--should have been made the subject of
painful comments in his father's will.

Notwithstanding this serious opposition from within, the power and influence of the paper visibly
and rapidly grew.  The new Editor concentrated in the columns of his paper a range of information
such as had never before been attempted, or indeed thought possible.  His vigilant eye was
directed to every detail of his business.  He greatly improved the reporting of public meetings,
the money market, and other intelligence,--aiming at greater fulness and accuracy.  In the
department of criticism his labours were unwearied.  He sought to elevate the character of
the paper, and rendered it more dignified by insisting that it should be impartial.  He thus
conferred the greatest public service upon literature, the drama, and the fine arts, by protecting
them against the evil influences of venal panegyric on the one hand, and of prejudiced hostility
on the other.

But the most remarkable feature of The Times that which emphatically commended it to public
support and ensured its commercial success--was its department of foreign intelligence. At
the time that Walter undertook the management of the journal, Europe was a vast theatre of
war; and in the conduct of commercial affairs--not to speak of political movements--it was
of the most vital importance that early information should be obtained of affairs on the Continent.
The Editor resolved to become himself the purveyor of foreign intelligence, and at great expense
he despatched his agents in all directions, even in the track of armies; while others were
employed, under various disguises and by means of sundry pretexts, in many parts of the Continent.
These agents collected information, and despatched it to London, often at considerable risks,
for publication in The Times, where it usually appeared long in advance of the government despatches.

The late Mr. Pryme, in his 'Autobiographic Recollections,' mentions a visit which he paid to
Mr. Walter at his seat at Bearwood.  "He described to me," says Mr. Pryme, "the cause of the
large extension in the circulation of The Times.  He was the first to establish a foreign correspondent.
This was Henry Crabb Robinson, at a salary of 300L. a year....  Mr. Walter also established
local reporters, instead of copying from the country papers.  His father doubted the wisdom
of such a large expenditure, but the son prophesied a gradual and certain success, which has
actually been realised."

Mr. Robinson has described in his Diary the manner in which he became connected with the foreign
correspondence.  "In January, 1807," he says, "I received, through my friend J.D. Collier,
a proposal from Mr. Walter that I should take up my residence at Altona, and become The Times
correspondent.  I was to receive from the editor of the 'Hamburger Correspondenten' all the
public documents at his disposal, and was to have the benefit also of a mass of information,
of which the restraints of the German Press did not permit him to avail himself. The honorarium
I was to receive was ample with my habits of life.  I gladly accepted the offer, and never
repented having done so.  My acquaintance with Mr. Walter ripened into friendship, and lasted
as long as he lived."[1]

Mr. Robinson was forced to leave Germany by the Battle of Friedland and the Treaty of Tilsit,
which resulted in the naval coalition against England.  Returning to London, he became foreign
editor of The Times until the following year, when he proceeded to Spain as foreign correspondent.
Mr. Walter had also an agent in the track of the army in the unfortunate Walcheren expedition;
and The Times announced the capitulation of Flushing forty-eight hours before the news had
arrived by any other channel.  By this prompt method of communicating public intelligence,
the practice, which had previously existed, of systematically retarding the publication of
foreign news by officials at the General Post Office, who made gain by selling them to the
Lombard Street brokers, was effectually extinguished.

This circumstance, as well as the independent course which Mr. Walter adopted in the discussion
of foreign politics, explains in some measure the opposition which he had to encounter in the
transmission of his despatches.  As early as the year 1805, when he had come into collision
with the Government and lost the Customs printing, The Times despatches were regularly stopped
at the outports, whilst those for the Ministerial journals were allowed to proceed.  This might
have crushed a weaker man, but it did not crush Walter.  Of course he expostulated. He was
informed at the Home Secretary's office that he might be permitted to receive his foreign papers
as a favour.  But as this implied the expectation of a favour from him in return, the proposal
was rejected; and, determined not to be baffled, he employed special couriers, at great cost,
for the purpose of obtaining the earliest transmission of foreign intelligence.

These important qualities--enterprise, energy, business tact, and public spirit--sufficiently
account for his remarkable success. To these, however, must be added another of no small importance--discernment
and knowledge of character.  Though himself the head and front of his enterprise, it was necessary
that he should secure the services and co-operation of men of first-rate ability; and in the
selection of such men his judgment was almost unerring.  By his discernment and munificence,
he collected round him some of the ablest writers of the age.  These were frequently revealed
to him in the communications of correspondents--the author of the letters signed "Vetus" being
thus selected to write in the leading columns of the Paper.  But Walter himself was the soul
of The Times.  It was he who gave the tone to its articles, directed its influence, and superintended
its entire conduct with unremitting vigilance.

Even in conducting the mechanical arrangements of the paper--a business of no small difficulty--he
had often occasion to exercise promptness and boldness of decision in cases of emergency. 
Printers in those days were a rather refractory class of work men, and not unfrequently took
advantage of their position to impose hard terms on their employers, especially in the daily
press, where everything must be promptly done within a very limited time.  Thus on one occasion,
in 1810, the pressmen made a sudden demand upon the proprietor for an increase of wages, and
insisted upon a uniform rate being paid to all hands, whether good or bad.  Walter was at first
disposed to make concessions to the men; but having been privately informed that a combination
was already entered into by the compositors, as well as by the pressmen, to leave his employment
suddenly, under circumstances that would have stopped the publication of the paper, and inflicted
on him the most serious injury, he determined to run all risks, rather than submit to what
now appeared to him in the light of an extortion.

The strike took place on a Saturday morning, when suddenly, and without notice, all the hands
turned out.  Mr. Walter had only a few hours' notice of it, but he had already resolved upon
his course.  He collected apprentices from half a dozen different quarters, and a few inferior
workmen, who were glad to obtain employment on any terms.  He himself stript to his shirt-sleeves,
and went to work with the rest; and for the next six-and-thirty hours he was incessantly employed
at case and at press.  On the Monday morning, the conspirators, who had assembled to triumph
over his ruin, to their inexpressible amazement saw The Times issue from the publishing office
at the usual hour, affording a memorable example of what one man's resolute energy may accomplish
in a moment of difficulty. 

It is built on the lines of the clocks at Westminster and Worcester Cathedral, and chimes the
so-called "Cambridge quarters" as arranged by Dr. Crotch. Small though the clock looks from
the level of the churchyard, it must be remembered that it is the massive tower that dwarfs it--the
diameter of the face is in reality 8 feet.

Nothing is known of the place of origin of the pre-Reformation bells, but, arguing from the
proximity of Gloucester, it may be assumed that out of the eight bells weighing 14,200 lb. or
more, some may have been cast by John Sandre, of Gloucester.

The eight bells were bought from the King's Commissioners for £142,
i.e., at the rate of 5 lb. for a shilling.

They may have been bought to sell again, as the number was soon reduced to four. In 1612 a fifth
bell was added, as a rhyme on the cover of the baptismal register (1607-1629) tells us:

"William Dixon and Thomas Hoare Made us that bell which wee ring before, Which men for that
good deede praie we they maie thrive, For we having but four bells, they made them five; And
out of the grownde this bell they did delve The 24th of Julie, Anno Dom. 1612."

Near the arcaded passage in the room in the tower are some memoranda of the changes possible with
five bells, rudely engraved in the stonework.
In 1632 the peal was recast and a sixth bell was added, and in 1679
the two newest bells were recast. Two new bells were added in 1696.
In 1797 the great or tenor bell was recast. From the time when the
bells were overhauled and tuned at Gloucester, in 1837, no further
alteration has been made. The present peal is about 500 lb. less in
weight than the peal in use at the time of the Dissolution.

Mr. Walter could not brook the tedium of this irksome and laborious process.  To increase the
number of impressions, he resorted to various expedients.  The type was set up in duplicate,
and even in triplicate; several Stanhope presses were kept constantly at work; and still the
insatiable demands of the newsmen on certain occasions could not be met.  Thus the question
was early forced upon his consideration, whether he could not devise machinery for the purpose
of expediting the production of newspapers.  Instead of 300 impressions an hour, he wanted
from 1500 to 2000.  Although such a speed as this seemed quite as chimerical as propelling
a ship through the water against wind and tide at fifteen miles an hour, or running a locomotive
on a railway at fifty, yet Mr. Walter was impressed with the conviction that a much more rapid
printing of newspapers was feasible than by the slow hand-labour process; and he endeavoured
to induce several ingenious mechanical contrivers to take up and work out his idea.

The principle of producing impressions by means of a cylinder, and of inking the types by means
of a roller, was not new.  We have seen, in the preceding memoir, that as early as 1790 William
Nicholson had patented such a method, but his scheme had never been brought into practical
operation.  Mr. Walter endeavoured to enlist Marc Isambard Brunel--one of the cleverest inventors
of the day--in his proposed method of rapid printing by machinery; but after labouring over
a variety of plans for a considerable time, Brunel finally gave up the printing machine, unable
to make anything of it.  He was supplied with the necessary funds to enable him to prosecute
his idea; but Mr. Walter's father was opposed to the scheme, and when the funds became exhausted,
this scheme also fell to the ground.

As years passed on, and the circulation of the paper increased, the necessity for some more
expeditious method of printing became still more urgent.  Although Mr. Walter had declined
to enter into an arrangement with Bensley in 1809, before Koenig had completed his invention
of printing by cylinders, it was different five years later, when Koenig's printing machine
was actually at work.  In the preceding memoir, the circumstances connected with the adoption
of the invention by Mr. Walter are fully related; as well as the announcement made in The Times
on the 29th of November, 1814--the day on which the first newspaper printed by steam was given
to the world.

But Koenig's printing machine was but the beginning of a great new branch of industry.  After
he had left this country in disgust, it remained for others to perfect the invention; although
the ingenious German was entitled to the greatest credit for having made the first satisfactory
beginning.  Great inventions are not brought forth at a heat.  They are begun by one man, improved
by another, and perfected by a whole host of mechanical inventors.  Numerous patents were taken
out for the mechanical improvement of printing.  Donkin and Bacon contrived a machine in 1813,
in which the types were placed on a revolving prism. One of them was made for the University
of Cambridge, but it was found too complicated; the inking was defective; and the project was
abandoned.

In 1816, Mr. Cowper obtained a patent (No.3974) entitled, "A Method of Printing Paper for Paper
Hangings, and Other Purposes."

The principal feature of this invention consisted in the curving or bending of stereotype plates
for the purpose of being printed in that form.  A number of machines for printing in two colours,
in exact register, was made for the Bank of England, and four millions of One Pound notes were
printed before the Bank Directors determined to abolish their further issue.  The regular mode
of producing stereotype plates, from plaster of Paris moulds, took so much time, that they
could not then be used for newspaper printing.

Two years later, in 1818, Mr. Cowper invented and patented (No. 4194) his great improvements
in printing.  It may be mentioned that he was then himself a printer, in partnership with Mr.
Applegath, his brother-in-law.  His invention consisted in the perfect distribution of the
ink, by giving end motion to the rollers, so as to get a distribution crossways, as well as
lengthways.  This principle is at the very foundation of good printing, and has been adopted
in every machine since made.  The very first experiment proved that the principle was right.
Mr. Cowper was asked by Mr. Walter to alter Koenig's machine at The Times office, so as to
obtain good distribution.  He adopted two of Nicholson's single cylinders and flat formes of
type.  Two "drums" were placed betwixt the cylinders to ensure accuracy in the register,--over
and under which the sheet was conveyed in it s progress from one cylinder to the other,--the
sheet being at all times firmly held between two tapes, which bound it to the cylinders and
drums.  This is commonly called, in the trade, a "perfecting machine;" that is, it printed
the paper on both sides simultaneously, and is still much used for "book-work," whilst single
cylinder machines are often used for provincial newspapers.

After this, Mr. Cowper designed the four cylinder machine for The Times,--by means of which
from 4000 to 5000 sheets could be printed from one forme in the hour.  In 1823, Mr. Applegath
invented an improvement in the inking apparatus, by placing the distributing rollers at an
angle across the distributing table, instead of forcing them endways by other means.

Mr. Walter continued to devote the same unremitting attention to his business as before.  He
looked into all the details, was familiar with every department, and, on an emergency, was
willing to lend a hand in any work requiring more than ordinary despatch.

Thus, it is related of him that, in the spring of 1833, shortly after his return to Parliament
as Member for Berkshire, he was at The Times office one day, when an express arrived from Paris,
bringing the speech of the King of the French on the opening of the Chambers.  The express
arrived at 10 A.M., after the day's impression of the paper had been published, and the editors
and compositors had left the office.  It was important that the speech should be published
at once; and Mr. Walter immediately set to work upon it.  He first translated the document;
then, assisted by one compositor, he took his place at the type-case, and set it up.  To the
amazement of one of the staff, who dropped in about noon, he "found Mr. Walter, M.P. for Berks,
working in his shirt-sleeves!"  The speech was set and printed, and the second edition was
in the City by one o'clock.  Had he not "turned to" as he did, the whole expense of the express
service would have been lost.  And it is probable that there was not another man in the whole
establishment who could have performed the double work--intellectual and physical--which he
that day executed with his own head and hands.

Such an incident curiously illustrates his eminent success in life.  It was simply the result
of persevering diligence, which shrank from no effort and neglected no detail; as well as of
prudence allied to boldness, but certainly not "of chance;" and, above all, of highminded integrity
and unimpeachable honesty.  It is perhaps unnecessary to add more as to the merits of Mr. Walter
as a man of enterprise in business, or as a public man and a Member of Parliament.  The great
work of his life was the development of his journal, the history of which forms the best monument
to his merits and his powers.

The progressive improvement of steam printing machinery was not affected by Mr. Walter's death,
which occurred in 1847.  He had given it an impulse which it never lost.  In 1846 Mr. Applegath
patented certain important improvements in the steam press.  The general disposition of his
new machine was that of a vertical cylinder 200 inches in circumference, holding on it the
type and distributing surfaces, and surrounded alternately by inking rollers and pressing cylinders.
Mr. Applegath estimated in his specification that in his new vertical system the machine, with
eight cylinders, would print about 10,000 sheets per hour.  The new printing press came into
use in 1848, and completely justified the anticipations of its projector.

Applegath's machine, though successfully employed at The Times office, did not come into general
use.  It was, to a large extent, superseded by the invention of Richard M. Hoe, of New York.
Hoe's process consisted in placing the types upon a horizontal cylinder, against which the
sheets were pressed by exterior and smaller cylinders.  The types were arranged in segments
of a circle, each segment forming a frame that could be fixed on the cylinder.  These printing
machines were made with from two to ten subsidiary cylinders.  The first presses sent by Messrs.
Hoe & Co. to this country were for Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper, and were of the six-cylinder size.
These were followed by two ten-cylinder machines, ordered by the present Mr. Walter, for The
Times.  Other English newspaper proprietors--both in London and the provinces--were supplied
with the machines, as many as thirty-five having been imported from America between 1856 and
1862.  It may be mentioned that the two ten-cylinder Hoes made for The Times were driven at
the rate of thirty-two revolutions per minute, which gives a printing rate of 19,200 per hour,
or about 16,000 including stoppages.

Much of the ingenuity exercised both in the Applegath and Hoe Machines was directed to the
"chase," which had to hold securely upon its curved face the mass of movable type required
to form a page.  And now the enterprise of the proprietor of The Times again came to the front.
The change effected in the art of newspaper-printing, by the process of stereotypes, is scarcely
inferior to that by which the late Mr. Walter applied steam-power to the printing press, and
certainly equal to that by which the rotary press superseded the reciprocatory action of the
flat machine.

Stereotyping has a curious history.  Many attempts were made to obtain solid printing-surfaces
by transfer from similar surfaces, composed, in the first place, of movable types.  The first
who really succeeded was one Ged, an Edinburgh goldsmith, who, after a series of difficult
experiments, arrived at a knowledge of the art of stereotyping.  The first method employed
was to pour liquid stucco, of the consistency of cream, over the types; and this, when solid,
gave a perfect mould. Into this the molten metal was poured, and a plate was produced, accurately
resembling the page of type.  As long ago as 1730, Ged obtained a privilege from the University
of Cambridge for printing Bibles and Prayer-books after this method.  But the workmen were
dead against it, as they thought it would destroy their trade.  The compositors and the pressmen
purposely battered the letters in the absence of their employers.  In consequence of this interference
Ged was ruined, and died in poverty.

The art had, however, been born, and could not be kept down.  It was revived in France, in
Germany, and in America.  Fifty years after the discovery of Ged, Tilloch and Foulis, of Glasgow,
patented a similar invention, without knowing anything of what Ged had done; and after great
labour and many experiments, they produced plates, the impressions from which could  not be
distinguished from those taken from the types from which they were cast.  Some years afterwards,
Lord Stanhope, to whom the art of printing is much indebted, greatly improved the art of stereotyping,
though it was still quite inapplicable to newspaper printing.  The merit of this latter invention
is due to the enterprise of the present proprietor of The Times.

Mr. Walter began his experiments, aided by an ingenious Italian founder named Dellagana, early
in 1856.  It was ascertained that when papier-mache matrices were rapidly dried and placed
in a mould, separate columns might be cast in them with stereotype metal, type high, planed
flat, and finished with sufficient speed to get up the duplicate of a forme of four pages fitted
for printing.  Steps were taken to adapt these type-high columns to the Applegath Presses,
then worked with polygonal chases.  When the Hoe machines were introduced, instead of dealing
with the separate columns, the papier-mache matrix was taken from the whole page at one operation,
by roller-presses constructed for the purpose.  The impression taken off in this manner is
as perfect as if it had been made in the finest wax.  The matrix is rapidly dried on heating
surfaces, and then accurately adjusted in a casting machine curved to the exact circumference
of the main drum of the printing press, and fitted with a terra-cotta top to secure a casting
of uniform thickness.  On pouring stereotype metal into this mould, a curved plate was obtained,
which, after undergoing a certain amount of trimming at two machines, could be taken to press
and set to work within twenty-five minutes from the time at which the process began.

Besides the great advantages obtained from uniform sets of the plates, which might be printed
on different machines at the rate of 50,000 impressions an hour, or such additional number
as might be required, there is this other great advantage, that there is no wear and tear of
type in the curved chases by obstructive friction; and that the fount, instead of wearing out
in two years, might last for twenty; for the plates, after doing their work for one day, are
melted down into a new impression for the next day's printing.  At the same time, the original
type-page, safe from injury, can be made to yield any number of copies that may be required
by the exigencies of the circulation.  It will be sufficiently obvious that by the multiplication
of stereotype plates and printing machines, there is practically no limit to the number of
copies of a newspaper that may be printed within the time which the process now usually occupies.

This new method of newspaper stereotyping was originally employed on the cylinders of the Applegath
and Hoe Presses.  But it is equally applicable to those of the Walter Press, a brief description
of which we now subjoin.  As the construction of the first steam newspaper machine was due
to the enterprise of the late Mr. Walter, so the construction of this last and most improved
machine is due in like manner to the enterprise of his son.  The new Walter Press is not, like
Applegath and Cowper's, and Hoe's, the improvement of an existing arrangement, but an almost
entirely original invention.

In the Reports of the Jurors on the "Plate, Letterpress, and other modes of Printing," at the
International Exhibition of 1862, the following passage occurs:--"It is incumbent on the reporters
to point out that, excellent and surprising as are the results achieved by the Hoe and Applegath
Machines, they cannot be considered satisfactory while those machines themselves are so liable
to stoppages in working. No true mechanic can contrast the immense American ten-cylinder presses
of The Times with the simple calico-printing machine, without feeling that the latter furnishes
the true type to which the mechanism for newspaper printing should as much as possible approximate."

On this principle, so clearly put forward, the Inventors of the Walter Press proceeded in the
contrivance of the new machine.  It is true that William Nicholson, in his patent of 1790,
prefigured the possibility of printing on "paper, linen, cotton, woollen, and other articles,"
by means of type fixed on the outer surface of a revolving cylinder; but no steps were taken
to carry  his views into effect.  Sir Rowland Hill also, before he became connected with Post
Office reform, revived the contrivance of Nicholson, and referred to it in his patent of 1835
(No. 6762); and he also proposed to use continuous rolls of paper, which Fourdrinier and Donkin
had made practicable by their invention of the paper-making machine about the year 1804; but
both Nicholson's and Hill's patents remained a dead letter.[2]

It may be easy to conceive a printing machine, or even to make a model of one; but to construct
an actual working printing press, that must be sure and unfailing in its operations, is a matter
surrounded with difficulties.  At every step fresh contrivances have to be introduced; they
have to be tried again and again; perhaps they are eventually thrown aside to give place to
new arrangements.  Thus the head of the inventor is kept in a state of constant turmoil.  Sometimes
the whole machine has to be remodelled from beginning to end.  One step is gained by degrees,
then another; and at last, after years of labour, the new invention comes before the world
in the form of a practical working machine.

In 1862 Mr. Walter began in The Times office, with tools and machinery of his own, experiments
for constructing a perfecting press which should print the paper from rolls of paper instead
of from sheets. Like his father, Mr. Walter possessed an excellent discrimination of character,
and selected the best men to aid him in his important undertaking.  Numerous difficulties had,
of course, to be surmounted. Plans were varied from time to time; new methods were tried, altered,
and improved, simplification being aimed at throughout.  Six long years passed in this pursuit
of the possible.  At length the clear light dawned.  In 1868 Mr. Walter ventured to order the
construction of three machines on the pattern of the first complete one which had been made.
By the end of 1869 these were finished and placed in a room by themselves; and a  fourth was
afterwards added.  There the printing of The Times is now done, in less than half the time
it previously occupied, and with one-fifth the number of hands.

The most remarkable feature in the Walter Press is its wonderful simplicity of construction.
Simplicity of arrangement is always the beau ideal of the mechanical engineer.  This printing
press is not only simple, but accurate, compact, rapid, and economical.

While each of the ten-feeder Hoe Machines occupies a large and lofty room, and requires eighteen
men to feed and work it, the new Walter Machine occupies a space of only about 14 feet by 5,
or less than any newspaper machine yet introduced; and it requires only three lads to take
away, with half the attention of an overseer, who easily superintends two of the machines while
at work.  The Hoe Machine turns out 7000 impressions printed on both sides in the hour, whereas
the Walter Machine turns out 12,000 impressions completed in the same time.

The new Walter Press does not in the least resemble any existing printing machine, unless it
be the calendering machine which furnished its type.  At the printing end it looks like a collection
of small cylinders or rollers.  The first thing to be observed is the continuous roll of paper
four miles long, tightly mounted on a reel, which, when the machine is going, flies round with
immense rapidity.  The web of paper taken up by the first roller is led into a series of small
hollow cylinders filled with water and steam, perforated with thousands of minute holes.  By
this means the paper is properly damped before the process of printing is begun.  The roll
of paper, drawn by nipping rollers, next flies through to the cylinder on which the stereotype
plates are fixed, so as to form the four pages of the ordinary sheet of The Times; there it
is lightly pressed against the type and printed; then it passes downwards round another cylinder
covered with cloth, and reversed; next to the second type-covered roller, where it takes the
impression exactly on the other side of the remaining four pages.  It next reaches one of the
most ingenious contrivances of the invention--the cutting machinery, by means of which the
paper is divided by a quick knife into the 5500 sheets of which the entire web consists.  The
tapes hurry the now completely printed newspaper up an inclined plane, from which the divided
sheets are showered down in a continuous stream by an oscillating frame, where they are met
by two boys, who adjust the sheets as they fall.  The reel of four miles long is printed and
divided into newspapers complete in about twenty-five minutes.

The machine is almost entirely self-acting, from the pumping-up of the ink into the ink-box
out of the cistern below stairs, to the registering of the numbers as they are printed in the
manager's room above.  It is always difficult to describe a machine in words.  Nothing but
a series of sections and diagrams could give the reader an idea of the construction of this
unrivalled instrument.  The time to see it and wonder at it is when the press is in full work.
And even then you can see but little of its construction, for the cylinders are wheeling round
with immense velocity.  The rapidity with which the machine works may be inferred from the
fact that the printing cylinders (round which the stereotyped plates are fixed), while making
their impressions on the paper, travel at the surprising speed of 200 revolutions a minute,
or at the rate of about nine miles an hour!

Contrast this speed with the former slowness.  Go back to the beginning of the century.  Before
the year 1814 the turn-out of newspapers was only about 300 single impressions in an hour--that
is, impressions printed on only one side of the paper.  Koenig by his invention increased the
issue to 1100 impressions.  Applegath and Cowper by their four-cylinder machine increased the
issue to 4000, and by the eight-cylinder machine to 10,000 an hour.  But these were only impressions
printed on one side of the paper. The first perfecting press--that is, printing simultaneously
the paper on both sides--was the Walter, the speed of which has been raised to 12,000, though,
if necessary, it can produce excellent work at the rate of 17,000 complete copies of an eight-page
paper per hour.  Then, with the new method of stereotyping--by means of which the plates can
be infinitely multiplied and by the aid of additional machines, the supply of additional impressions
is absolutely unlimited.

The Walter Press is not a monopoly.  It is manufactured at The Times office, and is supplied
to all comers.  Among the other daily papers printed by its means in this country are the Daily
News, the Scotsmam, and the Birmingham Daily Post.  The first Walter Press was sent to America
in 1872, where it was employed to print the Missouri Republican at St.  Louis, the leading
newspaper of the Mississippi Valley.  An engineer and a skilled workman from The Times office
accompanied the machinery.  On arriving at St.  Louis--the materials were unpacked, lowered
into the machine-room, where they were erected and ready for work in the short space of five days.

The Walter Press was an object of great interest at the Centennial Exhibition held at Philadelphia
in 1876, where it was shown printing the New Fork Times one of the most influential journals
in America. The press was surrounded with crowds of visitors intently watching its perfect
and regular action, "like a thing of life."  The New York Times said of it: "The Walter Press
is the most perfect printing press yet known to man; invented by the most powerful journal
of the Old World, and adopted as the very best press to be had for its purposes by the most
influential journal of the New World....  It is an honour to Great Britain to have such an
exhibit in her display, and a lasting benefit to the printing business, especially to newspapers....
The first printing press run by steam was erected in the year 1814 in the office of The Times
by the father of him who is the present proprietor of that world-famous journal.  The machine
of 1814 was described in The Times of the 29th November in that year, and the account given
of it closed in these words: 'The whole of these complicated acts is performed with such a
velocity and simultaneosness of movement that no less than 1100 sheets are impressed in one
hour.' Mirabile dictu!  And the Walter Press of to-day can run off 17,000 copies an hour printed
on both sides.  This is not bad work for one man's lifetime."

It is unnecessary to say more about this marvellous machine.  Its completion forms the crown
of the industry which it represents, and of the enterprise of the journal which it prints.

Footnotes for Chapter VII.

[1] Diary, Reminiscences, and Correspondence of Henry Crabb Robinson, Barrister-at-Law, F.S.A.,
i. 231.

[2] After the appearance of my article on the Koenig and Walter Presses in Macmillan's Magazine
for December, 1869, I received the following letter from Sir Rowland Hill:--

"Hampstead"  January 5th, 1870.

"My dear sir,

"In your very interesting article in Macmillan's Magazine on the subject of the printing machine,
you have unconsciously done me some injustice.  To convince yourself of this, you have only
to read the enclosed paper.  The case, however, will be strengthened when I tell you that as
far back as the year 1856, that is, seven years after the expiry of my patent, I pointed out
to Mr. Mowbray Morris, the manager of The Times, the fitness of my machine for the printing
of that journal, and the fact that serious difficulties to its adoption had been removed. 
I also, at his request, furnished him with a copy of the document with which I now trouble
you.  Feeling sure that you would like to know the truth on any subject of which you may treat,
I should be glad to explain the matter more fully, and for this purpose will, with your permission,
call upon you at any time you may do me the favour to appoint. "Faithfully yours,

"Rowland Hill."

On further enquiry I obtained the Patent No. 6762; but found that nothing practical had ever
come of it.  The pamphlet enclosed by Sir Rowland Hill in the above letter is entitled 'The
Rotary Printing Machine.' It is very clever and ingenious, like everything he did.  But it
was still left for some one else to work out the invention into a practical working printing-press.
The subject is fully referred to in the 'Life of Sir Rowland Hill' (i. 224,525).  In his final
word on the subject, Sir Rowland "gladly admits the enormous difficulty of bringing a complex
machine into practical use," a difficulty, he says, which "has been most successfully overcome
by the patentees of the Walter Press."

CHAPTER VIII.

WILLIAM CLOWES: INTRODUCER OF BOOK-PRINTING BY STEAM.

Steam has proved as useful and potent in the printing of books as in the printing of newspapers.
Down to the end of last century, "the divine art," as printing was called, had made comparatively
little progress.  That is to say, although books could be beautifully printed by hand labour,
they could not be turned out in any large numbers.

The early printing press was rude.  It consisted of a table, along which the forme of type,
furnished with a tympan and frisket, was pushed by hand.  The platen worked vertically between
standards, and was brought down for the impression, and raised after it, by a common screw,
worked by a bar handle.  The inking was performed by balls covered with skin pelts; they were
blacked with ink, and beaten down on the type by the pressman. The inking was consequently
irregular.

In 1798, Earl Stanhope perfected the press that bears his name. He did not patent it, but made
his invention over to the public. In 1818, Mr. Cowper greatly improved the inking of formes
used in the Stanhope and other presses, by the use of a hand roller covered with a composition
of glue and treacle, in combination with a distributing table.  The ink was thus applied in
a more even manner, and with a considerable decrease of labour.  With the Stanhope Press, printing
was as far advanced as it could possibly be by means of hand labour.  About 250 impressions
could be taken off, on one side, in an hour.

But this, after all, was a very small result.  When books could be produced so slowly, there
could be no popular literature. Books were still articles for the few, instead of for the many.
Steam power, however, completely altered the state of affairs. When Koenig invented his steam
press, he showed by the printing of Clarkson's 'Life of Penn'--the first sheets ever printed
with a cylindrical press--that books might be printed neatly, as well as cheaply, by the new
machine. Mr. Bensley continued the process, after Koenig left England; and in 1824, according
to Johnson in his 'Typographia,' his son was "driving an extensive business."

In the following year, 1825, Archibald Constable, of Edinburgh, propounded his plan for revolutionising
the art of bookselling. Instead of books being articles of luxury, he proposed to bring them
into general consumption.  He would sell them, not by thousands, but by hundreds of thousands,
"ay, by millions;" and he would accomplish this by the new methods of multiplication--by machine
printing and by steam power.  Mr. Constable accordingly issued a library of excellent books;
and, although he was ruined--not by this enterprise, but the other speculations into which
he entered--he set the example which other enterprising minds were ready to follow.  Amongst
these was Charles Knight, who set the steam presses of William Clowes to work, for the purposes
of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.

William Clowes was the founder of the vast printing establishment from which these sheets are
issued; and his career furnishes another striking illustration of the force of industry and
character.  He was born on the 1st of January, 1779.  His father was educated at Oxford, and
kept a large school at Chichester; but dying when William was but an infant, he left his widow,
with straitened means, to bring up her family.  At a proper age William was bound apprentice
to a printer at Chichester; and, after serving him for seven years, he came up to London, at
the beginning of 1802, to seek employment as a journeyman. He succeeded in finding work at
a small office on Tower Hill, at a small wage.  The first lodgings he took cost him 5s. a week;
but finding this beyond his means he hired a room in a garret at 2s. 6d., which was as much
as he could afford out of his scanty earnings.

The first job he was put to, was the setting-up of a large poster-bill--a kind of work which
he had been accustomed to execute in the country; and he knocked it together so expertly that
his master, Mr. Teape, on seeing what he could do, said to him, "Ah! I find you are just the
fellow for me."  The young man, however, felt so strange in London, where he was without a
friend or acquaintance, that at the end of the first month he thought of leaving it; and yearned
to go back to his native city.  But he had not funds enough to enable him to follow his inclinations,
and he accordingly remained in the great City, to work, to persevere, and finally to prosper.
He continued at Teape's for about two years, living frugally, and even contriving to save a
little money.

He then thought of beginning business on his own account.  The small scale on which printing
was carried on in those days enabled him to make a start with comparatively little capital.
By means of his own savings and the help of his friends, he was enabled to take a little printing-office
in Villiers Street, Strand, about the end of 1803; and there he began with one printing press,
and one assistant.  His stock of type was so small, that he was under the necessity of working
it from day to day like a banker's gold.  When his first job came in, he continued to work
for the greater part of three nights, setting the type during the day, and working it off at
night, in order that the type might be distributed for resetting on the following morning.
He succeeded, however, in executing his first job to the entire satisfaction of his first customer.

His business gradually increased, and then, with his constantly saved means, he was enabled
to increase his stock of type, and to undertake larger jobs.  Industry always tells, and in
the long-run leads to prosperity.  He married early, but he married well.  He was only twenty-four
when he found his best fortune in a good, affectionate wife.  Through this lady's cousin, Mr.
Winchester, the young printer was shortly introduced to important official business.  His punctual
execution of orders, the accuracy of his work, and the despatch with which he turned it out
soon brought him friends, and his obliging and kindly disposition firmly secured them.  Thus,
in a few years, the humble beginner with one press became a printer on a large scale.

The small concern expanded into a considerable printing-office in Northumberland Court, which
was furnished with many presses and a large stock of type.  The office was, unfortunately,
burnt down; but a larger office rose in its place.

What Mr. Clowes principally aimed at, in carrying on his business, was accuracy, speed, and
quantity.  He did not seek to produce editions de luxe in limited numbers, but large impressions
of works in popular demand--travels, biographies, histories, blue-books, and official reports,
in any quantity. For this purpose, he found the process of hand-printing too tedious, as well
as too costly; and hence he early turned his attention to book printing by machine presses,
driven by steam power,--in this matter following the example of Mr. Walter of the Times, who
had for some years employed the same method for newspaper printing.

Applegath & Cowper's machines had greatly advanced the art of printing. They secured perfect
inking and register; and the sheets were printed off more neatly, regularly, and expeditiously;
and larger sheets could be printed on both sides, than by any other method.  In 1823, accordingly,
Mr. Clowes erected his first steam presses, and he soon found abundance of work for them. 
But to produce steam requires boilers and engines, the working of which occasions smoke and
noise. Now, as the printing-office, with its steam presses, was situated in Northumberland
Court, close to the palace of the Duke of Northumberland, at Charing Cross, Mr. Clowes was
required to abate the nuisance, and to stop the noise and dirt occasioned by the use of his
engines.  This he failed to do, and the Duke commenced an action against him.

The case was tried in June, 1824, in the Court of Common Pleas. It was ludicrous to hear the
extravagant terms in which the counsel for the plaintiff and his witnesses described the nuisance--the
noise made by the engine in the underground cellar, some times like thunder, at other times
like a thrashing-machine, and then again like the rumbling of carts and waggons.  The printer
had retained the Attorney-general, Mr. Copley, afterwards Lord Lyndhurst, who conducted his
case with surpassing ability. If they wound us, we must pay tribute to appearances, and you would
be the first to censure an excessive indulgence.

See that you do not misunderstand us. Not to vex us on such occasions would be really to offend. We recommend
you to practice discretion and prudence, that is the rôle we enact, is it not? Is it necessary
for me to tell you the part you are to play?

I am often reminded that accepting the letter of the law, is to fail to understand it. You may
be sure that you will be in accord with our intentions as soon as you are able to interpret them
properly.

XXIV

An Abuse of Credulity Is Intolerable

The Countess no longer retreats? You think she has no other object in view than to put your love
to the proof? Whatever preference you have manifested for her; however little precaution you
have taken to testify to your passion, she finds nothing in you but cause for scolding. The
least excuse, however, and the reproaches die upon her lips, and her anger is so delightful
that you do everything to deserve it. Permit me to share in your joy with all my heart. But although this
behavior flatters you, if you consider that such acts are not intended to be of long duration,
how badly reasonable women, who value their reputation, misunderstand their true interests
by thus multiplying through an affected incredulity, occasions for slandering them. Do they not
understand and feel that it is not always the moment when they are tender which gives a blow
to their reputation? The doubt they cast upon the sincerity of the affection they have inspired,
does them more harm in the eyes of the world than even their defeat. As long as they continue incredulous
the slightest imprudence compromises them.

They dispose of their reputation at retail.

Whenever a lover finds a woman incredulous of the truth of his sentiments, he goes full lengths, every
time he has an opportunity, to furnish proofs of his sincerity. The most indiscreet eagerness,
the most marked preferences, the most assiduous attentions, seem
to him the best means of succeeding. Can he make use of them without
calling the attention of the whole world to the fact; without offending
every other woman and giving them occasions to be revenged by their
sharpest arrows?

As soon as the preliminaries are settled, that is
to say, as soon as we commence to believe ourselves sincerely loved,
nothing appears on the surface, nothing happens; and if outsiders
perceive our liaison, if they put a malicious construction upon it,
it will only be by the recollection of what passed during a time when
love was not in question.

I would, for the good of everybody concerned,
that as soon as a woman ceases to find any pleasure in the society
of a man who wishes to please her, that she could tell him so clearly
and dismiss him, without abusing his credulity, or giving him ground
for vain hopes.  The sale was originally 75,000
weekly; but, as the plan enlarged, the price was increased from 1d. to 2d., and then to 4d.
At the end of the second year, the circulation had fallen to 44,000; and at the end of the
third year, to 20,000.

It was unfortunate for Mr. Knight to be so much under the influence of his Society.  Had the
Cyclopaedia been under his own superintendence, it would have founded his fortune.  As it was,
he lost over 30,000L. by the venture.  The 'Penny Magazine' also went down in circulation,
until it became a non-paying publication, and then it was discontinued.  It is curious to contrast
the fortunes of William Chambers of Edinburgh with those of Charles Knight of London.  'Chambers's
Edinburgh Journal' was begun in February, 1832, and the 'Penny Magazine' in March, 1832.

Chambers was perhaps shrewder than Knight.  His journal was as good, though without illustrations;
but he contrived to mix up amusement with useful knowledge.  It may be a weakness, but the
public like to be entertained, even while they are feeding upon better food.  Hence Chambers
succeeded, while Knight failed.  The 'Penny Magazine' was discontinued in 1845, whereas 'Chambers's
Edinburgh Journal' has maintained its popularity to the present day.  Chambers, also, like
Knight, published an 'Encyclopaedia,' which secured a large circulation.  But he was not trammelled
by a Society, and the 'Encyclopaedia' has become a valuable property.

The publication of these various works would not have been possible without the aid of the
steam printing press.  When Mr. Edward Cowper was examined before a Committee of the House
of Commons, he said, "The ease with which the principles and illustrations of Art might be
diffused is, I think, so obvious that it is hardly necessary to say a word about it.  Here
you may see it exemplified in the 'Penny Magazine.'  Such works as this could not have existed
without the printing machine."  He was asked, "In fact, the mechanic and the peasant, in the
most remote parts of the country, have now an opportunity of seeing tolerably correct outlines
of form which they never could behold before?" To which he answered, "Exactly; and literally
at the price they used to give for a song."  "Is there not, therefore, a greater chance of
calling genius into activity?"  "Yes," he said, "not merely by books creating an artist here
and there, but by the general elevation of the taste of the public."

Mr. Clowes was always willing to promote deserving persons in his office.  One of these rose
from step to step, and eventually became one of the most prosperous publishers in London. 
He entered the service as an errand-boy, and got his meals in the kitchen.  Being fond of reading,
he petitioned Mrs. Clowes to let him sit somewhere, apart from the other servants, where he
might read his book in quiet.  Mrs. Clowes at length entreated her husband to take him into
the office, for "Johnnie Parker was such a good boy."  He consented, and the boy took his place
at a clerk's desk.  He was well-behaved, diligent, and attentive.  As he advanced in years,
his steady and steadfast conduct showed that he could be trusted.  Young fellows like this
always make their way in life; for character invariably tells, not only in securing respect,
but in commanding confidence.  Parker was promoted from one post to another, until he was at
length appointed overseer over the entire establishment.

A circumstance shortly after occurred which enabled Mr. Clowes to advance him, though greatly
to his own inconvenience, to another important post.  The Syndics of Cambridge were desirous
that Mr. Clowes should go down there to set their printing-office in order; they offered him
400L. a year if he would only appear occasionally, and see that the organisation was kept complete.
He declined, because the magnitude of his own operations had now become so great that they
required his unremitting attention. He, however strongly recommended Parker to the office,
though he could ill spare him.  But he would not stand in the young man's way, and he was appointed
accordingly.  He did his work most effectually at Cambridge, and put the University Press into
thorough working order.

As the 'Penny Magazine' and other publications of the Society of Useful Knowledge were now
making their appearance, the clergy became desirous of bringing out a religious publication
of a popular character, and they were in search for a publisher. Parker, who was well known
at Cambridge, was mentioned to the Bishop of London as the most likely person.  An introduction
took place, and after an hour's conversation with Parker, the Bishop went to his friends and
said, "This is the very man we want."  An offer was accordingly made to him to undertake the
publication of the 'Saturday Magazine' and the other publications of the Christian Knowledge
Society, which he accepted.  It is unnecessary to follow his fortunes.  His progress was steady;
he eventually became the publisher of 'Fraser's Magazine' and of the works of John Stuart Mill
and other well-known writers. She was violently angry and did not conceal her hatred for the
woman who had stolen her husband's affections. The Marquise was a trifle vulgar and common
in her manner of manifesting her displeasure, but the Marquis, a
very polite and affable gentleman, did not pay the slightest attention
to his wife's daily recriminations, but continued to amuse himself
with the charming Ninon.

Under such circumstances each was compelled to have a separate social circle, the Marquis entertaining
his friends with the adorable Ninon as the center of attraction, and Madame la Marquise doing
her best to offer counter attractions. Somehow, Ninon drew around her all the most desirable
partis among the flower of the nobility and wits, leaving the social circle managed by la Marquise
to languish for want of stamina. It was a constant source of annoyance to the Marquise to see
her rival's entertainments so much in repute and her own so poorly attended, and she was at
her wits' end to devise something that would give them éclat. One of her methods, and an impromptu
scene at one of her drawing-rooms, will serve to show the reason why Madame la Marquise was not
in good repute and why she could not attract the élite of Paris to
her entertainments.

La Marquise was a very vain, moreover, a very ignorant woman, a "nouvelle riche" in fact, or what
might be termed in modern parlance "shoddy," without tact, sense, or savoir faire. One day at a
grand reception, some of her guests desired to see her young son, of whom she was very proud,
and of whose talents and virtues she was always boasting. He was sent for and came into the
presence accompanied by his tutor, an Italian savant who never left
his side.

From praising his beauty of person, they passed to his mental qualities. Madame la Marquise,
enchanted at the caresses her son was receiving and aiming to create
a sensation by showing off his learning, took it into her head to
have his tutor put him through an examination in history.

"Interrogate my son upon some of his recent lessons in history," said she to the tutor, who
was not at all loth to show his own attainments by the brilliancy of his pupil.
"Come, now, Monsieur le Marquis," said the tutor with alacrity, "Quem
habuit successorem Belus rex Assiriorum?" (Whom did Belus, king of
the Assyrians, have for successor?)

It so happened that the tutor
had taught the boy to pronounce the Latin language after the Italian
fashion. 
Still, the idea had been born, and, like other inventions, became eventually developed into
a useful working machine.  Composing machines are now in use in many printing-offices, and
the present Clowes' firm possesses several of them.  Those in The Times newspaper office are
perhaps the most perfect of all.

Mr. Clowes was necessarily a man of great ability, industry, and energy.  Whatever could be
done in printing, that he would do. He would never admit the force of any difficulty that might
be suggested to his plans.  When he found a person ready to offer objections, he would say,
"Ah! I see you are a difficulty-maker: you will never do for me."

Mr. Clowes died in 1847, at the age of sixty-eight.  There still remain a few who can recall
to mind the giant figure, the kindly countenance, and the gentle bearing of this "Prince of
Printers," as he was styled by the members of his craft.  His life was full of hard and useful
work; and it will probably be admitted that, as the greatest multiplier of books in his day,
and as one of the most effective practical labourers for the diffusion of useful knowledge,
his name is entitled to be permanently associated, not only with the industrial, but also with
the intellectual development of our time.

CHAPTER IX.

CHARLES BIANCONI: A LESSON OF SELF-HELP IN IRELAND.

"I beg you to occupy yourself in collecting biographical notices respecting the Italians who
have honestly enriched themselves in other regions, particularly referring to the obstacles
of their previous life, and to the efforts and the means which they employed for vanquishing
them, as well as to the advantages which they secured for themselves, for the countries in
which they settled, and for the country to which they owed their birth."--GENERAL MENABREA,
Circular to Italian Consuls.

When Count Menabrea was Prime Minister of Italy, he caused a despatch to be prepared and issued
to Italian Consuls in all parts of the world, inviting them to collect and forward to him "biographical
notices respecting the Italians who have honourably advanced themselves in foreign countries."

His object, in issuing the despatch, was to collect information as to the lives of his compatriots
living abroad, in order to bring out a book similar to 'Self-help,' the examples cited in which
were to be drawn exclusively from the lives of Italian citizens.  Such a work, he intimated,
"if it were once circulated among the masses, could not fail to excite their emulation and
encourage them to follow the examples therein set forth," while "in the course of time it might
exercise a powerful influence on the increased greatness of our country."

We are informed by Count Menabrea that, although no special work has been published from the
biographical notices collected in answer to his despatch, yet that the Volere e Potere ('Will
is Power') of Professor Lessona, issued a few years ago, sufficiently answers the purpose which
he contemplated, and furnishes many examples of the patient industry and untiring perseverance
of Italians in all parts of the world.  Many important illustrations of life and character
are necessarily omitted from Professor Lessona's interesting work.  Among these may be mentioned
the subject of the following pages,--a distinguished Italian who entirely corresponds to Count
Menabrea's description--one who, in the face of the greatest difficulties, raised himself to
an eminent public position, at the same time that he conferred the greatest benefits upon the
country in which he settled and carried on his industrial operations.  We mean Charles Bianconi,
and his establishment of the great system of car communication through out Ireland.[1]

Charles Bianconi was born in 1786, at the village of Tregolo, situated in the Lombard Highlands
of La Brianza, about ten miles from Como.  The last elevations of the Alps disappear in the
district; and the great plain of Lombardy extends towards the south.  The region is known for
its richness and beauty; the inhabitants being celebrated for the cultivation of the mulberry
and the rearing of the silkworm, the finest silk in Lombardy being produced in the neighbourhood.
Indeed, Bianconi's family, like most of the villagers, maintained themselves by the silk culture.

Charles had three brothers and one sister.  When of a sufficient age, he was sent to school.
The Abbe Radicali had turned out some good scholars; but with Charles Bianconi his failure
was complete.  The new pupil proved a tremendous dunce.  He was very wild, very bold, and very
plucky; but he learned next to nothing.

Learning took as little effect upon him as pouring water upon a duck's back.  Accordingly,
when he left school at the age of sixteen, he was almost as ignorant as when he had entered
it; and a great deal more wilful.

Young Bianconi had now arrived at the age at which he was expected to do something for his
own maintenance.  His father wished to throw him upon his own resources; and as he would soon
be subject to the conscription, he thought of sending him to some foreign country in order
to avoid the forced service.  Young fellows, who had any love of labour or promptings of independence
in them, were then accustomed to leave home and carry on their occupations abroad.  It was
a common practice for workmen in the neighbourhood of Como to emigrate to England and carry
on various trades; more particularly the manufacture and sale of barometers, looking-glasses,
images, prints, pictures, and other articles.

Accordingly, Bianconi's father arranged with one Andrea Faroni to take the young man to England
and instruct him in the trade of print-selling.  Bianconi was to be Faroni's apprentice for
eighteen months; and in the event of his not liking the occupation, he was to be placed under
the care of Colnaghi, a friend of his father's, who was then making considerable progress as
a print-seller in London; and who afterwards succeeded in achieving a considerable fortune
and reputation.

Bianconi made his preparations for leaving home.  A little festive entertainment was given
at a little inn in Como, at which the whole family were present.  It was a sad thing for Bianconi's
mother to take leave of her boy, wild though he was.  On the occasion of this parting ceremony,
she fainted outright, at which the young fellow thought that things were assuming a rather
serious aspect.  As he finally left the family home at Tregolo, the last words his mother said
to him were these--words which he never forgot: "When you remember me, think of me as waiting
at this window, watching for your return."

Besides Charles Bianconi, Faroni took three other boys under his charge.  One was the son of
a small village innkeeper, another the son of a tailor, and the third the son of a flax-dealer.
This party, under charge of the Padre, ascended the Alps by the Val San Giacomo road. From
the summit of the pass they saw the plains of Lombardy stretching away in the blue distance.
They soon crossed the Swiss frontier, and then Bianconi found himself finally separated from
home.  He now felt, that without further help from friends or relatives, he had his own way
to make in the world.

The party of travellers duly reached England; but Faroni, without stopping in London, took
them over to Ireland at once.  They reached Dublin in the summer of 1802, and lodged in Temple
Bar, near Essex Bridge.  It was some little time before Faroni could send out the boys to sell
pictures.  First he had the leaden frames to cast; then they had to be trimmed and coloured;
and then the pictures--mostly of sacred subjects, or of public characters--had to be mounted.
The flowers; which were of wax, had also to be prepared and finished, ready for sale to the
passers-by.

When Bianconi went into the streets of Dublin to sell his mounted prints, he could not speak
a word of English.  He could only say, "Buy, buy!"  Everybody spoke to him an unknown tongue.
When asked the price, he could only indicate by his fingers the number of pence he wanted for
his goods.  At length he learned a little English,--at least sufficient "for the road;" and
then he was sent into the country to sell his merchandize.  He was despatched every Monday
morning with about forty shillings' worth of stock, and ordered to return home on Saturdays,
or as much sooner as he liked, if he had sold all the pictures.  The only money his master
allowed him at starting was fourpence.  When Bianconi remonstrated at the smallness of the
amount, Faroni answered, "While you have goods you have money; make haste to sell your goods!"

During his apprenticeship, Bianconi learnt much of the country through which he travelled.
He was constantly making acquaintances with new people, and visiting new places.  At Waterford
he did a good trade in small prints.  Besides the Scripture pieces, he sold portraits of the
Royal Family, as well as of Bonaparte and his most distinguished generals.  "Bony" was the
dread of all magistrates, especially in Ireland.  At Passage, near Waterford, Bianconi was
arrested for having sold a leaden framed picture of the famous French Emperor.  He was thrown
into a cold guard-room, and spent the night there without bed, or fire, or food.  Next morning
he was discharged by the magistrate, but cautioned that he must not sell any more of such pictures.

Many things struck Bianconi in making his first journeys through Ireland.  He was astonished
at the dram-drinking of the men, and the pipe-smoking of the women.  The violent faction-fights
which took place at the fairs which he frequented, were of a kind which he had never before
observed among the pacific people of North Italy.  These faction-fights were the result, partly
of dram-drinking, and partly of the fighting mania which then prevailed in Ireland.  There
were also numbers of crippled and deformed beggars in every town,--quarrelling and fighting
in the streets,--rows and drinkings at wakes,--gambling, duelling, and riotous living amongst
all classes of the people,--things which could not but strike any ordinary observer at the
time, but which have now, for the most part, happily passed away.

At the end of eighteen months, Bianconi's apprenticeship was out; and Faroni then offered to
take him back to his father, in compliance with the original understanding.  But Bianconi had
no wish to return to Italy.  Faroni then made over to him the money he had retained on his
account, and Bianconi set up business for himself.  He was now about eighteen years old; he
was strong and healthy, and able to walk with a heavy load on his back from twenty to thirty
miles a day.  He bought a large case, filled it with coloured prints and other articles, and
started from Dublin on a tour through the south of Ireland.  He succeeded, like most persons
who labour diligently.  The curly-haired Italian lad became a general favourite.  He took his
native politeness with him  everywhere; and made many friends among his various customers throughout
the country.

Bianconi used to say that it was about this time when he was carrying his heavy case upon his
back, weighing at least a hundred pounds--that the idea began to strike him, of some cheap
method of conveyance being established for the accommodation of the poorer classes in Ireland.
As he dismantled himself of his case of pictures, and sat wearied and resting on the milestones
along the road, he puzzled his mind with the thought, "Why should poor people walk and toil,
and rich people ride and take their ease?  Could not some method be devised by which poor people
also might have the opportunity of travelling comfortably?"

It will thus be seen that Bianconi was already beginning to think about the matter.  When asked,
not long before his death, how it was that he had first thought of starting his extensive Car
establishment, he answered, "It grew out of my back!"  It was the hundred weight of pictures
on his dorsal muscles that stimulated his thinking faculties. But the time for starting his
great experiment had not yet arrived.

Bianconi wandered about from town to town for nearly two years. The picture-case became heavier
than ever.  For a time he replaced it with a portfolio of unframed prints.  Then he became
tired of the wandering life, and in 1806 settled down at Carrick-on-Suir as a print-seller
and carver and gilder.  He supplied himself with gold-leaf from Waterford, to which town he
used to proceed by Tom Morrissey's boat.  Although the distance by road between the towns was
only twelve miles, it was about twenty-four by water, in consequence of the windings of the
river Suir. Besides, the boat could only go when the state of the tide permitted. Time was
of little consequence; and it often took half a day to make the journey.  In the course of
one of his voyages, Bianconi got himself so thoroughly soaked by rain and mud that he caught
a severe cold, which ran into pleurisy, and laid him up for about two months.  He was carefully
attended to by a good, kind physician, Dr. White, who would not take a penny for his medicine
and nursing.

Business did not prove very prosperous at Carrick-on-suir; the town was small, and the trade
was not very brisk.  Accordingly, Bianconi resolved, after a year's ineffectual trial, to remove
to Waterford, a more thriving centre of operations.  He was now twenty-one years old. He began
again as a carver and gilder; and as business flowed in upon him, he worked very hard, sometimes
from six in the morning until two hours after midnight.  As usual, he made many friends.  Among
the best of them was Edward Rice, the founder of the "Christian Brothers" in Ireland.  Edward
Rice was a true benefactor to his country.  He devoted himself to the work of education, long
before the National Schools were established; investing the whole of his means in the foundation
and management of this noble institution.

Mr. Rice's advice and instruction set and kept Bianconi in the right road.  He helped the young
foreigner to learn English. Bianconi was no longer a dunce, as he had been at school; but a
keen, active, enterprising fellow, eager to make his way in the world.  Mr. Rice encouraged
him to be sedulous and industrious, urged him to carefulness and sobriety, and strengthened
his religions impressions.  The help and friendship of this good man, operating upon the mind
and soul of a young man, whose habits of conduct and whose moral and religious character were
only in course of formation, could not fail to exercise, as Bianconi always acknowledged they
did, a most powerful influence upon the whole of his after life.

Although "three removes" are said to be "as bad as a fire," Bianconi, after remaining about
two years at Waterford, made a third removal in 1809, to Clonmel, in the county of Tipperary.
Clonmel is the centre of a large corn trade, and is in water communication, by the Suir, with
Carrick and Waterford. Bianconi, therefore, merely extended his connection; and still continued
his dealings with his customers in the other towns.  He made himself more proficient in the
mechanical part of his business; and aimed at being the first carver and gilder in the trade.
Besides, he had always an eye open for new business.  At that time, when the war was raging
with France, gold was at a premium.  The guinea was worth about twenty-six or twenty-seven
shillings.  Bianconi therefore began to buy up the hoarded-up guineas of the peasantry.  The
loyalists became alarmed at his proceedings, and began to circulate the report that Bianconi,
the foreigner, was buying up bullion to send secretly to Bonaparte! The country people, however,
parted with their guineas readily; for they had no particular hatred of "Bony," but rather
admired him.

Bianconi's conduct was of course quite loyal in the matter; he merely bought the guineas as
a matter of business, and sold them at a profit to the bankers.

The country people had a difficulty in pronouncing his name.  His shop was at the corner of
Johnson Street, and instead of Bianconi, he came to be called "Bian of the Corner."  He was
afterwards known as "Bian."

Bianconi soon became well known after his business was established.  He became a proficient
in the carving and gilding line, and was looked upon as a thriving man.  He began to employ
assistants in his trade, and had three German gilders at work. While they were working in the
shop he would travel about the country, taking orders and delivering goods--sometimes walking
and sometimes driving.

He still retained a little of his old friskiness and spirit of mischief.  He was once driving
a car from Clonmel to Thurles; he had with him a large looking-glass with a gilt frame, on
which about a fortnight's labour had been bestowed.  In a fit of exuberant humour he began
to tickle the horse under his tail with a straw!  In an instant the animal reared and plunged,
and then set off at a gallop down hill. The result was, that the car was dashed to bits and
the looking-glass broken into a thousand atoms!

On another occasion, a man was carrying to Cashel on his back one of Bianconi's large looking-glasses.
An old woman by the wayside, seeing the odd-looking, unwieldy package, asked what it was; on
which Bianconi, who was close behind the man carrying the glass, answered that it was "the
Repeal of the Union!"  The old woman's delight was unbounded!  She knelt down on her knees
in the middle of the road, as if it had been a picture of the Madonna, and thanked God for
having preserved her in her old age to see the Repeal of the Union!

But this little waywardness did not last long.  Bianconi's wild oats were soon all sown.  He
was careful and frugal.  As he afterwards used to say, "When I was earning a shilling a day
at Clonmel, I lived upon eightpence."  He even took lodgers, to relieve him of the charge of
his household expenses.  But as his means grew, he was soon able to have a conveyance of his
own.  He first started a yellow gig, in which he drove about from place to place, and was everywhere
treated with kindness and hospitality. He was now regarded as "respectable," and as a person
worthy to hold some local office.  He was elected to a Society for visiting the Sick Poor,
and became a Member of the House of Industry.  He might have gone on in the same business,
winning his way to the Mayoralty of Clonmel, which he afterwards held; but that the old idea,
which had first sprung up in his mind while resting wearily on the milestones along the road,
with his heavy case of pictures by his side, again laid hold of him, and he determined now
to try whether his plan could not be carried into effect.

He had often lamented the fatigue that poor people had to undergo in travelling with burdens
from place to place upon foot, and wondered whether some means might not be devised for alleviating
their sufferings.  Other people would have suggested "the Government!"  Why should not the
Government give us this, that, and the other,--give us roads, harbours, carriages, boats, nets,
and so on.  This, of course, would have been a mistaken idea; for where people are too much
helped, they invariably lose the beneficent practice of helping themselves. Charles Bianconi
had never been helped, except by advice and friendship.  He had helped himself throughout;
and now he would try to help others.

The facts were patent to everybody.  There was not an Irishman who did not know the difficulty
of getting from one town to another.  There were roads between them, but no conveyances. There
was an abundance of horses in the country, for at the close of the war an unusual number of
horses, bred for the army, were thrown upon the market.  Then a tax had been levied upon carriages,
which sent a large number of jaunting-cars out of employment.

The roads of Ireland were on the whole good, being at that time quite equal, if not superior,
to most of those in England.  The facts of the abundant horses, the good roads, the number
of unemployed outside cars, were generally known; but until Bianconi took the enterprise in
hand, there was no person of thought, or spirit, or capital in the country, who put these three
things together horses, roads, and cars and dreamt of remedying the great public inconvenience.

It was left for our young Italian carver and gilder, a struggling man of small capital, to
take up the enterprise, and show what could be done by prudent action and persevering energy.
Though the car system originally "grew out of his back," Bianconi had long been turning the
subject over in his mind.  His idea was, that we should never despise small interests, nor
neglect the wants of poor people.  He saw the mail-coaches supplying the requirements of the
rich, and enabling them to travel rapidly from place to place.  "Then," said he to himself,
"would it not be possible for me to make an ordinary two-wheeled car pay, by running as regularly
for the accommodation of poor districts and poor people?"

When Mr. Wallace, chairman of the Select Committee on Postage, in 1838, asked Mr. Bianconi,
"What induced you to commence the car establishment?" his answer was, "I did so from what I
saw, after coming to this country, of the necessity for such cars, inasmuch as there was no
middle mode of conveyance, nothing to fill up the vacuum that existed between those who were
obliged to walk and those who posted or rode.  My want of knowledge of the language gave me
plenty of time for deliberation, and in proportion as I grew up with the knowledge of the language
and the localities, this vacuum pressed very heavily upon my mind, till at last I hit upon
the idea of running jaunting-cars, and for that purpose I commenced running one between Clonmel
and Cahir."[2]

What a happy thing it was for Bianconi and Ireland that he could not speak with facility,--that
he did not know the language or the manners of the country!  In his case silence was "golden."
Had he been able to talk like the people about him, he might have said much and done little,--attempted
nothing and consequently achieved nothing.  He might have got up a meeting and petitioned Parliament
to provide the cars, and subvention the car system; or he might have gone amongst his personal
friends, asked them to help him, and failing their help, given up his idea in despair, and
sat down grumbling at the people and the Government.

But instead of talking, he proceeded to doing, thereby illustrating Lessona's maxim of Volere
e potere.  After thinking the subject fully over, he trusted to self-help.  He found that with
his own means, carefully saved, he could make a beginning; and the beginning once made, included
the successful ending.

The beginning, it is true, was very small.  It was only an ordinary jaunting-car, drawn by
a single horse, capable of accommodating six persons.  The first car ran between Clonmel and
Cahir, a distance of about twelve miles, on the 5th of July, 1815--a memorable day for Bianconi
and Ireland.  Up to that time the public accommodation for passengers was confined to a few
mail and day coaches on the great lines of road, the fares by which were very high, and quite
beyond the reach of the poorer or middle-class people.

People did not know what to make of Bianconi's car when it first started. That mare'll settle some
of ye, if you make so free with her! she's not a bit too chary of her hind feet. Get out of
that, I tell you;" and he lightly struck with the point of his whip the boy who had Lambert Brown's
horse.

"Ah, Mr Bingham," said, the boy, pretending to rub the part very hard, "you owe me one for that,
anyhow, and it's you are the good mark for it, God bless you."

"Faix,"
said another, "one blow from your honour is worth two promises from
Lambert Brown, any way."  People preferred trudging on foot, and saved their money, which was more valuable
to them than their time.  The car sometimes ran for weeks without a passenger.  Another man
would have given up the enterprise in despair.  But this was not the way with Bianconi.  He
was a man of tenacity and perseverance. What should he do but start an opposition car?   Nobody
knew of it but himself; not even the driver of the opposition car.  However, the rival car
was started.  The races between the car-drivers, the free lifts occasionally given to passengers,
the cheapness of the fare, and the excitement of the contest, attracted the attention of the
public.  The people took sides, and before long both cars came in full.  Fortunately the "great
big yallah horse" of the opposition car broke down, and Bianconi had all the trade to himself.

The people became accustomed to travelling.  They might still walk to Cahir; but going by car
saved their legs, saved their brains, and saved their time.  They might go to Cahir market,
do their business there, and be comfortably back within the day. Bianconi then thought of extending
the car to Tipperary and Limerick.  In the course of the same year, 1815, he started another
car between Clonmel, Cashel, and Thurles.  Thus all the principal towns of Tipperary were,
in the first year of the undertaking, connected together by car, besides being also connected
with Limerick.

It was easy to understand the convenience of the car system to business men, farmers, and even
peasants.  Before their establishment, it took a man a whole day to walk from Thurles to Clonmel,
the second day to do his business, and the third to walk back again; whereas he could, in one
day, travel backwards and forwards between the two towns, and have five or six intermediate
hours for the purpose of doing his business. Thus two clear days could be saved.

Still carrying out his scheme, Bianconi, in the following year (1816), put on a car from Clonmel
to Waterford.  Before that time there was no car accommodation between Clonmel and Carrick-on-Suir,
about half-way to Waterford; but there was an accommodation by boat between Carrick and Waterford.
The distance between the two latter places was, by road, twelve miles, and by the river Suir
twenty-four miles.  Tom Morrissey's boat plied two days a week; it carried from eight to ten
passengers at 6 1/2d. of the then currency; it did the voyage in from four to five hours, and
besides had to wait for the tide to float it up and down the river.  When Bianconi's car was
put on, it did the distance daily and regularly in two hours, at a fare of two shillings.

The people soon got accustomed to the convenience of the cars. They also learned from them
the uses of punctuality and the value of time. They liked the open-air travelling and the sidelong
motion.  The new cars were also safe and well-appointed.  They were drawn by good horses and
driven by good coachmen. Jaunting-car travelling had before been rather unsafe.  The country
cars were of a ramshackle order, and the drivers were often reckless.  "Will I pay the pike,
or drive at it, plaise your honour?" said a driver to his passenger on approaching a turnpike-gate. I
have blasphemed love; I have degraded it by calling it a "necessity?" You have such noble thoughts,
Marquis. What is passing in your mind is proof of it.

You can not realize, or imagine anything less than the pure and delicate
sentiments which fill your heart. 
The gentleman gave him another shilling.  "And now what do you mean by saying, 'if ye knew
but all?'"  "That I druv yer honor the last three miles widout a linch-pin!"

Bianconi, to make sure of the soundness and safety of his cars, set up a workshop to build
them for himself.  He could thus depend upon their soundness, down even to the linch-pin itself.
He kept on his carving and gilding shop until his car business had increased so much that it
required the whole of his time and attention; and then he gave it up. In fact, when he was
able to run a car from Clonmel to Waterford--a distance of thirty-two miles--at a fare of three-and-sixpence,
his eventual triumph was secure.

He made Waterford one of the centres of his operations, as he had already made Clonmel.  In
1818 he established a car between Waterford and Ross, in the following year a car between Waterford
and Wexford, and another between Waterford and Enniscorthy.  A few years later he established
other cars between Waterford and Kilkenny, and Waterford and Dungarvan.  From these furthest
points, again, other cars were established in communication with them, carrying the line further
north, east, and west.  So much had the travelling between Clonmel and Waterford increased,
that in a few years (instead of the eight or ten passengers conveyed by Tom Morrissey's boat
on the Suir) there was horse and car power capable of conveying a hundred passengers daily
between the two places.

