When H. G. Stordock became warden, I was made librarian, while Jim carried the mail and Bob
was clerk to the steward where we remained during the administration of Wardens Randall and
Garvin, except Bob, who wasted away from consumption and died in September, 1889.

When Warden Wolfer came to the prison, he put Jim in charge of the mail and the library, and
I was set at work in the laundry temporarily while the new hospital building was being made
ready.  I was then made head nurse in the hospital, and remained there until the day we were
paroled, Warden Reeve, who was there for two years under the administration of Gov. Lind, leaving
us there.

Every one of these wardens was our friend, and the deputy wardens, too. Abe Hall, Will Reed,
A. D. Westby, Sam A. Langum, T. W. Alexander, and Jack Glennon were all partisans of ours.
If any reader misses one name from this list of deputy wardens, there is nothing I have to
say for or against him.

Dr. Pratt, who was prison physician when we went to Stillwater, Dr. T. C. Clark, who was his
assistant, and Dr. B. J. Merrill, who has been prison physician since, have been staunch partisans
of the Younger boys in the efforts of our friends to secure our pardon.  And the young doctors
with whom I was thrown in close contact during their service as assistant prison physicians,
Drs. Sidney Boleyn, Gustavus A. Newman, Dan Beebe, A. E. Hedbeck, Morrill Withrow, and Jenner
Chance, have been most earnest in their championship of our cause.

The stewards, too, Benner, and during the Reeve regime, Smithton, which whom as head nurse
I was thrown in direct contact, never had any difficulty with me, although Benner with a twinkle
in his eye, would say to me:

“Cole, I believe you come and get peaches for your patients up there long after they are dead.”

The invalids in that hospital always got the delicacies they wanted, subject to the physician’s
permission, if what they wanted was to be found anywhere in Stillwater or in St. Paul.  The
prison hospital building is not suitable for such use, and a new hospital building is needed,
but no fault can be found with the way invalid prisoners are cared for at Stillwater.

When there is added a new hospital building, and the present hospital is transformed into an
insane ward, Stillwater will indeed be a model prison.

Words fail me when I seek to express my gratitude to the host of friends who were glad to plead
our cause during the later years of our confinement at Stillwater, and especially to Warden
Henry Wolfer and his family, every one of whom was a true friend to Jim and myself.

33. THE STAR OF HOPE

In spite of the popular indignation our crime had justly caused, from the day the iron gates
closed behind us in 1876, there were always friends who hoped and planned for our ultimate
release.  Some of these were misguided, and did us more harm than good.

Among these were two former guerrillas, who committed small crimes that they might be sent
to prison and there plot with us for our escape.  One of them was only sent to the county jail,
and the other served a year in Stillwater prison without ever seeing us.

Well meaning, too, but unfortunate, was the declaration of Missouri friends in Minnesota that
they could raise $100,000 to get us out of Stillwater.

But as the years went by, the popular feeling against us not only subsided, but our absolute
submission to the minutest details of prison discipline won for us the consideration, I might
even say the high esteem of the prison officials who came in contact with us, and as the Northfield
tragedy became more and more remote, those who favored our pardon became more numerous, and
yearly numbered in their ranks more and more of the influential people of the state, who believed
that our crime had been avenged, and that Jim and I, the only survivors of the tragedy, would
be worthy citizens if restored to freedom.

My Missouri friends are surprised to find that I prize friendships in Minnesota, a state where
I found so much trouble, but in spite of Northfield, and all its tragic memories, I have in
Minnesota some of the best friends a man ever had on earth.

Every governor of Minnesota from as early as 1889 down to 1899 was petitioned for our pardon,
but not one of them was satisfied of the advisability of a full pardon, and the parole system
provided by the enlightened humanitarianism of the state for other convicts did not apply to
lifers.

Under this system a convict whose prison record is good may be paroled on his good behavior
after serving half of the term for which he was sentenced.

The reiterated requests for our pardon, coming from men the governors had confidence in, urging
them to a pardon they were reluctant to grant, led to a feeling, which found expression finally
in official circles, that the responsibility of the pardoning power should be divided by the
creation of a board of pardons as existed in some other states.

It was at first proposed that the board should consist of the governor, attorney general and
the warden of the prison, but before the bill passed, Senator Allen J. Greer secured the substitution
for the chief justice for the warden, boasting, when the amendment was made:

“That ties the Youngers up for as long as Chief Justice Start lives.”

A unanimous vote of the board was required to grant a pardon, and as Chief Justice Start had
lived in the vicinity of Northfield at the time of the raid in 1876, many people believed that
he would never consent to our pardon.

In the legislature of 1889, our friends endeavored to have the parole system extended to life
prisoners, and secured the introduction in the legislature of a bill to provide that life prisoners
might be paroled when they had served such a period as would have entitled them to their release
had they been sentenced to imprisonment for 35 years.  The bill was drawn by George M. Bennett
of Minneapolis, who had taken a great deal of interest in our case, and was introduced in the
senate by Senator George P. Wilson, of Minneapolis.  As the good time allowances on a 35-year
sentence would cut it to between 23 and 24 years, we could have been paroled in a few months
had this bill passed.  Although there was one other inmate of the prison who might have come
under its provisions, it was generally known as the “Youngers’ parole bill” and the feeling
against it was largely identified with the feeling against us. I am told, however, since my
release, that it would have passed at that session had it not been for the cry of “money” that
was used.  There never was a dollar used in Minnesota to secure our pardon, and before our
release we had some of the best men and women in the state working in our behalf, without money
and without price.  But this outcry defeated the bill of 1899.

Still it did not discourage our friends on the outside.

At the next session of the legislature, 1901, there was finally passed the bill which permitted
our conditional parole, the pardon board not being ready to grant us our full freedom.  This
bill provided for the parole of any life convict who had been confined for twenty years, on
the unanimous consent of the board of pardons.

The bill was introduced in the house by Representative P. C. Deming of Minneapolis, and among
those who worked for its passage was Representative Jay W. Phillips, who, as a boy, had been
driven from the streets the day we entered Northfield.  Senator Wilson, who had introduced
the bill which failed in 1899, was again a staunch supporter and led the fight for us in the
senate.

The board of prison managers promptly granted the parole the principal conditions of which
were as follows:

“He shall not exhibit himself in any dime museum, circus theater, opera house, or any other
place of public amusement or assembly where a charge is made for admission.”

“He shall on the twentieth day of each month write the warden of the state prison a report
of himself, stating whether he had been constantly at work during the last month, and if not,
why not; how much he has earned, and how much he has expended, together with a general statement
as to his surroundings and prospects, which must be indorsed by his employer.”

“He shall in all respects conduct himself honestly, avoid evil associations, obey the law,
and abstain from the use of intoxicating liquors.”

“He shall not go outside the state of Minnesota.”

The parole was unanimously concurred in by Messrs. B. F. Nelson, F. W. Temple, A. C. Weiss,
E. W. Wing, and R. H. Bronson, of the prison board and urged by Warden Henry Wolfer.

The board of pardons, in indorsing our parole, said:

“We are satisfied that the petitioners in this case have by exceptionally good conduct in prison
for a quarter of a century, and the evidence they have given of sincere reformation, earned
the right to a parole, if any life prisoner can do so.”

And July 14, 1901, Jim and I went out into the world for the first time in within a few months
of twenty-five years.

Rip Van Winkle himself was not so long away.  St. Paul and Minneapolis which, when we were
there in 1876, had less than 75,000 people all told, had grown to cities within whose limits
were over 350,000. A dozen railroads ended in one or the other of these centers of business
that we had known as little better than frontier towns.

34. ON PAROLE

Our first positions after our release from prison were in the employ of the P. N. Peterson
Granite company, of St. Paul and Stillwater, Mr. Peterson having known us since early in our
prison life.

We were to receive $60 a month each and expenses.  Jim was to take care of some office work,
and take orders in the immediate vicinity of Stillwater. He worked mostly through Washington
county, and with a horse and buggy, but had not been at work more than two months when the
sudden starting of the horse as he was getting out of the buggy started anew his intermittent
trouble with the bullet that lodged under his spine, and he was compelled to find other employment.

He then went into the cigar department of the Andrew Schoch grocery company in St. Paul, and
after several months there was employed by Maj. Elwin, of the Elwin cigar company in Minneapolis,
where he remained until a few days before his death.

I traveled for the Peterson company until Nov., 1901, covering nearly all of Minnesota.  But
the change from the regularity of prison hours to the irregular hours, meals and various changes
to which the drummer is subject was too much for me, and I returned to St. Paul to enter the
employ of Edward J. and Hubert C. Schurmeier, who had been strenuous workers for my pardon,
and James Nugent at the Interstate institute for the cure of the liquor and morphine habits,
on Rosabel street in St. Paul.

There I remained several months, and then was employed by John J. O’Connor, chief of police
at St. Paul, in connection with private interests to which he could not give his personal attention.

35. JIM GIVES IT UP

The bullet wound which Jim received in our last fight near Madelia, shattering his upper jaw,
and remaining imbedded near his brain, until it was removed by Dr. T. G. Clark after we were
in the prison at Stillwater, affected Jim at intervals during all his prison life, and he would
have periodical spells of depression, during which he would give up all hope, and his gloomy
spirits would repel the sympathy of those who were disposed to cheer him up.

I remember that at the time of the fire in 1884, he was in one of these fits of depression,
but the excitement of that time buoyed him up, and he was himself again for a considerable period.

After our release from prison, Jim’s precarious health and his inability to rejoin his family
in Missouri combined to make these fits of depression more frequent.  While he was working
for Maj. Elwin, instead of putting in his afternoons, which were free, among men, or enjoying
the sunshine and air which had so long been out of our reach, he would go to his room and revel
in socialistic literature, which only tended to overload a mind already surcharged with troubles.
For my part, I tried to get into the world again, to live down the past, and I could and did
enjoy the theaters, although Jim declared he would never set foot in one until he could go
a free man.  In July, he and some of his friends petitioned the board of pardons for a full
pardon, but the board was of the opinion that it was too early to consider that, believing
that we should be kept on our good behavior for a time.

That resulted in another fit of depression for Jim.  He took it to heart, and never regained
his cheerful mood, for when he was up, he was away up, and when down, away down.  There was
no half way place with Jim.

In October, 1902, he left Maj. Elwin expecting to go to St. Paul to work for Yerxa Bros.

But Sunday afternoon, Oct. 19, his dead body was found in a room at the hotel Reardon, Seventh
and Minnesota streets, St. Paul, where he had been staying since leaving Minneapolis.  His
trunk had been sent to friends, and there was every indication that he had carefully planned
his death by his own hand.  A bullet hole above his right ear and a pistol clutched in his
hand, told the story of suicide.  Dr. J. M. Finnell, who as acting coroner, was summoned, decided
that he must have shot himself early in the forenoon, although neighbors in the block had not
been disturbed by the shot.

I was sick in bed at the time and my physician, Dr. J. J. Platt, forbade my attempting to do
anything in the premises, but Jim’s body was taken in charge in my behalf by Chief of Police
O’Connor, and borne to Lee’s Summit, Mo., our old Jackson county home, where it was laid to rest.

The pallbearers were G. W. Wigginton, O. H. Lewis, H. H. McDowell, Sim Whitsett, William Gregg
and William Lewis, all old neighbors or comrades during the war.

Some people obtained the idea that it was Jim’s wish that he be cremated, but this idea grew
out of a letter he left showing his gloomy condition. It “roasted” Gov. Van Sant and Warden
Wolfer and the board of pardons, declared for socialism, and urged Bryan to come out for it.

On the outside of the envelope was written:

“All relations stay away from me.  No crocodile tears wanted.  Reporters, be my friends.  Burn
me up.—Jim Younger.”

I think the “burn me up” was an admonition to the reporters.  Jim always felt that the papers
had been bitter to us, although some of them had been staunch supporters of the proposal for
our parole. The day we were paroled, Jim said to a visiting newspaper woman:

“When we get out we would like to be left in peace.  We don’t want to be stared at and we don’t
want to be interviewed.  For twenty-five years now, we have been summoned here to have men
stare at us and question us and then go back and write up what they think and believe.  It’s
hard to have people write things about you that are not true and put words in your mouth that
you never uttered.”

It was to such newspaper men, I think, that Jim sent his message “Burn me up.”

36. FREE AGAIN

Jim’s tragic death brought the Youngers again into the public eye, and aside from any effort
on my part, there was a renewed discussion of the advisability of extending a full pardon to
me, the lone survivor of the band who had invaded Northfield.

At the next quarterly meeting of the board, which was held in January of this year, the matter
was taken up, and the board considered my application, which was for an absolute or a conditional
pardon as the board might see fit.

It was urged on my behalf that the limitation clause confining me to Minnesota was one that
it might be well to do away with, as it prevented me from joining my friends and relatives
in Missouri, and kept me in a state, where a great many people did not really care for my society,
although so many were very kind and cordial to me.

Against this it was urged that while I was in the state, the board could
exercise a supervision of my employment and movements which it might be
judicious to continue.
                        Chas. M. Start, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
                                     Wallace B. Douglas, Attorney-General. THE WILD WEST

The “Cole Younger and Frank James’ Historical Wild West Show” is an effort on the part of two
men whose exploits have been more wildly exaggerated, perhaps, than those of any other men
living, to make an honest living and demonstrate to the people of America that they are not
as black as they have been painted.

There will be nothing in the Wild West show to which any exception can be taken, and it is
my purpose, as a part owner in the show, and I have put in the contracts with my partners,
that no crookedness nor rowdyism will be permitted by attaches of the I show.  We will assist
the local authorities, too, in ridding the show of the sort of camp-followers who frequently
make traveling shows the scapegoat for their misdoings.  We propose to have our show efficiently
and honestly policed, to give the people the worth of their money, and to give an entertainment
that will show the frontiersman of my early manhood as he was.

I had hoped if my pardon had been made unconditional, to earn a livelihood on the lecture platform.
I had prepared a lecture which I do think would not have harmed any one, while it might have
impressed a valuable lesson on those who took it to heart.

I give it herewith under the title, “What My Life Has Taught Me.”

38. WHAT MY LIFE HAS TAUGHT ME

Looking back through the dimly lighted corridors of the past, down the long vista of time,
a time when I feared not the face of mortal man, nor battalions of men, when backed by my old
comrades in arms, it may seem inconsistent to say that I appear before you with a timidity
born of cowardice, but perhaps you will understand better than I can tell you that twenty-five
years in a prison cell fetters a man’s intellect as well as his body.  Therefore I disclaim
any pretensions to literary merit, and trust that my sincerity of purpose will compensate for
my lack of eloquence; and, too, I am not so sure that I care for that kind of oratory that
leaves the points to guess at, but rather the simple language of the soul that needs no interpreter.

Let me say, ladies and gentlemen, that the farthest thought from my mind is that of posing
as a character.  I do not desire to stand upon the basis of the notoriety which the past record
of my life may have earned for me.

Those of you who have been drawn here by mere curiosity to see a character or a man, who by
the events of his life has gained somewhat of notoriety, will miss the real object of this
lecture and the occasion which brings us together.  My soul’s desire is to benefit you by recounting
some of the important lessons which my life has taught me.

Life is too short to make any other use of it.  Besides, I owe too much to my fellow men, to
my opportunities, to my country, to my God and to myself, to make any other use of the present
occasion.

