The joke of these highwayman friends of ours was mainly a joke upon themselves; for they had
waited for me on the cold hill-top two full hours before I came, and there was very little
fun in that; they were so chilled that it took them a couple of weeks to get warm again.  Moreover,
I never had a thought that they would kill me to get money which it was so perfectly easy to
get without any such folly, and so they did not really frighten me bad enough to make their
enjoyment worth the trouble they had taken.  I was only afraid that their weapons would go
off accidentally.  Their very numbers inspired me with confidence that no blood would be intentionally
spilled.  They were not smart; they ought to have sent only one highwayman, with a double-barrelled
shot gun, if they desired to see the author of this volume climb a tree.

However, I suppose that in the long run I got the largest share of the joke at last; and in
a shape not foreseen by the highwaymen; for the chilly exposure on the "divide" while I was
in a perspiration gave me a cold which developed itself into a troublesome disease and kept
my hands idle some three months, besides costing me quite a sum in doctor's bills. Since then
I play no practical jokes on people and generally lose my temper when one is played upon me.

When I returned to San Francisco I projected a pleasure journey to Japan and thence westward
around the world; but a desire to see home again changed my mind, and I took a berth in the
steamship, bade good-bye to the friendliest land and livest, heartiest community on our continent,
and came by the way of the Isthmus to New York--a trip that was not much of a pic-nic excursion,
for the cholera broke out among us on the passage and we buried two or three bodies at sea
every day.  I found home a dreary place after my long absence; for half the children I had
known were now wearing whiskers or waterfalls, and few of the grown people I had been acquainted
with remained at their hearthstones prosperous and happy--some of them had wandered to other
scenes, some were in jail, and the rest had been hanged.  These changes touched me deeply,
and I went away and joined the famous Quaker City European Excursion and carried my tears to
foreign lands.

Thus, after seven years of vicissitudes, ended a "pleasure trip" to the silver mines of Nevada
which had originally been intended to occupy only three months.  However, I usually miss my
calculations further than that.

MORAL.

If the reader thinks he is done, now, and that this book has no moral to it, he is in error.
The moral of it is this: If you are of any account, stay at home and make your way by faithful
diligence; but if you are "no account," go away from home, and then you will have to work,
whether you want to or not.  Thus you become a blessing to your friends by ceasing to be a
nuisance to them--if the people you go among suffer by the operation.

APPENDIX. A.

BRIEF SKETCH OF MORMON HISTORY.

Mormonism is only about forty years old, but its career has been full of stir and adventure
from the beginning, and is likely to remain so to the end.  Its adherents have been hunted
and hounded from one end of the country to the other, and the result is that for years they
have hated all "Gentiles" indiscriminately and with all their might.  Joseph Smith, the finder
of the Book of Mormon and founder of the religion, was driven from State to State with his
mysterious copperplates and the miraculous stones he read their inscriptions with.  Finally
he instituted his "church" in Ohio and Brigham Young joined it.  The neighbors began to persecute,
and apostasy commenced.  Brigham held to the faith and worked hard.  He arrested desertion.
He did more--he added converts in the midst of the trouble.  He rose in favor and importance
with the brethren. He was made one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church.  He shortly fought
his way to a higher post and a more powerful--President of the Twelve. The neighbors rose up
and drove the Mormons out of Ohio, and they settled in Missouri.  Brigham went with them. 
The Missourians drove them out and they retreated to Nauvoo, Illinois.  They prospered there,
and built a temple which made some pretensions to architectural grace and achieved some celebrity
in a section of country where a brick court-house with a tin dome and a cupola on it was contemplated
with reverential awe. But the Mormons were badgered and harried again by their neighbors. All
the proclamations Joseph Smith could issue denouncing polygamy and repudiating it as utterly
anti-Mormon were of no avail; the people of the neighborhood, on both sides of the Mississippi,
claimed that polygamy was practised by the Mormons, and not only polygamy but a little of everything
that was bad.  Brigham returned from a mission to England, where he had established a Mormon
newspaper, and he brought back with him several hundred converts to his preaching.  His influence
among the brethren augmented with every move he made.  Finally Nauvoo was invaded by the Missouri
and Illinois Gentiles, and Joseph Smith killed.  A Mormon named Rigdon assumed the Presidency
of the Mormon church and government, in Smith's place, and even tried his hand at a prophecy
or two.  But a greater than he was at hand.  Brigham seized the advantage of the hour and without
other authority than superior brain and nerve and will, hurled Rigdon from his high place and
occupied it himself.  He did more. He launched an elaborate curse at Rigdon and his disciples;
and he pronounced Rigdon's "prophecies" emanations from the devil, and ended by "handing the
false prophet over to the buffetings of Satan for a thousand years"--probably the longest term
ever inflicted in Illinois.  The people recognized their master.  They straightway elected
Brigham Young President, by a prodigious majority, and have never faltered in their devotion
to him from that day to this.  Brigham had forecast--a quality which no other prominent Mormon
has probably ever possessed. He recognized that it was better to move to the wilderness than
be moved. By his command the people gathered together their meagre effects, turned their backs
upon their homes, and their faces toward the wilderness, and on a bitter night in February
filed in sorrowful procession across the frozen Mississippi, lighted on their way by the glare
from their burning temple, whose sacred furniture their own hands had fired!  They camped,
several days afterward, on the western verge of Iowa, and poverty, want, hunger, cold, sickness,
grief and persecution did their work, and many succumbed and died--martyrs, fair and true,
whatever else they might have been.  Two years the remnant remained there, while Brigham and
a small party crossed the country and founded Great Salt Lake City, purposely choosing a land
which was outside the ownership and jurisdiction of the hated American nation.  Note that.
This was in 1847.  Brigham moved his people there and got them settled just in time to see
disaster fall again.  For the war closed and Mexico ceded Brigham's refuge to the enemy--the
United States!  In 1849 the Mormons organized a "free and independent" government and erected
the "State of Deseret," with Brigham Young as its head.  But the very next year Congress deliberately
snubbed it and created the "Territory of Utah" out of the same accumulation of mountains, sage-brush,
alkali and general desolation,--but made Brigham Governor of it.  Then for years the enormous
migration across the plains to California poured through the land of the Mormons and yet the
church remained staunch and true to its lord and master.  Neither hunger, thirst, poverty,
grief, hatred, contempt, nor persecution could drive the Mormons from their faith or their
allegiance; and even the thirst for gold, which gleaned the flower of the youth and strength
of many nations was not able to entice them!  That was the final test.  An experiment that
could survive that was an experiment with some substance to it somewhere.

Great Salt Lake City throve finely, and so did Utah.  One of the last things which Brigham
Young had done before leaving Iowa, was to appear in the pulpit dressed to personate the worshipped
and lamented prophet Smith, and confer the prophetic succession, with all its dignities, emoluments
and authorities, upon "President Brigham Young!"  The people accepted the pious fraud with
the maddest enthusiasm, and Brigham's power was sealed and secured for all time.  Within five
years afterward he openly added polygamy to the tenets of the church by authority of a "revelation"
which he pretended had been received nine years before by Joseph Smith, albeit Joseph is amply
on record as denouncing polygamy to the day of his death.

Now was Brigham become a second Andrew Johnson in the small beginning and steady progress of
his official grandeur.  He had served successively as a disciple in the ranks; home missionary;
foreign missionary; editor and publisher; Apostle; President of the Board of Apostles; President
of all Mormondom, civil and ecclesiastical; successor to the great Joseph by the will of heaven;
"prophet," "seer," "revelator."  There was but one dignity higher which he could aspire to,
and he reached out modestly and took that--he proclaimed himself a God!

He claims that he is to have a heaven of his own hereafter, and that he will be its God, and
his wives and children its goddesses, princes and princesses.  Into it all faithful Mormons
will be admitted, with their families, and will take rank and consequence according to the
number of their wives and children.  If a disciple dies before he has had time to accumulate
enough wives and children to enable him to be respectable in the next world any friend can
marry a few wives and raise a few children for him after he is dead, and they are duly credited
to his account and his heavenly status advanced accordingly.

Let it be borne in mind that the majority of the Mormons have always been ignorant, simple,
of an inferior order of intellect, unacquainted with the world and its ways; and let it be
borne in mind that the wives of these Mormons are necessarily after the same pattern and their
children likely to be fit representatives of such a conjunction; and then let it be remembered
that for forty years these creatures have been driven, driven, driven, relentlessly!  and mobbed,
beaten, and shot down; cursed, despised, expatriated; banished to a remote desert, whither
they journeyed gaunt with famine and disease, disturbing the ancient solitudes with their lamentations
and marking the long way with graves of their dead--and all because they were simply trying
to live and worship God in the way which they believed with all their hearts and souls to be
the true one.  Let all these things be borne in mind, and then it will not be hard to account
for the deathless hatred which the Mormons bear our people and our government.

That hatred has "fed fat its ancient grudge" ever since Mormon Utah developed into a self-supporting
realm and the church waxed rich and strong.  Brigham as Territorial Governor made it plain
that Mormondom was for the Mormons.  The United States tried to rectify all that by appointing
territorial officers from New England and other anti-Mormon localities, but Brigham prepared
to make their entrance into his dominions difficult.  Three thousand United States troops had
to go across the plains and put these gentlemen in office.  And after they were in office they
were as helpless as so many stone images.  They made laws which nobody minded and which could
not be executed.  The federal judges opened court in a land filled with crime and violence
and sat as holiday spectacles for insolent crowds to gape at--for there was nothing to try,
nothing to do nothing on the dockets!  And if a Gentile brought a suit, the Mormon jury would
do just as it pleased about bringing in a verdict, and when the judgment of the court was rendered
no Mormon cared for it and no officer could execute it.  Our Presidents shipped one cargo of
officials after another to Utah, but the result was always the same--they sat in a blight for
awhile they fairly feasted on scowls and insults day by day, they saw every attempt to do their
official duties find its reward in darker and darker looks, and in secret threats and warnings
of a more and more dismal nature--and at last they either succumbed and became despised tools
and toys of the Mormons, or got scared and discomforted beyond all endurance and left the Territory.
If a brave officer kept on courageously till his pluck was proven, some pliant Buchanan or
Pierce would remove him and appoint a stick in his place. In 1857 General Harney came very
near being appointed Governor of Utah. And so it came very near being Harney governor and Cradlebaugh
judge! --two men who never had any idea of fear further than the sort of murky comprehension
of it which they were enabled to gather from the dictionary.  Simply (if for nothing else)
for the variety they would have made in a rather monotonous history of Federal servility and
helplessness, it is a pity they were not fated to hold office together in Utah.

Up to the date of our visit to Utah, such had been the Territorial record.  The Territorial
government established there had been a hopeless failure, and Brigham Young was the only real
power in the land.  He was an absolute monarch--a monarch who defied our President--a monarch
who laughed at our armies when they camped about his capital--a monarch who received without
emotion the news that the august Congress of the United States had enacted a solemn law against
polygamy, and then went forth calmly and married twenty-five or thirty more wives.

B. THE MOUNTAIN MEADOWS MASSACRE.

The persecutions which the Mormons suffered so long--and which they consider they still suffer
in not being allowed to govern themselves --they have endeavored and are still endeavoring
to repay.  The now almost forgotten "Mountain Meadows massacre" was their work.  It was very
famous in its day.  The whole United States rang with its horrors.  A few items will refresh
the reader's memory.  A great emigrant train from Missouri and Arkansas passed through Salt
Lake City and a few disaffected Mormons joined it for the sake of the strong protection it
afforded for their escape.  In that matter lay sufficient cause for hot retaliation by the
Mormon chiefs.  Besides, these one hundred and forty-five or one hundred and fifty unsuspecting
emigrants being in part from Arkansas, where a noted Mormon missionary had lately been killed,
and in part from Missouri, a State remembered with execrations as a bitter persecutor of the
saints when they were few and poor and friendless, here were substantial additional grounds
for lack of love for these wayfarers. And finally, this train was rich, very rich in cattle,
horses, mules and other property--and how could the Mormons consistently keep up their coveted
resemblance to the Israelitish tribes and not seize the "spoil" of an enemy when the Lord had
so manifestly "delivered it into their hand?"

Wherefore, according to Mrs. C. V. Waite's entertaining book, "The Mormon Prophet," it transpired
that--

"A 'revelation' from Brigham Young, as Great Grand Archee or God, was dispatched to President
J. C. Haight, Bishop Higbee and J. D. Lee (adopted son of Brigham), commanding them to raise
all the forces they could muster and trust, follow those cursed Gentiles (so read the revelation),
attack them disguised as Indians, and with the arrows of the Almighty make a clean sweep of
them, and leave none to tell the tale; and if they needed any assistance they were commanded
to hire the Indians as their allies, promising them a share of the booty.  They were to be
neither slothful nor negligent in their duty, and to be punctual in sending the teams back
to him before winter set in, for this was the mandate of Almighty God."

The command of the "revelation" was faithfully obeyed.  A large party of Mormons, painted and
tricked out as Indians, overtook the train of emigrant wagons some three hundred miles south
of Salt Lake City, and made an attack.  But the emigrants threw up earthworks, made fortresses
of their wagons and defended themselves gallantly and successfully for five days!  Your Missouri
or Arkansas gentleman is not much afraid of the sort of scurvy apologies for "Indians" which
the southern part of Utah affords.  He would stand up and fight five hundred of them.

At the end of the five days the Mormons tried military strategy.  They retired to the upper
end of the "Meadows," resumed civilized apparel, washed off their paint, and then, heavily
armed, drove down in wagons to the beleaguered emigrants, bearing a flag of truce!  When the
emigrants saw white men coming they threw down their guns and welcomed them with cheer after
cheer!  And, all unconscious of the poetry of it, no doubt, they lifted a little child aloft,
dressed in white, in answer to the flag of truce!

The leaders of the timely white "deliverers" were President Haight and Bishop John D. Lee,
of the Mormon Church.  Mr. Cradlebaugh, who served a term as a Federal Judge in Utah and afterward
was sent to Congress from Nevada, tells in a speech delivered in Congress how these leaders
next proceeded:

"They professed to be on good terms with the Indians, and represented them as being very mad.
They also proposed to intercede and settle the matter with the Indians.  After several hours
parley they, having (apparently) visited the Indians, gave the ultimatum of the savages; which
was, that the emigrants should march out of their camp, leaving everything behind them, even
their guns.  It was promised by the Mormon bishops that they would bring a force and guard
the emigrants back to the settlements.  The terms were agreed to, the emigrants being desirous
of saving the lives of their families.  The Mormons retired, and subsequently appeared with
thirty or forty armed men.  The emigrants were marched out, the women and children in front
and the men behind, the Mormon guard being in the rear.  When they had marched in this way
about a mile, at a given signal the slaughter commenced.  The men were almost all shot down
at the first fire from the guard.  Two only escaped, who fled to the desert, and were followed
one hundred and fifty miles before they were overtaken and slaughtered.  The women and children
ran on, two or three hundred yards further, when they were overtaken and with the aid of the
Indians they were slaughtered.  Seventeen individuals only, of all the emigrant party, were
spared, and they were little children, the eldest of them being only seven years old.  Thus,
on the 10th day of September, 1857, was consummated one of the most cruel, cowardly and bloody
murders known in our history."

The number of persons butchered by the Mormons on this occasion was one hundred and twenty.

With unheard-of temerity Judge Cradlebaugh opened his court and proceeded to make Mormondom
answer for the massacre.  And what a spectacle it must have been to see this grim veteran,
solitary and alone in his pride and his pluck, glowering down on his Mormon jury and Mormon
auditory, deriding them by turns, and by turns "breathing threatenings and slaughter!"

An editorial in the Territorial Enterprise of that day says of him and of the occasion:

"He spoke and acted with the fearlessness and resolution of a Jackson; but the jury failed
to indict, or even report on the charges, while threats of violence were heard in every quarter,
and an attack on the U.S. troops intimated, if he persisted in his course.

"Finding that nothing could be done with the juries, they were discharged with a scathing rebuke
from the judge.  And then, sitting as a committing magistrate, he commenced his task alone.
He examined witnesses, made arrests in every quarter, and created a consternation in the camps
of the saints greater than any they had ever witnessed before, since Mormondom was born.  At
last accounts terrified elders and bishops were decamping to save their necks; and developments
of the most starling character were being made, implicating the highest Church dignitaries
in the many murders and robberies committed upon the Gentiles during the past eight years."

Had Harney been Governor, Cradlebaugh would have been supported in his work, and the absolute
proofs adduced by him of Mormon guilt in this massacre and in a number of previous murders,
would have conferred gratuitous coffins upon certain citizens, together with occasion to use
them.  But Cumming was the Federal Governor, and he, under a curious pretense of impartiality,
sought to screen the Mormons from the demands of justice.  On one occasion he even went so
far as to publish his protest against the use of the U.S. troops in aid of Cradlebaugh's proceedings.

Mrs. C. V. Waite closes her interesting detail of the great massacre with the following remark
and accompanying summary of the testimony--and the summary is concise, accurate and reliable:

"For the benefit of those who may still be disposed to doubt the guilt of Young and his Mormons
in this transaction, the testimony is here collated and circumstances given which go not merely
to implicate but to fasten conviction upon them by 'confirmations strong as proofs of Holy Writ:'

"1.  The evidence of Mormons themselves, engaged in the affair, as shown by the statements
of Judge Cradlebaugh and Deputy U.S.  Marshall Rodgers.

"2.  The failure of Brigham Young to embody any account of it in his Report as Superintendent
of Indian Affairs.  Also his failure to make any allusion to it whatever from the pulpit, until
several years after the occurrence

"3.  The flight to the mountains of men high in authority in the Mormon Church and State, when
this affair was brought to the ordeal of a judicial investigation.

"4.  The failure of the Deseret News, the Church organ, and the only paper then published in
the Territory, to notice the massacre until several months afterward, and then only to deny
that Mormons were engaged in it.

"5.  The testimony of the children saved from the massacre.

"6.  The children and the property of the emigrants found in possession of the Mormons, and
that possession traced back to the very day after the massacre.

"7.  The statements of Indians in the neighborhood of the scene of the massacre: these statements
are shown, not only by Cradlebaugh and Rodgers, but by a number of military officers, and by
J. Forney, who was, in 1859, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Territory.  To all these
were such statements freely and frequently made by the Indians.

"8.  The testimony of R. P. Campbell, Capt.  2d Dragoons, who was sent in the Spring of 1859
to Santa Clara, to protect travelers on the road to California and to inquire into Indian depredations."

C. CONCERNING A FRIGHTFUL ASSASSINATION THAT WAS NEVER CONSUMMATED

If ever there was a harmless man, it is Conrad Wiegand, of Gold Hill, Nevada.  If ever there
was a gentle spirit that thought itself unfired gunpowder and latent ruin, it is Conrad Wiegand.
If ever there was an oyster that fancied itself a whale; or a jack-o'lantern, confined to a
swamp, that fancied itself a planet with a billion-mile orbit; or a summer zephyr that deemed
itself a hurricane, it is Conrad Wiegand. Therefore, what wonder is it that when he says a
thing, he thinks the world listens; that when he does a thing the world stands still to look;
and that when he suffers, there is a convulsion of nature?  When I met Conrad, he was "Superintendent
of the Gold Hill Assay Office"--and he was not only its Superintendent, but its entire force.
And he was a street preacher, too, with a mongrel religion of his own invention, whereby he
expected to regenerate the universe.  This was years ago.  Here latterly he has entered journalism;
and his journalism is what it might be expected to be: colossal to ear, but pigmy to the eye.
It is extravagant grandiloquence confined to a newspaper about the size of a double letter
sheet.  He doubtless edits, sets the type, and prints his paper, all alone; but he delights
to speak of the concern as if it occupies a block and employs a thousand men.

[Something less than two years ago, Conrad assailed several people mercilessly in his little
"People's Tribune," and got himself into trouble.  Straightway he airs the affair in the "Territorial
Enterprise," in a communication over his own signature, and I propose to reproduce it here,
in all its native simplicity and more than human candor.  Long as it is, it is well worth reading,
for it is the richest specimen of journalistic literature the history of America can furnish,
perhaps:]

From the Territorial Enterprise, Jan. 20, 1870.

SEEMING PLOT FOR ASSASSINATION MISCARRIED.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ENTERPRISE: Months ago, when Mr. Sutro incidentally exposed mining management
on the Comstock, and among others roused me to protest against its continuance, in great kindness
you warned me that any attempt by publications, by public meetings and by legislative action,
aimed at the correction of chronic mining evils in Storey County, must entail upon me (a) business
ruin, (b) the burden of all its costs, (c) personal violence, and if my purpose were persisted
in, then (d) assassination, and after all nothing would be effected.

YOUR PROPHECY FULFILLING. In large part at least your prophecies have been fulfilled, for (a)
assaying, which was well attended to in the Gold Hill Assay Office (of which I am superintendent),
in consequence of my publications, has been taken elsewhere, so the President of one of the
companies assures me. With no reason assigned, other work has been taken away.  With but one
or two important exceptions, our assay business now consists simply of the gleanings of the
vicinity.  (b) Though my own personal donations to the People's Tribune Association have already
exceeded $1,500, outside of our own numbers we have received (in money) less than $300 as contributions
and subscriptions for the journal.  (c) On Thursday last, on the main street in Gold Hill,
near noon, with neither warning nor cause assigned, by a powerful blow I was felled to the
ground, and while down I was kicked by a man who it would seem had been led to believe that
I had spoken derogatorily of him.  By whom he was so induced to believe I am as yet unable
to say.  On Saturday last I was again assailed and beaten by a man who first informed me why
he did so, and who persisted in making his assault even after the erroneous impression under
which he also was at first laboring had been clearly and repeatedly pointed out.  This same
man, after failing through intimidation to elicit from me the names of our editorial contributors,
against giving which he knew me to be pledged, beat himself weary upon me with a raw hide,
I not resisting, and then pantingly threatened me with permanent disfiguring mayhem, if ever
again I should introduce his name into print, and who but a few minutes before his attack upon
me assured me that the only reason I was "permitted" to reach home alive on Wednesday evening
last (at which time the PEOPLE'S TRIBUNE was issued) was, that he deems me only half-witted,
and be it remembered the very next morning I was knocked down and kicked by a man who seemed
to be prepared for flight.

[He sees doom impending:]

WHEN WILL THE CIRCLE JOIN? How long before the whole of your prophecy will be fulfilled I cannot
say, but under the shadow of so much fulfillment in so short a time, and with such threats
from a man who is one of the most prominent exponents of the San Francisco mining-ring staring
me and this whole community defiantly in the face and pointing to a completion of your augury,
do you blame me for feeling that this communication is the last I shall ever write for the
Press, especially when a sense alike of personal self-respect, of duty to this money-oppressed
and fear-ridden community, and of American fealty to the spirit of true Liberty all command
me, and each more loudly than love of life itself, to declare the name of that prominent man
to be JOHN B. WINTERS, President of the Yellow Jacket Company, a political aspirant and a military
General?  The name of his partially duped accomplice and abettor in this last marvelous assault,
is no other than PHILIP LYNCH, Editor and Proprietor of the Gold Hill News.

Despite the insult and wrong heaped upon me by John B. Winters, on Saturday afternoon, only
a glimpse of which I shall be able to afford your readers, so much do I deplore clinching (by
publicity) a serious mistake of any one, man or woman, committed under natural and not self-wrought
passion, in view of his great apparent excitement at the time and in view of the almost perfect
privacy of the assault, I am far from sure that I should not have given him space for repentance
before exposing him, were it not that he himself has so far exposed the matter as to make it
the common talk of the town that he has horsewhipped me. That fact having been made public,
all the facts in connection need to be also, or silence on my part would seem more than singular,
and with many would be proof either that I was conscious of some unworthy aim in publishing
the article, or else that my "non-combatant" principles are but a convenient cloak alike of
physical and moral cowardice.  I therefore shall try to present a graphic but truthful picture
of this whole affair, but shall forbear all comments, presuming that the editors of our own
journal, if others do not, will speak freely and fittingly upon this subject in our next number,
whether I shall then be dead or living, for my death will not stop, though it may suspend,
the publication of the PEOPLE'S TRIBUNE. [The "non-combatant" sticks to principle, but takes
along a friend or two of a conveniently different stripe:]

THE TRAP SET. On Saturday morning John B. Winters sent verbal word to the Gold Hill Assay Office
that he desired to see me at the Yellow Jacket office. Though such a request struck me as decidedly
cool in view of his own recent discourtesies to me there alike as a publisher and as a stockholder
in the Yellow Jacket mine, and though it seemed to me more like a summons than the courteous
request by one gentleman to another for a favor, hoping that some conference with Sharon looking
to the betterment of mining matters in Nevada might arise from it, I felt strongly inclined
to overlook what possibly was simply an oversight in courtesy.  But as then it had only been
two days since I had been bruised and beaten under a hasty and false apprehension of facts,
my caution was somewhat aroused.  Moreover I remembered sensitively his contemptuousness of
manner to me at my last interview in his office.  I therefore felt it needful, if I went at
all, to go accompanied by a friend whom he would not dare to treat with incivility, and whose
presence with me might secure exemption from insult.  Accordingly I asked a neighbor to accompany
me.

THE TRAP ALMOST DETECTED. Although I was not then aware of this fact, it would seem that previous
to my request this same neighbor had heard Dr. Zabriskie state publicly in a saloon, that Mr.
Winters had told him he had decided either to kill or to horsewhip me, but had not finally
decided on which.  My neighbor, therefore, felt unwilling to go down with me until he had first
called on Mr. Winters alone.  He therefore paid him a visit.  From that interview he assured
me that he gathered the impression that he did not believe I would have any difficulty with
Mr. Winters, and that he (Winters) would call on me at four o'clock in my own office.

MY OWN PRECAUTIONS. As Sheriff Cummings was in Gold Hill that afternoon, and as I desired to
converse with him about the previous assault, I invited him to my office, and he came.  Although
a half hour had passed beyond four o'clock, Mr. Winters had not called, and we both of us began
preparing to go home. Just then, Philip Lynch, Publisher of the Gold Hill News, came in and
said, blandly and cheerily, as if bringing good news:

"Hello, John B. Winters wants to see you."

I replied, "Indeed!  Why he sent me word that he would call on me here this afternoon at four
o'clock!"

"O, well, it don't do to be too ceremonious just now, he's in my office, and that will do as
well--come on in, Winters wants to consult with you alone.  He's got something to say to you."

Though slightly uneasy at this change of programme, yet believing that in an editor's house
I ought to be safe, and anyhow that I would be within hail of the street, I hurriedly, and
but partially whispered my dim apprehensions to Mr. Cummings, and asked him if he would not
keep near enough to hear my voice in case I should call.  He consented to do so while waiting
for some other parties, and to come in if he heard my voice or thought I had need of protection.

On reaching the editorial part of the News office, which viewed from the street is dark, I
did not see Mr. Winters, and again my misgivings arose. Had I paused long enough to consider
the case, I should have invited Sheriff Cummings in, but as Lynch went down stairs, he said:
"This way, Wiegand--it's best to be private," or some such remark.

[I do not desire to strain the reader's fancy, hurtfully, and yet it would be a favor to me
if he would try to fancy this lamb in battle, or the duelling ground or at the head of a vigilance
committee--M.  T.:]

I followed, and without Mr. Cummings, and without arms, which I never do or will carry, unless
as a soldier in war, or unless I should yet come to feel I must fight a duel, or to join and
aid in the ranks of a necessary Vigilance Committee.  But by following I made a fatal mistake.
Following was entering a trap, and whatever animal suffers itself to be caught should expect
the common fate of a caged rat, as I fear events to come will prove.

Traps commonly are not set for benevolence. [His body-guard is shut out:]

