As for the little room within, it offer'd little or no consolation to us:  'twas a damp, cold
closet, with a half dismantled window- shutter, and with a window which had neither glass nor
oil paper in it to keep out the tempest of the night.  I did not endeavour to stifle my cough
when the lady gave a peep into it; so it reduced the case in course to this alternative--That
the lady should sacrifice her health to her feelings, and take up with the closet herself,
and abandon the bed next mine to her maid,--or that the girl should take the closet, &c., &c.

The lady was a Piedmontese of about thirty, with a glow of health in her cheeks.  The maid
was a Lyonoise of twenty, and as brisk and lively a French girl as ever moved.--There were
difficulties every way,--and the obstacle of the stone in the road, which brought us into the
distress, great as it appeared whilst the peasants were removing it, was but a pebble to what
lay in our ways now.--I have only to add, that it did not lessen the weight which hung upon
our spirits, that we were both too delicate to communicate what we felt to each other upon
the occasion.

We sat down to supper; and had we not had more generous wine to it than a little inn in Savoy
could have furnish'd, our tongues had been tied up, till necessity herself had set them at
liberty;--but the lady having a few bottles of Burgundy in her voiture, sent down her fille
de chambre for a couple of them; so that by the time supper was over, and we were left alone,
we felt ourselves inspired with a strength of mind sufficient to talk, at least, without reserve
upon our situation.  We turn'd it every way, and debated and considered it in all kinds of
lights in the course of a two hours' negotiation; at the end of which the articles were settled
finally betwixt us, and stipulated for in form and manner of a treaty of peace,--and I believe
with as much religion and good faith on both sides as in any treaty which has yet had the honour
of being handed down to posterity.

They were as follow:  -

First, as the right of the bed-chamber is in Monsieur,--and he thinking the bed next to the
fire to be the warmest, he insists upon the concession on the lady's side of taking up with it.

Granted, on the part of Madame; with a proviso, That as the curtains of that bed are of a flimsy
transparent cotton, and appear likewise too scanty to draw close, that the fille de chambre
shall fasten up the opening, either by corking pins, or needle and thread, in such manner as
shall be deem'd a sufficient barrier on the side of Monsieur.

2dly.  It is required on the part of Madame, that Monsieur shall lie the whole night through
in his robe de chambre.

Rejected:  inasmuch as Monsieur is not worth a robe de chambre; he having nothing in his portmanteau
but six shirts and a black silk pair of breeches.

The mentioning the silk pair of breeches made an entire change of the article,--for the breeches
were accepted as an equivalent for the robe de chambre; and so it was stipulated and agreed
upon, that I should lie in my black silk breeches all night.

3dly.  It was insisted upon and stipulated for by the lady, that after Monsieur was got to
bed, and the candle and fire extinguished, that Monsieur should not speak one single word the
whole night.

Granted; provided Monsieur's saying his prayers might not be deemed an infraction of the treaty.

There was but one point forgot in this treaty, and that was the manner in which the lady and
myself should be obliged to undress and get to bed;--there was but one way of doing it, and
that I leave to the reader to devise; protesting as I do it, that if it is not the most delicate
in nature, 'tis the fault of his own imagination,--against which this is not my first complaint.

Now, when we were got to bed, whether it was the novelty of the situation, or what it was,
I know not; but so it was, I could not shut my eyes; I tried this side, and that, and turn'd
and turn'd again, till a full hour after midnight; when Nature and patience both wearing out,--O,
my God! said I.

- You have broke the treaty, Monsieur, said the lady, who had no more slept than myself.--I
begg'd a thousand pardons--but insisted it was no more than an ejaculation.  She maintained
'twas an entire infraction of the treaty--I maintained it was provided for in the clause of
the third article.

The lady would by no means give up her point, though she weaken'd her barrier by it; for in
the warmth of the dispute, I could hear two or three corking pins fall out of the curtain to
the ground.

Upon my word and honour, Madame, said I,--stretching my arm out of bed by way of asseveration. -

(I was going to have added, that I would not have trespassed against the remotest idea of decorum
for the world); -

But the fille de chambre hearing there were words between us, and fearing that hostilities
would ensue in course, had crept silently out of her closet, and it being totally dark, had
stolen so close to our beds, that she had got herself into the narrow passage which separated
them, and had advanced so far up as to be in a line betwixt her mistress and me:  -

So that when I stretch'd out my hand I caught hold of the fille de chambre's -

Footnotes:

{1}  Nosegay.

{2}  Hackney coach.

{3}  Plate, napkin, knife, fork and spoon.