"Oh, sir, have mercy on me! I've an ailing wife and seven children to support," said poor Johnson,
wringing his hands.

"Can't I do anything with the Government?"----

"No, sir; I'm told they're so mighty angry with my rascally brother, they'll listen to nobody!
It's a hard matter for me to keep things straight at home without this, sir, I've so many mouths
to fill; and if they take me off to prison, Lord! Lord! what's to become of us all?"

Mr. Aubrey's lip quivered. Johnson fell on his knees, and the tears ran down his cheeks. "I've
never asked a living man for money before, sir; and if you'll only lend it me, God Almighty
will bless you and yours; you'll save us all from ruin; I'll work day and night to pay it back
again!"

"Rise--rise, Johnson," said Mr. Aubrey, with emotion. "You shall have the money, my friend,
if you will call to-morrow," he added with a deep sigh, after a moment's hesitation.

He was as good as his word.[19]

Had Mr. Aubrey been naturally of a cheerful and vivacious turn, the contrast now afforded by
his gloomy manner must have alarmed his family. As it was, however, the contrast was not so
strong and marked as to be attended with that effect, especially as he exerted himself to the
utmost to conceal his distress. That something had gone wrong, he freely acknowledged; and
as he spoke of it always in connection with political topics, he succeeded in parrying their
questions, and checking suspicion. But, whenever they were all collected together, could he
not justly compare them to a happy group, unconscious that they stood on a mine which was on
the eve of being fired?

About a week afterwards, namely, on the 12th of January, arrived little Charles's birthday,
when he became five years old; and Kate had for some days been moving heaven and earth to get
up a juvenile ball in honor of the occasion. After divers urgent despatches, and considerable
riding and driving about, she succeeded in persuading the parents of some eight or ten children--two
little daughters, for instance, of the Earl of Oldacre (beautiful creatures they were, to be
sure)--little Master and the two Miss Bertons, the children of one of the county members--Sir
Harry Oldfield, an orphan of about five years of age, the infant owner of a magnificent estate--and
two or three little girls beside--to send them all--cold as was the weather--to Yatton, for
a day and a night, with their governesses and attendants.

'Twas a charming little affair! It went off brilliantly, as the phrase is, and repaid all Kate's
exertions. She, her mother, and brother, and sister, all dined at the same table, at a very
early hour, with the merry little guests, who, (with a laughable crowd of attendants behind
them, to be sure) behaved remarkably well on the occasion. Sir Harry (a little thing about
Charles's age--the black ribbon round his waist, and also the half-mourning dress worn by his
maid, who stood behind him, showed how recent was the event which had made him an orphan) proposed
little Aubrey's health, in (I must own) a somewhat stiff speech, demurely dictated to him by
Kate, who sat between him and her beautiful little nephew. She then performed the same office
for Charles, who stood on a chair while delivering his eloquent acknowledgment of the toast.

[Oh! that anguished brow of thine, Aubrey, (thank God it is unobserved!) but it tells me that
the iron is entering thy soul!]

And the moment that he had done--Kate folding her arms around him and kissing him--down they
all jumped, and, a merry throng, scampered off to the drawing-room, (followed by Kate,) where
blind-man's buff, husbands and wives, and divers other little games, kept them in constant
enjoyment. After tea, they were to have dancing--Kate mistress of the ceremonies--and it was
quite laughable to see how perpetually she was foiled in her efforts to form the little sets.
The girls were orderly enough--but their wild little partners were quite uncontrollable! The
instant they were placed, and Kate had gone to the instrument and struck off a bar or two--ah!--what
a scrambling little crowd was to be seen wildly jumping and laughing, and chattering and singing!
Over and over again she formed them into sets, with the like results. But at length a young
lady, one of their governesses, took Miss Aubrey's place at the piano, leaving the latter to
superintend the performances in person. She at length succeeded in getting up something like
a country-dance, led off by Charles and little Lady Anne Cherville, the eldest daughter of
the Earl of Oldacre, a beautiful child of about five years old, and who, judging from appearances,
bade fair in due time to become another Lady Caroline Caversham. You would have laughed outright
to watch the coquettish airs which this little creature gave herself with Charles, whom yet
she evidently could not bear to see dancing with another.

"Now I shall dance with somebody else!" he exclaimed, suddenly quitting Lady Anne, and snatching
hold of a sweet little thing, Miss Berton, standing modestly beside him. The discarded beauty
walked with a stately air, and a swelling heart, towards Mrs. Aubrey, who sat beside her husband
on the sofa; and on reaching her, stood for a few moments silently watching her fickle partner
busily and gayly engaged with her successor--Then she burst into tears.

"Charles!" called out Mrs. Aubrey; who had watched the whole affair, and could hardly keep
her countenance--"come hither directly, Charles!"

"Yes, mamma!" he exclaimed--quite unaware of the serious aspect which things were assuming--and
without quitting the dance, where he was (as his jealous mistress too plainly saw, for, despite
her grief, her eye seemed to follow all his motions) skipping about with infinite glee with
a third partner--a laughing sister of her for whom he had quitted Lady Anne.

"Do you hear your mamma, Charles!" said Mr. Aubrey, somewhat peremptorily; and in an instant
his little son, all flushed and breathless, was at his side.

"Well, dear papa!" said he, keeping his eye fixed on the merry throng he had just quitted,
and where his deserted partner was skipping about alone.

"What have you been doing to Lady Anne, Charles?" said his father.

"Nothing, dear papa!" he replied, still wistfully eying the dancers.

"You know you left me, and went to dance with Miss Berton; you did, Charles!" said the offended
beauty, sobbing.

"That is not behaving like a little gentleman, Charles," said his father. The tears came to
the child's eyes.

"I'm very sorry, dear papa, I will dance with her."

"No, not now," said Lady Anne, haughtily.

"Oh, pooh! pooh!--kiss and be friends," said Mrs. Aubrey, laughing, "and go and dance as prettily
as you were doing before." Little Aubrey put his arms around Lady Anne, kissed her, and away
they both started to the dance again. While the latter part of this scene was going on, Mr.
Aubrey's eye caught the figure of a servant who simply made his appearance at the door and
then retired, (for such had been Mr. Aubrey's orders, in the event of any messenger arriving
from Grilston.) Hastily whispering that he should speedily return, he left the room. In the
hall stood a clerk from Mr. Parkinson; and on seeing Mr. Aubrey, he took out a packet and retired--Mr.
Aubrey, with evident trepidation, repairing to his library. With a nervous hand he broke the
seal, and found the following letter from Mr. Parkinson, with three other enclosures:--

                                            "Grilston, 12th Jan. 18--.
     "MY DEAR SIR,

     "I have only just received, and at once forward to you, copies of
     the three opinions given by the Attorney-General, Mr. Mansfield,
     and Mr. Crystal. I lament to find that they are all of a
     discouraging character. They were given by their respective writers
     without any of them having had any opportunity of conferring
     together--all the three cases having been laid before them at the
     same time: yet you will observe that each of them has hit upon
     precisely the same point, viz. that the descendants of Geoffrey
     Dreddlington had no right to succeed to the inheritance till there
     was a failure of the heirs of Stephen Dreddlington. If, therefore,
     our discreditable opponents should have unhappily contrived to
     ferret out some person satisfying that designation, (I cannot
     conjecture how they can ever have got upon the scent,) I really
     fear (it is no use disguising matters) we must prepare for a very
     serious struggle. I have been quietly pushing my inquiries in all
     directions, with a view to obtaining a clew to the case intended to
     be set up against us, and which you will find very shrewdly guessed
     at by the Attorney-General. Nor am I the only party, I find, in
     the field, who has been making pointed inquiries in your
     neighborhood; but of this more when we meet to-morrow.

                                "I remain,
                                           "Yours most respectfully,
                                                          "J. PARKINSON.
     "CHARLES AUBREY, ESQ., M. P. &c. &c. &c."

Having read this letter, Mr. Aubrey sank back in his chair, and remained motionless for more
than a quarter of an hour. At length he roused himself, and read over the opinions; the effect
of which--as far as he could comprehend their technicalities--he found had been but too correctly
given by Mr. Parkinson. Some suggestions and inquiries put by the acute and experienced Mr.
Crystal, suddenly revived recollections of one or two incidents even of his boyish days, long
forgotten, but which, as he reflected upon them, began to reappear to his mind's eye with sickening
distinctness. Wave after wave of apprehension and agony passed over him, chilling and benumbing
his heart within him; so that, when his little son came some time afterwards running up to
him, with a message from his mamma, that she hoped he could come back to see them all play
at snap-dragon before they went to bed, he replied mechanically, hardly seeming sensible even
of the presence of the laughing and breathless boy, who quickly scampered back again. At length,
with a groan that came from the depths of his heart, Mr. Aubrey rose and walked to and fro,
sensible of the necessity of exertion, and preparing himself, in some degree, for encountering
his mother, his wife, and his sister. Taking up his candle, he hastened to his dressing-room,
where he hoped, by the aid of refreshing ablutions, to succeed in effacing at least the stronger
of those traces of suffering which his glass displayed to him, as it reflected the image of
his agitated countenance. A sudden recollection of the critical and delicate situation of his
idolized wife, glanced through his heart like a keen arrow. He sank upon the sofa, and, clasping
his hands, looked indeed forlorn. Presently the door was pushed hastily but gently open; and,
first looking in to see that it was really he of whom she was in search, in rushed Mrs. Aubrey,
pale and agitated, having been alarmed by his long-continued absence from the drawing-room,
and the look of the servant, from whom she had learned that his master had been for some time
gone up-stairs.

"Charles! my love! my sweet love!" she exclaimed, rushing in, sitting down beside him, and
casting her arms round his neck. Overcome by the suddenness of her appearance and movements,
for a moment he spoke not.

"For mercy's sake--as you love me!--tell me, dearest Charles, what has happened!" she gasped,
kissing him fervently.

"Nothing--love--nothing," he replied; but his look belied his speech.

"Oh! am not I your wife, dearest? Charles, I shall really go distracted if you do not tell
me what has happened!--I know that something--something dreadful"--He put his arm round her
waist, and drew her tenderly towards him. He felt her heart beating violently. He kissed her
cold forehead, but spoke not.

"Come, dearest!--my own Charles!--let me share your sorrows," said she, in a thrilling voice.
"Cannot you trust your Agnes? Has not Heaven sent me to share your anxieties and griefs?"

"I love you, Agnes! ay, perhaps more than ever man loved woman!" he faltered, as he felt her
arms folding him in closer and closer embrace; and she gazed at him with wild agitation, expecting
presently to hear of some fearful catastrophe.

"I cannot bear this much longer, dearest--I feel I cannot," said she, rather faintly. "What
has happened? What, that you dare not tell me? I can bear anything, while I have you and my
children! You have been unhappy--you have been wretched, Charles, for many days past. I have
felt that you were!--I will not part with you till I know all!"

"You soon must know all, my sweet love; and I take Heaven to witness, that it is principally
on your account, and that of my children, that I---- in fact, I did not wish any of you to
have known it till"----

"You--are never going--to fight a duel?" she gasped, turning white as death.

"Oh! no, no, Agnes! I solemnly assure you! If I could have brought myself to engage in such
an unhallowed affair, would this scene ever first have occurred? No, no, my own love! Must
I then tell you of the misfortune that has overtaken us?" His words somewhat restored her,
but she continued to gaze at him in mute and breathless apprehension. "Let me then conceal
nothing, Agnes--they are bringing an action against me, which, if successful, may cause us
all to quit Yatton--and it may be, forever."

"Oh, Charles!" she murmured, her eyes riveted upon his, while she unconsciously moved still
nearer to him and trembled. Her head drooped upon his shoulder.

"Why is this?" she whispered, after a pause.

"Let us, dearest, talk of it another time. I have now told you what you asked me."--He poured
her out a glass of water. Having drank a little, she appeared revived.

"Is all lost?--And--why? Do, my own Charles--let me know really the worst!"

"We are young, my Agnes! and have the world before us! Health and integrity are better than
riches! You and our little loves--the children which God has given us--are my riches," said
he, gazing at her with unspeakable tenderness. "Even should it be the will of Heaven that this
affair should go against us--so long as they cannot separate us from each other, they cannot
really hurt us!" She suddenly kissed him with frantic energy, and an hysteric smile gleamed
over her pallid excited features.

"Calm yourself, Agnes!--calm yourself, for my sake!--as you love me!" His voice quivered. "Oh,
how very weak and foolish I have been to yield to"----

"No, no, no!" she gasped, evidently laboring with hysteric oppression. "Hush!" said she, suddenly
starting, and wildly leaning forward towards the door which opened into the gallery leading
to the various bedrooms. He listened--the MOTHER'S ear had been quick and true. He presently
heard the sound of many children's voices approaching: they were the little party, accompanied
by Kate, and their attendants, on their way to bed; and little Charles's voice was loudest,
and his laugh the merriest, of them all. A dreadful smile gleamed on Mrs. Aubrey's face; her
hand grasped her husband's with convulsive pressure; and she suddenly sank, rigid and senseless,
upon the sofa. He seemed for a moment stunned at the sight of her motionless figure. Soon,
however, recovering his presence of mind, he rang the bell, and one or two female attendants
quickly appeared, by whose joint assistance Mrs. Aubrey was carried to her bed in the adjoining
room, where, by the use of the ordinary remedies, she was, after a brief interval, restored
to consciousness. Her first languid look was towards Mr. Aubrey, whose hand she slowly raised
to her lips. She tried to throw a smile over her wan features--but 't was in vain; and, after
a few heavy and half-choking sobs, her overcharged feelings found relief in a flood of tears.
Full of the liveliest apprehensions as to the effect of this violent emotion upon her, in her
critical condition, he remained with her for some time, pouring into her ear every soothing
and tender expression he could think of. He at length succeeded in bringing her into a somewhat
more tranquil state than he could have expected. He strictly enjoined the attendants, who had
not quitted their lady's chamber, and whose alarmed and inquisitive looks he had noticed for
some time with anxiety, to preserve silence concerning what they had so unexpectedly witnessed,
adding, that something unfortunate had happened, of which they would hear but too soon.

"Are you going to tell Kate?" whispered Mrs. Aubrey, sorrowfully. "Surely, love, you have suffered
enough through my weakness. Wait till to-morrow. Let her--poor girl!--have a few more happy hours!"

"No, Agnes--it was my own weakness which caused me to be surprised into this premature disclosure
to you. And now I must meet her again to-night, and I cannot control either my features, or
my feelings. Yes, poor Kate, she must know all to-night! I shall not be long absent, Agnes."
And directing her maid to remain with her till he returned, he withdrew, and with slow step
and heavy heart descended to the library; preparing himself for another heart-breaking scene--plunging
another innocent and joyous creature into misery, which he believed to be inevitable. Having
looked into the drawing-room as he passed it, and seen no one there--his mother having, as
usual, retired at a very early hour--he rang his library bell, and desired Miss Aubrey's maid
to request her mistress to come down to him there, as soon as she should be at leisure. He
was glad that the only light in the room was that given out by the fire, which was not very
bright, and so would in some degree shield his features from, at all events, immediate scrutiny.
His heart ached as, shortly afterwards, he heard Kate's light step crossing the hall. When
she entered, her eyes sparkled with vivacity, and a smile was on her beauteous cheek. Her dress
was slightly disordered, and her hair half uncurled--the results of her sport with the little
ones whom she had been seeing to bed.

"What merry little things, to be sure!" she commenced laughingly--"I could not get them to
lie still a moment--popping their little heads in and out of the clothes. A fine time I shall
have of it, by-and-by, with Sir Harry! for he is to be my tiny little bed-fellow, and I dare
say I shall not sleep a wink all night!--Why, Charles, how very--very grave you look!" she
added, quickly observing his eye fixed moodily upon her.

"'Tis you who are so very gay," he replied, endeavoring to smile. "I want to speak to you,
dear Kate," he commenced affectionately--at the same time rising and closing the door--"on
a serious matter. I have received some letters to-night"----

Kate colored suddenly and violently, and her heart beat; but, sweet soul! she was mistaken--very,
very far off the mark her troubled brother was aiming at. "And, relying on your strength of
mind, I have resolved to put you at once in possession of what I myself know. Can you bear
bad news well, Kate?"

She turned very pale, and drawing her chair nearer to her brother, said, "Do not keep me in
suspense, Charles--I can bear anything but suspense--that is dreadful! What has happened? Oh
dear," she added, with sudden alarm, "where are mamma and Agnes?" She started to her feet.

"I assure you they are both well, Kate. My mother is now doubtless asleep, and as well as she
ever was; Agnes is in her bedroom--certainly much distressed at the news which I am going"----

"Oh why, Charles, did you tell anything distressing to her?" exclaimed Miss Aubrey, with an
alarmed air.

"We came together by surprise, Kate! Perhaps, too, it would have been worse to have kept her
in suspense; but she is recovering!--I shall soon return to her. And now, my dear Kate--I know
your strong sense and spirit--a very great calamity hangs over us. Let you and me," he grasped
her hands affectionately, "stand it steadily, and support those who cannot!"

"Let me at once know all, Charles. See if I do not bear it as becomes your sister," said she,
with forced calmness.

"If it should become necessary for all of us to retire into obscurity--into humble obscurity,
dear Kate--how do you think you could bear it?"

"If it will be an honorable obscurity--nay, 'tis quite impossible it can be a dishonorable
obscurity," said Miss Aubrey, with a momentary flash of energy.

"Never, never, Kate! The Aubreys may lose everything on earth but the jewel HONOR, and love
for one another!"

"Let me know all, Charles: I see that something or other shocking has happened," said Miss
Aubrey, in a low tone, with a look of the deepest apprehension.

"I will tell you the worst, Kate--- a strange claim is set up--by one I never heard of--to
the whole of the property we now enjoy!"

Miss Aubrey started, and the slight color that remained faded entirely from her cheek. Both
were silent for very nearly a minute.

"But is it a true claim, Charles?" she inquired, faintly.

"That remains to be proved. I will, however, disguise nothing from you--I have woful apprehensions"----

"Do you mean to say that Yatton is not ours?" inquired Miss Aubrey, catching her breath.

"So, alas! my dearest Kate, it is said!"

Miss Aubrey looked bewildered, and pressed her hand to her forehead.

"How shocking!--shocking!--shocking!" she gasped--"What is to become of mamma?"

"God Almighty will not desert her in her old age. He will desert none of us, if we only trust
in him," said her brother.

Miss Aubrey remained gazing at him intently, and continued perfectly motionless.

"Must we then all leave Yatton?" said she, faintly, after a while.

"If this claim succeeds--but we shall leave it together, Kate."

She threw her arms around his neck, and wept bitterly.

"Hush, hush, Kate!" said he, perceiving the increasing violence of her emotions, "restrain
your feelings for the sake of my mother--and Agnes."

His words had the desired effect: the poor girl made a desperate effort. Unclasping her arms
from her brother's neck, she sat down in her chair, breathing hard, and pressing her hand upon
her heart. After a few minutes' pause, she said faintly, "I am better now. Do tell me more,
Charles! Let me have something to think about--only don't say anything about--about--mamma
and Agnes!" In spite of herself a visible shudder ran through her frame.

"It seems, Kate," said he, with all the calmness he could assume--"at least they are trying
to prove--that our branch of the family has succeeded to the property prematurely--that there
is living an heir of the elder branch--that his case has been taken up by powerful friends;
and--let me tell you the worst at once--even the lawyers consulted by Mr. Parkinson on my behalf,
take a most alarming view of the possibilities of the case that may be brought against us"----

"But is mamma provided for?" whispered Miss Aubrey, almost inarticulately. "When I look at
her again, I shall drop at her feet insensible!"

"No, no, Kate, you won't! Heaven will give you strength," said her brother, in a tremulous
voice. "Remember, my only sister--my dearest Kate! you must support me in my trouble, as I
will support you--we will try to support each other"----

"We will--we will!" interrupted Miss Aubrey--instantly checking, however, her rising excitement.

"You bear it bravely, my noble girl!" said Mr. Aubrey, fondly, after a brief interval of silence.

She turned from him her head, and moved her hand--in deprecation of expressions which might
utterly unnerve her. Then she convulsively clasped her hands over her forehead; and, after
a minute or two, turned towards him with tears in her eyes, but tranquillized features. The
struggle had been dreadful, though brief--her noble spirit had recovered itself.

----'T was like some fair bark, in mortal conflict with the black and boiling waters and howling
hurricane; long quivering on the brink of destruction, but at last outliving the storm, righting
itself, and suddenly gliding into safe and tranquil waters!----

The distressed brother and sister sat conversing for a long time, frequently in tears, but
with infinitely greater calmness and firmness than could have been expected. They agreed that
Dr. Tatham should very early in the morning be sent for, and implored to take upon himself
the bitter duty of breaking the matter as gradually and safely as possible to Mrs. Aubrey;
its effects upon whom, her children anticipated with the most vivid apprehension. They both
considered that an event of such publicity and importance could not possibly remain long unknown
to her, and that it was, on the whole, better that the dreaded communication should be got
over as soon as possible. They then retired--Kate to a sleepless pillow, and her brother to
spend a greater portion of the night in attempts to soothe and console his suffering wife;
each of them having first knelt in humble reverence, and poured forth the breathings of a stricken
and bleeding heart, before Him who hath declared that he is ever present to HEAR and to ANSWER
prayer.

Ah! who can tell what a day or an hour may bring forth?

       *       *       *       *       *

"It won't kindle--not a bit on't--it's green and full o' sap. Go out, and get us a log that's
dry and old, George--and let's try to have a bit of a blaze in t'ould chimney, this bitter
night," said Isaac Tonson, the gamekeeper at Yatton, to the good-natured landlord of the Aubrey
Arms, the little--and only--inn of the village. The suggestion was instantly attended to.

"How Peter's a-feathering of his geese to-night, to be sure!" exclaimed the landlord on his
return, shaking the snow off his coat, and laying on the fire a great dry old log of wood,
which seemed very acceptable to the hungry flames, for they licked it cordially the moment
it was placed among them, and there was very soon given out a cheerful blaze. 'T was a snug
room. The brick floor was covered with fresh sand; and on a few stools and benches, with a
table in the middle, on which stood a large can and ale-glasses, with a plate of tobacco, sat
some half-dozen men, enjoying their pipe and glass. In the chimney corner sat Thomas Dickons,
the faithful under-bailiff of Mr. Aubrey, a big broad-shouldered, middle-aged man, with a hard-featured
face and a phlegmatic air. In the opposite corner sat the little grizzle-headed clerk and sexton,
old Hallelujah--(as he was called, but his real name was Jonas Higgs.) Beside him sat Pumpkin,
the gardener at the Hall, a very frequent guest at the Aubrey Arms o' nights--always attended
by Hector, the large Newfoundland dog already spoken of, and who was now lying stretched on
the floor at Pumpkin's feet, his nose resting on his fore feet, and his eyes, with great gravity,
watching the motions of a skittish kitten under the table. Opposite to him sat Tonson the gamekeeper--a
thin, wiry, beetle-browed fellow, with eyes like a ferret; and there were also, one or two
farmers, who lived in the village.

"Let's ha' another can o' ale, afore ye sit down," said Tonson, "we can do with another half
gallon, I'm thinking!" This order also was quickly attended to; and then the landlord, having
seen to the door, fastened the shutters close, and stirred the crackling fire, took his place
on a vacant stool, and resumed his pipe.

"So she do take a very long grave, Jonas?" inquired Dickons of the sexton, after some little pause.

"Ay, Mr. Dickons, a' think she do, t'ould girl! I always thought she would--I used to measure
her (as one may say) in my mind, whenever I saw her! 'Tis a reg'lar man's size, I warrant you;
and when parson saw it, a' said, he thought 'twere too big; but I axed his pardon, and said
I hadn't been sexton for thirty years without knowing my business--he, he!"

"I suppose, Jonas, you mun ha' seen her walking about i' t' village, in your time!--Were she
such a big-looking woman?" inquired Pumpkin, as he shook the ashes out of his pipe, and replenished
it.

"Forty year ago I did use to see her--she were then an old woman, wi' white hair, and leaned
on a stick--I never thought she'd a' lasted so long," replied Higgs, emptying his glass.

"She've had a pretty long spell on't," quoth Dickons, after slowly emptying his mouth of smoke.

"A hundred and two," replied the sexton; "so saith her coffin-plate--a' see'd it to-day."

"What were her name?" inquired Tonson--"I never knew her by any name but Blind Bess."

"Her name be Elizabeth Crabtree on the coffin," replied Higgs; "and she be to be buried to-morrow."

"She were a strange old woman," said Hazel, one of the farmers, as he took down one of the
oatcakes hanging overhead; and breaking off a piece, held it with the tongs before the fire
to toast, and then put it into his ale.

"Ay, she were," quoth Pumpkin; "I wonder what she thinks o' such things now--maybe--God forgive
me!--she's paying dear for her tricks!"

"Tut, Pumpkin," said Tonson, "let t'ould creature rest in her grave, where she's going to,
peaceably!"

"Ay, Master Tonson," quoth the clerk, in his reading-desk twang--"THERE be no knowledge, nor
wisdom, nor device!"

"'Tis very odd," observed Pumpkin, "but this dog that's lying at my feet never could a' bear
going past her cottage late o' nights--hang me if he could; and the night she died--Lord! you
should have heard the howl Hector gave--and a' didn't then know she were gone--it's as true
as the gospel--it is--actually!"

"No! but were't really so?" inquired Dickons--several of the others taking their pipes out
of their mouths, and looking earnestly at Pumpkin.

"I didn't half like it, I can tell you," quoth Pumpkin.

"Ha, ha, ha!--ha, ha!" laughed the gamekeeper--

"Ay, marry, you may laugh," quoth Pumpkin, "but I'll stake half-a-gallon o' ale you daren't
go by yourself to the cottage where she's lying--now, mind--i' the dark."

"I'll do it," quoth Higgs, eagerly, preparing to lay down his pipe.

"No, no--thou'rt quite used to dead folk--'tis quite in thy line!" replied Pumpkin--and, after
a little faint drollery, silence ensued for some moments.

"Bess dropped off sudden like, at the last, didn't she?" inquired the landlord.

"She went out, as, they say, like the snuff of a candle," replied Jobbins, one of the farmers;
"no one were with her but my Missis at the time. The night afore, she had took to the rattles
all of a sudden. My Sall (that's done for her, this long time, by Madam's orders,) says old
Bess were a good deal shaken by a chap from London, which cam' down about a week afore Christmas."

"Ay, ay," quoth one, "I've heard o' that--what was it?--what passed atwixt them?"

"Why, a' don't well know--but he seemed to know summat about t'ould girl's connections, and
he had a book, and wrote down something, and he axed her, so Sall do tell me, such a many things
about old people, and things that are long gone by!"

"What were the use on't?" inquired Dickons; "for Bess hath been silly this ten years, to my
sartin knowledge."

"Why, a' couldn't tell. He seemed very 'quisitive, too, about t'ould creature's Bible and prayer-book
(she kept them in that ould bag of hers)--and Sall said she had talked a good deal to the chap
in her mumbling way, and seemed to know some folk he asked her about. And Sall saith she hath
been, in a manner, dismal ever since, and often a-crying and talking to herself."

"I've heard," said the landlord, "that squire and parson were wi' her on Christmas-day--and
that she talked a deal o' strange things, and that the squire did seem, as it were, struck
a little, you know--struck, like!"

"Why, so my Sall do say; but it may be all her own head," replied Jobbins.

Here a pause took place.

"Madam," said the sexton, "hath given orders for an uncommon decent burying to-morrow."

"Well, a' never thought any wrong of ould Bess, for my part," said one--and another--and another;
and they smoked their pipes for some short time in silence.

"Talking o' strangers from London," said the sexton, presently--"who do know anything o' them
two chaps that were at church last Sunday? Two such peacock chaps I never see'd afore in my
time--and grinning all sarvice-time! the heathen!"

"Ay, I'll tell you something of 'em," said Hazel--a big broad-shouldered farmer, who plucked
his pipe out of his mouth with sudden energy--"They're a brace o' good ones, to be sure, ha,
ha! Some week or ten days ago, as I were a-coming across the field leading into the lane behind
the church, I see'd these same two chaps, and on coming nearer, (they not seeing me for the
hedge,) Lord bless me! would you believe it?--if they wasn't a-teasing my daughter Jenny, that
were coming along wi' some physic from the doctor for my old woman! One of 'em seemed a-going
to put his arm round her neck and t' other came close to her on t' other side, a-talking to
her and pushing her about." Here a young farmer, who had but seldom spoken, took his pipe out
of his mouth, and exclaiming, "Lord bless me!" sat listening with his mouth wide open. "Well,"
continued the former, "a' came into the road behind 'em, without their seeing me; and"--(here
he stretched out a thick, rigid, muscular arm, and clinched his teeth)--"a' got hold of each
by the collar, and one of 'em I shook about, and gave him a kick i' the breech that sent him
spinning a yard or two on the road, he clapping his hand behind him, and crying, to be sure--'You'll
smart for this--a good hundred pound damages!' or summat o' that sort. T' other dropped on
his knees, and begged for mercy; so a' just spit in his face, and flung him under t' hedge,
telling him if he stirred till I were out o' sight, I'd crack his skull for him; and so I would!"
Here the wrathful speaker pushed his pipe again between his lips, and began puffing away with
great energy; while he who had appeared to take so great an interest in the story, and who
was the very man who had flown to the rescue of Miss Aubrey, when she seemed on the point of
being similarly treated, told that circumstance exactly as it occurred, amid the silent but
excited wonder of those present--all of whom, at its close, uttered vehement execrations, and
intimated the summary and savage punishment which the cowardly rascal would have experienced
at the hands of each and every one of them, had they come across him.

"I reckon," said the landlord, as soon as the swell had a little subsided, "they must be the
two chaps that put up here, some time ago, for an hour or so. You should ha' seen 'em get on
and off the saddle--that's all! Why, a' laughed outright! The chap with the hair under his
chin got on upon the wrong side, and t'other seemed as if he thought his beast would a' bit him!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed all.

"I thought they'd a' both got a fall before they'd gone a dozen yards!"

"They've taken a strange fancy to my churchyard," said the sexton, setting down his glass,
and then preparing to fill his pipe again; "they've been looking about among 'em--among t'ould
gravestones, up behind t'ould yew-tree yonder; and one of them writ something, now and then,
in a book; so they're book-writers, in coorse!"

"That's scholars, I reckon," quoth Dickons; "but rot the larning of such chaps as them!"

"I wonder if they'll put a picture o' the Hall in their book," quoth the sexton. "They axed
a many questions about the people up there, especially about the squire's father, and some
ould folk, whose names I knew when they spoke of 'em--but I hadn't heard o' them for this forty
year. And one of 'em (he were the shortest, and such a chap, to be sure!--just like the monkey
that were dressed i' man's clothes, last Grilston fair) talked uncommon fine about young Miss"----

"If I'd a' heard him tak' her name into his dirty mouth, his teeth should a' gone after it!"
said Tonson.

"Lord! he didn't say any harm--only silly like--and t' other seemed now and then not to like
his going on so. The little one said Miss were a lovely gal, or something like that--and hoped
they'd become by-and-by better friends--ah, ha!"

"What! wi' that chap?" said Pumpkin--and he looked as if he were meditating putting the little
sexton up the chimney, for the mere naming of such a thing.

"I reckon they're fro' London, and brought toon tricks wi' 'em--for I never heard o' such goings
on as theirs down here afore," said Tonson.

"One of 'em--him that axed me all the questions, and wrote i' t' book, seemed a sharp enough
chap in his way; but I can't say much for the little one," said Higgs. "Lud, I couldn't hardly
look in his face for laughing, he seemed such a fool!--He had a riding-whip wi' a silver head,
and stood smacking his legs (you should ha' seen how tight his clothes was on his legs--I warrant
you, Tim Timpkins never see'd such a thing, I'll be sworn) all the while, as if a' liked to
hear the sound of it."

"If I'd a' been beside him," said Hazel, "I'd a' saved him that trouble--only I'd a' laid it
into another part of him!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" they laughed--and presently passed on to other matters.

"Hath the squire been doing much lately in Parliament?" inquired the sexton, of Dickons.

"Why, yes--he's trying hard to get that new road made from Harkley bridge to Hilton."

"Ah, that would save a good four mile, if a' could manage it!" said one of the farmers.

"I hear the Papists are trying to get the upper hand again--which the Lud forbid!" said the
sexton, after another pause.

"The squire hath lately made a speech in that matter, that hath finished them," said Dickons,
in a grave and authoritative tone.

"What would they be after?" inquired the landlord of Dickons, of whom, in common with all present,
he thought great things. "They say they wants nothing but what's their own, and liberty, and
that like"----

"If thou wert a shepherd, Master Higgs," replied Dickons, "and wert to be asked by ten or a
dozen wolves to let them in among thy flock of sheep, they saying how quiet and kind they would
be to 'em--would'st let 'em in, or keep 'em out?--eh?"

"Ay, ay--that be it--'tis as true as gospel!" said the clerk.

"So you a'n't to have that old sycamore down, after all, Master Dickons?" inquired Tonson,
after a pause in the conversation.

"No; Miss hath carried the day against the squire and Mr. Waters; and there stands the old
tree, and it hath to be looked to better than ever it were afore!"

"Why hath Miss taken such a fancy to it? 'Tis an old crazy thing!"

"If thou hadst been there when she did beg, as I may say, its life," replied Dickons, with
a little energy--"and hadst seen her, and heard her voice, that be as smooth as cream, thou
would'st never have forgotten it, I can tell thee!"

"There isn't a more beautiful lady i' t' county, I reckon, than the squire's sister?" inquired
the sexton.

"No, nor in all England: if there be, I'll lay down twenty pounds!"

"And where's to be found a young lady that do go about i' t' village like she?--She were wi'
Phœbe Williams t'other night, all through the snow, and i' t' dark."

"If I'd only laid hands on that chap!" interrupted the young farmer, her rescuer.

"I wonder she do not choose some one to be married to, up in London," said the landlord.

"She'll be having some delicate high quality chap, I reckon, one o' these fine days," said Hazel.

"She will be a dainty dish, truly, for whomever God gives her to," quoth Dickons.

"Ay, she will," said more than one, in an earnest tone.

"Now, to my mind," said Tonson, "saving your presence, Master Dickons, I know not but young
Madam be more to my taste; she be in a manner somewhat fuller--plumper-like, and her skin be
so white, and her hair as black as a raven's."

"There's not another two such women to be found in the whole world," said Dickons, authoritatively.
Here Hector suddenly rose up, and went to the door, where he stood snuffing in an inquisitive
manner.

"Now, what do that dog hear, I wonder?" quoth Pumpkin, curiously, stooping forward.

"Blind Bess," replied Tonson, winking his eye, and laughing. Presently there was a sharp rapping
at the door; which the landlord opened, and let in one of the servants from the Hall, his clothes
white with snow, his face nearly as white, with manifest agitation.

"Why, man, what's the matter?" inquired Dickons, startled by the man's appearance. "Art frightened
at anything?"

"Oh, Lord! oh, Lord!" he commenced.

"What is it, man? Art drunk?--or mad?--or frightened? Take a drop o' drink," said Tonson. But
the man refused it.

"Oh, Lord!--There's woful work at the Hall!"

"What's the matter?" cried all at once, rising and standing round the new-comer.

"If thou be'st drunk, John," said Dickons, sternly, "there's a way of sobering thee--mind that."

"Oh, Master Dickons, I don't know what's come to me, for grief and fright! The squire, they
do say, and all of us, are to be turned out o' Yatton!"

"What!" exclaimed all in a breath.

"There's some one else lays claim to it. We must all go! Oh, Lud! oh, Lud!" No one spoke for
a while; and consternation was written on every face.

"Sit thee down here, John," said Dickons at length, "and let us hear what thou hast to say--or
thou wilt have us all be going up in a body to the Hall."

Having forced on him part of a glass of ale, he began,--"There hath been plainly mischief brewing,
somewhere, this many days, as I could tell by the troubled face o' t' squire; but he kept it
to himself. Lawyer Parkinson and another have been latterly coming in chaises from London;
and last night the squire got a letter that seems to have finished all. Such trouble there
were last night wi' t' squire, and young Madam and Miss! And to-day the parson came, and were
a long while alone with old Madam, who hath since had a stroke, or a fit, or something of that
like, (the doctors have been there all day from Grilston,) and likewise young Madam hath taken
to her bed, and is ill. Oh, Lud! oh, Lud! Such work there be going on!"

"And what of the squire and Miss?" inquired some one, after all had maintained a long silence.

"Oh, 't would break your heart to see them," said the man, dolefully: "they be both pale as
death: he so dreadful sorrowful, but quiet, like, and she now and then wringing her hands,
and both of them going from the bedroom of old Madam to young Madam's. Nay, an' there had been
half a dozen deaths i' t' house, it could not be worse. Neither the squire or Miss hath touched
food the whole day!"

There was, in truth, not a dry eye in the room, nor one whose voice did not seem somewhat obstructed
with his emotions.

"Who told thee all this about the squire's losing the estate?" inquired Dickons, with mingled
trepidation and sternness.

"We heard of it but an hour or so agone. Mr. Parkinson (it seems by the squire's orders) told
Mr. Waters, and he told it to us; saying as how it was useless to keep such a thing secret,
and that we might as well all know the occasion of so much trouble."

"Who's to ha' it then, instead of the squire?" at length inquired Tonson, in a voice half choked
with rage and grief.

"Lord only knows at present. But whoever 'tis, there isn't one of us sarvents but will go with
the squire and his--if it be even to prison, that I can tell ye!"

"I'm Squire Aubrey's gamekeeper," quoth Tonson, his eye kindling as his countenance darkened,
"and no one's else! It shall go hard if any one else here hath a game"--

"But if there's law in the land, sure the justice must be wi' t' squire--he and his family
have had it so long?" said one of the farmers.

"I'll tell you what, masters," said Pumpkin, mysteriously, "I shall be somewhat better pleased
when Jonas here hath got that old creature Bess safe underground!" 

New crops and varieties should besought for the irrigated farms. On the dry-farms should be
grown the crops that can be handled in a large way and at a small
cost per acre, and that yield only moderate acre returns.

By such cooperation between irrigation and dry-farming will the regions of the world with a scanty
rainfall become the healthiest, wealthiest, happiest, and most populous on earth.

CHAPTER XIII

THE COMPOSITION OF DRY-FARM CROPS

The acre-yields of crops on dry-farms, even under the most favorable methods of culture, are
likely to be much smaller than in humid sections with fertile soils. The necessity for frequent
fallowing or resting periods over a large portion of the dry-farm
territory further decreases the average annual yield.

It does not follow from this condition that dry-farming is less profitable
than humid-or irrigation-farming, for it has been fully demonstrated
that the profit on the investment is as high under proper dry-farming
as under any other similar generally adopted system of farming in
any part of the world.

Yet the practice of dry-farming would appear to be, and indeed would be, much more desirable could
the crop yield be increased. The discovery of any condition which will offset the small annual
yields is, therefore, of the highest importance to the advancement of dry-farming. The recognition
of the superior quality of practically all crops grown without irrigation under a limited rainfall
has done much to stimulate faith in the great profitableness of dry-farming. As the varying nature of
the materials used by man for food, clothing, and shelter has become more clearly understood, more
attention has been given to the valuation of commercial products on the basis of quality as
well as of quantity. Sugar beets, for instance, are bought by the sugar factories under a
guarantee of a minimum sugar content; and many factories of Europe vary the price paid according
to the sugar contained by the beets. The millers, especially in certain parts of the country where wheat
has deteriorated, distinguish carefully between the flour-producing qualities of wheats from
various sections and fix the price accordingly. Even in the household, information concerning
the real nutritive value of various foods is being sought eagerly, and foods let down to possess
the highest value in the maintenance of life are displacing, even at a higher cost, the inferior
products. The quality valuation is, in fact, being extended as rapidly as the growth of knowledge
will permit to the chief food materials of commerce. As this practice becomes fixed the dry-farmer
will be able to command the best market prices for his products, for it is undoubtedly true that
from the point of view of quality, dry-farm food products may be placed safely in competition
with any farm products on the markets of the world.

Proportion of plant parts

It need hardly be said, after the discussions in the preceding chapters, that the nature of
plant growth is deeply modified by the arid conditions prevailing in dry-farming. This shows
itself first in the proportion of the various plant parts, such as roots, stems, leaves, and
seeds. The root systems of dry-farm crops are generally greatly developed, and it is a common observation
that in adverse seasons the plants that possess the largest and most vigorous roots endure
best the drouth and burning heat.

The first function of the leaves is to gather materials for the building and strengthening of
the roots, and only after this has been done do the stems lengthen and the leaves thicken.
Usually, the short season is largely gone before the stem and leaf growth begins, and, consequently,
a somewhat dwarfed appearance is characteristic of dry-farm crops. The size of sugar beets,
potato tubers, and such underground parts depends upon the available water and food supply when the
plant has established a satisfactory root and leaf system. If the water and food are scarce,
a thin beet results; if abundant, a well-filled beet may result.

Dry-farming is characterized by a somewhat short season. Even if good growing weather prevails, the
decrease of water in the soil has the effect of hastening maturity. The formation of flowers and
seed begins, therefore, earlier and is completed more quickly under arid than under humid conditions.
Moreover, and resulting probably from the greater abundance of materials stored in the root system,
the proportion of heads to leaves and stems is highest in dry-farm crops. In fact, it is a general
law that the proportion of heads to straw in grain crops increases as the water supply decreases.
This is shown very well even under humid or irrigation conditions when different seasons or different
applications of irrigation water are compared. For instance, Hall quotes from the Rothamsted
experiments to the effect that in 1879, which was a wet year (41 inches), the wheat crop yielded
38 pounds of grain for every 100 pounds of straw; whereas, in 1893,
which was a dry year (23 inches), the wheat crop yielded 95 pounds
of grain to every 100 pounds of straw.

The Utah station likewise has established the same law under arid conditions. In one series
of experiments it was shown as an average of three years' trial that
a field which had received 22.5 inches of irrigation water produced
a wheat crop that gave 67 pounds of grain to every 100 pounds of straw;
while another field which received only 7.5 inches of irrigation water
produced a crop that gave 100 pounds of grain for every 100 pounds
of straw.

Since wheat is grown essentially for the grain, such a variation is of tremendous importance.
The amount of available water affects every part of the plant.

Thus, as an illustration, Carleton states that the per cent of meat in oats grown in Wisconsin under
humid conditions was 67.24, while in North Dakota, Kansas, and Montana, under arid and semiarid
conditions, it was 71.51. Similar variations of plant parts may be observed as a direct result
of varying the amount of available water. In general then, it may be said that the roots of
dry-farm crops are well developed; the parts above ground somewhat dwarfed; the proportion of
seed to straw high, and the proportion of meat or nutritive materials
in the plant parts likewise high.

The water in dry-farm crops

One of the constant constituents of all plants and plant parts is water. Hay, flour, and starch
contain comparatively large quantities of water, which can be removed only by heat. The water in
green plants is often very large.

In young lucern, for instance, it reaches 85 per cent, and in young peas nearly 90 per cent,
or more than is found in good cow's milk.

The water so held by plants has no nutritive value above ordinary water. It is, therefore, profitable
for the consumer to buy dry foods.

In this particular, again, dry-farm crops have a distinct advantage: During growth there is
not perhaps a great difference in the water content of plants, due to climatic differences, but
after harvest the drying-out process goes on much more completely
in dry-farm than in humid districts.

Hay, cured in humid regions, often contains from 12 to 20 per cent of water; in arid climates it
contains as little as 5 per cent and seldom more than 12 per cent. The drier hay is naturally more
valuable pound for pound than the moister hay, and a difference in price, based upon the difference
in water content, is already being felt in certain sections of the West.

The moisture content of dry-farm wheat, the chief dry-farm crop, is even more important. According
to Wiley the average water content of wheat for the United States
is 10.62 per cent, ranging from 15 to 7 per cent. Stewart and Greaves
examined a large number of wheats grown on the dry-farms of Utah and
found that the average per cent of water in the common bread varieties
was 8.46 and in the durum varieties 8.89.

    This means that the Utah dry-farm wheats transported to ordinary
humid conditions would take up enough water from the air to increase
their weight one fortieth, or 2.2 per cent, before they reached the
average water content of American wheats.

In other words, 1,000,000 bushels of Utah dry-farm wheat contain
as much nutritive matter as 1,025,000 bushels of wheat grown and kept
under humid conditions.

    This difference should be and now is recognized in the prices paid.

In fact, shrewd dealers, acquainted with the dryness of dry-farm wheat, have for some years
bought wheat from the dry-farms at a slightly increased price, and
trusted to the increase in weight due to water absorption in more
humid climates for their profits.

The time should be near at hand when grains and similar products should be purchased upon the basis
of a moisture test.

While it is undoubtedly true that dry-farm crops are naturally drier than those of humid countries,
yet it must also be kept in mind that the driest dry-farm crops are always obtained where
the summers are hot and rainless. In sections where the precipitation comes chiefly in the
spring and summer the difference would not be so great. Therefore, the crops raised on the Great
Plains would not be so dry as those raised in California or in the Great Basin. Yet, wherever
the annual rainfall is so small as to establish dry-farm conditions, whether it comes in the
winter or summer, the cured crops are drier than those produced under conditions of a much higher
rainfall, and dry farmers should insist that, so far as possible in the future, sales be based on
dry matter.

The nutritive substances in crops

The dry matter of all plants and plant parts consists of three very distinct classes of substances:
First, ash or the mineral constituents. Ash is used by the body in building bones and in supplying
the blood with compounds essential to the various life processes.

Second, protein or the substances containing the element nitrogen. Protein is used by the body
in making blood, muscle, tendons, hair, and nails, and under certain conditions it is burned
within the body for the production of heat. Protein is perhaps the most important food constituent.
Third, non-nitrogenous substances, including fats, woody fiber, and nitrogen-free extract, a name
given to the group of sugars, starehes, and related substances.

These substances are used by the body in the production of fat, and are also burned for the production
of heat. Of these valuable food constituents protein is probably the most important, first, because
it forms the most important tissues of the body and, secondly, because it is less abundant than the
fats, starches, and sugars. Indeed, plants rich in protein nearly always command the highest
prices.

The composition of any class of plants varies considerably in different localities and in different
seasons. This may be due to the nature of the soil, or to the fertilizer applied, though variations
in plant composition resulting from soil conditions are comparatively small. The greater variations
are almost wholly the result of varying climate and water supply. As far as it is now known
the strongest single factor in changing the composition of plants is the amount of water available
to the growing plant.

Variations due to varying water supply

The Utah station has conducted numerous experiments upon the effect of water upon plant composition.
The method in every case has been to apply different amounts of water throughout the growing season
on contiguous plats of uniform land. [Lengthy table deleated from this edition.] Even a casual
study of . . . [the results show] that the quantity of water used influenced the composition
of the plant parts. The ash and the fiber do not appear to be greatly influenced, but the other
constituents vary with considerable regularity with the variations in the amount of irrigation
water. The protein shows the greatest variation. As the irrigation water is increased, the
percentage of protein decreases. In the case of wheat the variation was over 9 per cent. The percentage
of fat and nitrogen-free extract, on the other hand, becomes larger
as the water increases.

That is, crops grown with little water, as in dry-farming, are rich in the important flesh-and
blood-forming substance protein, and comparatively poor in fat, sugar, stareh, and other of
the more abundant heat and fat-producing substances. This difference is of tremendous importance
in placing dry-farming products on the food markets of the world. Not only seeds, tubers, and
roots show this variation, but the stems and leaves of plants grown with little water are found to
contain a higher percentage of protein than those grown in more humid climates.

The direct effect of water upon the composition of plants has been observed by many students.
For instance, Mayer, working in Holland, found that, in a soil containing throughout the season
10 per cent of water, oats was produced containing 10.6 per cent of protein; in soil containing
30 per cent of water, the protein percentage was only 5.6 per cent, and in soil containing
70 per cent of water, it was only 5.2 per cent. Carleton, in a study
of analyses of the same varieties of wheat grown in humid and semi-arid
districts of the United States, found that the percentage of protein
in wheat from the semiarid area was 14.4 per cent as against 11.94
per cent in the wheat from the humid area.

The average protein content of the wheat of the United States is a little more than 12 per cent; Stewart
and Greaves found an average of 16.76 per cent of protein in Utah dry-farm wheats of the common
bread varieties and 17.14 per cent in the durum varieties. The experiments conducted at Rothamsted,
England, as given by Hall, confirm these results. For example, during 1893, a very dry year,
barley kernels contained 12.99 per cent of protein, while in 1894, a wet, though free-growing
year, the barley contained only 9.81 per cent of protein. Quotations might be multiplied confirming
the principle that crops grown with little water contain much protein and little heat-and fat-producing
substances.

Climate and composition

The general climate, especially as regards the length of the growing season and naturally including
the water supply, has a strong effect upon the composition of plants. Carleton observed that
the same varieties of wheat grown at Nephi, Utah, contained 16.61 per cent protein; at Amarillo,
Texas, 15.25 per cent; and at McPherson, Kansas, a humid station, 13.04 per cent. This variation
is undoubtedly due in part to the varying annual precipitation but, also, and in large part, to
the varying general climatic conditions at the three stations.

An extremely interesting and important experiment, showing the effect of locality upon the composition
of wheat kernels, is reported by LeClerc and Leavitt. Wheat grown in 1905 in Kansas was planted
in 1906 in Kansas, California, and Texas In 1907 samples of the seeds grown at these three
points were planted side by side at each of the three states All the crops from the three localities
were analyzed separately each year.

The results are striking and convincing. The original seed grown in Kansas in 1905 contained
16.22 per cent of protein. The 1906 crop grown from this seed in Kansas contained 19.13 per
cent protein; in California, 10.38 percent; and in Texas, 12.18 percent. In 1907 the crop harvested
in Kansas from the 1906 seed from these widely separated places and of very different composition
contained uniformly somewhat more than 22 per cent of protein; harvested in California, somewhat
more than 11 per cent; and harvested in Texas, about 18 per cent. In short, the composition of
wheat kernels is independent of the composition of the seed or the nature of the soil, but
depends primarily upon the prevailing climatic conditions, including the water supply. The
weight of the wheat per bushel, that is, the average size and weight of the wheat kernel, and also the hardness
or flinty character of the kernels, were strongly affected by the varying climatic conditions.
It is generally true that dry-farm grain weighs more per bushel than grain grown under humid
conditions; hardness usually accompanies a high protein content and is therefore characteristic
of dry-farm wheat. These notable lessons teach the futility of bringing in new seed from far
distant places in the hope that better and larger crops may be secured. The conditions under
which growth occurs determine chiefly the nature of the crop. It is a common experience in the West
that farmers who do not understand this principle send to the Middle West for seed corn, with
the result that great crops of stalks and leaves with no ears are obtained. The only safe rule for
the dry-farmer to follow is to use seed which has been grown for many years under dry-farm conditions.

A
reason for variation in composition

It is possible to suggest a reason for the high protein content of dry-farm crops. It is well
known that all plants secure most of their nitrogen early in the growing period. From the nitrogen,
protein is formed, and all young plants are, therefore, very rich in protein. As the plant becomes
older, little more protein is added, but more and more carbon is taken from the air to form the
fats, starches, sugars, and other non-nitrogenous substances. Consequently, the proportion or
percentage of protein becomes smaller as the plant becomes older. The impelling purpose of
the plant is to produce seed. Whenever the water supply begins to give out, or the season shortens
in any other way, the plant immediately begins to ripen. Now, the essential effect of dry-farm
conditions is to shorten the season; the comparatively young plants, yet rich in protein, begin
to produce seed; and at harvest, seed, and leaves, and stalks are rich in the flesh-and blood-forming
element of plants. In more humid countries plants delay the time of seed production and thus
enable the plants to store up more carbon and thus reduce the percent of protein. The short growing
season, induced by the shortness of water, is undoubtedly the main reason for the higher protein
content and consequently higher nutritive value of all dry-farm crops.

Nutritive value of dry-farm hay, straw, and flour


The "intimate friend" to whom Titmouse alluded as having engaged himself to dinner with him,
was, in fact, Mr. Snap; who had early evinced a great partiality for him, and lost no opportunity
of contributing to his enjoyment. Snap was a sharp-sighted person, and quickly detected many
qualities in Titmouse, kindred to his own. He sincerely commiserated Titmouse's situation,
than which, could anything be more lonely and desolate? Was he to sit night after night in
the lengthening nights of autumn and winter, with not a soul to speak to, not a book to read,
(that was at least interesting or worth reading;) nothing, in short, to occupy his attention?
"No," said Snap to himself; "I will do as I would be done by; I will come and draw him out
of his dull hole; I will show him life--I will give him an early insight into the habits and
practices of the great world, in which he is so soon to cut a leading figure! I will early
familiarize him with the gayest and most exciting modes of London life!" The very first taste
of this cup of pleasure was exquisitely relished by Titmouse; and he felt a proportionate gratitude
to him whose kind hand had first raised it to his lips. Scenes of which he had heretofore only
heard and read--after which he had often sighed and yearned, were now opening daily before
him, limited as were his means; and he felt perfectly happy. When Snap had finished the day's
labors of the office, from which he was generally released about eight or nine o'clock in the
evening, he would repair to his lodgings, and decorate himself for the night's display; after
which, either he would go to Titmouse, or Titmouse come to him, as might have been previously
agreed upon between them; and then,--

    "The town was all before them, where to choose!"

Sometimes they would, arm in arm, each with his cigar in his mouth, saunter, for hours together,
along the leading streets and thoroughfares, making acute observations and deep reflections
upon the ever-moving and motley scenes around them. Most frequently, however, they would repair,
at half-price, to the theatres; for Snap had the means of securing almost a constant supply
of "orders" from the underlings of the theatres, and also from reporters to the Sunday Flash,
(with which Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were connected,) and other newspapers. Ah, 'twas a glorious
sight to see these two gentlemen saunter into a vacant box, conscious that the eyes of two-thirds
of the house were fixed upon them in admiration, and conducting themselves accordingly--as
swells of the first water! One such night counterbalanced, in Titmouse's estimation, a whole
year of his previous obscurity and wretchedness! The theatre over, they would repair to some
cloudy tavern, full of noise and smoke, and the glare of gaslight--redolent of the fragrant
fumes of tobacco, gin, and porter, intermingled with the tempting odors of smoking kidneys,
mutton-chops, beefsteaks, oysters, stewed cheese, toasted cheese, Welsh rabbits; where those
who are chained to the desk and the counter during the day, revel in the license of the hour,
and eat, and drink, and smoke to the highest point either of excitement or stupefaction, and
enter into all the slang of the day--of the turf, the ring, the cockpit, the theatres--and
shake their sides at comic songs. To enter one of these places when the theatre was over, was
a luxury indeed to Titmouse; figged out in his very uttermost best, with satin stock and double
breastpins; his glossy hat cocked on one side of his head, his tight blue surtout, with the
snowy handkerchief elegantly drooping out of the breast-pocket; straw-colored kid gloves, tight
trousers, and shining boots; his ebony silver-headed cane held carelessly under his arm! To
walk into the middle of the room with a sort of haughty ease and indifference, or nonchalance;
and after deliberately scanning, through his eye-glass, every box, with its occupants, at length
drop into a vacant nook, and with a languid air summon the bustling waiter to receive his commands,
was ecstasy! The circumstance of his almost always accompanying Snap on these occasions, who
was held in great awe by the waiters, to whom his professional celebrity was well known, (for
there was scarce an interesting, a dreadful, or a nasty scene at any of the police-offices,
in which Snap's name did not figure in the newspapers as "appearing on behalf of the prisoner,")
got Titmouse almost an equal share of consideration, and aided the effect produced by his own
commanding appearance. As for Snap, whenever he was asked who his companion was, he would whisper
in a very significant tone and manner--"Devilish high chap!" From these places they would repair,
not unfrequently, to certain other scenes of nightly London life, which, I thank God! the virtuous
reader can form no notion of, though they are, strange to say, winked at, if not patronized
by the police and magistracy, till the metropolis is choked with them. Thus would Snap and
Titmouse pleasantly pass away their time till one, two, three, and often four o'clock in the
morning; at which hours they would, with many yawns, skulk homewards through the deserted and
silent streets, their clothes redolent of tobacco smoke, their stomachs overcharged, their
heads often muddled, swimming, and throbbing with their multifarious potations--having thus
spent a "jolly night," and "seen life." 'T was thus that Snap greatly endeared himself to Titmouse,
and secretly (for he enjoined upon Titmouse, as the condition of their continuance, strict
secrecy on the subject of these nocturnal adventures) stole a march upon his older competitors
for the good opinion of Titmouse--Messrs. Quirk, Tag-rag, and even the astute and experienced
Gammon himself. The New Testament abounds in symbols, parables, and proverbs, taken from ancient
tradition, but beautifully woven into a purer faith, which taught that the healthy joys of life,
and all knowledge of divine truth, should be given not to a few kings or priests, a few favored
with initiation into divine mysteries, as of old, but to the whole world; for the spirit of
Christianity was identical with the genius of republicanism. As taught by our Lord Jesus Christ,
it was eminently healthy, brave-hearted, and joyous. It did not commend celibacy, nor excess
of fasting, nor too long prayers, nor righteousness overmuch. It did not approve of a plethora
of outward goods, while the culture of our highest faculties was neglected. It condemned all
excess of care, even in our daily duties, at the expense of that 'better part' which distinguishes
us from mere ants or bees. It gave no warrant for the dismal dirges and melancholy groans which
are raised in its name, by men whom Jesus would have been the first to reprove. 'It was a religion
of life and of beauty, of friendship and temperate mirth, of love, truth, and manliness; one which
opposed neither feasting at weddings nor "going a fishing."'

The temptation to find a refuge from the evils of life in active exertion, instead of cultivating
the sources of joy in our own nature, is the subject of an ingenious and striking chapter.
In a land, where enjoyment in many minds is connected with a sense of sin, it is doubtless better
that the overflowing energy of character, which is a trait of the population, should seek vent in the
excitements of labor, than in poisonous liquors, horse races, politics, and the gaming table. Where
the natural support of life is wanting, partial methods of relief may be employed. He who can
no longer swallow, may gain an imperfect nourishment by means of baths, or artificial transmission.
So, the grim and hardened soul, which has lost the support of inward cheerfulness, may find
strength in work, merely for the sake of work.

But it is a fraud upon humanity to educate men solely as industrious animals. Hives are beautiful,
honey is sweet, and wonderful is the cunning structure of the cell; but society is not a hive,
nor the people bees. The day is dawning when it will be understood that cheerful songs are as
essential to genuine manhood as work; that labor is not to be borne as a curse, with sighs and
groans; but combined with mental culture, will become capable of self-support, and will supply
its own enthusiasm.
The great problem of the age is the union of beauty with practical
uses. In their highest forms, art and science blend and become identical,
just as the Beautiful and the Good assimilate, as we trace them to
their source in Truth. He promised, however, to read such books as Mr. Gammon might recommend;
who thereupon sent him several: but a book before Titmouse was much the same as a plate of
sawdust before a hungry man. Mr. Gammon, himself a man of considerable acquirements, soon saw
the true state of the case, and gave up his attempts in despair and disgust. Not that he ever
suffered Titmouse to perceive the faintest indication of such feelings towards him; on the
contrary, Gammon ever exhibited the same bland and benignant demeanor, consulting his wishes
in everything, and striving to instil into him feelings of love, tempered by respect, as towards
the most powerful--the only real, disinterested friend he had! To a very great extent he succeeded.

Titmouse spent several hours in preparing for an effective first appearance at the dinner-table
at Alibi House. Since dining at Satin Lodge, he had considerably increased his wardrobe both
in quantity and style. He now sported a pair of tight black trousers, with pumps and gossamer
silk stockings. He wore a crimson velvet waistcoat, with a bright blue satin under-waistcoat,
a shirt-frill standing out somewhat fiercely at right angles with his breast, and a brown dress-coat
cut in the extreme of the fashion, the long tails coming to a point just about the backs of
his knees. His hair (its purple hue still pretty distinctly perceptible) was disposed with
great elegance. He had discarded mustaches; but had a very promising imperial. The hair underneath
his chin came out curling on each side of it, above his stock, like two little tufts or horns.
Over his waistcoat he wore his mosaic gold watch-guard, and a broad black watered ribbon, to
which was attached his eye-glass--in fact, if he had dressed himself in order to sit to a miniature
painter for his likeness, he could not have taken greater pains, or secured a more successful
result. The only points about his appearance with which he was at all dissatisfied, were his
hair--which was not yet the thing which he hoped in due time to see it--his thick red stumpy
hands, and his round shoulders. The last matter gave him considerable concern, for he felt
that it seriously interfered with a graceful carriage; and that the defect in his figure had
been, after all, not in the least remedied by the prodigious padding of his coat. His protuberant
eyes, of very light hue, had an expression entirely harmonizing with that of his open mouth;
and both together, quite independently of his dress, carriage, and demeanor--(there is nothing
like being candid)--gave you the image of a--complete fool. Having at length carefully adjusted
his hat on his head, and drawn on his white kid gloves, he enveloped himself in a stylish cloak,
with long black silk tassels, which had been lent to him by Snap; and about four o'clock, forth
sallied Mr. Titmouse, carefully picking his way, in quest of the first coach that could convey
him to Alibi House, or as near to it as might be. He soon found one, and, conscious that his
appearance was far too splendid for an outside place, got inside. All the way along, his heart
was in a little flutter of vanity, excitement, and expectation. He was going to be introduced
to Miss Quirk--and probably, also, to several people of great consequence--as the heir apparent
to £10,000 a-year! Two very respectable female passengers, his companions, he never once deigned
to interchange, a syllable with. Four or five times did he put his head out of the window,
calling out in a loud peremptory tone--"Mind, coachman--Alibi House--Mr. Quirk's--Alibi House--Do
you hear, demme?" After which he would sink back into the seat with a magnificent air, as if
he had not been used to give himself so much trouble. The coach at length stopped. "Hallibi
Ouse, sir," said the coachman, in a most respectful tone--"this is Mr. Quirk's, sir." Titmouse
stepped out, dropped eighteenpence into the man's hand, and opening the gate, found himself
in a straight and narrow gravel walk, of about twenty yards in length, with little obstinate-looking
stunted shrubs on each side. 'T was generally known, among Mr. Quirk's friends, by the name
of "the Rope-walk." Titmouse might have entered before as fine-looking a house, but only to
deliver a bundle of drapery or hosiery: never before had he entered such an one in the reality
of guest. It was, in fact, a fair-sized house, at least treble that of Satin Lodge, and had
a far more stylish appearance. When Titmouse pulled the bell, the door was quickly plucked
open by a big footman, with showy shoulder-knot and a pair of splendid red plush breeches,
who soon disposed of Titmouse's cloak and hat, and led the way to the drawing-room, before
our friend, with a sudden palpitation of the heart, had had a moment's time even to run his
hands through his hair.

"Your name, sir?" inquired the man, suddenly pausing--with his hand upon the handle of the door.

"Mr. Titmouse!"

"I--beg your pardon, sir; what name?"

Titmouse clearing his throat repeated his name--open went the door, and--"Mr. Ticklemouse,"
said the servant, very loudly and distinctly--ushering in Titmouse; on whom the door was the
next instant closed. He felt amazingly flustered--and he would have been still more so, if
he could have been made aware of the titter which pervaded the fourteen or twenty people assembled
in the room, occasioned by the droll misnomer of the servant, and the exquisitely ridiculous
appearance of poor Titmouse. Mr. Quirk, dressed in black, with knee breeches and silk stockings,
immediately bustled up to him, shook him cordially by the hand, and led him up to the assembled
guests. "My daughter--Miss Quirk; Mrs. Alderman Addlehead; Mrs. Deputy Diddle-daddle; Mrs.
Alias, my sister;--Mr. Alderman Addlehead; Mr. Deputy Diddle-daddle; Mr. Bluster; Mr. Slang;
Mr. Hug; Mr. Flaw; Mr. Viper; Mr. Ghastly; Mr. Gammon you know." Miss Quirk was about four
or five and twenty--a fat young lady, with flaxen hair curled formally all over her head and
down to her shoulders; so that she very much resembled one of those great wax dolls seen in
bazaars and shop windows. Her complexion was beautifully fair; her eyes were small; her face
was quite round and fat. From the die-away manner in which she moved her head, and the languid
tone of her voice, it was obvious that she was a very sentimental young lady. She was dressed
in white, and wore a massive gold chain--her fat arms being half covered with long kid gloves.
She was sitting on the sofa, from which she did not rise when Titmouse was introduced to her--and
the moment afterwards, hid her face behind the album which had been lying on her knee, and
which she had been showing to the ladies on each side of her; for, in fact, neither she nor
any one else could, without the greatest difficulty, refrain from laughing at the monkeyfied
appearance of Titmouse. The alderman was a stout, stupid little man--a fussy old prig--with
small angry-looking black eyes, and a short red nose; as for his head, it seemed as though
he had just smeared some sticky fluid over it, and then dipped it into a flour-tub, so thickly
laden was it with powder. Mr. Deputy Diddle-daddle was tall and thin, and serious and slow
of speech, with the solemn composure of an undertaker. Mr. Bluster was a great Old Bailey barrister,
about fifty years old, the leader constantly employed by Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and
was making at least a thousand a-year. He had an amazingly truculent-looking countenance, coarse
to a degree, and his voice matched it; but on occasions like the present--i. e. in elegant
society--he would fain drop the successful terrors of his manner, and appear the mild, dignified
gentleman. He therefore spoke in a very soft, cringing way, with an anxious smile; but his
bold insolent eye and coarse mouth--what could disguise or mitigate their expression? Here
he was, playing the great man; making himself, however, most particularly agreeable to Messrs.
Quirk and Gammon. Slang was of the same school; fat, vulgar, confident, and empty; telling
obscene jokes and stories, in a deep bass voice. He sang a good song, too--particularly of
that class which required the absence of ladies--and of gentlemen. Hug (Mr. Toady Hug) was
also a barrister; a glib little Jewish-looking fellow, creeping into considerable criminal
practice. He was a sneaking backbiter, and had a blood-hound scent after an attorney. See him,
for instance, at this moment, in close and eager conversation with Mr. Flaw, who, rely upon
it, will give him a brief before the week is over. Viper was the editor of the Sunday Flash;
a cold, venomous little creature. A committee Meeting of our Council has been summoned for the
day after to-morrow (May 5) at eight o'clock P.M., at the Beaconsfield Club, to consider some
important questions affecting your Candidature and the plan of campaign to be adopted in prosecuting
it. I trust that you may be able to make it convenient to attend, and shall be glad to receive
a wire from you to this effect. I may mention to you that I have lately heard, in confidence, that
Sir THOMAS CHUBSON's health is causing considerable anxiety to the Radical leaders here. He has attended
very few divisions lately, and has offended many of the advanced section by his conduct over the
Strike Subvention Bill, which was backed by the Labour Members. Sir THOMAS, however, abstained
from the division on the Second Reading. It is just possible that, under the circumstances, he
may decide to apply for the Chiltern Hundreds very shortly, and we must be prepared for every
emergency.

Yours faithfully, JAMES TOLLAND.

It was a confounded nuisance. I had arranged to take the BELLAMYS to the Scandinavian Exhibition
this afternoon, and to dine and go to the theatre with the JACKSONS. Had to put off everything.
MARY BELLAMY will be dreadfully annoyed. Wrote specially to her to apologise and explain.
They're sure to get that beast POMFRET to take them instead. He's always hanging round. Last
week he wrote a lot of verse in MARY's Confession Album, in this style (I copied some of it
out, in order to show it to VULLIAMY, who hates him):--

Though, when he's asked his favourite name, a man is apt to stare, he Must answer, if he knows
what's what, "My favourite name is MARY."

    And this:--

The vice I detest and abhor above all Is not dancing four times with you at a ball.

And this, in answer to the question, "What or who would you rather be, if you were not yourself?"--

I'd
rather be the rosebud that nestles in your hair, Or the aunt whose hand you took in yours and
pressed upon the stair.

They all admired this slip-slop immensely, and MARY asked me, when I called the other day, if
I didn't think it wonderfully clever. I know, when I wrote my answers in her album, it took me days
of thought to get them done in prose, and even then they turned out
the most ordinary, commonplace things.

However I thought they pleased MARY, and now POMFRET steps in with
his confounded rhymes.

Mrs. BELLAMY's father once published a volume of verse, and is still talked of in the household
as "your grandfather the poet." She told me that she thought "a faculty for versification was
the mark of a truly refined and delicate mind." Bah! POMFRET's one of the most selfish and
calculating ruffians outside a convict prison, and always haggles over his luncheon bills
at the Club, till the head-waiter and all the rest nearly go off their heads.

However, I had to come to Billsbury, nilly-willy. Met the Committee
after dinner.

They were anxious that I should do some canvassing soon, and wanted me, when next I spoke,
to explain myself more fully (1) on the Temperance Question and the question of Compensation
to Publicans; (2) on the Women's Suffrage Question; (3) on the Labour Question; (4) on Foreign Policy;
and (5) with reference to the Billsbury Main Drainage Scheme.

I said I would, but I should probably require more than one speech
to do it in.

Afterwards a very solemn member of the Committee, whose name I forget, got up and made a long
speech, in which he observed that my habit of appearing in dress
clothes at the meetings had annoyed a good many of my supporters,
and that he ventured to suggest to me, for my own good, that I should
wear ordinary dress.

It seems a good many of the lower lot thought it looked uppish. I'm glad enough not to have
to do it any more.

There were other points, but I'm too tired to remember them. By the way, I have subscribed
to about a dozen more Clubs and Institutions, and have promised to
get Mother to open a bazaar here at the end of the month.

Back to London to-morrow. What a life!

* * * * *

THE LATEST "LABOR PROGRAM."

(BY A NEW-UNIONIST.)

I am all for myself, and 'tis perfectly true That the "labor"

I love is regardless of "u." But, per contra, informing my "program" you see Though I wink (with
two I's), I eliminate "me."

                                          
                                    * * * * *
                                                

     * * * * *

IN A LOCK.--A WHITSUNTIDE WARBLE.

     
     
     "Lock! Lock!"--Shock! Rock! That's a pretty frock bulging over
     the gunwale! She looks like to choke with that horrible smoke, which
     is fuming out of the Steam-Launch funnel. Pleasant old cry! All
     in, and dry. though we're awfully crowded this first Spring holiday,
     Better this than St. Stephen's dead-lock! Our serious Senators out
     for a jolly day Might do worse.

              Who carries the purse? That ten-foot
               rod with the toll-net ending it Means a hint.

     They must make "a mint"; and, by Jove, there are many worse ways of
     spending it,-- Money, I mean. Now were G-SCH-N seen collecting cash
     for his dry Exchequer With pole and net, it were nicer, you
     bet, than keeping up his financial pecker With Spirit Duties! Those
     two blonde beauties in Cambridge blue are exceeding bonny; B-LF-R
     now at that same boat's bow would be quite in his element--eh, my
     sonny? And OLD MORALITY cooling his legs in the stern-sheets
     yonder would find the steering Easier far than amidst the jar of
St. Stephen's, hot with T-M H-LY jeering.

     S-L-SB-RY, too, with a well-trained crew, would put his back--that
broad back of his!--in it.

            Don't be in
              a hurry, my nautical friend!
                we shall all get out
                    in another minute.

     Just like life!

              Such fidgety strife
              to be first to the front when the lock-gates
              sever. What does it matter, friends, after
              all?

                    The slow, the skilful, the dull, the clever, The snake-swift "swell"
and the splashing 'ARRY, the puffing launch, and the trim outrigger,
The calm canoest who hugs the timbers, the fussy punter who toils
like a nigger, All will anon be well out in the cutting, the old gates
shutting slowly behind them, And where are those who so shoved to
the front?

At the tail of the race you may presently find them. The G.O.M. (with his collars for sails),
that jaunty skiff might be handling. Bless us! Can he take holiday, he whom toil seems to encoil
like a shirt of Nessus? Well, Unionist or Separatist, or chap with a twist like C-NN-NGH-M
GR-H-M, Or howling PAT, or Aristocrat with manners like BRUMMEL and voice like BRAHAM, Peppery
G-SCH-N, or pompous H-RC-RT, or genial SM-TH, the new-made Warden, All, all, to-day, when the
world is gay, the stream like silver, the banks a garden, Much worse might do than tog up in blue
and join a crew on the rolling river, "Beyond the tide," dropping all their "side," party or
personal, leaving "liver," And Influenza, and other "Obstructions," all party-jobbers, all jibbers
and jolters, In sunny weather to crowd together in Moulsey Lock, or it might be BOULTER's!

* * * * *

* * * * *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

The Kennel, Barks, Friday, May 15.--This entry in Diary is dated from my ancestral home, pleasantly
situated in the County I have the honour to represent. Haven't been to Westminster this week. Hear,
through usual channels of information, that House adjourns to-day for Whitsun Recess. When I say House,
I mean fragment that remains; a few doors and chimneys, with here and there a ruined wing. Fact
is, majority absent with influenza. Some seventy or eighty of us have formed House of our own;
meet regularly at usual hour; get through business in a way that would astonish the residuum left
at Westminster; and jog off comfortably for dinner. All Parties and all sections of Party represented.
SPEAKER and Chairman of Committees still stick to Westminster. But we have GORST, one of the
Deputy-Speakers, who presides with dignity and despatch. JACKSON looks after arrangement of
business. AKERS-DOUGLAS whips up the Conservatives, assisted by SYDNEY HERBERT and ARTHUR HILL.
THOMAS ESMONDE brings up to the scratch TANNER, SWIFT MACNEILL, and PIERCE MAHONY. On Treasury
Bench MICHAEL BEACH sits in place of OLD MORALITY, being supported by GEORGIE HAMILTON, STUART
WORTLEY, and JAMES FERGUSSON, whilst KNUTSFORD and DERBY look down from Peers' Gallery. On
Front Opposition Bench Mr. G., just arrived; finds JOHN MORLEY, OSBORNE AP MORGAN, KAY-SHUTTLEWORTH,
and MUNDELLA. WOLMER not yet arrived, but daily expected. Meanwhile JOHN LUBBOCK, MUNTZ, T.W.
RUSSELL, and the Wiwacious WIGGIN here, ready to obey the Whip, when issued.

CHARLES FORSTER, looks after petitions for us; FRANK LOCKWOOD draws us out (or in, as the case
may be); ALGERNON BORTHWICK throws an air of fashionable society
around us; the Reverberating COLOMB lifts his tall head in our midst;
ISAAC HOLDEN never tires of telling the fascinating story of how he
discovered the lucifer-match; HENNIKER HEATON passes the time writing
letters to RAIKES, and complains that the Postmaster-General has his
communications ostentatiously fumigated before opening them; SEYMOUR
KEAY says he must get back to Westminster (nobody says him nay), or
Land Bill would be getting passed through Committee; and here is the
Grand Young GARDNER and his wife--Lady WINIFRED, of course, looking
down on us from Ladies' Gallery.

Have on the whole a very good time.

Looked after by RUSTEM ROOSE, whose cure is as alluring as it is infallible. "Eat, drink and
sleep," he says. "Lie on your back and sedulously do nothing." So whilst they storm and fret at
Westminster, here, in hollow Lotos Land we live and lie reclining. Pleasant to hear RUSTEM ROOSE's
voice as he goes his morning rounds, stethoscope in hand. "A long breath, dear friend: say '74;
Pommery, certainly if you like; a pint at luncheon and a roast chicken. Turn over, dear friend;
another long breath; say '80; de Lanson, of course, if you prefer it; a pint at dinner with
a fried sole and a porterhouse steak; or, if you are tired of champagne, take a pint of claret
with a glass or two of port. A long breath, dear friend; say '50; three glasses if '50 port won't
do you any harm."

Worst of it is we're all getting better, and shall be back to the grind at Westminster after Whitsuntide.
Business done.--All taking long breaths.

* * * * *

THE DIS-ORDER OF THE DAY.--In the House of Commons on the Motion of the First Lord of the Treasury,
it was resolved that Influenza, M.P., be expelled. Mr. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN, Leader of the Opposition,
pro tem., moved to amend the Resolution by adding "at once."

This was agreed to nem. con.

The Serjeant-at-Arms was thereupon ordered to remove Influenza. He declined on the ground
that if he did he might catch it.

After some conversation the debate was adjourned.

Influenza left sitting on Members generally.--Extract from the Fifteenth
of May's Parliamentary Report.

* * * * *

A PENNY FOR YOUR THOUGHTS!

(BY A PERPLEXED READER OF THE PENNY PAPERS.)

When you're lying awake, with a horrid headache (to adopt a suggestion of GILBERT's), When too
freely you've dined, or too heavily wined, or munched too many walnuts or filberts; When your
brain is a maze, and creation a haze, then each queer social craze--there are many!-- Gets your
wits in a spool, and there isn't a fool for your thoughts would advance you a penny.

You can't sleep a wink, so the question of Drink, though you timidly
shrink from it, harries you.

Your wit's in a whirl, as you think, if some girl with a penchant
for you, ups and marries you.

And ties you for life to the thing called a Wife,--that figment,
that fraud, that illusion, Where, what will you be?

And you can't find a key to the epoch's chaotic confusion.

It seems Local Option is sure of adoption, and what a tyrannic majority May "opt" for one day,
you're unable to say, and in vain you appeal to Authority. The Law of the Land is a labyrinth grand,
which you can't understand, nor can anyone, And that is a thought,
with delirium fraught, an appalling, if 'tis not a penny one.

Now Law, the Old Antic, seems utterly frantic, absurdly romantic and maundering; And Cool Common
Sense has gone dotty and dense, in dim deserts of Sentiment wandering. Now Reason and Right,
hydrocephalous quite, are both Della-Cruscan and drivelling, Life
(barring the fun) like "The Mulberry One," seems a mixture of diddling
and snivelling.

There's LAWSON who jaws on the Abstinence Cause on, and would lay his claws on the Nation,
And put sudden stopper on all that's improper (as he thinks) without
compensation; And then there's Sir EDWARD, who, when he goes bedward,
must have his reflections nightmarish!

It seems, from such rigs, that our biggest Big Wigs are scarcest to govern a parish. MCDOUGALL
again, is agog to restrain all that gives his soul pain--it's a squeamish
one!-- He thinks he's a stayer as Jabberwock-slayer, mere Angry Boy
he, not a Beamish One!

These Oracles windy do raise such a shindy, and kick such a doose of a dust up, One would
think without them we were wrong stern and stem, and the whole of creation would bust up.
But verily why men should new worship Hymen,--who, just as unshackled
as Cupid,-- (See decision Re JACKSON), take burdens their backs on,
I cannot conceive.

It seems stupid Beyond all expression to have a "possession" whose "ownness" there's desperate
doubt of, And which (if she's nous) you can't keep in your house,
nor yet (if she's "savvy") keep out of!

What is "Hymen's halter"? I fidget and falter! The Beaks seem to palter and fumble. In such a
strange fashion, I fly in a passion, and vow that the world is a jumble. Law seems a wigged
noodle, as tame as a poodle, the whole darned caboodle (as 'ARRY
sees) Is ructions and "rot," and our "rulers" a lot of confounded
old foodles and Pharisees!

Yes, that's what I think about Marriage and Drink--if you may call it thought, which with frenzy
is fraught, and gives me a "head" like bad whiskey; whose dread is
on me day and night, makes me wake in a fright, from visions most
solemn of column on column of such "printed matter" and paragraph
chatter, as makes me feel flatter than cold eggless batter upon a
lead platter--as mad as a hatter, and who will relieve me?

Can anyone? I tell you it's dreadful to face a whole bedful of spectres and spooks (born of papers
and books) with, most horrible looks, limbs contorted in crooks, and bat-wings with big hooks, which
haunt all the nooks of tester and curtain, and which, I am certain,
will drive me insane if some one can't explain where the mischief
we are, 'midst the jumble and jar of factions and fads, of crotchets
and cads, of Tolstois and Jeunes, and Ibsens (whose lunes are more
lunatic still).

Oh, I'd learn with a will from any or aught, who could bring me,
fresh caught, with lucidity fraught (what so long I have sought) a
Clear Comforting Thought--though a Penny One!

* * * * *

IN RE THE INFLUENZA.

(AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTE ON THE APPEARANCE OF THE EPIDEMIC IN THE LAW COURTS.)

Owing to recent sentimental legislation, many members of the learned profession, to which I have the
honour to belong, have found their practice becoming (to quote the poet) "small by degrees
and beautifully less."

Times were when I could scarcely pass a week in term time without appearing in Court holding
a consent brief, or armed with authority to move (unopposed) for the appointment of a receiver.
But that was long ago--a deep contrast with to-day--when my admirable and excellent Clerk
PORTINGTON, finds an hour a day ample, almost too ample, time for posting up to date my Fee Book.
However, occasionally a gleam of the old sunshine illumines, so to
speak, the chambers I occupy, and such a gleam was my retention for
the Defence in the cause of Quicksilver v. Nore.

It was a Patent Case, and one of the deepest possible interest. It is my good fortune to know
the Defendant, personally, and it was through his kind offices that the instructions to appear
for him were left at my chambers. My friend and client (who is unjustly said to be eccentric in
his habits) has recently patented and produced a most important invention, which greatly facilitates
the retention of dinner-napkins, after those useful, nay, necessary articles have been used
for the purpose for which they are manufactured.

Like all really valuable inventions, the patent is simplicity itself,
the napkin-ring consisting of the section of the thicker end of an
elephant's tusk cut to an appropriate size and hollowed out.

It is necessary to fold the dinner-napkin in such a fashion that, when inserted through the ring,
its shape is retained by the adherent properties inseparable from
the ivory.

The patent can also be produced in other materials, such as gold,
silver and jewels for the wealthy, and in bone, tin and even glass
for purchasers of smaller means.

I must say that when the ring was shown to me I was greatly struck with the cleverness and
simplicity of the idea, and could not understand how Mr. QUICKSILVER could have allowed himself
to be so badly advised as to bring an action for infringement, merely on the strength of his
patent being also a dinner-napkin-holder with the ring element so far introduced that it consisted
of a circle closed and opened by a hinge. However, it was no part of my duty to advise the other side,
so I set to work to get up my case (as I invariably do) con amore.

I hunted up all the causes in the Digest, that seemed to be on all-fours with the matter in
dispute, and spent days in the Public Library of the Patent Office searching for patents having
to do with table-napkins. As the specifications were not consecutively published, I had to wade
through a large number of these interesting documents that treated of other subjects. For instance,
the first specification I would take out of the box in which it was kept, would perhaps have
to do with house-raising without disturbance to the foundations, the second would prove to
be an article half umbrella, half revolver, while in the third I would perhaps find an extremely
quaint notion for a portable pocket corkscrew. I myself picked up many ideas for future use,
and hope some day, if I do nothing else, at least to perfect a clever little contrivance of
my own for arousing the inmates of a house invaded by burglars by casement concussions. I propose
calling this valuable little instrument (which is founded to some extent on the simple construction
by which the figures in a child's box of wooden soldiers are enabled to advance and retire in a
scissors-like fashion), when produced, the Policeman's Upper Floor Window Tapper.


"Shall I call out encore? A'n't that the word? 'pon my soul, most lovely gal! She must sing
it again!"

"No, no--she wishes to go--'tis not usual: she will sing it for you, I dare say, this evening,
if you ask her."

"Well--most charming gal!--Lovely!"----

"Have patience, my dear Titmouse," said Gammon, in a low whisper, "in a few months' time you'll
soon be thrown into much higher life than even this--among really beautiful, and rich, and
accomplished women"--[and, thought Gammon, you'll resemble a monkey that has found his way
into a rich tulip-bed!]

"Fancy that girl Tag-rag standing beside Miss Quirk!" whispered Titmouse, scornfully.

"Ha, ha!" gently laughed Gammon--"both of them, in their way, are very worthy persons; but"--Here
the ladies withdrew. 'Twas no part of Gammon's schemes, that Titmouse should become the son-in-law
of either Quirk or Tag-rag. Mr. Gammon had formed already, vastly different plans for him!

As soon as Quirk had taken the head of the table, and the gentlemen drawn together, the bottles
were pushed round very briskly, accompanied by no fewer than three different sorts of snuff-boxes,
all belonging to Mr. Quirk--all of them presents from grateful Old Bailey clients! One was
a huge affair, of Botany Bay wood, with a very flaming inscription on the inside of the lid;
from which it appeared that its amiable donors, who were trying the effect of a change of climate
on their moral health at the expense of a grateful country, owed their valuable lives to the
professional skill and exertions of "Caleb Quirk, Esq." In short, the other two were trophies
of a similar description, of which their possessor was very justly not a little proud; and
as he saw Titmouse admiring them, it occurred to him as very possible that, within a short
time, he should be in possession of a magnificent gold snuff-box, in acknowledgment of the
services he should have rendered to his distinguished guest and client. Titmouse was in the
highest possible spirits. This, his first glimpse into high life, equalled all his expectations.
Round and round went the bottles--crack went joke after joke. Slang sang song upon song, of,
however, so very coarse and broad a character as infinitely disgusted Gammon, and apparently
shocked the alderman;--though I greatly distrust that old sinner's sincerity in the matter.
Then Ghastly's performances commenced. Poor fellow! he exerted himself to the utmost to earn
the good dinner he had just devoured; but when he was in the very middle of one of his most
impassioned scenes--undoubtedly "tearing a passion to rags,"--Mr. Quirk interrupted impatiently--"Come,
come, Ghastly, we've had enough of that sort of thing--it don't suit--d'ye see--at all!--Lord
bless us!--don't roar so, man!"

Poor Ghastly instantly resumed his seat, with a chagrined and melancholy air.

"Give us something funny," snuffled the alderman.

"Let's have the chorus of Pigs and Ducks," said Quirk; "you do that remarkable well. I could
fancy the animals were running, and squealing, and quacking all about the room!" The actor
respectfully did as he was desired, commencing with a sigh, and was much applauded. At length
Gammon happened to get into a discussion with Mr. Bluster upon some point connected with the
Habeas Corpus Act, in which our friend Gammon, who never got heated in discussion, and was
very accurate in whatever he knew, had glaringly the best of it. His calm, smiling self-possession
almost drove poor Bluster frantic. The less he knew, of course the louder he talked, the more
vehement and positive he became; at length offering a bet that there was no such thing as a
writ of Habeas Corpus before the time of Charles II.;[20] at which Gammon bowed, smiled, and
closed the discussion. While engaged in it, he had of course been unable to keep his eye upon
Titmouse, who drank, consequently, claret, port, sherry, and madeira, like a little fish, never
letting the decanter pass him. Every one about him filled his glass every time--why should not he?

Hug sat next to Viper; feared him, and avoided discussion with him; for, though they agreed
in the lowest Radical politics, they had a personal antipathy each to the other. In spite of
their wishes, they at length got entangled in a very virulent controversy, and said so many
insulting things to each other, that the rest of the company, who had for some time been amused,
got at length--not disgusted--but alarmed, for the possible results--fully expecting the exchange
of a brace of wine-glasses against each other's heads! Mr. Quirk therefore interfered.

"Bravo! bravo! bravo!" he exclaimed, as Viper concluded a most envenomed passage, "that will
do, Viper--whip it into the next Flash--'t will be a capital leader! It will produce a sensation!
And in the mean time, gentlemen, let me request you to fill your glasses--bumpers--for I have
a toast to propose, in which you'll all feel interested when you hear who's the subject of
it. It is a gentleman who is likely soon to be elevated to a station which Nature has formed
him--hem! hem!--to adorn"----

"Mr. Quirk's proposing your health, Titmouse!" whispered Gammon to his companion, who, having
been very restless for some time, had at length become quite silent--his head resting on his
hand, his elbow on the table--his eyes languidly half open, and his face exceedingly pale.
Gammon saw that he was, in truth, in an exceedingly ticklish condition.

"I--wish--you'd--let me--go out--I'm devilish ill"--said Titmouse, faintly. Gammon made a signal
to Quirk, who instantly ceased his speech; and coming down to Titmouse, he and Gammon hastily
led that gentleman out of the room and into the nearest bed-chamber, where he began to be very
ill indeed, and so continued for several hours. Old Quirk, who was a long-headed man, was delighted
by this occurrence; for he saw that if he insisted on Titmouse's being put to bed, and passing
the night--and perhaps the next day--at Alibi House, it would enable Miss Quirk to bring her
attractions to bear upon him effectively, by exhibiting those delicate and endearing attentions
which are so soothing and indeed necessary to an invalid. Titmouse continued desperately indisposed
during the whole of the night; and, early in the morning, it was thought advisable to send
for a medical man, who pronounced Titmouse to be in danger of a bilious fever, and to require
rest and care and medical attendance for some days to come. This was rather "too much of a
good thing" for old Quirk; but there was no remedy. Foreseeing that Titmouse would be thrown
constantly, for some little time to come, into Miss Quirk's company, her prudent parent enjoined
upon Mrs. Alias, his sister, the necessity of impressing on his daughter's mind the great uncertainty
which, after all, existed as to Titmouse's prospects; and the consequent necessity there was
for her to regulate her conduct with a view to either failure or success--to keep her affections,
as it were, in abeyance. But the fact was, that Miss Quirk had so often heard the subject of
Titmouse's brilliant expectations talked of by her father, and knew so well his habitual prudence
and caution, that she looked upon Titmouse's speedy possession of ten thousand a-year as a
matter almost of certainty. She was a girl of some natural shrewdness, but of an early inclination
to maudlin sentimentality. Had she been blest with the vigilant and affectionate care of a
mother as she grew up, (that parent having died when Miss Quirk was but a child,) and been
thrown among a set of people different from those who constantly visited at Alibi House--and
of whom a very favorable specimen has been laid before the reader--Miss Quirk might really
have become a very sensible and agreeable girl. As it was, her manners had contracted a certain
coarseness, which at length overspread her whole character; and the selfish and mercenary motives
by which she could not fail to perceive all her father's conduct regulated, gradually infected
herself. She resolved, therefore, to be governed by the considerations so urgently pressed
upon her by both her father and her aunt.

It was several days before Titmouse was allowed, by his medical man, to quit his bedroom; and
it is impossible for any woman not to be touched by the sight of a sudden change effected in
a man's appearance by severe indisposition and suffering, even be that man so poor a creature
as Titmouse. He was very pale, and considerably reduced by the serious nature of the attack,
and of the powerful treatment with which it had been encountered. When he made his first appearance
before Miss Quirk, one afternoon, with somewhat feeble gait, and a languid air which mitigated,
if it did not obliterate, the foolish and conceited expression of his features, she really
regarded him with something akin to interest; and, though she might hardly have owned it even
to herself, his expected good fortune invested him with a sort of subdued radiance. Ten thousand
a-year!--Miss Quirk's heart fluttered! By the time that he was well enough to take his departure,
she had, at his request, read over to him nearly half of that truly interesting work,--the
Newgate Calendar; she had sung to him and played to him whatever he asked her; and, in short,
she felt that if she could but be certain that he would gain his great lawsuit, and step into
ten thousand a-year, she could love him. She insisted, on the day of his quitting Alibi House,
that he should write in her album; and he very readily complied. It was nearly ten minutes
before he could get a pen to suit him. At length he succeeded, and left the following interesting
memento of himself in the very centre of a fresh page:--

    "Tittlebat Titmouse Is My name,
        England Is My Nation,
    London Is My dwelling-Place,
        And Christ Is My Salvation.
                  "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE,
                      "halibi lodge."

Miss Quirk turned pale with astonishment and vexation on seeing this elegant and striking addition
to her album. Titmouse, on the contrary, looked at it with no little pride; for having had
a capital pen, and his heart being in his task, he had produced what he conceived to be a very
superior specimen of penmanship: in fact, the signature was by far the best he had ever written.
When he had gone, Miss Quirk was twenty times on the point of tearing out the leaf which had
been so dismally disfigured; but on her father coming home in the evening, he laughed heartily--"and
as to tearing it out," said he, "let us first see which way the verdict goes!"

Titmouse became, after this, a pretty frequent visitor at Alibi House; growing more and more
attached to Miss Quirk, who, however, conducted herself towards him with much judgment. His
inscription on her album had done a vast deal towards cooling down the ardor with which she
had been disposed to regard even the future owner of ten thousand a-year. Poor Snap seemed
to have lost all chance, being treated with greater coldness by Miss Quirk on every succeeding
visit to Alibi House. At this he was sorely discomfited; for she would have whatever money
her father might die possessed of, besides a commanding interest in the partnership business.
'T was a difficult thing for him to preserve his temper under such circumstances, in his close
intimacy with Titmouse, who had so grievously interfered with his prospects.

The indisposition I have been mentioning, prevented Titmouse from paying his promised visit
to Satin Lodge. On returning to his lodgings from Alibi House, he found that Tag-rag had either
called or sent every day to inquire after him with the most affectionate anxiety; and one or
two notes lying on his table apprised him of the lively distress which the ladies of Satin
Lodge were enduring on his account, and implored him to lose not a moment in communicating
the state of his health, and personally assuring them of his safety. Though the image of Miss
Quirk was continually before his eyes, Titmouse, nevertheless, had cunning enough not to drop
the slightest hint to the Tag-rags of the true state of his feelings. Whenever any inquiry,
with ill-disguised anxiety, was made by Mrs. Tag-rag concerning Alibi House and its inmates,
Titmouse would, to be sure, mention Miss Quirk, but in such a careless and slighting way as
gave great consolation and encouragement to Tag-rag, his wife, and daughter. "Miss Quirk,"
he said, "was well enough--but devilish fat!"--When at Mr. Quirk's, he spoke somewhat unreservedly
of the amiable inmates of Satin Lodge. These two mansions were almost the only private residences
visited by Titmouse, who spent his time much in the way which I have already described. How
he got through his days I can hardly tell. At his lodgings he got up very late, and went to
bed very late. He never read anything excepting occasionally a song-book lent him by Snap,
or a novel, or some such book as "Boxiana," from the circulating library, and the Sunday Flash.
Dawdling over his dress and his breakfast, then whistling and humming and looking out of the
window, took up so much of every day as he passed at his lodgings. The rest was spent in idling
about the town, looking in at shop windows, and now and then going to some petty exhibition--as
of sparring, cock-fighting, etc. When evening came, he was generally joined by Snap, when they
would spend the night together in the manner I have already described. As often as he dared,
he called at Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's office at Saffron Hill, worrying them not a
little by inquiries concerning the state of his affairs, and the cause of the delay in commencing
proceedings. As for Huckaback, by the way, Titmouse cut him entirely; saying that he was a
devilish low fellow, and it was no use knowing him. He made many desperate efforts, both personally
and by letter, to renew his acquaintance with Titmouse, but in vain. I may as well mention,
by the way, that as soon as Snap got scent of the little money transaction between his friend
and Huckaback, he called upon the latter, and tendering him twelve shillings, demanded up the
document which he had extorted from Titmouse. Huckaback held out obstinately for some time--but
Snap was too much for him, and talked in such a formidable strain about an indictment for a
conspiracy (!) and fraud, that Huckaback at length consented, on receiving twelve shillings,
to deliver up the document to Snap, on condition of Snap's destroying it on the spot. This
was done, and so ended all intercourse--at least on this side of the grave--between Titmouse
(as far, at least, as his intentions went) and Huckaback.

The sum allowed by Messrs. Quirk and Gammon to Titmouse, was amply sufficient to have kept
him in comfort; but it never would have enabled him to lead the kind of life which I have described--and
he would certainly have got very awkwardly involved, had it not been for the kindness of Snap
in advancing him, from time to time, such sums as his exigencies required. In fact, matters
went on as quietly and smoothly as possible for several months--till about the middle of November;
when an event occurred which seemed to threaten the total demolition of all his hopes and expectations.

He had not seen or heard from Messrs. Quirk or Gammon for nearly a fortnight; Snap he had not
seen for nearly a week. At length he ventured to make his appearance at Saffron Hill, and was
received with a startling coldness--a stern abruptness of manner--which frightened him out
of his wits. All the three partners were alike--as for Snap, the contrast between his present
and his former manner, was perfectly shocking: he seemed quite another person. The fact was,
that the full statement of Titmouse's claims had been laid before Mr. Subtle, the leading counsel
retained in his behalf, for his opinion on the case generally, before actually commencing proceedings;
and the partners were indeed thunderstruck on receiving that opinion; for Mr. Subtle pointed
out a radical deficiency of proof in a matter which, as soon as their attention was thus pointedly
called to it, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were amazed at their having overlooked, and still more
at its having escaped the notice of Mr. Tresayle, Mr. Mortmain, and Mr. Frankpledge. Mr. Quirk
hurried with the opinion to the first two of these gentlemen; and after a long interview with
each, they owned their fears that Mr. Subtle was right, and that the defect seemed incurable;
but they easily satisfied their agitated clients, that they--the aforesaid Messrs. Tresayle
and Mortmain--had been guilty of neither oversight nor ignorance, inasmuch as the matter in
question was one of evidence only--one which a nisi prius lawyer, with a full detail of "proofs"
before him, could hardly fail to light upon--but which, it would be found, had been assumed,
and taken for granted, in the cases laid before conveyancers. They promised, however, to turn
it over in their minds, and to let Messrs. Quirk and Gammon know if anything occurred to vary
their impression. A week elapsed, however, and Mr. Tresayle and Mr. Mortmain preserved an ominous
silence. As for Frankpledge, he had a knack, somehow or another, of always coming to the conclusion
wished and hoped for by his clients; and, after prodigious pains, he wrote a very long opinion,
to show that there was nothing in the objection. Neither Mr. Quirk nor Mr. Gammon could understand
the process by which Mr. Frankpledge arrived at such a result; but, in despair, they laid his
opinion before Mr. Subtle, in the shape of a further "Case for his Opinion." It was in a few
days' time returned to them, with only a line or two--thus:--

     "I see no reason whatever to depart from the view I have already
     taken of this case.--J. S."

Here was something like a dead lock, indeed!

"We're done, Gammon!" said Quirk, with a dismayed air. Gammon seemed lost, and made no answer.

"Does anything--eh?" quoth Quirk, with a troubled air. "Anything occur to you? Gammon, I will
say this for you--you're a long-headed fellow!" Still Gammon spoke not.

"Gammon! Gammon! I really believe--ah?--you--you--begin to see something--don't you?"

"It's to be DONE, Mr. Quirk!" said Gammon, at length, with a grave and apprehensive look, and
a cheek which had suddenly grown pale.

"Eh? how? Oh, I see!--Know what you mean, Gammon," replied Quirk, with a hurried whisper, glancing
at both doors to see that they were safe.

"We must resume our intercourse with Titmouse, and let matters go on as before," said Gammon,
with a very anxious, but, at the same time, a determined air.

"I--I wonder if what has occurred to you is what has occurred to me?" inquired Quirk, in an
eager whisper.

"Pooh! pooh! Mr. Quirk."

"Gammon, dear Gammon, no mystery! You know I have a very deep stake in this matter!"

"So have I, Mr. Quirk," replied Gammon, with a sigh. "However"--Here the partners put their
heads close together, and whispered to each other in a low, earnest tone, for some minutes.
Quirk rose from his seat, and took two or three turns about the room in silence, Gammon watching
him calmly.

To his inexpressible relief and joy, within a few hours of the happening of the above colloquy,
Titmouse found himself placed on precisely his former footing with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap.

In order to bring on the cause for trial at the next spring assizes, it was necessary that
the declaration in ejectment should be served on the tenant in possession before Hilary term;
and, in a matter of such magnitude, it was deemed expedient that Snap should proceed to Yorkshire,
and personally effect the service in question. In consequence, also, of some very important
suggestions as to the evidence, given by the junior in the cause, (Mr. Lynx,) it was arranged
that Snap should go down about a week before the time fixed upon for effecting the service,
and make quietly certain minute inquiries in the neighborhood of Yatton. As soon as Titmouse
had heard of this movement--that Snap was going direct to Yatton, the scene of his, Titmouse's,
future greatness--he made the most pertinacious and vehement entreaties to Messrs. Quirk and
Gammon to be allowed to accompany him, even going down on his knees. There was no resisting
this; but they exacted from him a solemn pledge that he would place himself entirely at the
disposal of Mr. Snap; go under some feigned name, and, in short, neither say nor do anything
tending to disclose their real character or errand.

Snap and Titmouse established themselves at the Hare and Hounds Inn at Grilston; and the former
immediately began, cautiously and quietly, to collect such evidence as he could discover. One
of the first persons to whom he went was old Blind Bess. His many pressing questions at length
stirred up in the old woman's mind faint confused recollections of long-forgotten names, persons,
places, scenes, and associations, thereby producing an agitation not easily to be got rid of,
and which had by no means subsided when Dr. Tatham and Mr. Aubrey paid her the Christmas-day
visit, which has been described.

CHAPTER XI.

The reader has had, already, pretty distinct indications of the manner in which Titmouse and
Snap conducted themselves during their stay in Yorkshire; and which, I fear, have not tended
to raise either of these gentlemen in the reader's estimation. Titmouse manifested a very natural
anxiety to see the present occupants of Yatton; and it was with infinite difficulty that Snap
could prevent him from sneaking about in the immediate neighborhood of the Hall, with the hope
of seeing them. His first encounter with Mr. and Miss Aubrey was entirely accidental, as the
reader may remember; and when he found that the lady on horseback near Yatton, and the lady
whom he had striven to attract the notice of in Hyde Park, were one and the same beautiful
woman, and that that beautiful woman was neither more nor less than the sister of the present
owner of Yatton--the marvellous discovery created a mighty pother in his little feelings. The
blaze of Kate Aubrey's beauty in an instant consumed the images both of Tabitha Tag-rag and
Dora Quirk. It even for a while outshone the splendors of ten thousand a-year: such is the
inexpressible and incalculable power of woman's beauty over everything in the shape of man--over
even so despicable a sample of him, as Tittlebat Titmouse.

While putting in practice some of those abominable tricks to which, under Snap's tutelage,
Titmouse had become accustomed in walking the streets of London, and from which even the rough
handling they had got from farmer Hazel could not turn him, Titmouse at length, as has been
seen, most unwittingly fell foul of that fair creature, Catherine Aubrey herself; who seemed
truly like an angelic messenger, returning from her errand of sympathy and mercy, and suddenly
beset by a little imp of darkness. When Titmouse discovered who was the object of his audacious
and revolting advances, his soul (such as it was) seemed petrified within him; and it was fortunate
that the shriek of Miss Aubrey's attendant at length startled him into a recollection of a
pair of heels, to which he was that evening indebted for an escape from a most murderous cudgelling,
which might have been attended with one effect not contemplated by him who inflicted it, (so
profoundly in the dark are we as to the causes and consequences of human actions;) viz. the
retention of the Aubreys in the possession of Yatton! Titmouse ran for nearly half a mile on
the high-road towards Grilston, without stopping. He dared not venture to return to Yatton,
with the sound of the lusty farmer's voice in his ears, to get back from the Aubrey Arms the
horse which had brought him that afternoon from Grilston, to which place, therefore, he walked
on, through the snow and darkness; reaching his inn in a perfect panic, from which, at length,
a tumbler of stiff brandy and water, with two or three cigars, somewhat relieved him. Forgetful
of the solemn pledge which he had given to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, not to disclose
his name or errand, and it never once occurring to him that if he would but keep his own counsel,
Miss Aubrey could never identify him with the ruffian who had assailed her; Titmouse spent
the interval between eight and twelve o'clock, at which latter hour the coach by which he had
resolved to return to London would pass through Grilston, in inditing the following letter
to Miss Aubrey:--

                                        "Grilston, January 6th, 18--.
     "HONORED MISS,

     "Hoping No Offence Will Be Taken where None is meant, (which am
     Sure of,) This I send To say Who I Am which, Is the Right And True
     Owner of Yatton which You Enjoy Amongst You All At This present
     (Till The Law Give it to Me) Which It quickly Will, and No
     Mistake, And which It Ought to Have done When I were First born And
     Before Y^r Respect^e. Family ever Came into it, And All which Y^r
     hon^d. Brother Have so unlawfully Got Possession Of must Come Back
     to Them Whose Due It is w^h Is myself as will be Soon prov^d. And
     w^h am most truely Sorry Of on your own Acc^t. (Meaning (hon^d.
     Miss) you Alone) as Sure As Yatton is Intirely Mine So My Heart Is
     yours and No Longer my Own Ever since I Saw You first as Can
     Easily prove but w^h doubtless You Have forgot Seeing You Never
     New, because (as Mr. Gammon, My Solliciter And a Very Great Lawyer,
     says) Cases Alter Circumstances, what Can I say More Than that I
     Love you Most Amazing Such As Never Thought Myself Capable of
     Doing Before and w^h cannot help Ever Since I First saw your most
     Lovely and Divine and striking Face w^h have Stuck In my Mind
     Ever Since Day and Night Sleeping and Waking I will Take my Oath
     Never Of Having Lov'd Any one Else, Though (must Say) have Had a
     Wonderful Many Offers From Females of The Highest Rank Since my
     Truely Wonderful Good fortune got Talked About every Where but have
     Refused Them All for y^r sake, And Would All the World But you.
     When I Saw You on Horseback It was All my Sudden confusion In
     Seeing you (the Other Gent. was One of my Resp^e Solicitors) w^h
     Threw Me off in that Ridiculous Way w^h was a Great Mortification
     And made My brute Of A horse go on so, For I Remembered You and
     was Wonderful struck with Your Improv'd Appearance (As that Same
     Gent. can Testify) And you was (Hon^d. Miss) Quite Wrong To
     Night when You Spoke so Uncommon Angry To Me, seeing If I Had Only
     Known What Female It Was (meaning yourself which I respect So)
     out so Late Alone I should Have spoke quite Different So hope You
     Will think Nothing More Of that Truely Unpleasant Event Now
     (Hon^d. Madam) What I have to say Is if You will Please to
     Condescend To Yield To My Desire We Can Live Most uncommon
     Comfortable at Yatton Together w^h Place shall Have Great Pleasure
     (if you please) in Marrying You From and I may (perhaps) Do
     Something handsome for y^r. respectable Brother and Family, w^h can
     Often Come to see us And Live in the Neighborhood, if You Refuse
     me, Will not say What shall Happen to Those which (am Told) Owe
     me a Precious Long Figure w^h May (perhaps) Make a Handsome
     Abatement in, if You And I Hit it.

     "Hoping You Will Forget What Have So Much Griev^d. me, And Write
     p^t. return of Post,

          "Am,
            "hon^d. Miss
        "Y^r. most Loving & Devoted Servant
            "(Till Death)
              TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.
       "PARTICULAR Private."

This exquisitely constructed document its accomplished writer sealed twice, and then left,
together with sixpence, in the hands of the landlady of the Hare and Hounds, to be delivered
at Yatton Hall the first thing in the morning. The good woman, however--having no particular
wish to oblige such a strange puppy, whom she was only too glad to get rid of, and having moreover
a good deal to attend to--laid the letter aside on the chimney-piece, and entirely lost sight
of it for nearly a fortnight. Shortly after the lamentable tidings concerning the impending
misfortunes of the Aubrey family had been communicated to the inhabitants of Grilston, she
forwarded the letter, (little dreaming of the character in which its writer was likely, erelong,
to reappear at Grilston,) together with one or two others, a day or two after Miss Aubrey had
had the interview with her brother which I have described to the reader; but it lay unnoticed
by any one--above all, by the sweet sufferer whose name was indicated on it--among a great
number of miscellaneous letters and papers which had been suffered to accumulate on the library
table.

Mr. Aubrey entered the library one morning, alone, for the purpose of attending to many matters
which had been long neglected. He was evidently thinner: his face was pale, and his manner
dejected: still there was about him an air of calmness and resolution. Through the richly-pictured
old stained-glass window, the mottled sunbeams were streaming in a kind of tender radiance
upon the dear familiar objects around him. All was silent. Having drawn his chair to the table,
on which was lying a confused heap of letters and papers, he felt a momentary repugnance to
enter upon the task which he had assigned to himself; and rose and walked slowly for some time
up and down the room, with folded arms, uttering occasionally profound sighs. At length he
resumed his seat, and commenced the disheartening task of opening the many letters before him.
One of the earliest that came to his hand was from Peter Johnson--the old tenant to whom he
had lent the sum of two hundred pounds, and it was full of fervent expressions of gratitude
and respect; Mr. Aubrey's heart ached as he read them. Then came a letter, a fortnight old,
bearing the frank of Lord C----, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. He opened it and
read:--

                                        "Whitehall, 16th January, 18--.

     "My DEAR AUBREY,

     "You will remember that Lord ----'s motion stands for the 28th. We
     all venture to calculate upon receiving your powerful support in
     the debate. We expect to be much pressed with the Duke of ----'s
     affair, which you handled shortly before the recess with such
     signal ability and success. When you return to town, you must
     expect a renewal of certain offers, which I most sincerely trust,
     for the benefit of the public service, will not be again
     declined.

                                       "Ever yours faithfully,
                                              "C----.
                                     "(Private and confidential.)
     "CHARLES AUBREY, Esq. M. P."

Mr. Aubrey laid down the letter calmly, as soon as he had read it; and leaning back in his
chair, seemed lost in thought for several minutes. Presently he reapplied himself to his task,
and opened and glanced over a great many letters; the contents of several of which occasioned
him deep emotion. Some were from persons in distress whom he had assisted, and who implored
a continuance of his aid; others were from ardent political friends--some sanguine, others
desponding--concerning the prospects of the session. Two or three hinted that it was everywhere
reported that he had been offered one of the under secretaryships, and had declined; but that
it was, at the king's desire, to be pressed upon him. Many letters were on private, and still
more on county, business; and with one of them he was engaged when a servant entered with one
of that morning's county newspapers. Tired with his task, Mr. Aubrey rose from his chair as
the servant gave him the paper; and, standing before the fire, unfolded the Yorkshire Stingo,
and glanced listlessly over its miscellaneous contents. At length his eye lit upon the following
paragraph:--

     "The rumors so deeply affecting a member for a certain borough in
     this county, and to which we alluded in our last paper but one,
     turn out to be well founded. A claimant has started up to the very
     large estates at present held by the gentleman in question; and we
     are much misinformed if the ensuing spring assizes will not effect
     a considerable change in the representation of the borough alluded
     to, by relieving it from the Tory thraldom under which it has been
     so long oppressed. We have no wish to bear hard upon a falling man;
     and, therefore, shall make no comment upon the state of mind in
     which that person may be presumed to be, who must be conscious of
     having been so long enjoying the just rights of others. Some
     extraordinary disclosures may be looked for when the trial comes
     on. We have heard from a quarter on which we are disposed to place
     reliance, that the claimant is a gentleman of decided Whig
     principles, and who will prove a valuable accession to the Liberal
     cause."[21]

Mr. Aubrey was certainly somewhat shocked by brutality such as this; but on Miss Aubrey's entering
the room, he quietly folded up the paper and laid it aside, fearful lest his sister's feelings
should be pierced by the coarse and cruel paragraph which it contained. It had, in fact, been
concocted in London, in the office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; who were, as before
stated, interested in the Sunday Flash, which was in some sort connected, through the relationship
of the editors, with the Yorkshire Stingo. The idea had been suggested by Gammon, by way of
attempting to enlist the political feeling of a portion of the county, in favor of their client.

"Here are several letters for you, Kate," said her brother, picking out several of them. The
very first she took up, it having attracted her attention by the double seal, and the vulgar
style of the handwriting, was that from Titmouse, which has just been laid before the reader.
With much surprise she opened the letter, her brother being similarly engaged with his own;
and her face getting gradually paler and paler as she went on, at length she flung it on the
floor with a passionate air, and burst into tears. Her brother, with astonishment, exclaimed--"Dear
Kate, what is it?" and he rose and stooped to pick up the letter.

"Don't--don't, Charles!" she cried, putting her foot upon it, and flinging her arms round his
neck. "It is an audacious letter--a vulgar, a cruel letter, dear Charles!" Her emotion increased
as her thoughts recurred to the heartless paragraph concerning her brother with which the letter
concluded. "I could have overlooked everything but that," said she, unwittingly. With gentle
force he succeeded in getting hold of the painfully ridiculous and contemptible effusion. He
attempted faintly to smile several times as he went on.

"Don't--don't, dearest Charles!" said she, passionately. "I can't bear it!--Don't smile!--It's
very far from your heart; you do it only to assure me!"

Here Mr. Aubrey read the paragraph concerning himself. His face turned a little paler than
before, and his lips quivered with suppressed emotion. "He is evidently a very foolish fellow!"
he exclaimed, walking towards the window, with his back to his sister, whom he did not wish
to see how much he was affected by so petty an incident.

"What does he allude to, Kate, when he talks of your having spoken angrily to him, and that
he did not know you?" he inquired, after a few moments' pause, returning to her.

"Oh, dear!--I am so grieved that you should have noticed it--but since you ask I will not deceive
you!" and she told him the disgusting occurrence alluded to in the letter. Mr. Aubrey drew
himself up unconsciously as Kate went on, and she perceived him becoming still paler than before,
and felt the kindling anger of his eye.

"Forget it--forget it, dearest Charles!--So despicable a being is really not worth a thought,"
said Kate, with increasing anxiety; for she had never in her life before witnessed her brother
the subject of such powerful emotions as then made rigid his slender frame. At length drawing
a long breath--

"It is fortunate for him, Kate," said he, calmly, "that he is not a gentleman, and that I endeavor
to be--a Christian." She flung her arms round him, exclaiming, "There spoke my own noble brother!"

"I shall preserve this letter as a curiosity, Kate," said he, presently, and with a faint smile,
and a pointed significance of manner, which arrested his sister's attention, he added,--"It
is rather singular, but some time before you came in, I opened a letter in which your name
is mentioned--I cannot say in a similar manner, and yet--in short, it is from Lord De la Zouch,
enclosing one"----

Miss Aubrey suddenly blushed scarlet, and trembled violently.

"Don't be agitated, my dear Kate, the enclosure is from Lady De la Zouch; and if it be in the
same strain of kindness that pervades Lord De la Zouch's letter to me"----

"I would rather that you opened and read it, Charles"--she faltered, sinking into a chair.

"Come, come, dear Kate--play the woman!" said her brother, with an affectionate air--"To say
that there is nothing in these letters that I believe will interest you--very deeply gratify
and interest your feelings--would be"----

"I know--I--I--suspect--I"---- faltered Miss Aubrey, with much agitation--"I shall return."

"Then you shall take these letters with you, and read, or not read them, as you like," said
her brother, putting them into her hand with a fond and sorrowful smile, which soon, however,
flitted away--and, leading her to the door, he was once more alone; and, after a brief interval
of revery, he wrote answers to such of the many letters before him as he considered earliest
to require them.

Notwithstanding the judgment and tenderness with which Dr. Tatham discharged the very serious
duty which, at the entreaty of his afflicted friends, he had undertaken, of breaking to Mrs.
Aubrey the calamity with which she and her family were menaced, the effects of the disclosure
had been most disastrous. They occasioned an attack of paralysis; and Mr. Aubrey, who had long
been awaiting the issue, in sickening suspense, in an adjoining room, was hastily summoned
in to behold a mournful and heart-rending spectacle. His venerable mother--she who had given
him life, at the mortal peril of her own; she whom he cherished with unutterable tenderness
and reverence; she who doted upon him as upon the light of her eyes; from whose dear lips he
had never heard a word of unkindness or severity; whose heart had never known an impulse but
of gentle, noble, unbounded generosity towards all around her--this idolized being now lay
suddenly prostrated and blighted before him----

Poor Aubrey yielded to his long and violent agony, in the presence of her who could apparently
no longer hear or see, or be sensible of what was passing in the chamber.

"For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men."

It was with great difficulty that Dr. Tatham could render himself audible while uttering these
soothing and solemn passages of Scripture in the ear of his distracted friend, beside whom
he knelt.

Mrs. Aubrey had suffered a paralytic seizure, and lay motionless and insensible; her features
slightly disfigured, but partially concealed beneath her long silvery gray hair, which had,
in the suddenness of the fit, strayed from beneath her cap.

"But what am I about?" at length exclaimed Mr. Aubrey, with a languid and alarmed air--"has
medical assistance"----

"Dr. Goddart and Mr. Whately are both sent for by several servants, and will doubtless be very
quickly here," replied Dr. Tatham; and while he yet spoke, Mr. Whately--who, when hastened
on by the servant who had been sent for him, was entering the park on a visit to young Mrs.
Aubrey, who was also seriously ill and in peculiarly critical circumstances--entered the room,
and immediately resorted to the necessary measures. Soon afterwards, also, Dr. Goddart arrived;
but alas, how little could they do for the venerable sufferer!

During the next, and for many ensuing days, the lodge was assailed by very many anxious and
sympathizing inquirers, who were answered by Waters, whom Mr. Aubrey--oppressed by the number
of friends who hurried up to the Hall, and insisted upon seeing him to ascertain the extent
to which the dreadful rumors were correct--had stationed there during the day to afford the
requisite information. The Hall was pervaded by a gloom which could be felt. Every servant
had a woe-begone look, and moved about as if a funeral were stirring. Little Charles and Agnes,
almost imprisoned in their nursery, seemed quite puzzled and confused at the strange unusual
seriousness, and quietness, and melancholy faces everywhere about them. Kate romped not with
them as had been her wont; but would constantly burst into tears as she held them on her knee
or in her arms, trying to evade the continual questioning of Charles. "I think it will be time
for me to cry too, by-and-by!" said he to her one day, with an air half in jest and half in
earnest, that made poor Kate's tears flow afresh. Sleepless nights and days of sorrow soon
told upon her appearance. Her glorious buoyancy of spirits, which erewhile, as it were, had
filled the whole Hall with gladness--where were they now? Ah, me! the rich bloom had disappeared
from her beautiful cheek; but her high spirit, though oppressed, was not broken, and she stood
firmly and calmly amid the scowling skies and lowering tempests. You fancied you saw her auburn
tresses stirred upon her pale but calm brow by the breath of the approaching storm; and that
she also felt it, but trembled not, gazing on it with a bright and steadfast eye. Her heart
might be, indeed, bruised and shaken; but her spirit was, ay, unconquerable. My glorious Kate,
how my heart goes forth towards you!

And thou, her brother, who art of kindred spirit; who art supported by philosophy, and exalted
by religion, so that thy constancy cannot be shaken or overthrown by the black and ominous
swell of trouble which is increasing and closing around thee, I know that thou wilt outlive
the storm--and yet it rocks thee!

A month or two may see thee and thine expelled from Old Yatton, and not merely having lost
everything, but with a liability to thy successor which will hang round thy neck like a millstone.
What, indeed, is to become of you all? Whither will you go? And your suffering mother, should
she indeed survive so long, is her precious form to be borne away from Yatton?

Around thee stand those who, if thou fallest, will perish--and that thou knowest; around thy
calm, sorrowful, but erect figure, are a melancholy group--thy afflicted mother--the wife of
thy bosom--thy two little children--thy brave and beautiful sister--Yet think not, Misfortune!
that over this man thou art about to achieve thy accustomed triumphs. Here, behold, thou hast
a MAN to contend with; nay, more, a CHRISTIAN MAN, who hath calmly girded up his loins against
the coming fight!

'Twas Sabbath evening, some five weeks or so after the happening of the mournful events above
commemorated, and Kate, having spent, as usual, several hours keeping watch beside the silent
and motionless figure of her mother, had quitted the chamber for a brief interval, thinking
to relieve her oppressed spirits by walking, for a little while, up and down the long gallery.
Having slowly paced backwards and forwards once or twice, she rested against the little oriel
window at the farthest extremity of the gallery, and gazed with saddened eye upon the setting
sun, till at length, in calm grandeur, it disappeared beneath the horizon. 'Twas to Kate a
solemn and mournful sign; especially followed as it was by the deepening shadows and gloom
of evening. She sighed, and with her hands crossed on her bosom, gazed, with a tearful eye,
into the darkening sky, where glittered the brilliant evening star. Thus she remained, a thousand
pensive and tender thoughts passing through her mind, till the increasing chills of evening
warned her to retire. "I will go," said she to herself, as she walked slowly along, "and try
to play the evening hymn--I may not have many more opportunities!" With this view, she gently
opened the drawing-room door, and, glancing around, found that she should be alone. The fire
gave the only light. She opened the organ with a sigh, and then sat down before it for some
minutes without touching the keys. At length she struck them very gently, as if fearful of
disturbing those who, she soon recollected, were too distant to hear her. Ah! how many associations
were stirred up as she played over the simple and solemn air! At length, in a low and rather
tremulous voice, she began--

    "Soon will the evening star, with silver ray,
    Shed its mild radiance o'er the sacred day;
    Resume we, then, ere night and silence reign,
    The rites which holiness and heaven ordain"----

She sang the last line somewhat indistinctly; and, overcome by a flood of tender recollections,
ceased playing; then, leaning her head upon her hand, she shed tears. At length she resumed--

    "Here humbly let us hope our Maker's smile
    Will crown with sweet success our earthly toil--
    And here, on each returning Sabbath, join"----

Here poor Kate's voice quivered--and after one or two ineffectual attempts to sing the next
line, she sobbed, and ceased playing. She remained for several minutes, her face buried in
her handkerchief, shedding tears. At length, "I'll play the last verse," thought she, "and
then sit down before the fire, and read over the evening service," (feeling for her little
prayer-book,) "before I return to poor mamma!"

She played and sang these lines with a kind of solemn energy; and she felt as if a ray of heavenly
light had trembled for a moment upon her upturned eye. She had not been, as she had supposed,
alone; in the farthest corner of the room had been all the while sitting her brother--too exquisitely
touched by the simplicity and goodness of his sweet sister, to apprise her of his presence.
Several times his feelings had nearly overpowered him; and as she concluded, he arose from
his chair, and approaching her, after her first surprise was over,--"Heaven bless you, dear
Kate!" said he, taking her hands in his own. Neither of them spoke for a few moments.

"I could not have sung a line, or played, if I had known that you were here," said she, tremulously.

"I thought so, Kate, and therefore I remained silent"--

"I don't think I shall ever have heart to play again!" she replied--they were both silent.

"Be assured, Kate, that submission to the will of God," said Mr. Aubrey, as (he with his arm
round his sister) they walked slowly to and fro, "is the great lesson to be learned from the
troubles of life; and for that purpose they are sent. Let us bear up awhile; the waters will
not go over our heads!"

"I hope not," replied his sister, faintly, and in tears. "How did you leave Agnes, Charles?"

"She was asleep; she is still very feeble"---- Here the door was suddenly opened, and Miss
Aubrey's maid entered hastily, exclaiming, "Are you here, ma'am?--or sir?"

"Here we are," they replied, hurrying towards her; "what is the matter?"

"Oh, Madam is talking! She began speaking all of a sudden. She did, indeed, sir. She's talking,
and"---- continued the girl, almost breathless.

"My mother talking!" exclaimed Aubrey, with an amazed air.

"Oh yes, sir! she is--she is, indeed!"

Miss Aubrey sank into her brother's arms, overcome for a moment with the sudden and surprising
intelligence.

"Rouse yourself, Kate!" he exclaimed with animation; "did I not tell you that Heaven would
not forget us? But I must hasten up-stairs, to hear the joyful sounds with my own ears--and
do you follow as soon as you can." Leaving her in the care of her maid, he hastened out of
the room, and was soon at the door of his mother's chamber. He stood for a moment in the doorway,
and his straining ears caught the gentle tones of his mother's voice, speaking in a low but
cheerful tone. But after all, it will not do. It is anything but attainable by most of the world. It
demands good cheer and jovial company. But it dies out in the desert, and is stifled among simple,
vulgar associates. Rabelais believed that he sacrificed to freedom, when he only worshipped
fortune. He went through the world, familiar with the ways of princes and peers, priests and
peasants, travelling in many lands, exhausting the resources of art and learning, seeing through the
sins and shams and sorrows of life, and laughing at everything, like a good-natured, large-hearted
Mephistopheles.

But he had never learned the true philosophy of joyousness in the sincere love of nature, the
deep phases of humanity, and the affluence and purity of strong affection.

Nor do we find a better specimen in the renowned English humorists,
Sterne and Swift.

The former closely follows his French prototype in grotesque fancies: he abounds in tender and delicate
pathos, though in the highest degree artificial and forced; but do we ever arise from reading
him, like a giant refreshed by wine? Sterne, in fact, has even less of the true philosophy
of life than Rabelais. He affords no stimulant to joyous, healthy action, awakens no impulse to gladden
life, or to make sorrow less and hope greater. It may be all very touching, very comic, very
ingenious, but it is not healthy or joyous. And Swift? An immense fund of laughter, doubtless, had
the witty Irish dean; but as little claim to be a joyous writer as the prophet Jeremiah, or the
author of 'Groans from the Bottomless Pit.' The men who have been spoken of dealt largely in
satire and humor; but joyousness deals in infinitely more. Mirth and laughter are all very well, but
they are not all in all. Cheerfulness requires something more than a well-balanced Rabelaisian
nonchalance in adversity and a keen relish for all pleasure.

The relation of Christianity to the theme of the volume presents a delicate, and, it may be thought,
a dangerous topic of discussion, for a so decidedly secular pen as
Mr. Leland's; but he touches upon it with freedom and boldness, though
with frankest sympathy and reverence for the great Spirit, whose religion
is the most significant fact in the history of the world.

'I must confess,' says he, 'that even regarded from a material and historical point alone,
that is a poor, cowardly soul, which does not feel the deepest earnestness of truth in acknowledging
the Wonderful One, Jesus Christ, as the Lord and Saviour of the whole world.' His sublime
soul, profound, universal, loving beyond all power of human conception, introduced a new era
for humanity. Under his teaching, philosophy became indeed truly divine, for it became infinite,
and was thrown open to all. He first of all opened the consolations of free thought, of freedom from
old superstition, of love, and strength, and inward joy, to the whole race of mankind. No narrow
limits of sect or caste or nationality cramped him, the first great Cosmopolite.
 Higher and higher did he rise, in process of time, in his master's estimation;
and at length became quite a factotum--as such, acquainted with the whole course of business
that passed through the office. Many interesting matters connected with the circumstances and
connections of the neighboring nobility and gentry were thus constantly brought under his notice,
and now and then set him thinking whether the knowledge thus acquired could not, in some way,
and at some time or another, be turned to his own advantage; for I am sorry to say that he
was utterly unworthy of the kindness and confidence of Mr. Parkinson, who little thought that
in Steggars he had to deal with--a rogue in grain. Such being his character, and such his opportunities,
this worthy had long made a practice of minuting down, from time to time, anything of interest
or importance in the affairs of his betrayed master's clients--even laboriously copying long
documents, when he thought them of importance enough for his purpose, and had the opportunity
of doing so without attracting the attention of Mr. Parkinson. He thus silently acquired a
mass of information which might have enabled him to occasion great annoyance, and even inflict
serious injury; and the precise object he had in view, was either to force himself, hereafter,
into partnership with his employer, (provided he could get regularly introduced into the profession,)
or even compel his master's clients to receive him into their confidence, adversely to Mr.
Parkinson; and make it worth his while to keep the secrets of which he had become possessed.
So careful ought to be, and indeed generally are, attorneys and solicitors, as to the characters
of those whom they thus receive into their employ. On the occasion of Mr. Aubrey's intended
marriage with Miss St. Clair, with a view to the very liberal settlements which he contemplated,
a full "Abstract" of his "Title" was laid by Mr. Parkinson before his conveyancer, in order
to advise, and to prepare the necessary instruments. Owing to inquiries suggested by the conveyancer,
additional statements were laid before him; and produced an opinion of a somewhat unsatisfactory
description, from which I shall lay before the reader the following paragraph:--

     "...There seems no reason for supposing that any descendant of
     Stephen Dreddlington is now in existence;[22] still, as it is by
     no means physically impossible that such a person may be in esse,
     it would unquestionably be most important to the security of Mr.
     Aubrey's title, to establish clearly the validity of the conveyance
     by way of mortgage, executed by Harry Dreddlington, and which was
     afterwards assigned to Geoffrey Dreddlington on his paying off the
     money borrowed by his deceased uncle; since the descent of Mr.
     Aubrey from Geoffrey Dreddlington would, in that event, clothe him
     with an indefeasible title at law, by virtue of that deed; and any
     equitable rights which were originally outstanding, would be barred
     by lapse of time. But the difficulty occurring to my mind on this
     part of the case is, that unless Harry Dreddlington, who executed
     that deed of mortgage, survived his father, (a point on which I am
     surprised that I am furnished with no information,) the deed itself
     would have been mere waste parchment, as in reality the conveyance
     of a person who never had any interest in the Yatton
     property--and, of course, neither Geoffrey Dreddlington, nor his
     descendant, Mr. Aubrey, could derive any right whatever under such
     an instrument. In that case, such a contingency as I have above
     hinted at--I mean the existence of any legitimate descendant of
     Stephen Dreddlington--might have a most serious effect upon the
     rights of Mr. Aubrey."

Now every line of this opinion, and also even of the Abstract of Title upon which it was written,
did this quicksighted young scoundrel copy out, and deposit, as a great prize, in his desk,
among other similar notes and memoranda,--little wotting his master, the while, of what his
clerk was doing. Some year or two afterwards, the relationship subsisting between Mr. Parkinson
and his clerk Steggars, was suddenly determined by a somewhat untoward event; viz. by the latter's
decamping with the sum of £700 sterling, being the amount of money due on a mortgage which
he had been sent to receive from a client of Mr. Parkinson's. Steggars fled for it--but first
having bethought himself of the documents to which I have been alluding, and which he carried
with him to London. First walking erect, then in bent attitude, then crouching still lower, then
as quadrupeds on all-fours, and at length, crawling like reptiles, they make their approach to the
pass that leads down into the valley.

They do not enter it; they dare not.

Before getting within the gape of its gloomy portals they hear voices issuing therefrom. They
can see tiny sparks of fire glowing at the lips of ignited cigars.

From this they can tell that there are sentries there--a line of
them across the ravine, guarding it from side to side.

"It ain't no use tryin', Frank," whispers Wilder; "ne'er a chance o' our settin' through. They're
stannin' thick all over the ground. I kin see by thar seegars.

Don't ye hear them palaverin? A black snake kedn't crawl through among 'em 'ithout bein' obsarved."

"What
are we to do?" asks Hamersley, in a despairing tone.

"We kin do nothin' now, 'ceptin' go back an' git our mules. We must move them out o' the way
afore sun-up. 'Taint no matter o' use our squattin' hyar. No doubt o' what's been done. The
main body's goed below; them we see's only a party left to guard the gap. Guess it's all over
wi' the poor critters in the cabin, or will be afore we kin do anythin' to help 'em. Ef they ain't
kilt, they're captered by this time."

Hamersley can scarce restrain himself from uttering an audible groan. Only the evident danger keeps
him silent.

"I say agin, Frank, 'tair no use our stayin' hyar. Anythin' we kin do must be did elsewhar. Let's
go back for our mules, fetch 'em away, an' see ef we kin clomb up one o' these hyar hills. Thar's
a good skirtin' o' kiver on thar tops. Ef the anymals can't be tuk up, we kin leave them in some
gulch, an' go on to the summut ourselves. Thar we may command a view
o' all that passes.

The sogers'll be sartin to kum past in the mornin', bringin' thar prisoners. Then we'll see
who's along wi' 'em, and kin foller thar trail."

"Walt, I'm willing to do as you direct. I feel as if I'd lost all hope, and could give way to downright
despair."

"Deespair be durned!

Thar's allers a hope while thar's a bit o' breth in the body. Keep up yur heart, man! Think o'
how we war 'mong them wagguns.

That oughter strengthen yur gizzern. Niver say die till yur dead, and the crowner are holdin'
his 'quest over yur karkidge. Thet's the doctryne o' Walt Wilder."

As if to give illustrative proof of it, he catches hold of his comrade's sleeve; with a pluck
turns him around, and leads him back to the place where they had parted from the mules. These are
released from their pickets, then led silently, and in a circuitous direction, towards the base
of one of the buttes.

Its sides appear too steep for even a mule to scale them; but a boulder-strewed ravine offers a suitable
place for secreting the animals.

There they are left, their lariats affording sufficient length to make them fast to the rocks,
while a tapado of the saddle-blankets secures them against binneying.

Having thus disposed of the animals, the two men scramble on up the
ravine, reach the summit of the hill, and sit down among the cedar-scrub
that crowns it, determined to remain there and await the "development
of events."

CHAPTER FIFTY ONE.

APPROACHING THE PREY.

Were we gifted with clairvoyance, it might at times spare us much
misery, thought at other times it would make it.

Perhaps 'tis better we are as we are.

Were Frank Hamersley and Walt Wilder, keeping watch on the summit of the mound, possessed of second
sight, they would not think of remaining there throughout all the night--not for an hour--nay,
not so much as a minute, for they would be aware that within less than ten miles of them is
a party of men with friendly hearts and strong arms, both at their disposal for the very purpose
they now need such. Enough of them to strike Uraga's lancers and scatter them like chaff.

And could the man commanding these but peep over the precipitous escarpment of the Llano Estacado
and see those stalwart Texans bivouacked below, he would descend into the valley with less deliberation,
and make greater haste to retire out of it. He and his know nothing of the formidable foes so
near, any more than Hamersley and Wilder suspect the proximity of such powerful friends. Both are
alike unconscious that the Texans are encamped within ten miles. Yet they are; for the gorge
at whose mouth they have halted is the outlet of the valley stream, where it debouches upon
the Texan plain.

Without thought of being interfered with, the former proceed upon their ruthless expedition; while
the latter have no alternative but await its issue. They do so with spirits impatiently chafing,
and hearts sorely agonised.

Both are alike apprehensive for what next day's sun will show them-- perchance a dread spectacle.

Neither
shuts eye in sleep. With nerves excited and bosoms agitated they lie awake, counting the hours,
the minutes; now and then questioning the stars as to the time.

They converse but little, and only in whispers. The night is profoundly still. The slightest
sound, a word uttered above their breath, might betray them.

They can distinctly hear the talk of the lancers left below. Hamersley, who understands their tongue,
can make out their conversation. It is for the most part ribald and blasphemous, boasts of
their bonnes fortunes with the damsels of the Del Norte, commingled with curses at this ill-starred
expedition that for a time separates them from their sweethearts.

Among them appears a gleam greater than the ignited tips of their cigarittos. 'Tis the light of
a candle which they have stuck up over a serape spread along the earth. Several are seen clustering
around it; while their conversation tells that they are relieving the dull hours with a little
diversion. They are engaged in gambling, and ever and anon the cries, "Soto en la puerta!" "Cavallo
mozo!" ascending in increased monotone, proclaim it to be the never-ending national game of monte.

Meanwhile
Uraga, with the larger body of the lancers, has got down into the glen, and is making way towards
the point aimed at. He proceeds slowly and with caution. This for two distinct reasons--the sloping
path is difficult even by day, at night requiring all the skill of experienced riders to descend
it.

Still with the traitor at their head, who knows every step, they gradually crawl down the cliff,
single file, again forming "by twos" as they reach the more practicable causeway below.

Along this they continue to advance in silence and like caution. Neither the lancer colonel nor
his lieutenant has forgotten the terrible havoc made among the Tenawas by the two men who survived
that fearful affray, and whom they may expect once more to meet. They know that both have guns--the traitor
has told them so--and that, as before, they will make use of them. Therefore Uraga intends approaching
stealthily, and taking them by surprise. Otherwise he may himself be the first to fall--a
fate he does not wish to contemplate. But there can be no danger, he fancies as he rides forward.
It is now the mid-hour of night, a little later, and the party to be surprised will be in their
beds. If all goes well he may seize them asleep.

So far everything seems favourable. No sound comes from the direction of the lonely dwelling,
not even the bark of a watch dog. The only noises that interrupt the stillness of the night
are the lugubrious cry of the coyote and the wailing note of the whip-poor-will; these, at intervals
blending with the sweeter strain of the tzenzontle--the Mexican nightingale--intermittently
silenced as the marching troop passes near the spot where it is perched.

Once more, before coming in sight of the solitary jacal, Uraga commands a halt. This time to reconnoitre,
not to rest or stay. The troopers sit in their saddles, with reins ready to be drawn; like
a flock of vultures about to unfold their wings for the last swoop upon their victims--to clutch,
tear, kill, do with them as they may wish!

CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

A BLOODLESS CAPTURE.

A house from which agreeable guests have just taken departure is rarely cheerful. The reverse,
if these have been very agreeable--especially on the first evening after.

The rude sheiling which gives shelter to the refugees is no exception.

    Everyone under its roof is afflicted with low spirits, some of them
sad--two particularly so.

Thus has it been since the early hour of daybreak, when the guests regretted spoke the parting speech.

In
the ears of Adela Miranda, all day long, has been ringing that painful word, "Adios!" while
thoughts about him who uttered it have been agitating her bosom.

Not that she has any fear of his fealty, or that he will prove traitor to his troth now plighted.
On the contrary, she can confide in him for that, and does--fully,
trustingly.

                   
                          
             Her fears are from a far different
             cause; the danger he is about
  to dare.
                                      
                      Conchita, in like manner, though
                      in less degree, has her apprehensions.
          The great Colossus who has captured her heart, and been
                      promised her hand, may never return
            to claim it. But, unacquainted with the risk he is going
          to run, the little mestiza has less to alarm her, and only contemplates
       her lover's absence, with that sense of uncertainty common
         to all who live in a land where every day has its dangers.

Colonel
           Miranda is discomforted too. Never before since his
                  arrival in the valley have his apprehensions been so keen.

Hamersley's words, directing suspicion to the peon, Manuel, have excited them. All the more from
his having entertained something of this before. And now still more, that his messenger is
three days overdue from the errand on which he has sent him.

At noon he and Don Prospero again ascend to the summit of the pass, and scan the table plain
above--to observe nothing upon it, either westwardly or in any other direction. And all the
afternoon has one or the other been standing near the door of the jacal, with a lorgnette
levelled up the ravine through which the valley is entered from above.

Only as the shades of night close over them do they desist from this vigil, proving fruitless.

Added to the idea of danger, they have another reason for desiring
the speedy return of the messenger.

Certain little luxuries he is expected to bring--among the rest a skin or two of wine and
a few boxes of cigars. For neither the colonel himself nor the ex-army surgeon are anchorites,
however much they have of late been compelled to the habit. Above all, they need tobacco, their stock
being out; the last ounce given to their late guests on leaving.

These are minor matters, but yet add to the cheerlessness of the time after the strangers have
gone. Not less at night, when more than ever one feels a craving for the nicotian weed, to consume
it in some way-- pipe, cigar, or cigaritto.

As the circle of three
assemble in their little sitting-room, after a frugal supper, tobacco
is the Colonel's chief care, and becomes the first topic of conversation.

"Carramba!"
he explains, as if some new idea had entered his head, "I couldn't
have believed in a man suffering so much from such a trifling cause."

"What
are you referring to?" interrogates the doctor.

"The thing you're
thinking of at this moment, amigo mio. I'll make a wager it's the
same."

"As you know, colonel, I never bet."

"Nor I upon a certainty,
as in this case it would be. I know what your mind's bent upon--tobacco."

"I
confess it, colonel. I want a smoke, bad as ever I did in my life."

"Sol."

"But
why don't you both have it, then?"

It is Adela who thus innocently
interrogates.

"For the best of all reasons," rejoins her brother.
"We haven't the wherewith."

"What! no cigarittos? I saw some yesterday
on one of the shelves."

"But not to day. At this moment there isn't
a pinch of tobacco within twenty miles of where we sit, unless our
late guests have made a very short day's march. I gave them the last
I had to comfort them on the journey."

"Yes, senorita," adds the
doctor, "and something quite as bad, if not worse. Our bottles are
empty. The wine is out as well as the weed."

"In that," interrupts
the Colonel, "I'm happy to say you're mistaken. It's not so bad as
you think, doctor. True, the pigskin has collapsed; for the throat
of the huge Texan was as difficult to saturate as the most parched
spot on the Staked Plain. Finding it so, I took occasion to abstract
a good large gourd, and set it surreptitiously aside. I did that to
meet emergencies. As one seems to have arisen, I think the hidden
treasure may now be produced."

Saying this, the colonel steps out
of the room, soon returning with a large calabash bottle.

Conchita
is summoned, and directed to bring drinking cups, which she does.

Miranda,
pouring out the wine says,--

"This will cheer us; and, in truth,
we all need cheering. I fancy there's enough to last us till Manuel
makes his reappearance with a fresh supply. Strange his not having
returned. He's had time to do all his bargainings and been back three
days ago. I hoped to see him home before our friends took departure,
so that I could better have provided them for their journey. They'll
stand a fair chance of being famished."

"No fear of that," puts in
Don Prospero.

"Why do you say so, doctor?"

"Because of the rifle
I gave to Senor Gualtero. With it he will be able to keep both provisioned.
'Tis marvellous how he can manage it. He has killed bits of birds
without spoiling their skins or even ruffling a feather. I'm indebted
to him for some of my best specimens. So long as he carries a gun,
with ammunition to load it, you need have no fear he or his companion
will perish from hunger, even on the Llano Estacado."

"About that,"
rejoins Miranda, "I think we need have no uneasiness. Beyond lies
the thing to be apprehended--not on the desert, but amid cultivated
fields, in the streets of towns, in the midst of so-called civilisation.
There will be their real danger."

For some time the three are silent,
their reflections assuming a sombre hue, called forth by the colonel's
words.

But the doctor, habitually light-hearted, soon recovers, and
makes an effort to imbue the others with cheerfulness like his own.

"Senorita,"
he says, addressing himself to Adela, "your guitar, hanging there
against the wall, seems straining its strings as if they longed for
the touch of your fair fingers. You've been singing every night for
the last month, delighting us all I hope you won't be silent now that
your audience is reduced, but will think it all the more reason for
bestowing your favours on the few that remain."

To the gallant speech
of pure Castilian idiom, the young lady answers with a smile expressing
assent, at the same time taking hold of her guitar. As she reseats
herself, and commences tuning the instrument, a string snaps.

It
seems an evil omen; and so all three regard it, though without knowing
why. As,
however, it is suspected that Harry Dreddlington executed a conveyance in fee of the property,
in order to secure the loan contracted by him from Aaron Moses, it will be extremely important
to ascertain, and, if possible, procure satisfactory evidence that the decease of Harry Dreddlington
occurred before the period at which, by his father's death, that conveyance could have become
operative upon the property: since it is obvious that, should he have survived his father,
that instrument, being outstanding, may form a complete answer to the case of the lessor of
the plaintiff.[26] The danger will be obviously increased should the debt to Aaron Moses prove
to have been paid off, (as it is stated was rumored to have been the fact,) by Geoffrey Dreddlington,
the younger son of Charles Dreddlington; for, should that turn out to be the case, he would
probably have taken a conveyance to himself, or to trustees for his benefit, from Aaron Moses--which
being in the power of the defendant, Mr. Aubrey, would enable him to make out a title to the
property, paramount to that now attempted to be set up on behalf of Mr. Titmouse. Every possible
exertion, therefore, should be made to ascertain the precise period of the death of Harry Dreddlington.
The registries of the various parishes in which the family may have at any time resided should
be carefully searched; and an examination made in the churches and churchyards, of all tombstones,
escutcheons, etc., belonging, or supposed to belong, to the Dreddlington family, and by which
any light can be thrown upon this most important point. It appears clear that Dreddlington
(the common ancestor) died on the 7th August, 1742:--the question, therefore, simply is, whether
the death of his eldest son (Harry) took place prior or subsequent to that period. It is to
be feared that the defendant may be in possession of some better and more direct evidence on
this point than is attainable by the lessor of the plaintiff. The natural presumption would
certainly seem to be that the son, being the younger and stronger man, was the survivor."[27]

The above-mentioned opinion of Mr. Lynx, together with that of Mr. Subtle entirely corroborating
it, (and which was alluded to in a late chapter of this history,[28]) and a pedigree, were
lying on the table, one day, at the office at Saffron Hill, before the anxious and perplexed
partners, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon.

Gammon was looking attentively, and with a very chagrined air, at the pedigree; and Quirk was
looking at Gammon.

"Now, Gammon," said the former, "just let me see again where the exact hitch is--eh? You'll
think me perhaps infernally stupid, but--curse me if I can see it!"

"See it, my dear sir? Here, here!" replied Gammon, with sudden impatience, putting his finger
two or three times to the words "Harry D."

"Lord bless us! Don't be so sharp with one, Gammon! I know as well as you that that's about
where the crack is; but what is the precise thing we're in want of, eh?"

"Proof, my dear sir," replied Gammon, somewhat impatiently, but with a smile, "of the death
of Harry Dreddlington some time--no matter when--previous to the 7th August, 1742; and in default
thereof, Mr. Quirk, we are all flat on our backs, and had better never have stirred in the
business!"

"You know, Gammon, you're better up in these matters than I--(because I've not been able to
turn my particular attention to 'em since I first began business)--so just tell me, in a word,
what good's to be got by showing that fellow to have died in his father's lifetime?"

"You don't show your usual acuteness, Mr. Quirk," replied Gammon, blandly. "It is to make waste
paper of that confounded conveyance which he executed, and which Mr. Aubrey doubtless has,
and with which he may, at a stroke, cut the ground from under our feet!"

"The very thought makes one feel quite funny--don't it, Gammon?" quoth Quirk, with a flustered air.

"It may well do so, Mr. Quirk. Now we are fairly embarked in a cause where success will be
attended with so many splendid results, Mr. Quirk--though I'm sure you'll always bear me out
in saying how very unwilling I was to take advantage of the villany of that miscreant Steg--hem"----

"Gammon, Gammon, you're always harking back to that--I'm tired of hearing on't!" interrupted
Quirk, angrily, but with an embarrassed air.

"Well, now we're in it," said Gammon, with a sigh, and shrugging his shoulders, "I don't see
why we should allow ourselves to be baffled by trifles. The plain question is, undoubtedly,
whether we are to stand still--or go on." Mr. Quirk gazed at Mr. Gammon with an anxious and
puzzled look.

"How d'ye make out--in a legal way, you know, Gammon--when a man died--I mean, of a natural
death?" somewhat mysteriously inquired Quirk, who was familiar enough with the means of proving
the exact hour of certain violent deaths at Debtor's Door.

"Oh! there are various methods of doing so, my dear sir," replied Gammon, carelessly. "Entries
in family Bibles and prayer-books--registers--tombstones--ay, by the way, AN OLD TOMBSTONE,"
continued Gammon, musingly, "that would settle the business!"

"An old tombstone!" echoed Quirk, briskly, but suddenly dropping his voice. "Lord, Gammon,
so it would! That's an idea!--I call that a decided idea, Gammon. 'Twould be the very thing!"

"The very thing!" repeated Gammon, pointedly. They remained silent for some moments.

"Snap could not have looked about him sharply enough when he was down at Yatton--could he,
Gammon?" at length observed Quirk, in a low tone, flushing all over as he uttered the last
words, and felt Gammon's cold gray eye settled on him like that of a snake.

"He could not, indeed, my dear sir," replied Gammon, while Quirk continued gazing earnestly
at him, now and then wriggling about in his chair, rubbing his chin, and drumming with his
fingers on the table.--"And now that you've suggested the thing, [oh, Gammon! Gammon]--it's
not to be wondered at!--You know, it would have been an old tombstone--a sort of fragment of
a tombstone, perhaps--so deeply sunk in the ground, probably, as easily to have escaped observation.
Eh?--Does not it strike you so, Mr. Quirk?" All this was said by Gammon in a musing manner,
and in a very low tone of voice; and he was delighted to find his words sinking into the eager
and fertile mind of his companion.

"Ah, Gammon!" exclaimed Quirk, with a sound of partly a sigh, and partly a whistle, (the former
being the exponent of the true state of his feelings, i. e. anxiety--the latter of what he
wished to appear the state of his feelings, i. e. indifference.)

"Yes, Mr. Quirk?"

"You're a deep devil, Gammon--I will say that for you!" replied Quirk, glancing towards each
door, and, as it were, unconsciously drawing his chair a little closer to that of Gammon.

"Nay, my dear sir!" said Gammon, with a deferential and deprecating smile, "you give me credit
for an acuteness I feel I do not possess! If, indeed, I had not had your sagacity to rely upon,
ever since I have had the honor of being connected with you in business---- ah, Mr. Quirk,
you know you lead--I follow"----

"Gammon, Gammon!" interrupted Quirk, with an uncomfortable, but still a mollified air, "Come--your
name's Oily"----

"In moments like these, Mr. Quirk, I say nothing that I do not feel," interrupted Gammon, gravely,
putting to his nose the least modicum of snuff which he could take with the tip of his finger
out of the huge box of Mr. Quirk, who, just then, was thrusting immense pinches, every half
minute, up his nostrils.

"It will cost a great deal of money to find that same tombstone, Gammon!" said Quirk, in almost
a whisper, and paused, looking intently at Gammon.

"I think this is a different kind of snuff from that which you usually take, Mr. Quirk, isn't
it?" inquired Gammon, as he inserted the tips of his fingers a second time into the mechanically
proffered box of Mr. Quirk.

"The same--the same," replied Quirk, hastily.

"You are a man better fitted for serious emergencies, Mr. Quirk, than any man I ever came near,"
said Gammon, deferentially; "I perceive that you have hit the nail on the head, as indeed you
always do!"

"Tut! Stuff, Gammon; you're every bit as good a hand as I am!" replied Quirk, with an evident
mixture of pleasure and embarrassment. Gammon smiled, shook his head, and shrugged his shoulders.

"'Tis that practical sagacity of yours, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon--"you know it as well as I
can tell you--that has raised you to your present professional eminence!" He paused, and looked
very sincerely at his senior partner.

"Well, I must own I think I do know a trick or two," quoth Quirk, with a sort of grunt of gratification.

"Ay, and further, there are some clever men who never can keep their own counsel; but are like
a hen that has just laid an egg, and directly she has risen, goes foolishly cackling about
everywhere, and then her egg is taken away; but you"----

"Ha, ha!" laughed Quirk; "that's devilish good, Gammon!--Capital! Gad, I think I see the hen!
Ha, ha!"

"Ha, ha!" echoed Gammon, gently. "But to be serious, Mr. Quirk; what I was going to say was,
that I thoroughly appreciate your admirable caution in not confiding to any one--no, not even
to me--the exact means by which you intend to extricate us from our present dilemma." Here
Quirk got very fidgety, and twirled his watch-key violently.

"Hem! But--hem! Ay--a--a," he grunted, looking with an uneasy air at his calm astute companion;
"I didn't mean so much as all that, either, Gammon; for two heads, in my opinion, are better
than one. You must own that, Gammon!" said he, not at all relishing the heavy burden of responsibility
which he felt that Gammon was about to devolve upon his (Quirk's) shoulders exclusively.

"'Tis undoubtedly rather a serious business on which we are now entering," said Gammon; "and
I have always admired a saying which you years ago told me of that great man Machiavel"----

[Oh, Gammon! Gammon! You well know that poor old Mr. Quirk never heard of the name of that
same Machiavel till this moment!]--

"That 'when great affairs are stirring, a master-move should be confined to the master-mind
that projects it.' I understand! I see! I will not, therefore, inquire into the precise means
by which I am satisfied you will make it appear, in due time (while I am engaged getting up
the subordinate, but very harassing details of the general case), that Harry Dreddlington died
BEFORE the 7th of August, 1742." Here, taking out his watch, he suddenly added--"Bless me,
Mr. Quirk, how time passes!--Two o'clock! I ought to have been at Messrs. Gregson's a quarter
of an hour ago."

"Stop--a moment or two can't signify! It--it," said Quirk, hesitatingly, "it was you, wasn't
it, that thought of the tombstone?"

"I, my dear Mr. Quirk"--interrupted Gammon, with a look of astonishment and deference.

"Come, come--honor among thieves, you know, Gammon!" said Quirk, trying to laugh.

"No--it shall never be said that I attempted to take the credit of"---- commenced Gammon; when
a clerk entering, put an end to the colloquy between the partners, each of whom, presently,
was sitting alone in his own room--for Gammon found that he was too late to think of keeping
his engagement with Messrs. Gregson; if indeed he had ever made any--which, in fact, he had
not. Mr. Quirk sat in a musing posture for nearly half an hour after he and Gammon had separated.
"Gammon is a deep one! I'll be shot if ever there was his equal," said Quirk to himself, at
length; and starting off his chair, with his hands crossed behind him, he walked softly to
and fro. "I know what he's driving at--though he thought I didn't! He'd let me scratch my hands
in getting the blackberries, and then he'd come smiling in to eat 'em! But--share and share
alike--share profit, share danger, master Gammon;--you may find that Caleb Quirk is a match
for Oily Gammon--I'll have you in for it, one way or another!" Here occurred a long pause in
his thoughts, "Really I doubt the thing's growing unmanageable--the prize can't be worth the
risk!--Risk, indeed--'fore gad--it's neither more nor less than"---- Here a certain picture
hanging, covered with black crape, in the drawing-room at Alibi House, seemed to have glided
down from its station, and to be hanging close before his eyes, with the crape drawn aside--a
ghastly object--- eugh! He shuddered, and involuntarily closed his eyes. "How devilish odd
that I should just now have happened to think of it!" he inwardly exclaimed, sinking into his
chair in a sort of cold sweat.

"D--n the picture!" at length said he aloud--getting more and more flustered--"I'll burn it!
It sha'n't disgrace my drawing-room any longer!" Here Quirk almost fancied that some busy little
fiend sat squatting before the grisly picture, writing the words "CALEB QUIRK" at the bottom
of it; and a sort of sickness came over him for a moment. Presently he started up, and took
down one of several well-worn dingy-looking books standing on the shelves--a volume of Burns'
Justice. Resuming his seat, he put on his glasses, and with a little trepidation turned to
the head "Forgery," and glanced over it, divided as it was into two great heads--"Forgery at
Common Law, and Forgery by Statute," with many able observations of the learned compiler, and
important "cases" cited. At length his eye lit upon a paragraph which seemed suddenly to draw
his heart up into his throat, producing a sensation which made him involuntarily clap his hand
upon his neck.

"Oh, Gammon!!" he muttered, drawing off his glasses, sinking back in his chair, and looking
towards the door which opened into Gammon's room; extending at the same time, in that direction,
his right arm, and shaking his fist. "You precious villain!--I've an uncommon inclination,"
at length thought he, "to go down slap to Yorkshire--say nothing to anybody--make peace with
the enemy, and knock up the whole thing!--For a couple of thousand pounds--a trifle to the
Aubreys, I'm sure. Were I in his place, I shouldn't grudge it; and why should he?--By Jove,"
he got a little heated--"that would be, as Gammon has it, a master-move! and confined, egad!
to the master-mind that thought of it!--Why should he ever know of the way in which the thing
blew up?--Really, 'twould be worth half the money to do Gammon so hollow for once--by George
it would!--Gammon, that would slip Caleb Quirk's neck so slyly into the halter, indeed!"

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon, suddenly re-entering the room after about an
hour's absence, during which he too had, like his senior partner, been revolving many things
in his mind--"it has occurred to me, that I had better immediately go down to Yatton, alone."

Hereat Mr. Quirk opened both his eyes and his mouth to their very widest; got very red in the
face; and stared at his placid partner with a mingled expression of fear and wonder. "Hang
me, Gammon!" at length he exclaimed desperately, slapping his fist upon the table--"if I don't
think you're the very devil himself!"--and he sank back in his chair, verily believing, in
the momentary confusion of his thoughts, that what had been passing through his mind was known
to Gammon; or that what had been passing through his (Quirk's) mind, had also been occurring
to Gammon, who had resolved upon being beforehand in putting his purposes into execution. Gammon
was at first completely confounded by Quirk's reception of him, and stood for a few moments,
with his hands elevated, in silence. Then he approached the table, and his eye caught the well-thumbed
volume of Burns' Justice, open at the head "FORGERY!" and the quicksighted Gammon saw how matters
stood at a glance--the process by which the result he had just witnessed had been arrived at.

"Well, Mr. Quirk, what new vagary now?" he inquired with an air of smiling curiosity.

"Vagary be----!" growled old Quirk, sullenly, without moving in his chair.

Gammon stood for a moment or two eying him with a keen scrutiny. "What!" at length he inquired
good-humoredly, "do you then really grudge me any share in the little enterprise?"

"Eh?" quickly interrupted Quirk, pricking up his ears. "Do you intend to play Mackivel! eh?
What must you go down alone to Yatton for, Gammon?" continued Quirk, anxiously.

"Why, simply as a sort of pioneer--to reconnoitre the churchyard--eh? I thought it might have
been of service; but if"--

"Gammon, Gammon, your hand! I understand," replied Quirk, evidently vastly relieved--most cordially
shaking the cold hand of Gammon.

"But understand, Mr. Quirk," said he, in a very peremptory manner, "no one upon earth is to
know of my visit to Yatton except yourself."

He received a solemn pledge to that effect; and presently the partners separated, a little
better satisfied with each other. Though not a word passed between them for several days afterwards
on the topic chiefly discussed during the interview above described, the reader may easily
imagine that neither of them dropped it from his thoughts. Mr. Quirk, shortly afterwards, paid
one or two visits to the neighborhood of Houndsditch, (a perfect hotbed of clients to the firm,)
where resided two or three gentlemen of the Jewish persuasion, who had been placed, from time
to time, under considerable obligations by the firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, in respect
of professional services rendered both to themselves and to their friends. One of them, in
particular, had a painful consciousness that it was in old Mr. Quirk's power at any time by
a whisper to place his--the aforesaid Israelite's--neck in an unsightly noose which every now
and then might be seen dangling from a beam opposite Debtor's Door, Newgate, about eight o'clock
in the morning; him, therefore, every consideration of interest and of gratitude combined to
render subservient to the reasonable wishes of Mr. Quirk. He was a most ingenious little fellow,
and had a great taste for the imitative arts--so strong in fact, that it had once or twice
placed him in some jeopardy with the Goths and Vandals of the law; who characterized the noble
art in which he excelled, by a very ugly and formidable word, and annexed the most barbarous
penalties to its practice. What passed between him and old Quirk on the occasion of their interviews,
I know not; but one afternoon, the latter, on returning to his office, without saying anything
to anybody, having bolted the door, took out of his pocket several little pieces of paper,
containing pretty little picturesque devices of a fragmentary character, with antique letters
and figures on them--crumbling pieces of stone, some looking more and some less sunk in the
ground, and overgrown with grass; possibly they were designs for ornaments to be added to that
tasteful structure, Alibi House--possibly intended to grace Miss Quirk's album. However this
might be, after he had looked at them, and carefully compared them one with another, for some
time, he folded them up in a sheet of paper, sealed it--with certainly not the steadiest hand
in the world--and then deposited it in an iron safe.

CHAPTER XIII.

Yatton, the recovery of which was the object of these secret and formidable movements and preparations,
not to say machinations, was all this while the scene of deep affliction. The lamentable condition
of his mother plunged Mr. Aubrey, his wife, and sister, into profounder grief than had been
occasioned by the calamity which menaced them all in common. Had he been alone, he would have
encountered the sudden storm of adversity with unshrinking, nay, cheerful firmness; but could
it be so, when he had ever before him those whose ruin was involved in his own?--Poor Mrs.
Aubrey, his wife, having been two or three weeks confined to her bed, during which time certain
fond hopes of her husband had been blighted, was almost overpowered, when, languid and feeble,
supported by Mr. Aubrey and Kate, she first entered the bedroom of the venerable sufferer.
What a difference, indeed, was there between the appearance of all of them at that moment,
and on the Christmas day when, a happy group, they were cheerfully enjoying the festivities
of the season! Kate was now pale, and somewhat thinner; her beautiful features exhibited a
careworn expression; yet there was a serene lustre in her blue eye, and a composed resolution
in her air, which bespoke the superiority of her soul. What had it not cost her to bear with
any semblance of self-possession, or fortitude, the sad spectacle now presented by her mother!
What a tender and vigilant nurse was she, to one who could no longer be sensible of, or appreciate
her attentions! How that sweet girl humored all her venerated and suffering parent's little
eccentricities and occasional excitement, and accommodated herself to every varying phasis
of her mental malady! She had so schooled her sensibilities and feelings, as to be able to
maintain perfect cheerfulness and composure in her mother's presence, on occasions which forced
her brother to turn aside with an eye of agony--overcome by some touching speech or wayward
action of the unconscious sufferer, who constantly imagined herself, poor soul! to be living
over again her early married life; and that in her little grandchildren she beheld Mr. Aubrey
and Kate as in their childhood! She would gently chide Mr. Aubrey, her husband, for his prolonged
absence, asking many times a day whether he had returned from London. Every morning old Jacob
Jones was shown into her chamber, at the hour at which he had been accustomed, in happier days,
to attend upon her. The faithful old man's eyes would be blinded with tears, and his voice
choked, as he was asked how Peggy got over her yesterday's journey; and listened to questions,
messages, and directions, which had been familiar to him twenty years before, about villagers
and tenants who had long lain mouldering in their humble graves--their way thither cheered
and smoothed by Mrs. Aubrey's Christian charity and benevolence! 'Twas a touching sight to
see her two beautiful grandchildren, in whose company she delighted, brought, with a timorous
and half-reluctant air, into her presence. How strange must have seemed to them the cheerfulness
of the motionless figure always lying in the bed; a cheerfulness which, though gentle as gentle
could be, yet sufficed not to assure the little things, or set them at their ease. Though her
mild features ever smiled upon them, still 'twas from a prostrate figure, which never moved,
and was always surrounded by mournful persons, with sorrowful constraint in their countenances
and gestures! Charles would stand watching her, with apprehensive eye--the finger of one hand
raised to his lip, while his other retained the hand which had brought him in, as if fearful
of its quitting hold of him; the few words he could be brought to speak were in a subdued tone
and hurried utterance;--and when, having been lifted up to kiss his grandmamma, he and his
sister were taken out of the chamber, their little breasts would heave a sigh which showed
how sensibly they were relieved from their recent constraint!

How wofully changed was everything in the once cheerful old Hall! Mr. Aubrey sitting in the
library, intently engaged upon books and papers--Mrs. Aubrey and Kate now and then, arm in
arm, walking slowly up and down the galleries, or one of the rooms, or the hall, not with their
former sprightly gayety, but pensive, and often in tears, and then returning to the chamber
of their suffering parent. All this was sad work, indeed, and seemed, as it were, to herald
coming desolation!

But little variation occurred, for several weeks, in the condition of Mrs. Aubrey, except that
she grew visibly feebler. One morning, however, about six weeks after her seizure, from certain
symptoms, the medical men intimated their opinion that some important change was on the eve
of taking place, for which they prepared the family. She had been very restless during the
night. After frequent intervals of uneasy sleep, she would awake with evident surprise and
bewilderment. Sometimes a peculiar smile would flit over her emaciated features; at others,
they would be overcast with gloom, and she would seem struggling to suppress tears. Her voice,
too, when she spoke, was feeble and tremulous; and she would sigh, and shake her head mournfully.
Old Jacob Jones, not being introduced at the accustomed hour, she asked for him. When he made
his appearance, she gazed at him for a moment or two, with a perplexed eye, exclaiming, "Jacob!
Jacob! is it you?" in a very low tone; and then she closed her eyes, apparently falling asleep.
Thus passed the day; her daughter and daughter-in-law sitting on either side of the bed, where
they had so long kept their anxious and affectionate vigils--Mr. Aubrey sitting at the foot
of the bed--and Dr. Goddart and Mr. Whately in frequent attendance. Towards the evening, Dr.
Tatham also, as had been his daily custom through her illness, appeared, and in a low tone
read over the service for the visitation of the sick. Shortly afterwards Mr. Aubrey was obliged
to quit the chamber, in order to attend to some very pressing matters of business; and he had
been engaged for nearly an hour, intending almost every moment to return to his mother's chamber,
when Dr. Tatham entered, as Mr. Aubrey was subscribing his name to a letter, and, with a little
earnestness, said--"Come, my friend, let us return to your mother; methinks she is on the eve
of some decisive change: the issue is with God!" Within a very few moments they were both at
the bedside of Mrs. Aubrey. A large chamber-lamp, standing on a table at the farther end of
the room, diffused a soft light, rendering visible at a glance the silent and sad group collected
round the bed, all with their eyes directed towards the venerable figure who lay upon it. Mr.
Aubrey sat beside his wife close to his mother; and taking her white emaciated hand into his
own, gently raised it to his lips. She seemed dozing: but his action appeared to rouse her
for a moment. Presently she fixed her eye upon him--its expression, the while, slowly but perceptibly
changing, and exciting strange feelings within him. He trembled, and removed not his eye from
hers. He turned very pale--for the whole expression of his mother's countenance, which was
turned full towards him, was changing. Through the clouded windows of the falling fabric, behold!
its long-imprisoned tenant, THE SOUL, had arisen from its torpor, and was looking at him. Reason
was re-appearing. It was, indeed, his mother, and in her right mind, that was gazing at him.
He scarcely breathed. At length surprise and apprehension yielded before a gush of tenderness
and love. With what an unutterable look was his mother at that moment regarding him! His lip
quivered--his eye overflowed--and, as he felt her fingers very gently compressing his own,
his tears fell down. Gently leaning forward, he kissed her cheek, and sank on one knee beside
the bed.

"Is it you, my son?" said she, in a very low tone, but in her own voice, and it stirred up
instantly a thousand fond recollections, almost overpowering him. He kissed her hand with fervent
energy, but spoke not. She continued gazing at him with mingled solemnity and fondness. Her
eye seemed brightening as it remained fixed upon him. It would be in vain to attempt to describe
the manner in which these words were spoken; and which fell upon those who heard them as though
they were listening to one from the dead.

"My mother!--my mother!" at length faltered Aubrey.

"God bless thee, my son!" said she, solemnly. "And Catherine, my daughter--God bless thee"----
she presently added, gently turning round her head towards the quarter whence a stifled sob
issued from Miss Aubrey, who rose, trembling, and leaning over, kissed her mother. "Agnes,
are you here--and your little ones?--God bless"---- Her voice got fainter, and her eyes closed.
Mr. Whately gave her a few drops of ether, and she presently revived.

"God hath been very good to you, Madam," said Dr. Tatham, observing her eye fixed upon him,
"to restore you thus to your children."

"I have been long absent--long!--I wake, my children, but to bid you farewell, forever, upon
earth."

"Say not so, my mother--my precious mother!" exclaimed her son, in vain endeavoring to suppress
his emotions.

"I do, my son! Weep not for me; I am old, and am summoned away from among you"--She ceased,
as if from exhaustion; and no one spoke for some minutes.

"It may be that God hath roused me, as it were, from the dead, to comfort my sorrowful children
with words of hope," said Mrs. Aubrey, with much more power and distinctness than before. "Hope
ye, then, in God; for ye shall yet praise him who is the health of your countenance, and your God!"

"We will remember, my mother, your words!" faltered her son.

"Yes, my son--if days of darkness be at hand"--She ceased. Again Mr. Whately placed to her
white lips a glass with some reviving fluid--looking ominously at Mr. Aubrey, as he found that
she continued insensible. Miss Aubrey sobbed audibly; indeed all present were powerfully affected.
Again Mrs. Aubrey revived, and swallowed a few drops of wine and water. A heavenly serenity
diffused itself over her emaciated features.

"We shall meet again, my loves!--I can no longer see you with the eyes of"--Mr. Whately observing
a sudden change, came nearer to her.

"Peace! peace!" she murmured almost inarticulately. A dead silence ensued, interrupted only
by smothered sobs. Her children sank on their knees, and buried their faces in their hands,
trembling.

Mr. Whately made a silent signal to Dr. Tatham, that life had ceased--that the beloved spirit
had passed away. "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord!"
said Dr. Tatham, with tremulous solemnity. Mrs. Aubrey and Miss Aubrey, no longer able to restrain
their feelings, wept bitterly; and overpowered with grief, were supported out of the room by
Dr. Tatham and Mr. Aubrey.

As soon as it was known that this venerable lady was no more, universal reverence was testified
for her memory, and sympathy for the afflicted survivors, by even those, high and low, in the
remoter parts of the neighborhood who had no personal acquaintance with the family. Two or
three days afterwards, the undertaker, who had received orders from Mr. Aubrey to provide a
simple and inexpensive funeral, submitted to him a list of more than thirty names of the nobility
and gentry of the country, who had sent to him to know whether it would be agreeable to the
family for them to be allowed to attend Mrs. Aubrey's remains to the grave. After much consideration,
Mr. Aubrey accepted this spontaneous tribute of respect to the memory of his mother. 'Twas
a memorable and melancholy day on which the interment took place--one never to be forgotten
at Yatton. What can be more chilling than the gloomy bustle of a great funeral, especially
in the country; and when the deceased is one whose memory is enshrined in the holiest feelings
of all who knew her? What person was there, for miles around, who could not speak of the courtesies,
the charities, the goodness of Madam Aubrey?

     "She was eyes to the blind, and feet was she to the lame.

     "She was a mother to the poor."----

Pale as death, the chief mourner, wrapped in his black cloak, is stepping into the mourning-coach.
No one speaks to him; his face is buried in his handkerchief; his heart seems breaking. He
thinks of her whose dear dust is before him;--then of the beloved beings whom he has left alone
in their agony till his return--his wife and sister. The procession is moving slowly on--long,
silent rows of the tenantry and villagers, old and young, male and female--not a dry eye among
them, nor a syllable spoken--stand on each side of the way; no sound heard but of horses' feet,
and wheels crushing along the wet gravel--for the day is most gloomy and inclement. As they
quit the gates, carriage after carriage follows in the rear; and the sorrowful crowd increases
around them. Many have in their hands the Bibles and prayer-books which had been given them
by her who now lies in yonder hearse; and a few can recollect the day when the late lord of
Yatton led her along from the church to the Hall, his young and blooming bride--in pride and
joy--and they are now going to lay her beside him again! They are met at the entrance of the
little churchyard, by good Dr. Tatham, in his surplice, bareheaded, and with book in hand;
with full eye and quivering lip he slowly precedes the body into the church. His voice frequently
trembles, and sometimes he pauses while reading the service. Now they are standing bareheaded
at the vault's mouth--the last sad rites are being performed; and probably, as is thinking
the chief mourner, over the last of his race who will rest in that tomb! 

Many of the native plants need examination with a view to their economic use. For instance, the
sego lily bulbs, upon which the Utah pioneers subsisted for several seasons of famine, may possibly
be made a cultivated crop. Finally, it remains to be said that it is doubtful wisdom to attempt
to grow the more intensive crops on dry-farms. Irrigation and dry-farming will always go together.
They are supplementary systems of agriculture in arid and semiarid regions.


Thus died, and was buried, Madam Aubrey; and she is not yet forgotten.

How desolate seemed the Hall, the next morning, to the bereaved inmates, as, dressed in deep
mourning, they met at the cheerless breakfast-table! Aubrey kissed his wife and sister--who
could hardly answer his brief inquiries. The gloom occasioned throughout the Hall, for the
last ten days, by the windows being constantly darkened--now that the blinds were drawn up--had
given way to a staring light and distinctness, which almost startled and offended the eyes
of those whose hearts were dark with sorrow as ever. Every object reminded them of the absence
of one--whose chair stood empty in its accustomed place. He could not escape the deep woe of
seeing social right and human happiness trodden under foot by tyranny; and folly and ignorance,
pain and sorrow were the great foundation stones on which the gay temple of Grecian beauty
was built.


Great troubles seem coming upon them; and now that they have buried their dead out of their
sight, and when time shall have begun to pour his balm into their present smarting wounds,
I doubt not that they will look those troubles in the face, calmly and with fortitude, not
forgetful of the last words of her for whom they now mourn so bitterly, and whom, beloved and
venerable being! God hath mercifully taken away from evil days that are to come.

After much consideration, they resolved to go, on the ensuing Sunday morning, to church, where
neither Mrs. Aubrey nor Kate had been since the illness of her mother. The little church was
crowded; almost every one present, besides wearing a saddened countenance, exhibited some outward
mark of respect, in their dress--some badge of mourning--such as their little means admitted
of. The pulpit and reading-desk were hung in black, as also was Mr. Aubrey's pew--an object
of deep interest to the congregation, who expected to see at least some member of the family
at the Hall. They were not disappointed. A little before Dr. Tatham took his place in the reading-desk,
the well-known sound of the family-carriage wheels was heard as it drew up before the gate;
and presently Mr. Aubrey appeared at the church door, with his wife and sister on either arm;
all of them, of course, in the deepest mourning--Mrs. and Miss Aubrey's countenances concealed
beneath their long crape veils. For some time after taking their seats, they seemed oppressed
with emotion, evidently weeping. Mr. Aubrey, however, exhibited great composure, though his
countenance bore traces of the suffering he had undergone. Mrs. Aubrey seldom rose from her
seat; but Kate stood up, from time to time, with the rest of the congregation; her white handkerchief,
however, might have been seen frequently raised to her eyes, beneath her black veil. The last
bell rang. The baggageman bustled, fuming, from one pile of baggage to another, dispensing chalk
to the trunks, checks to the passengers, and curses to the porters, in approved railway style.

'Mine!--Philadelphia!'
cried a stout, military-looking man, with enormous whiskers and a red face, crowding forward,
as the baggageman laid his hand on the first bag.

'Won't you please to give me a check for this, now?' entreated a pale, slender, carefully-dressed
young man, for the ninth time, holding out bag No. 2. 'I have a lady to look after.'

'Say! be you agoin' to give me a check for that 'are, or not?' growled
the proprietor of bag No. 3, a short, pockmarked fellow, in a shabby
overcoat.

'All right, gen'l'men. He experienced emotions such as he had never known before. So
that was Miss Aubrey!

Mr. Gammon--for he it was, and he had gone thither under the expectation of seeing, for the
first time, some of the Aubrey family--generally passed for a cold-blooded person; and in fact
few men living had more control over their feelings, or more systematically checked any manifestations
of them; but there was something in the person and circumstances of Miss Aubrey--for by a hurried
inquiry of the person next to him he learned that it was she--which excited new feelings in
him. Her slightest motion his eye watched with intense eagerness; and faint half-formed schemes,
purposes, and hopes, passed in rapid confusion through his mind, as he foresaw that circumstances
would hereafter arise by means of which--

"Good heavens! how very--very beautiful she is!" said he to himself, as, the service over,
her graceful figure, following her brother and his wife with slow sad step, approached the
pew in which he was standing, on her way to the door. He felt a sort of cold shudder as her
black dress rustled past, actually touching him. What was he doing and meditating against that
lovely being? In comparison with it, the proverb is only a humble subordinate, and song itself, with
all its power, but a weak influence. Yet the song and the proverb boast a critical literature,
while the brief compendiums of merriment which never die, which, once written, live through
every age, and force their way through every penetrable language,
are undoubtedly less studied than any other popular medium of feeling.

What is a jest? It is as little worth the while to try to define
its nature, as it is to analyze wit. As he walked back
to Grilston to his solitary dinner, he was lost in thought; and on arriving at the inn, repaired
at once to his room, where he found a copy of the Sunday Flash, which had, according to orders,
been sent to him from town, under his assumed name, "Gibson." He ate but little, and that mechanically;
and seemed to feel, for once, little or no interest in his newspaper. He had never paid the
least attention to the eulogia upon Miss Aubrey of the idiot Titmouse, nor of Snap, of whom
he entertained but a very little higher opinion than of Titmouse. One thing was clear, that
from that moment Miss Aubrey formed a new element in Mr. Gammon's calculations; and for aught
I know, may occasion very different results from those originally contemplated by that calm
and crafty person.

