Mrs. Jarley may be made a silent character, sitting on one side, and occasionally making believe
to dust or arrange a figure, while the "patter" is delivered by a male exhibitor. Or Mrs. Jarley
may, if preferred, be suppressed altogether, and the exhibitor appear as (say) Artemus Ward,
or in ordinary evening costume, without assuming any special character. A good deal of fun
may be made of the supposed tendency of any particular figure to tip over, and the application,
by John and Peter, of wooden wedges, penny pieces, etc., under its feet to keep it upright.
Supposed defective working, causing the figure to stop suddenly in the middle of its movements,
and involving the rewinding or oiling of its internal mechanism, will also produce a good deal
of amusement. The "winding up" may be done with a bed-winch, a bottle-jack key, or the winch
of a kitchen range, the click of the mechanism being imitated by means of a watchman's rattle,
or by the even simpler expedient of drawing a piece of hard wood smartly along a notched stick.
(This, of course, should be done out of sight of the audience.) The movement of the figure
should be accompanied by the piano, to a slow or lively measure, as may be most appropriate.

The arrangement being complete and the curtain raised, Mrs. Jarley delivers her opening speech,
about as follows:

"Ladies and gentlemen, you here behold Mrs. Jarley, one of the most remarkable  women of the
world, who has traveled all over the country with her curious Collection of Waxworks. These
figures have been gathered, at great expense, from every clime and country, and are here shown
together for the first time. I shall describe each one of them for your benefit, and, after
I have given you their history, I shall have each one of them wound up, for they are all fitted
with clockwork inside, and they can thus go through the same motions they did when living.
In fact, they execute their movements so naturally that many people have supposed them to be
alive; but I assure you that they are all made of wood and wax--blockheads every one.

"Without further prelude, I shall now introduce to your notice each one of my figures, beginning,
as usual, with the last one first."

I. THE CHINESE GIANT

A MAN OR WOMAN STANDING ON A HIGH STOOL, CHINTZ SKIRT AROUND THE WAIST, LONG ENOUGH TO HIDE
THE STOOL, CHINESE OVERDRESS, HAT, PIG-TAIL AND MOUSTACHE

"This figure is universally allowed to be the tallest figure in my collection; he originated
in the two provinces of Oolong and Shanghi, one province not being long enough to produce him.
On account of his extreme length it is impossible to give any adequate idea of him in one entertainment,
consequently he will be continued in our next.

"He was the inventor, projector and discoverer of Niagara Falls, Bunker's Hill Monument and
the Balm of Columbia. In fact, everything was originally discovered by him or some other of
the Chinese. The portrait of this person, who was a high dignitary among them, may be often
seen depicted on a blue china plate, standing upon a bridge, which leans upon nothing, at either
end, and intently observing two birds which are behind him in the distance.

"John, wind up the Giant."

The Giant bows low, then wags his head three times and bows as before, and after a dozen motions
slowly stops.

"You will observe that I have spared no expense in procuring wonders of every sort, and here
is my crowning effort or masterpiece--"

II. THE TWO-HEADED GIRL

"A remarkable freak of nature, which impresses the beholder with silent awe. Observe the two
heads and one body. See these fair faces, each one lovelier than the other. No one can gaze
upon them without a double sensation 'of sorrow and of joy'--sorrow that such beauty and grace
were ever united, and joy that he has had the pleasure of contemplating their union.

"Wind them up, Peter."

This figure is made by two young ladies standing back to back, wrapped in one large skirt.
They hold their arms out, with their hands hanging, and slowly revolve when they are wound up.

III. THE SEWING-WOMAN

"John, bring out the Sewing-Woman, and let the ladies behold the unfortunate seamstress who
died from pricking her finger with a needle while sewing on Sunday. You see that the work which
she holds is stained with gore, which drips from her finger onto the floor. (Which is poetry!)
This forms a sad and melancholy warning to all heads of families immediately to purchase the
best sewing-machines, for this accident never could have happened had she not been without
one of those excellent machines, such as no family should be without."

Costume: Optional.

When wound up, the figure sews very stiffly and stops slowly.

IV. CAPTAIN KIDD AND HIS VICTIM

"Ladies and Gentlemen: Permit me to call your attention to this beautiful group, which has
lately been added, at an enormous expense, to my collection. You here behold the first privateer
and the first victim of his murderous propensities. Captain Kidd, the robber of the main, is
supposed to have originated somewhere down east. His whole life being spent upon the stormy
deep, he amassed an immense fortune, and buried it in the sand along the flower-clad banks
of Cape Cod, by which course he invented the savings banks, now so common along shore. Having
hidden away so much property, which, like so many modern investments, never can be unearthed,
he was known as a great sea-cretur. Before him kneels his lovely and innocent victim, the Lady
Blousabella Infantina, who was several times taken and murdered by this bloodthirsty tyrant,
which accounts for the calm look of resignation depicted upon her lovely countenance.

"Wind 'em up, John."

Costumes: Captain Kidd--white pantaloons, blue shirt, sailor hat, pistol and sword.

Victim--Lady with flowing hair, white dress. Movement--The captain's sword moves up and down,
and the victim's arms go in unison.

V. THE SIAMESE TWINS

Two gentlemen dressed alike in ordinary costume, with a large bone (attached by wire or string)
between them. One arm of each over the other's neck. Since returning to Valencia I'm giving chase ... What I went through, girl! I'll
tell you. And finally I caught ... Ah, good piece! Now I'll pay all together ... How you made
me suffer! ... More curses you've missed a convent that happy ...! But how beautiful you are,
baby.

- Chi.

- You're beautiful .-- Chi ... for you.

Cold fever that suddenly was changed into heat extremely violent and convulsive laughter in
explosion of crying.

"It is a day to mourn, but to be happy."

- Do you know what I remember? Nenin my so funny ... Had he lived, he would have wanted you, right?
I think I see him, when he took in the blue box ... That same Juarez night was when I took a
cuchillote Black so great, and he told me that vocerrón: "Brr ... are the eight, reads what you
have to pray, because before I kill nine. "

Was furious with jealousy ... Oh, what fear so terrible!

- Have
much to tell!

... I love you, you to me. I know you're married. You did well.

This has made it fell to the neighbor as a cold drop in the heart, bringing it sharply to reality.
Wiping her tears, she remembered Maxi, their wedding, and his house, which had leagues hundred miles away,
got there, four steps, funeral and unfriendly. Rejection of his soul to this phenomenon in an
instant wiped all the tears.

"And why did it?".

- Because that are freer and have a name. You can do whatever you want, whenever you do it with
discretion. I heard that your husband is a good boy, he sees visions ...

Upon hearing this, Fortunata was up in his mind the ideal image, or
rather, the spectrum for their wickedness. What was just done what
only has a name, so very special and abnormal in the record of human
wickedness. The place, the occasion gave his greatest act ugliness,
and they understood in a cursory examination of conscience, but had
the ancient and ever new passion so much drive and vigor, that the
spectrum fled without a trace of himself. It was considered Fortunata
in that case as a blind mechanism that receives supernatural impulse
hand. What had done, doeth he, in his view, by order of the mysterious
energy ordering the greatest things in the universe, the sunrise and
fall of heavy bodies. And not had to do it, or discussing the inevitable,
or try to mitigate their responsibility, because it did not looked
very clear, and although he saw it was someone so firmly in their
direction, that did not stop at any consequence, and was content,
such was his idea, to go to hell.

Costume: Evening dress.

VIII. THE YANKEE

Description: A tall, thin man, clean shaven, but for a tuft on chin, dressed in black, with
broad-brimmed straw hat. He is seated on a low rocking-chair, with his legs resting on the
back of another chair. He holds a wooden stick, which he is whittling with a jackknife.

"You here behold a specimen of our irrepressible, indomitable native Yankee, who has been everywhere,
seen everything and knows everything. He has explored the arid jungles of Africa, drawn forth
the spotted cobra by his prehensile tail, snowballed the Russian bear on the snowy slopes of
Alpine forests, and sold wooden nutmegs to the unsuspecting innocents of Patagonia. He has
peddled patent medicines in the Desert of Sahara, and hung his hat and carved his name on the
extreme top of the North Pole. The only difficulty I find in describing him is that I cannot
tell what he cannot do. I will therefore set him in motion, as he hates to be quiet."

When, wound up he pushes his hat back on his head and begins to whittle.

IX. THE CANNIBAL

"Here you behold a curious cannibal from the Feejee Islands, first discovered by Captain Cook,
who came very near being cooked by him. In that case, the worthy captain would never have completed
his celebrated voyage round the world. This individual was greatly interested in the cause
of foreign missions. Indeed, he received the missionaries gladly and gave them a place near
his heart. He was finally converted by a very tough tract-distributor, who had been brought
up in a Bloomsbury boarding-house, and was induced to become civilized. One of his evidences
of a change of life was shown by his statement that he now had but one wife, like the English.
'What have you done with the other twelve which you said you had a month ago?' asked the tract
distributor. 'Oh, I have eaten them!' replied the gentle savage. This cannibal was very fond
of children, especially those of a tender age; he holds in his hand a war-club, with which
he prepared his daily meals, also a warwhoop, which is an original one."

Costume: Brown jersey and drawers, face and hands colored to match, very short skirt, feather
headdress, large rings in nose and ears. One hand holds a war-club, the other a child's hoop.

Movement: When wound up he brandishes his club and raises hoop to his mouth.

X. BABES IN THE WOOD

Two men, the bigger the better, one dressed as a very small boy, the other as a little girl;
each holds a penny bun.

"In the next group you behold the Babes in the Wood, who had the misfortune to have an uncle.
This wicked man hired a villain to carry these babes away into the wood and leave them to wander
until death put an end to their sorrow, and the little robins covered them up with leaves.
These lifelike figures represent the children just after taking their leaves of the villain.
By a master stroke of genius the artist has shown very delicately that human nature is not
utterly depraved, for the villain has placed in the hand of each of the innocents a penny bun
as a parting present. I have been often asked 'why I did not have a figure of the villain also
added to the group?' but my reply always is, 'Villains are too common to be any curiosity.'

"Wind 'em up, John."

Each Babe offers to the other a bite of bun alternately.

XI. LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD

A young lady carrying a basket on her arm. Costume in accordance with the story.

"Here you behold Little Red Riding-Hood, a model of grand filial devotion, for she was so fond
of her granny that she wandered through the forest to take the old lady's luncheon, and was
eaten by the wolf for so doing, which is a warning to all children to be careful how they do
much for their grandmothers, unless they are rich and can leave them something in their wills.
This personage was an especial favorite with children, who love to read about her, and shed
tears over her unhappy fate, although some of them think that had she been as smart as her
dress, she would have been too smart to have mistaken the wolf for her grandmother, unless
she had been a very homely old lady, or he had been much better looking than most wolves."

When wound up, the figure curtseys and holds out her basket.

XII. LADY WITH GOLDEN LOCKS

Young lady with long hair, flowing over her shoulders, holds bottle (labelled Mrs. Blank's
Hair Restorer) and curling-tongs.

"This is one of the most expensive of my costly collection, for blonde hair is very high, and
you see how heavy and long are the golden locks which adorn her beautiful face. I cannot pass
this figure without saying a few words in praise of the wonderful hair restorer, for this image
had grown so bald from the effect of long journeys by road or rail that she was exhibited for
two years as the Old Man of the Mountain. One bottle of this wonderful fluid, however, restored
her hair to its present growth and beauty, and a little of the fluid being accidentally spilled
upon the pine box in which the figure was carried, it immediately became an excellent hair
trunk." EXHIBITION

The elaborate "sell" which goes by this name used to be a regular institution in church bazaars
and might well be rejuvenated as a novelty.

A regular printed catalogue is got up, containing apparently the names of a collection of pictures
or sculptures, each object duly numbered and with the name of the artist appended. In some
instances the name of a (supposed) picture is followed by an appropriate quotation in poetry
or prose, after the orthodox fashion of art galleries. We append, by way of illustration, a
selection from the catalogue of a collection which has met with great success: EXHIBITION OF
THE WORKS OF LIVING ARTISTS

PART I. WORKS OF ART

1. Horse Fair After Rosa Bonheur. 2. A Brush With a Cutter Off Deal Carpenter. 3. Caught in
a Squall Off Yarmouth Fisher. 4. The Last of Poor Dog Tray Barker. 5. "He Will Return, I Know
He Will" Lent by the Trustees of the Parish. 6. The Midnight Hour. C. Lock. 7. Heroes of Waterloo.
Schumacher. 8. True to the Core. C. Odling. 9. "Spring, Spring, Beautiful Spring!" Mayne. 10.
"Tears, Idle Tears." Strong. 11. The Midnight Assassin. F. Sharpe. 12. The Dripping Well. T.
Inman. 13. Family Jars. Potter. 14. Never Too Late to Mend. S. Titch. 15. Past Healing. Kobler.
16. The First Sorrow. Smalchild. 17. Saved. S. Kinflint 18. Lost 19. First Love. Sweet. 20.
The Death of the Camel. After Goodall. 21. His First Cigar. A. Young. 22. A Good Fellow Gone.
M. I. Slade. 23. Portrait of a Gentleman. Anonymous. 24. Portrait of a Lady. Anonymous. 25.
Our Churchwardens. Screw. 26. Portraits of the Reigning Sovereigns of Europe. (Taken by special
order). G. P. O. 27. Waifs of Ocean. Fish. "Strange things come up to look at us, The Monsters
of the deep." 28. The Last Man. Unknown. 29. Contribution from the Celebrated Sheepsbanks Collection.
Butcher. 30. The Light of Other Days. Dimm. 31. The Meet of Her Majesty's Hounds. Pratt. 32.
Water Scene. "And I hear Those waters rolling from the mountain springs With a sweet inland
murmur." 33. The Maiden's Joy. Bachelor. 34. The Fall. Adam. 35. Motherhood.

36. A Friendly Party on Hampstead Heath. Moke. 37. Borrowed Plumes. Wigg. 38. Out for the Night.
Anonymous. 39. Something to Adore. Anonymous. 40. The Weaned Grinder. Mayne Force. "Change
and decay in all around I see." 41. Repentance. G. Templar. 42. Maggie's Secret. Rossetter.
43. Somebody's Luggage. S. Canty. 44. Eusebius. B. Linkers. 45. Happy Childhood. Wackford Squeers.
46. Not Such a Fool as He Looks. The Exhibitor. 47. A Choice Collection of Old China. 48. A
Fine Specimen of Local Quartz Discovered in the Possession of a Workman. During the Building
of the New Town Hall. 49. The Skull of the Last of the Mohicans. 50. A Marble Group. 51. Bust.
52. The Puzzle. 53. The Instantaneous Kid Reviver. 54. The Earnest Entreaty.

EXPLANATION

Anyone not in the secret, perusing the above catalogue, would naturally conclude that the descriptions
referred to pictorial art of some kind or other. But such is by no means the case. The visitor,
on being admitted, finds, in place of the expected pictures, shelves or tables on which are
arranged sundry very commonplace objects, each bearing a numbered ticket. On close examination
he finds that the numbers correspond with those in the catalogue, and that No. 1, "Horse Fair"--fare--is
represented after a realistic fashion by a handful of oats and a wisp of hay. No. 2, which
he expected to find a spirited marine sketch, is in reality only a toothbrush lying beside
a jack-plane; while the supposed companion picture, "Caught in a Squall Off Yarmouth," is represented
by a red herring. No. 4, "The Last of Poor Dog Tray," is a sausage, and the exhibitor particularly
begs that no gentleman will on any account whistle while passing this picture. No. 5, "He Will
Return, I Know He Will," presumably the agonized cry of a forsaken maiden, is in reality a
poor-rate collector's paper, marked "Fifth application." No. 6 is represented by a numbered
ticket only, with no object attached to it. The exhibitor explains that "The Midnight Hour"
has not yet arrived, but that any gentleman who likes to wait till it does (which will be at
twelve o'clock punctually), is very welcome to do so. The "Heroes of Waterloo," Wellington
and Blucher, No. 7, are represented by a couple of boots known by those distinguished names.
8, "True to the Core," is a rosy-cheeked apple. 9 is a coil of watch spring. 10, "Tears, Idle
Tears," on which the exhibitor feelingly expatiates as a noble example of the imaginative in
art, is an onion. The space dedicated to No. 11 is occupied by the numbered ticket only, the
exhibitor explaining that "The Midnight Assassin" (who is stated to be a large and lively flea)
has strolled away and is wandering at large about the room; and he adds an entreaty that any
lady or gentleman who may meet with him will immediately return him to his place in the collection.
"The Dripping Well" (No. 12) proves to be of the description more usually known as a dripping-pan.
"Family Jars," by Potter, is found to consist of a pickle jar and jam pot. No. 14, "Never Too
Late to Mend," is a boot patched all over; while 15, "Past Healing," is its fellow, too far
gone to admit of like renovation. "The First Sorrow" is a broken doll. "Saved" is a money box,
containing twopence halfpenny, mostly in farthings. The next is a vacant space, over which
the exhibitor passes with the casual remark, "No. 18, as you will observe, is unfortunately
lost." No. 19, "First Love," is a piece of taffy. 20, "The Death of the Camel," is a straw,
labeled "the last," and the exhibitor explains that this is the identical straw that broke
the camel's back. "His First Cigar" is a mild Havana of brown paper. "A Good Fellow Gone" is
suggested, rather than represented, by an odd glove. Nos. 23 and 24 are represented by two
small mirrors, which are handed to a lady and a gentleman respectively, with a few appropriate
remarks as to the extreme success of the likenesses, coupled with critical remarks as to the
"expression" in each case. "Our Churchwardens" are a pair of long clay pipes. No. 26, "Portraits
of the Reigning Sovereigns of Europe," are represented by a few cancelled foreign postage stamps.
"The Monsters of the Deep," in No. 27, are represented by a periwinkle and a shrimp. "The Last
Man" (No. 28), is at present missing from his place in the collection, but the exhibitor explains
that he will be seen going out just as the exhibition closes. The "Contribution from the Sheepshanks
Collection" (29), is a couple of mutton bones; while "The Light of Other Days" (30) is an old-fashioned
lantern and tinder box. "The Meet (meat) of Her Majesty's Hounds" is a piece of dog biscuit.
No. 32 is a leaky can of water. "The Maiden's Joy" (obviously) is a wedding ring. "The Fall"
is a lady's veil. No. 35, "Motherhood," is the gem of the collection, and should be kept carefully
hidden (say by a handkerchief thrown over it) until the company have had time to read and appreciate
Mr. Caverley's graceful lines, when the veil is removed, and behold--an egg! No. 36, "A Friendly
Party on Hampstead Heath," is represented by three toy donkeys. "Borrowed Plumes" are represented
by a lady's false front. "Out for the Night" is an extinguished candle. "Something to Adore"
is a rusty bolt. "The Wearied Grinder" is a back tooth of somebody's very much the worse for
wear. "Repentance" (No. 41) is represented by a smashed hat and a bottle of sodawater. "Maggie's
Secret" is a gray hair, labeled "Her First." No. 43, "Somebody's Luggage," consists of a broken
comb and a paper collar. "Eusebius" is a pair of spectacles. "Happy Childhood" is indicated
by a lithe and "swishy" cane. When the company arrive at No. 46, the corresponding object is
apparently missing. The exhibitor refers to his notes and says: "46--46? I see they have written
down against No. 46, 'The Exhibitor,' but I don't see quite what they mean. Suppose we pass
on to the curiosities, ladies and gentlemen." No. 47 is merely some smashed crockery, and No.
48 a pewter quart pot. No. 49 is again a vacant space, and the exhibitor explains that "The
Last of the Mohicans" has just gone home to his tea, and has taken his skull with him. No.
50 is, as its name implies, a group of marbles, of the school boy character. No. 51 is a paper
bag of peas, and, being too full, has "bust." "The Puzzle" (No. 52) is an old guide book. "The
Instantaneous Kid Reviver" is a baby's feeding bottle; and the "Earnest Entreaty" is the request
of the exhibitor that the visitors will recommend the collection to their friends.

If the "showman" be possessed of a good fund of talk and a dash of dry humor, the fun of the
collection may be still further enhanced by his explanations and criticisms of the various
objects. Poor Artemus Ward's celebrated lecture is an excellent model to copy; indeed, many
of his "bits" may be stolen bodily with very satisfactory result. Even without the aid of a
showman, the comparison of the poetical descriptions and the sober reality will produce a good
deal of fun; but, in this case, the various blanks or vacant spaces to be filled up by explanation
must necessarily be omitted--a good many telling items being thereby sacrificed. There should
be a flap with hinges, to cover the opening, that the inside of the box may not be seen. There
must be holes in that part of the box which is over the lantern, to let out the smoke; and
over this must be placed a chafing-dish, of an oblong figure, large enough to hold several
lighted coals. This chafing-dish, for the better carrying on the deception, may be inclosed
in a painted tin box, about a foot high, with a hole at top, and should stand on four feet,
to let the smoke of the lantern escape. There must also be a glass planned to move up and down
in the groove, and so managed by a cord and pulley that it may be raised up and let down by
the cord coming through the outside of the box. On this glass the spectre (or any other figure
you please) must be painted, in a contracted or squat form, as the figure will reflect a greater
length than it is drawn. When you have lighted the lamp in the lantern and placed the mirror
in a proper direction, put the box on a table, and, setting the chafing-dish in it, throw some
incense in powder on the coals. You then open the trap door and let down the glass in the groove
slowly, and when you perceive the smoke diminish, draw up the glass, that the figure may disappear,
and shut the trap-door. This exhibition will afford much wonder. The lights in the room must
be extinguished, and the box should be placed on a high table, that the aperture through which
the light comes out may not be seen.

A MAGIC-LANTERN TRICK

The light of the magic-lantern and the color of images may not only be painted on a cloth,
but also reflected by a cloud of smoke. Provide a box of wood or pasteboard, about four feet
high and seven or eight inches square at bottom, but diminishing as it ascends, so that its
aperture at the top be but six inches long and half an inch wide. At the bottom of this box
there must be a door that shuts quite close, by which you are to place in the box a chafing-dish
with hot coals, on which is to be thrown incense, whose smoke goes out in a cloud at the top
of the box; on this cloud you are to throw the light that comes out of the lantern, and which
you bring into a smaller compass by drawing out the movable tube. In this representation, the
motion of the smoke does not at all change the figures, which appear so conspicuous that the
spectator thinks he can grasp them with his hand. In the experiment, some of the rays passing
through the smoke, the representation will be much less vivid than on the cloth; and if care
be not taken to reduce the light to its smallest focus, it will be still more imperfect.

THE PHANTASMAGORIA

In showing the common magic-lantern, the spectators see a round circle of light with the figures
in the middle of it; but in the Phantasmagoria they see the figures only, without any circle
of light. The exhibition is produced by a magic lantern, placed on that side of a half-transparent
screen which is opposite to that on which the spectators are, instead of being on the same
side, as in the ordinary exhibition of the magic lantern. To favor the deception, the slides
are made perfectly opaque, except in those places that contain the figures to be exhibited,
and in these light parts the glass is covered with a more or less transparent tint, according
to the effect required. The easiest way is to draw the figures with water colors on thin paper
and afterward varnish them. To imitate the natural motions of the objects represented, several
pieces of glass placed behind each other are occasionally employed. By removing the lantern
to different distances, and at the same time altering, more or less distinct, at the pleasure
of the exhibitor; so that, to a person unacquainted with the effect of optical instruments,
these figures appear actually to advance and recede. Transparent screens for the Phantasmagoria
are prepared by spreading white wax, dissolved in spirits of wine or oil of turpentine, over
thin muslin; a screen so prepared may be rolled up without injury. A clearer screen may be
produced by having the muslin always strained upon a rectangular frame, and preparing it with
turpentine, instead of wax; but such a screen is not always convenient, and cannot be rolled
without cracking, and becoming in a short time useless.

CHINESE SHADOWS

In a partition wall cut an aperture of any size; for example, four feet in length and two in
breadth, so that the lower edge may be about five feet from the floor, and cover it with white
Italian gauze, varnished with gum-copal. Provide several frames of the same size as the aperture,
covered with the same kind of gauze, and delineate upon the gauze different figures, such as
landscapes and buildings, analogous to the scenes which you intend to exhibit by means of small
figures representing men and animals. These figures are formed of pasteboard, and their different
parts are made movable, according to the effect intended to be produced by their shadows, when
moved backward and forward behind the frames, at a small distance from them. To make them act
with more facility, small wires, fixed to their movable parts, are bent backward and made to
terminate in rings, through which the fingers of the hand are put, while the figure is supported
on the left by means of another iron wire. In this manner they may be made to advance or recede
and to gesticulate, without the spectators observing the mechanism by which they are moved;
and as the shadow of these figures is not observed on the paintings till they are opposite
those parts which are not strongly shaded, they may thus be concealed and made to appear at
the proper moments, and others may be occasionally substituted in their stead.

It is necessary, when the figures are made to act, to speak a dialogue, suited to their gestures,
and imitate the noise occasioned by different circumstances. The paintings must be illuminated
from behind by means of a reverberating lamp, placed opposite to the center of the painting,
and distant from it about four or five feet. Various amusing scenes may be represented in this
manner by employing small figures of men and animals, and making them move in as natural a
way as possible, which will depend on the address and practice of the person who exhibits them.

A WONDERFUL MIRROR

Make two openings of a foot high and ten inches wide and about a foot distant from each other,
in the wainscoting of a wall; let them be at the common height of a man's head; and in each
of them place a transparent glass, surrounded with a frame, like a common mirror. Behind this
partition place two mirrors, one on the outward side of each opening, inclined to the wainscot
at an angle of forty-five degrees; let them both be eighteen inches square; let all the space
between them be enclosed by boards or pasteboard, painted black and well closed, that no light
may enter; let there be also two curtains to cover them, which may be drawn aside at pleasure.
When a person looks into one of these supposed mirrors, instead of seeing his own face he will
perceive the object that is in the front of the other; so that, if two persons present themselves
at the same time before these mirrors, instead of each one seeing himself, they will reciprocally
see each other. There should be a sconce with a candle or lamp placed on each side of the two
glasses in the wainscot, to enlighten the faces of the persons who look in them, otherwise
this experiment will have no remarkable effect. This recreation may be considerably improved
by placing the two glasses in the wainscot in adjoining rooms, and a number of persons being
previously placed in one room, when a stranger enters the other, you may tell him his face
is dirty, and desire him to look in the glass, which he will naturally do; and on seeing a
strange face he will draw back; but returning to it, and seeing another, another and another,
what his surprise will be is more easy to conceive than express.

When one looks in a mirror placed perpendicularly to another, his face will appear entirely
deformed. If the mirror be a little inclined, so as to make an angle of eighty degrees (that
is, one-ninth part from the perpendicular), he will then see all the parts of his face, except
the nose and forehead; if it be inclined to sixty degrees (that is, one-third part), he will
appear with three noses and six eyes; in short, the apparent deformity will vary at each degree
of inclination; and when the glass comes to forty-five degrees (that is, half-way down), the
face will vanish. If, instead of placing the two mirrors in this situation, they are so disposed
that their junction may be vertical, their different inclinations will produce other effects,
as the situation of the object relative to these mirrors is quite different.

THE DISAPPEARING PAPER

Attach to a dark wall a round piece of paper an inch or two in diameter, and, a little lower,
at the distance of two feet on each side, make two marks; then place yourself directly opposite
to the paper, and hold the end of your finger before your face in such a manner that when the
right eye is open it shall conceal the mark on the right; if you then look with both eyes to
the end of your finger, the paper, which is not at all concealed by it from either of your
eyes, will, nevertheless, disappear. Forgive, that well deserves it. We removed
your man, but she had no guilt. What a scab! ... Alas, it slipped. Dirty word, become for in-no,
stay out ... Well girl, do not be a turkey ... Do you believe that the best day again you
do not want your D. John? ... As if I saw it. When one is going to die, sees things clear, very
clearly, the death of light to one, and I tell you that your Lord will you.

It is the law, daughter, is a law, you can not miss ... And if I hurry,
I will say that he was not Jacinta a damn.

MULTIPLYING SHADOWS

A dummy figure (suppose that of a witch, riding on the conventional broomstick) is suspended
by fine threads or wires on the screen remote from the spectators. Behind this are ranged,
one behind the other, and at right angles to the screen, a row of lighted candles. Being all
in the same line, they throw one shadow only on the screen. The figure is now made to oscillate
slightly, so as to impart some little motion to the shadow. One of the candles is now removed
from its place in the row, and waved gently about, now high, now low, the effect to the spectators
being that a second shadow springs out of the first, and dances about it on the screen. A second
and third candle is then removed, and waved up and down, each candle as it leaves its place
in the line, producing a separate shadow. It is well to have three or four assistants, each
taking a candle in each hand. The players then draw at random as many bones as the game requires.
These dominoes with which the hand is to be played may stand on their edges in front of the
players or may be held in the hand, or both. It is usual to sort them into suits as far as
possible. The one who has drawn the highest doublet usually plays or sets first.

The object in dominoes is either to block the game so that the adversary cannot play or it
is to make the two ends when added together equal to some multiple of a given number, or it
is to make both ends of the line the same. The player first getting rid of all his pieces is
"Domino."

Dominoes are made in sets known by the number of pips on the highest domino or bone in the
set. The standard set is double-sixes and contains twenty-eight bones. Some persons use double-nines.
In the double-six set there are seven "suits," each named after some number from six to blank.
In each of these suits there are seven bones, but each domino in a suit, except the doublet,
belongs to some other suit as well. The lower figure on each domino shows the other suit to
which it belongs.

All games of dominoes, except matadore, are based on the principle of following suit or matching.
The first player "sets" a certain domino, and after that each player must play one of the same
suit, the suit called for being always that of the exposed or open end.