No doubt was there in Joan's little heart, no question as to who the sleeping child could be.
All the little learning she had gained died away when she saw the child. She had come to seek
the babe whose birth the angels had sung over, and she had found him. Without speech or motion,
scarcely breathing for very joy, she stood gazing at it. The little head and small face, the
tiny hands, filled her soul with awe and tenderness. Very timidly she touched the soft cheek
with the tip of her finger--the warm, soft cheek--and the baby stirred a little. Then Joan,
hanging the lantern to the rack above the manger, knelt down by its side to watch the quiet
slumber of the welcome child.

Were the angels there, asked Joan of herself, unseen and unheard by her, singing glory? And
oh! where was Mary, His mother? and where could Joseph be? She must take care of the sleeping
baby till they came back; and surely Aunt Priscilla would consent to have such guests as these
in her house.

But before very long she heard Nathan's voice calling her anxiously. He wanted his lantern;
and his mind was not quite easy as to whether it was well for Joan to keep up a fancy like
this. At the sound the baby stirred, and its tiny features grew puckered up, as if it was about
to cry. Joan sprang up quickly yet quietly, and appeared in the doorway, beckoning to old Nathan
to keep still.

"Hush! hush!" she cried; "he is here sleeping, and you mustn't wake him. But I don't know where
Mary is or Joseph. There is nobody but the baby. Oh, I am so happy! I am so happy!"

"What does Joan mean?" thought Nathan, stepping heavily yet gently on into the inner shed,
which he had filled with provender the day before. Joan led him to the farther stall, and there,
in a warm, soft nest of hay, well wrapped up and sleeping soundly again, lay the baby. The
old man stood silently gazing at it till the slow tears trickled down his grey and withered cheeks.

"God help us!" he sobbed at last; "poor little lost babe! Come on Christmas mornin'! And where's
thy poor, sorrowful mother? What can we do for thee, Joan and me? Nobody to give thee a welcome
but an old man and a little child. But we'll love thee for the dear Lord's sake as sent thee
to us on Christmas mornin'. Ay, and, old as I am, I'll fight thy battles for thee, poor lamb!"

Very gently he lifted up the tender little creature, and laid it in Joan's outstretched arms,
which tingled with delight, mingled with fear lest she should loose her hold of it. A flush
of colour had come to her pale face, and all the sadness had fled from it, and her eyes were
shining with joy. Nathan lighted her steps along the stony causeway, which she trod with a
thrill of anxious care, lest she might slip and fall with her precious burden. But the house
was reached in safety, and the sleeping child had uttered no cry.

"Lay it warm in thy own bed," said Nathan, "and wrap the blankets about it, and I'll run and
fetch Nurse Williams, that knows how to manage little babes; and keep it still, Joan, while
I'm away, whatever you do. Don't let thy aunt hear it till I come back."

How long Nathan was away Joan could not tell. She knew nothing of time as she knelt by the
bedside watching the child sleeping so softly and soundly, its tiny face growing rosy with
warmth. But at last her long day-dream was broken by the sound of her own name, uttered in
so loud and terrible a voice that she felt as if she could not stir hand or foot. The summit of
the elevated plateau country about the headwaters of the Little Colorado and Black rivers (which
is known locally as the "Big Mesa"), is an extended area of rolling
grassy plain, entirely surrounded by forests and varied irregularly
by wooded ridges and points of timber.

This open plain extends in a long sweep from a point a few miles south of Springerville westward
for about fifteen miles along the top of the divide to the bases
of Ord and Thomas peaks.

These elevated plains are separated from those of the Little Colorado
to the north by the belt of forests already described as covering
the abrupt northern wall of the plateau.

On the other sides of the "Big Mesa" an unbroken forest extends away over the undulating mountainous
country as far as the eye can reach.
 Thou'rt
a hard woman, Priscilla Parry, and God 'll show Himself hard to thee. With the unmerciful He'll
show Himself unmerciful, and with the froward He'll show Himself froward. And oh! it's a fearful
thing to think of an unmerciful and hard God!"

Joan listened in terror to Nathan's strange words, but she did not hear her aunt's voice making
any answer. There was utter silence for a long minute or two, followed by the sound of slow
and dragging footsteps, which grew fainter and fainter till she could hear them no more. Then
old Nathan came upstairs, and Nurse Williams, whom he had been to fetch.

CHAPTER IV

LOST AND FOUND

It was a very happy Christmas Day for Joan, though she never left her little bedroom. Her delight
was in watching the wonderful Christmas child all day, and in helping to nurse him. Never had
she seen anything so perfectly lovely as his tiny hands and feet, and the little head that
nestled down so peacefully on her arm. A good part of the day she was left alone with the baby,
for Nurse Williams was busy about the house, where there was a good deal of stir and excitement.
The neighbours were coming in to inquire about the rumours that had reached them, and Nathan
was away, and Miss Priscilla had shut herself up in her room, taking no notice whatever of
any appeals to her to open the door or to speak.

Happy as it was to Joan, to old Nathan it was the saddest Christmas Day of his life. He was
seeking some trace or tidings of the baby's mother; and his weary feet, made heavy by his heavy
heart, trod many a mile that short wintry day in quest of her. It could be no one else but
Rhoda who had laid the child in the manger. She had never been heard of since Aunt Priscilla
had answered her first and only letter, asking forgiveness, by a bitter, stern, and terrible
command that she must never show her face again at home, or dare to ask for any help, whatever
misery befell her.

But Nathan's search was all in vain. No one had seen her down in the village, or in the scattered
dwellings far and wide upon the mountains. But more than one had hinted to him that there were
places, not far away, where the cliffs overhung the sea; and as he returned sorrowfully homewards
he could hear the sad moaning and sobbing of the sea following him through the stillness of
the night air.

But sad as the day was to Nathan, it was most miserable of all for Aunt Priscilla. She had
shut out the grey light of the wintry sky from her room, and sat in gloom and cold, doing nothing.
But she could not shut out her thoughts and memories; she could not make her heart be still.
When she heard through the thin walls the faint little cry of the baby, she fancied it was
Rhoda's cry when she lay a helpless little creature on her lap. Again and again Joan's young
voice reached her ears, lulling the baby to sleep with the old, familiar words of the Christmas
Hymn--

  Peace on earth and mercy mild,
  God and sinners reconciled.

But there was no peace for her. She paced restlessly up and down her darkened room, repeating
to herself hundreds of times, "God and sinners reconciled!"

