PHILIP WINWOOD

  "The bravest are the tenderest."

                               BAYARD TAYLOR.

Presented Anew by

Robert Neilson Stephens

Author of A Gentleman Player, An Enemy to the King, The Continental Dragoon, The Road to Paris,
etc.

Illustrated by E. W. D. Hamilton

Boston: L.C. Page & Company (Incorporated)

1900

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I. PHILIP'S ARRIVAL IN NEW YORK

   II. THE FARINGFIELDS

  III. WHEREIN 'TIS SHOWN THAT BOYS ARE BUT BOYS

   IV. HOW PHILIP AND I BEHAVED AS RIVALS IN LOVE

    V. WE HEAR STARTLING NEWS, WHICH BRINGS ABOUT A
       FAMILY "SCENE"

   VI. NED COMES BACK, WITH AN INTERESTING TALE OF A
       FORTUNATE IRISHMAN

  VII. ENEMIES IN WAR

 VIII. I MEET AN OLD FRIEND IN THE DARK

   IX. PHILIP'S ADVENTURES--CAPTAIN FALCONER COMES
       TO TOWN

    X. A FINE PROJECT

   XI. WINWOOD COMES TO SEE HIS WIFE

  XII. THEIR INTERVIEW

 XIII. WHEREIN CAPTAIN WINWOOD DECLINES A PROMOTION

  XIV. THE BAD SHILLING TURNS UP ONCE MORE IN
       QUEEN STREET

   XV. IN WHICH THERE IS A FLIGHT BY SEA, AND A DUEL
       BY MOONLIGHT

  XVI. FOLLOWS THE FORTUNES OF MADGE AND NED

 XVII. I HEAR AGAIN FROM WINWOOD

XVIII. PHILIP COMES AT LAST TO LONDON

  XIX. WE MEET A PLAY-ACTRESS THERE

   XX. WE INTRUDE UPON A GENTLEMAN AT A COFFEE-HOUSE

  XXI. THE LAST, AND MOST EVENTFUL, OF THE HISTORY

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

CAPTAIN PHILIP WINWOOD                            Frontispiece

"OUR MOTIONS, AS WE TOUCHED OUR LIPS WITH THEM, WERE SO IN UNISON THAT MARGARET LAUGHED"

"SHE WAS INDEED THE TOAST OF THE ARMY"

"'HE IS A--AN ACQUAINTANCE'"

"HE FINALLY DREW BACK TO GIVE HER A MORE EFFECTUAL BLOW"

"IT WAS PHILIP'S CUSTOM, AT THIS TIME, TO ATTEND FIRST NIGHTS AT THE PLAYHOUSES"

CHAPTER I.

Philip's Arrival in New York.

'Tis not the practice of writers to choose for biography men who have made no more noise in
the world than Captain Winwood has; nor the act of gentlemen, in ordinary cases, to publish
such private matters as this recital will present. But I consider, on the one hand, that Winwood's
history contains as much of interest, and as good an example of manly virtues, as will be found
in the life of many a hero more renowned; and, on the other, that his story has been so partially
known, and so distorted, it becomes indeed the duty of a gentleman, when that gentleman was
his nearest friend, to put forth that story truly, and so give the lie for ever to the detractors
of a brave and kindly man.

There was a saying in the American army, proceeding first from Major Harry Lee, of their famous
Light Horse, that Captain Winwood was in America, in the smaller way his modesty permitted,
what the Chevalier Bayard was in France, and Sir Philip Sidney in England. This has been received
more than once (such is the malice of conscious inferiority) with derisive smiles or supercilious
sneers; and not only by certain of his own countrymen, but even in my presence, when my friendship
for Winwood, though I had been his rival in love and his enemy in war, was not less known than
was my quickness to take offence and avenge it. I dealt with one such case, at the hour of
dawn, in a glade near the Bowery lane, a little way out of New York. And I might have continued
to vindicate my friend's character so: either with pistols, as at Weehawken across the Hudson,
soon after the war, I vindicated the motives of us Englishmen of American birth who stood for
the king in the war of Independence; or with rapiers, as I defended the name of our admired
enemy, Washington, against a certain defamer, one morning in Hyde Park, after I had come to
London. But it has occurred to me that I can better serve Winwood's reputation by the spilling
of ink with a quill than of blood with a sword or pistol. This consideration, which is far
from a desire to compete with the young gentlemen who strive for farthings and fame, in Grub
Street, is my apology for profaning with my unskilled hand the implement ennobled by the use
of a Johnson and a Goldsmith, a Fielding and an Addison.

My acquaintance with the Captain's life, from the vantage of an eye-witness and comrade, goes
back to the time when all of us concerned were children; to the very day, in truth, when Philip,
a pale and slender lad of eleven years, first set foot in New York, and first set eye on Margaret
Faringfield.

As I think of it, it seems but yesterday, and myself a boy again: but it was, in fact, in the
year 1763; and late in the afternoon of a sunny Summer day. What influence can we presume on when
our commodities are shut out, not by legislative action but as a result of popular resentment?

THE
BOYCOTT

"True, the latest advices are to the effect that the boycott has broken down. I foresaw and
foretold more than two months ago that it could not in the nature of the case be of long duration,
that it was a mere ballon d'essai--an encouraging proof that Orientals are learning to apply
our methods. But is there not a deplorable difference between the conditions under which it is
used in the two countries? In one the people all read, and the newspaper is in everybody's
hand. The moment a strike or boycott is declared off all hands fall into their places and things
go on as usual. In the other the readers are less than one in twenty. Newspapers, away from
the open ports, are scarcely known, or if they exist they are subject to the tyranny of the
mandarins or the terrorism of the mob. Hence a war may be waged in one province and people
in another may scarcely hear of it. Chevaux-de-frise may bar out goods from one port, while they
are more or less openly admitted in other ports.

Not only so, the hostile feeling engendered by such conflict of interest is not dissipated
by sunshine, but rankles and spreads like an epidemic over vast regions unenlightened by newspapers
or by contact with foreign commerce.

"Witness the massacre of American missionaries at Lienchow in the Canton province. I am not going
to enter into the details of that shocking atrocity, nor to dwell on it further than to point
out that although the boycott was ended on September 14, the people in that district were in
such a state of exasperation that the missionaries felt themselves in danger fourteen days after
that date.

In the New York Sun of November 5 I find part of a letter from one of the victims, the Reverend
Mr. [Page 248] Peale, written exactly one month before the tragedy. Allow me to read it along
with an introductory paragraph.

"'PRINCETON, N. J., Nov. 4.--A. Lee Wilson, a student in the Princeton Theological Seminary, received
a letter a few days ago from John R. Peale, the missionary who, with his wife, was killed in
Lienchow, China, on October 28. The letter was dated September 28,
and reached America at the time that Peale and his wife were murdered.

It gives a clue to the troubles which led to the death of Peale. The letter says in part:

"'"The
interest in the boycott is vital to the missionaries. Heretofore the Americans always enjoyed special
favour, and to fly the American flag meant protection; but it is different now. No personal violence has
been attempted, but the people are less cordial and more suspicious. People in China are not
asking that their coolies be allowed entrance into the States, but they only ask that the Americans
cease treating the Chinese with contempt and allow their merchants and students the same privileges
that other foreigners receive."

"'Peale graduated from the Princeton Theological Seminary last May.

"Is it not evident that whatever spark caused the explosion, the nitro-glycerin that made it possible
came from the boycott?

"Not only do they boycott ponderables such as figure at the custom-house, but they extend the
taboo to things of the head and heart. The leader of the whole movement was formerly an active supporter
of the International Institute, an institution which proposes to open gratuitous courses of lectures
and to place Chinese men of intelligence on common ground with scholars of the West, He now
opposes the International Institute because, forsooth, it is originated and conducted by Dr.
Reid, a large-minded American.

"After this, will you be surprised to hear that your own publications, the best text-books for
the schools of the Far East, have been put on the index expurgatorius? A number of such books
were lately returned with the excuse that they were forbidden because
they bore the stamp of an American press.

[Page 249] "If I should go on to say that government officials, high
and low, look with satisfaction on this assertion of something like
national feeling, you might reply, 'National feeling!

Yes, it is a duty to cultivate that.' But do we not know how it has been fostered in China?
Has not hatred of the foreigner been mistaken for patriotism, and been secretly instigated as a
safeguard against foreign aggression? In this instance, however, there is no room to suspect
such a motive.

The movement is purely a result of provocation on our part; and it is fostered with a view
to coercing our government into modifying or repealing our offensive
exclusion laws.

The Viceroy of Central China, with whom I have spent the last three
years, is known as a pioneer of reform--a man who has done more than
any other to instruct his people in their duties as well as their
rights.

When, on the expiration of my engagement, I was about to leave for home, the prefect of Wuchang, a Canton
man, addressed me a letter begging me to plead the cause of his people with the President of the
United States. That letter was referred to in an interview by the viceroy, and the request which
it contained reiterated by him.

He gave me a parting banquet, attended by many of his mandarins,
and on that occasion the subject came up again and the same request
was renewed and pressed on me from all sides.

While I promised to exert myself on their behalf, let me give you a specimen of the kind of
oil which I poured on their wounded feelings.

"Said I, 'Under the exasperating effect of these petty grievances
your people forget what they owe to the United States.

They lose sight of the danger of alienating their best friend. In the Boxer War, when Peking was
captured by a combined force of eight foreign powers, who but America was the first to introduce
a self-denying ordinance forbidding any power to take any portion
of the Chinese territory?

In this she was backed up by Great Britain; the other powers fell
into line and the integrity of the Empire was assured.

Again, when China was in danger of being drawn into the vortex of
the Russo-Japanese war, who but America secured for her the privileges
of neutrality--thus a second time protecting her national life?

And now you turn [Page 250] against us! Is not such conduct condemned by your ancient poet
who says:

"'Ki wo siao yuen, wang wo ta teh', etc.

(How many acts of kindness
done One small offence wipes out, As motes obscure the shining sun
And shut his lustre out.')

"If the cause of offence be taken away
there is reason to hope that the beneficent action of our country,
on those two occasions so big with destiny, will be remembered, and
will lead China to look to our flag as an ægis under which she may
find protection in time of need.

Not till then will our influence, now reduced to the vanishing-point, be integrated to its
full value.

PROVOCATIONS TO A BOYCOTT

"The injuries inflicted, though trifling in comparison with the benefits
conferred, are such as no self-respecting people should either perpetrate
or endure.

Take one example, where I could give you twenty.

Two young men, both Christians, one rich, the other poor, came to
the United States for education.

They were detained in a prison-shed for three months, One of them,
falling sick, was removed to a hospital; the other obtaining permission
to visit him, they made their escape to Canada and thence back to
China.

"What wonder no more students come to us and that over 8,000 are now
pursuing their studies in Japan![*]

[Footnote *: The conciliatory
policy of President Roosevelt is bearing fruit Forty students are
about to start to the United States (May, 1906).]

"The present irritation
is, we are assured by the agitators, provoked by the outrageous treatment
of the privileged classes (merchants, travellers, and students) and
not by the exclusion of labourers, to which their government has given
its assent.

Yet in the growing intelligence of the Chinese a time has come when
their rulers feel such discrimination as a stigma.

It is not merely [Page 251] a just application of existing laws that
Viceroy Chang and his mandarins demand.

They call for the rescinding of those disgraceful prohibitions and the right to compete on
equal terms with immigrants from Europe.

If we show a disposition to treat the Chinese fairly, their country
and their hearts will be open to us as never before.

Our commerce with China will expand to vast proportions; and our flag will stand highest among
those that overarch and protect the integrity of that empire."

On November 16, I was received by President Roosevelt.

Running his eye over the documents (see below) which I placed in his hands he expressed himself
on each point. The grievances arising from the Exclusion Laws he acknowledged to be real. He promised
that they should be mitigated or removed by improvements in the mode of administration; but he
held out no hope of their repeal. "We have one race problem on our hands and we don't want another,"
he said with emphasis.

The boycott which the Chinese have resorted to as a mode of coercion he condemned as an aggravation
of existing difficulties. The interruption of trade and the killing of American missionaries
to which it had led made it impossible, he said, to turn over to China the surplus indemnity,
as he had intended.

This response is what I expected; but it will by no means satisfy the ruling classes in China,
who aim at nothing short of repeal. When I assured him the newspapers were wrong in representing
the agitation as confined to labourers and merchants, adding that the highest mandarins, while
formally condemning it, really give it countenance, he replied that he believed that to be
the case, and reiterated the declaration that [Page 252] nothing is to be gained by such violent
measures on the part of China.

From the Executive Mansion, I proceeded to the Chinese Legation, where I talked over the matter
with the minister, Sir Chentung Liang. He was not surprised at the attitude of the President.
He said the state of feeling towards China in Congress and in the entire country is improving,
but that, in his opinion, it will require ten years to bring about the repeal of the Exclusion Laws.

The
present hitch in negotiations comes in part from Peking, but he hoped a temporary settlement
would soon be arrived at.

The papers referred to above are here appended.

LETTERS REQUESTING GOOD OFFICES (Translation)

"To the Hon. Dr. Martin.

"Sir:

"During the last three years we have often exchanged views on the subject of education and other
topics of the day; and to me it is a joy to reflect that no discordant
note has ever marred our intercourse.

"In view of your learning and your long residence of forty years at our capital, besides fifteen
years in other parts of China, you are regarded by us with profound
respect.

When we hear your words we ponder them and treasure them up as things not to be forgotten.
It is by your scholarship and by your personal character that you have been able to associate
with the officers and scholars of the Central Empire in harmony like this.

"Now, sir, there is a matter which we wish to bring to your attention--a matter that calls
for the efforts of wise men like yourself. I refer to the exclusion of Chinese labourers. It
affects our mercantile as well as our labouring population very deeply.

[Page 253] "We beg you to bear in mind your fifty-five years' sojourn in China and to speak a
good word on our behalf to the President of the United States so
as to secure the welfare of both classes.

"If through your persuasion the prohibitory regulations should be
withdrawn the gratitude of our Chinese people will know no bounds;
your fifty-five years of devotion to the good of China will have a
fitting consummation in one day's achievement; and your name will
be handed down to coming generations.

"Being old friends, I write as frankly as if we were speaking face to face.

"(Signed) LIANG TING FEN, "Director of the Normal College for the
Two Lake "Provinces, Intendant of Circuit (Taotai), etc. etc. "Wuchang,
July 8, 1905."

The foregoing translation was made by me, and the original is attached
to the copy presented to the President, for the satisfaction of any
official interpreter who may desire to see it.

This letter may be regarded as expressing the sentiments of the higher
officials of the Chinese Empire.

It was written on the eve of my embarkation for home by a man who more than any other has a right
to be looked on as spokesman for Viceroy Chang; and the following
day the request was repeated by the viceroy himself.

These circumstances make it a document of more than ordinary importance.

The

outrageous treatment to which the privileged classes (merchants, students, and travellers) have
been subjected, under cover of enforcing the Exclusion Laws, has
caused a deep-rooted resentment, of which the boycott is only a superficial
manifestation.

That movement may not be of long duration, but it has already lasted
long enough to do us no little damage.

[Page 254] Besides occasioning embarrassment to our trade, it has
excited a feeling of hostility which it will require years of conciliatory
policy to eradicate.

The letter makes no direct reference to the boycott, neither does
it allude to coming negotiations; yet there can be little doubt that,
in making this appeal, the writer had both in view.

The viceroy and his officials are right in regarding the present as a grave crisis in the intercourse
of the two countries.

Their amicable relations have never been interrupted except during
a fanatical outbreak known as the "Boxer Troubles," which aimed at
the expulsion of all foreigners.

The leading part taken by our country in the subsequent settlement,
especially in warding off the threatened dismemberment of China, added
immensely to our influence.

Again, on the outbreak of the Russo-Japanese conflict, which was waged mainly on Chinese territory,
it was American diplomacy that secured for China the advantage of neutrality, and once more
warded off a danger that menaced her existence.

Yet every spark of gratitude for these transcendent services is liable to be extinguished by
the irritation caused by discrimination against her labourers and
the consequent ill-treatment of other classes of her people.

No argument is required to show how important it is to remove all
grounds of complaint in the interest of our growing commerce.

That any sweeping alteration will be made in our existing laws, I
have given my mandarin friends no reason to expect.

Self-preservation stands on a higher plane than the amenities of
intercourse.

For many years these laws served as a bulwark without which the [Page 255] sparse population of
our Western States would have been swamped by the influx of Asiatics.

In early days it was easier for the Chinese to cross the ocean than for the people of our Eastern
States to cross the Continent. Now, however, the completion of railroads has reduced the continental
transit to five or six days, in lieu of many months; and the population of our Pacific Coast
is so considerable that there is no longer any danger of its being overrun by immigrants from the
Far East.

Is it not therefore a fair question whether the maintenance of these old restrictions is desirable
or politic? Swaddling bands, necessary for the protection of an infant,
are an impediment to a growing boy.

That question can perhaps be best decided by ascertaining the general sentiment of our Pacific States.
My impression is that, with the exception of the fruit-growers of California and some others,
they are strongly opposed to what they call "letting down the bars."

The most feasible way of meeting the difficulty would be, as it appears to me, the enactment
of regulations to provide against abuses in the enforcement of our
Exclusion Laws.

The President has already spoken forcibly in condemnation of such abuses. The "privileged classes"
might be construed in a more liberal sense.

Provision might be made to mitigate the hardships of detention and repatriation; and a better
class of inspectors might be appointed with a general superintendent, whose duty it should be
to see that the laws are enforced humanely as well as faithfully.

On December 18, less than three months after the attack on Americans at Lienchow, an attempt [Page
256] was made to destroy the British settlement in Shanghai.

A woman arrested on a charge of kidnapping was sent to the foreign jail to await trial. The
Chinese assessor insisted, not without reason, that she ought to be kept in a native jail. No attention
being given to his protest, though supported by the taotai or local governor, a mob of riff-raff
from beyond the limits burst into the settlement, put the foreign police to flight, and began
to burn and pillage. Happily a body of marines with gatling guns and fire-engines succeeded in quelling
the flames and suppressing the insurrection. A few hours' delay must have seen that rich emporium
converted into a heap of ashes. Forty of the rioters were killed and many wounded. Though on ground
granted to Great Britain, the settlement is called international and is governed by a municipal
council elected by the foreign ratepayers. The Chinese residents, numbering half a million,
are allowed no voice in the council; and that also is felt as a grievance. They are, however,
protected against the rapacity of their own officials; and it is said they took no part in
the riot. In fact had it not been promptly suppressed they must have suffered all the horrors
of sack and pillage. After it was over they took occasion to demand recognition in the municipal
government; promising to be satisfied if allowed to appoint a permanent committee, with whom
the council should consult before deciding on any question affecting their interests.

Modest as this request was, it was rejected by an almost unanimous vote of the foreign ratepayers.
They knew that such committee, however elected, [Page 257] was certain to be manipulated by
the governor to extend his jurisdiction.

Their decision was quietly accepted by the Chinese residents, who appreciate the protection
which they enjoy in that strange republic. The question is certain to come up again, and their
claim to be heard will be pressed with more insistence as they become more acquainted with the
principles of representative government.
The existence of an imperium in imperio which comes between them
and their people is of course distasteful to the mandarins; and they
are bent on curtailing its privileges. If its franchises were surrendered,
"Ichabod" might be inscribed on the gates of the model settlement.

The
practice of marking out a special quarter for each nationality is
an old one in China, adopted for convenience. When, after the first
war, the British exacted the opening of ports, they required the grant
of a concession in each, within which their consuls should have chief,
if not exclusive authority. Other nations made the same demands; and
China made the grants, not as to the British from necessity, but apparently
from choice--the foreign consul being bound to keep his people in
order. Now, however, the influx of natives into the foreign settlements,
and the enormous growth of those mixed communities in wealth and population,
have led the Chinese Government to look on the ready compliance of
its predecessors as a blunder.

"Go to your room, sir," said Mr. Faringfield, in his sternest tone, looking his anger out of
eyes as hard as steel. This meant for Master Ned no supper, and probably much worse.

"Please, sir, I didn't do anything," answered Ned, with ill-feigned surprise. "She fell and
hurt her arm."

Fanny did not deny this, but she was no liar, and could not confirm it. So she looked to the
ground, and clasped her left wrist with her right hand. But in this latter movement she again
exposed her brother by the very means she took to protect him; for quick-seeing Madge, observing
the action, gently but firmly unclasped the younger sister's hand, and so disclosed the telltale
marks of Ned's fingers upon the delicate wrist, by squeezing or wrenching which that tyrant
had evinced his brotherly superiority.

At sight of this, Mrs. Faringfield gave a low cry of horror and maternal pity, and fell to
caressing the bruised wrist; and Madge, raising her arm girl-wise, began to rain blows on her
brother, which fell wherever they might, but where none of them could hurt. Her father, without
reproving her, drew her quietly back, and with a countenance a shade darker than before, pointed
out the way for Ned toward the veranda leading to the rear hall-door.

With a vindictive look, and pouting lips, Ned turned his steps down the walk. Just then he
noticed Philip Winwood, who had viewed every detail of the scene with wonder, and who now regarded
Ned with a kind of vaguely disliking curiosity, such as one bestows on some sinister-looking
strange animal. Philip's look was, of course, unconscious, but none the less clearly to be
read for that. Ned Faringfield, pausing on his way, stared at the unknown lad, with an expression
of insolent inquiry. Not daring to stay for questions, but observing the valise, he seemed
to become aware that the newcomer was an already accepted guest of the house; and he thereupon
surveyed Philip a moment, inwardly measuring him as a possible comrade or antagonist, but affecting
a kind of disdain. A look from his father ended Ned's inspection, and sent him hastily toward
his imprisonment, whither he went with no one's pity but Fanny's--for his mother had become
afraid of him, and little Tom took his likes and dislikes from his sister Madge.

And so they went in to supper, disappearing from my sight behind the corner of the parlour
wing as they mounted the rear veranda: Mr. and Mrs. Faringfield first, the mother leading Fanny
by the wounded wrist; the big dog next, wagging his tail for no particular reason; and then
Philip Winwood, with his cat in his basket, Madge at one side of him and pretending an interest
in the kitten while from beneath her lashes she alertly watched the boy himself, little Tom
on the other side holding Philip's hand. I stood at the gateway, looking after; and with all
my young infatuation for Madge, I had no feeling but one of liking, for this quiet, strange
lad, with the pale, kind face. And I would to God I might see those three still walking together,
as when children, through this life that has dealt so strangely with them all since that Summer
evening.

CHAPTER II.

The Faringfields.

Having shown how Philip Winwood came among us, I ought to tell at once, though of course I
learned it from him afterwards, all that need be known of his previous life. His father, after
leaving Oxford and studying medicine in Edinburgh, had married a lady of the latter city, and
emigrated to Philadelphia to practise as a physician. But whether 'twas that the Quaker metropolis
was overstocked with doctors even then, or for other reasons, there was little call for Doctor
Winwood's ministrations. Moreover, he was of so book-loving a disposition that if he happened
to have sat down to a favourite volume, and a request came for his services, it irked him exceedingly
to respond. This being noticed and getting abroad, did not help him in his profession.

The birth of Philip adding to the doctor's expenses, it soon came about that, in the land where
he had hoped to make a new fortune, he parted with the last of what fortune he had originally
possessed. Then occurred to him the ingenious thought of turning bookseller, a business which,
far from requiring that he should ever absent himself from his precious volumes, demanded rather
that he should always be among them. But the stock that he laid in, turned out to comprise
rather such works as a gentleman of learning would choose for company, than such as the people
of Philadelphia preferred to read. Furthermore, when some would-be purchaser appeared, it often
happened that the book he offered to buy was one for which the erudite dealer had acquired
so strong an affection that he would not let it change owners. Nor did his wife much endeavour
to turn him from this untradesmanlike course. Besides being a gentle and affectionate woman,
she had that admiration for learning which, like excessive warmth of heart and certain other
traits, I have observed to be common between the Scotch (she was of Edinburgh, as I have said)
and the best of the Americans.

Such was Philip's father, and when he died of some trouble of the heart, there was nothing
for his widow to do but continue the business. She did this with more success than the doctor
had had, though many a time it smote her heart to sell some book of those that her husband
had loved, and to the backs of which she had become attached for his sake and through years
of acquaintance. But the necessities of her little boy and herself cried out, and so did the
debt her husband had accumulated as tangible result of his business career. By providing books
of a less scholarly, more popular character, such as novels, sermons, plays, comic ballads,
religious poems, and the like; as well as by working with her needle, and sometimes copying
legal and other documents, Mrs. Winwood managed to keep the kettle boiling. And in the bookselling
and the copying, she soon came to have the aid of Philip.

The boy, too, loved books passionately, finding in them consolation for the deprivations incidental
to his poverty. But, being keenly sympathetic, he had a better sense of his mother's necessities
than his father had shown, and to the amelioration of her condition and his own, he sacrificed
his love of books so far as to be, when occasion offered, an uncomplaining seller of those
he liked, and a dealer in those he did not like. His tastes were, however, broader than his
father's, and he joyfully lost himself in the novels and plays his father would have disdained.

He read, indeed, everything he could put his hands on, that had, to his mind, reason, or wit,
or sense, or beauty. Many years later, when we were in London, his scholarly yet modest exposition
of a certain subject eliciting the praise of a group in a Pall Mall tavern, and he being asked
"What university he was of," he answered, with a playful smile, "My father's bookshop." It
was, indeed, his main school of book-learning. But, as I afterward told him, he had studied
in the university of life also. However, I am now writing of his boyhood in Philadelphia; and
of that there is only this left to be said.

In catering to his mind, he did not neglect bodily skill either. His early reading of Plutarch
and other warlike works had filled him with desire to emulate the heroes of battle. An old
copy of Saviolo's book on honour and fence, written in the reign of Elizabeth, or James, I
forget which, had in some manner found its way to his father's shelves; and from this Philip
secretly obtained some correct ideas of swordsmanship.[2] Putting them in practice one day
in the shop, with a stick, when he thought no one was looking, he suddenly heard a cry of "bravo"
from the street door, and saw he was observed by a Frenchman, who had recently set up in Philadelphia
as a teacher of fencing, dancing, and riding. This expert, far from allowing Philip to be abashed,
complimented and encouraged him; entered the shop, and made friends with him. The lad, being
himself as likable as he found the lively foreigner interesting, became in time something of
a comrade to the fencing master. The end of this was that, in real or pretended return for
the loan of Saviolo's book, the Frenchman gave Philip a course of instruction and practice
in each of his three arts.

To these the boy added, without need of a teacher, the ability to shoot, both with gun and
with pistol. I suppose it was from being so much with his mother, between whom and himself
there must have existed the most complete devotion, that notwithstanding his manly and scholarly
accomplishments, his heart, becoming neither tough like the sportsman's nor dry like the bookworm's,
remained as tender as a girl's--or rather as a girl's is commonly supposed to be. His mother's
death, due to some inward ailment of which the nature was a problem to the doctors, left him
saddened but too young to be embittered. And this was the Philip Winwood--grave and shy from
having been deprived too much of the company of other boys, but with certain mental and bodily
advantages of which too much of that company would have deprived him--who was taken into the
house of the Faringfields in the Summer of 1763.

The footing on which he should remain there was settled the very morning after his arrival.
Mr. Faringfield, a rigid and prudent man, but never a stingy one, made employment for him as
a kind of messenger or under clerk in his warehouse. The boy fell gratefully into the new life,
passing his days in and about the little counting-room that looked out on Mr. Faringfield's
wharf on the East River. He found it dull work, the copying of invoices, the writing of letters
to merchants in other parts of the world, the counting of articles of cargo, and often the
bearing a hand in loading or unloading some schooner or dray; but as beggars should not be
choosers, so beneficiaries should not be complainers, and Philip kept his feelings to himself.

Mr. Faringfield was an exacting master, whose rule was that his men should never be idle, even
at times when there seemed nothing to do. If no task was at hand, they should seek one; and
if none could be found, he was like to manufacture one. Thus was Phil denied the pleasure of
brightening or diversifying his day with reading, for which he could have found time enough.
He tried to be interested in his work, and he in part succeeded, somewhat by good-fellowship
with the jesting, singing, swearing wharfmen and sailors, somewhat by dwelling often on the
thought that he was filling his small place in a great commerce which touched so distant shores,
and so many countries, of the world. He used to watch the vessels sail, on the few and far-between
days when there were departures, and wish, with inward sighs, that he might sail with them.
A longing to see the great world, the Europe of history, the Britain of his ancestors, had
been implanted in him by his reading, before he had come to New York, and the desire was but
intensified by his daily contact with the one end of a trade whose other end lay beyond the ocean.

Outside of the hours of business, Philip's place was that of a member of the Faringfield household,
where, save in the one respect that after his first night it was indeed the garret room that
fell to him, he was on terms of equality with the children. Ned alone, of them all, affected
toward him the manner of a superior to a dependent. Whatever were Philip's feelings regarding
this attitude of the elder son, he kept them locked within, and had no more to say to Master
Ned than absolute civility required. With the two girls and little Tom, and with me, he was,
evenings and Sundays, the pleasantest playfellow in the world.

Ungrudgingly he gave up to us, once we had made the overtures, the time he would perhaps rather
have spent over his books; for he had brought a few of these from Philadelphia, a fact which
accounted for the exceeding heaviness of his travelling bag, and he had access, of course,
to those on Mr. Faringfield's shelves. His compliance with our demands was the more kind, as
I afterward began to see, for that his day's work often left him quite tired out. Of this we
never thought; we were full of the spirits pent up all day at school, Madge and Fanny being
then learners at the feet of a Boston maiden lady in our street, while I yawned and idled my
hours away on the hard benches of a Dutch schoolmaster near the Broadway, under whom Ned Faringfield
also was a student. But fresh as we were, and tired as Philip was, he was always ready for
a romp in our back yard, or a game of hide-and-seek in the Faringfields' gardens, or a chase
all the way over to the Bowling Green, or all the way up to the Common where the town ended
and the Bowery lane began.

But it soon came out that Phil's books were not neglected, either. The speed with which his
candles burnt down, and required renewal, told of nocturnal studies in his garret. As these
did not perceptibly interfere with his activity the next day, they were viewed by Mr. Faringfield
rather with commendation than otherwise, and so were allowed to continue. My mother thought
it a sin that no one interfered to prevent the boy's injuring his health; but when she said
this to Phil himself, he only smiled and answered that if his reading did cost him anything
of health, 'twas only fair a man should pay something for his pleasures.

My mother's interest in the matter arose from a real liking. She saw much of Philip, for he
and the three younger Faringfields were as often about our house as about their own. Ours was
not nearly as fine; 'twas a white-painted wooden house, like those in New England, but roomy
enough for its three only occupants, my mother and me and the maid. We were not rich, but neither
were we of the poorest. My father, the predecessor of Mr. Aitken in the customs office, had
left sufficient money in the English funds at his death, to keep us in the decent circumstances
we enjoyed, and there was yet a special fund reserved for my education. So we could be neighbourly
with the Faringfields, and were so; and so all of us children, including Philip, were as much
at home in the one house as in the other.

One day, in the Fall of that year of Philip's arrival, we young ones were playing puss-in-a-corner
in the large garden--half orchard, half vegetable plantation--that formed the rear of the Faringfields'
grounds. It was after Phil's working hours, and a pleasant, cool, windy evening. The maple
leaves were yellowing, the oak leaves turning red. I remember how the wind moved the apple-tree
boughs, and the yellow corn-stalks waiting to be cut and stacked as fodder. (When I speak of
corn, I do not use the word in the English sense, of grain in general, but in the American
sense, meaning maize, of which there are two kinds, the sweet kind being most delicious to
eat, as either kind is a beautiful sight when standing in the field, the tall stalks waving
their many arms in the breeze.) We were all laughing, and running from tree to tree, when in
from the front garden came Ned, his face wearing its familiar cruel, bullying, spoil-sport smile.

The wind blowing out Madge's brown hair as she ran, I suppose put him in mind of what to do.
For all at once, clapping his hand to his mouth, and imitating the bellowing war-whoop of an
Indian, he rushed upon us in that character, caught hold of Madge's hair, and made off as if
to drag her away by it. She, screaming, tried to resist, but of course could not get into an
attitude for doing so while he pulled her so fast. The end of it was, that she lost her balance
and fell, thus tearing her hair from his grasp.

I, being some distance away, picked up an apple and flung it at the persecutor's head, which
I missed by half an inch. Before I could follow the apple, Philip had taken the work out of
my hands.

"You are a savage," said Phil, in a low voice, but with a fiery eye, confronting Ned at close
quarters.

"And what are you?" replied young Faringfield promptly. "You're a beggar, that's what you are!
A beggar that my father took in."

For a moment or two Phil regarded his insulter in amazed silence; then answered:

"If only you weren't her brother!"

Here Madge spoke up, from the ground on which she sat:

"Oh, don't let that stop you, Phil!"

"I sha'n't," said Phil, with sudden decision, and the next instant the astounded Ned was recoiling
from a solid blow between the eyes.

Of course he immediately returned the compliment in kind, and as Ned was a strong fellow, Phil
had all he could do to hold his own in the ensuing scuffle. How long this might have lasted,
I don't know, had not Fanny run between, with complete disregard of her own safety, calling out:

"Oh, Phil, you mustn't hurt Ned!"

Her interposition being aided on the other side by little Tom, who seized Ned's coat-tails
and strove to pull him away from injuring Philip, the two combatants, their boyish belligerence
perhaps having had enough for the time, separated, both panting.

"I'll have it out with you yet!" said Master Ned, short-windedly, adjusting his coat, and glaring
savagely.

"All right!" said Phil, equally out of breath. Ned then left the field, with a look of contempt
for the company.

After that, things went on in the old pleasant manner, except that Ned, without any overt act
to precipitate a fight, habitually treated Phil with a most annoying air of scorn and derision.
This, though endured silently, was certainly most exasperating.

But it had not to be endured much of the time, for Ned had grown more and more to disdain our
society, and to cultivate companions superior to us in years and knowledge of the world. They
were, indeed, a smart, trick-playing, swearing set, who aped their elders in drinking, dicing,
card-gambling, and even in wenching. Their zest in this imitation was the greater for being
necessarily exercised in secret corners, and for their freshness to the vices they affected.

I do not say I was too good for this company and their practices; or that Philip was either.
Indeed we had more than a mere glimpse of both, for boys, no matter how studious or how aspiring
in the long run, will see what life they can; will seek the taste of forbidden fruit, and will
go looking for temptations to yield to. Indeed, the higher a boy's intelligence, the more eager
may be his curiosity for, his first enjoyment of, the sins as well as the other pleasures.
What banished us--Philip and me--from Ned's particular set was, first, Ned's enmity toward
us; second, our attachment to a clan of boys equally bent on playing the rake in secret, though
of better information and manners than Ned's comrades could boast of; third, Phil's fondness
for books, and mine for him; and finally, our love for Madge.

This last remained unaltered in both of us. As for Madge, as I had predicted to myself, she
had gradually restored me to my old place in her consideration as the novelty of Philip's newer
devotion had worn off. We seemed now to be equals in her esteem. At one time Phil would apparently
stand uppermost there, at another I appeared to be preferred. But this alternating superiority
was usually due to casual circumstance. Sometimes, I suppose, it owed itself to caprice; sometimes,
doubtless, to deep design unsuspected by either of us. Boys are not men until they are well
grown; but women are women from their first compliment. On the whole, as I have said, Phil
and I were very even rivals.

It was sometime in the winter--Philip's first winter with the Faringfields--that the next outbreak
came, between him and Master Edward. If ever the broad mansion of the Faringfields looked warm
and welcoming, it was in midwinter. The great front doorway, with its fanlight above, and its
panel windows at each side, through which the light shone during the long evenings, and with
its broad stone steps and out-curving iron railings, had then its most hospitable aspect. One
evening that it looked particularly inviting to me, was when Ned and the two girls and I were
returning with our skates from an afternoon spent on Beekman's pond. Large flakes were falling
softly on snow already laid. Darkness had caught up with us on the way home, and when we came
in sight of the cheery light enframing the Faringfields' wide front door, and showing also
from the windows at one side, I was not sorry I was to eat supper with them that evening, my
mother having gone sleighing to visit the Murrays at Incledon, with whom she was to pass the
night. As we neared the door, tired and hungry, whom should we see coming toward it from the
other direction but Philip Winwood. He had worked over the usual time at the warehouse. Before
the girls or I could exchange halloes with Phil, we were all startled to hear Ned call out
to him, in a tone even more imperious than the words:

"Here, you, come and take my skates, and carry them in, and tell mother I've stopped at Jack
Van Cortlandt's house a minute."

And he stood waiting for Phil to do his bidding. The rest of us halted, also; while Phil stopped
where he was, looking as if he could not have heard aright.

"Come, are you deaf?" cried Ned, impatiently. "Do as you're bid, and be quick about it."

Now, of course, there was nothing wrong in merely asking a comrade, as one does ask a comrade
such things, to carry in one's skates while one stopped on the way. No one was ever readier
than Phil to do such little offices, or great ones either. Indeed, it is the American way to
do favours, even when not requested, and even to inferiors. I have seen an American gentleman
of wealth go in the most natural manner to the assistance of his own servant in a task that
seemed to overtax the latter, and think nothing of it. But in the case I am relating; apart
from the fact that I, being nearer than Phil, was the proper one of whom to ask the favour;
the phrase and manner were those of a master to a servant; a rough master and a stupid servant,
moreover. And so Philip, after a moment, merely laughed, and went on his way toward the door.

At this Master Ned stepped forward with the spirit of chastisement in his eyes, his skates
held back as if he meant to strike Phil with their sharp blades. But it happened that Philip
had by now mounted the first door-step, and thus stood higher than his would-be assailant.
So Master Ned stopped just out of Philip's reach, and said insolently:

"'Tis time you were taught your place, young fellow. You're one of my father's servants, that's
all; so take in my skates, or I'll show you."

"You're wrong there," said Phil, with forced quietness. "A clerk or messenger, in business,
is not a personal servant."

"Take in these skates, or I'll brain you with 'em!" cried Ned, to that.

"Come on and brain!" cried Phil.

"By G----d, I will that!" replied Ned, and made to swing the skates around by the straps. But
his arm was, at that instant, caught in a powerful grip, and, turning about in surprise, he
looked into the hard, cold eyes of his father, who had come up unseen, having stayed; at the
warehouse even later than Phil.

"If any blows are struck here, you sha'n't be the one to strike them, sir," he said to Ned.
"What's this I hear, of servants? I'll teach you once for all, young man, that in my house
Philip is your equal. Go to your room and think of that till it becomes fixed in your mind."

To go without supper, with such an appetite, on such a cold night, was indeed a dreary end
for such a day's sport. I, who knew how chilled and starved Ned must be, really pitied him.

But instead of slinking off with a whimper, he for the first time in his life showed signs
of revolt.

"What if I don't choose to go to my room?" he answered, impudently, to our utmost amazement.
"You may prefer an outside upstart over your son, if you like, but you can't always make your
son a prisoner by the ordering."

Mr. Faringfield showed little of the astonishment and paternal wrath he doubtless felt. He
gazed coldly at his defiant offspring a moment; then took a step toward him. But Ned, with
the agility of boyhood, turned and ran, looking back as he went, and stopping only when he
was at a safe distance.

"Come back," called his father, not risking his dignity in a doubtful pursuit, but using such
a tone that few would dare to disobey the command.

"Suppose I don't choose to come back," answered Ned, to whose head the very devil had now certainly
mounted. "Maybe there's other places to go to, where one doesn't have to stand by and see an
upstart beggar preferred to himself, and put in his place, and fed on the best while he's lying
hungry in his dark room."

"If there's another place for you, I'd advise you to find it," said Mr. Faringfield, after
a moment's reflection.

"Oh, I'll find it," was the reply; and then came what Master Ned knew would be the crowning
taunt and insult to his father. "If it comes to the worst, I know how I can get to England,
where I'd rather be, anyway."

There was a reason why Mr. Faringfield's face turned dark as a thunder-cloud at this. You must
know, first, that in him alone was embodied the third generation of colonial Faringfields.
The founder of the American branch of the family, having gone pretty nearly to the dogs at
home, and got into close quarters with the law, received from his people the alternative of
emigrating to Virginia or suffering justice to take its course. Tossing up his last sixpence,
he indifferently observed, on its coming down, that it lay in favour of Virginia. So he chose
emigration, and was shipped off, upon condition that if he ever again set foot in England he
should be forthwith turned over to the merciless law. His relations, as he perceived, cherished
the hope that he would die of a fever likely to be caught on the piece of marshy land in Virginia
which they, in a belief that it was worthless, had made over to him. Pondering on this on the
voyage, and perhaps having had his fill of the flesh and the devil, he resolved to disappoint
his family. And, to make short a very long story of resolution and toil, he did so, becoming
at last one of the richest tobacco-planters in the province.

He might now have returned to England with safety; but his resentment against the people who
had exiled him when they might have compounded with justice otherwise, extended even to their
country, which he no longer called his, and he abode still by the condition of his emigration.
He married a woman who had her own special reasons for inimical feelings toward the English
authorities, which any one may infer who is familiar with one phase (though this was not as
large a phase as English writers seem to think) of the peopling of Virginia. Although she turned
over a new leaf in the province, and seems to have been a model wife and parent, she yet retained
a sore heart against the mother country. The feeling of these two was early inculcated into
the minds of their children, and their eldest son, in whom it amounted almost to a mania, transmitted
it on to his own successor, our Mr. Faringfield of Queen Street.

The second Faringfield (father of ours), being taken with a desire for the civilities and refinements
of a town life, moved from Virginia to New York, married there a very worthy lady of Dutch
patroon descent, and, retaining his Virginia plantation, gradually extended his business, so
that he died a general merchant, with a European and a West Indian trade, and with vessels
of his own. He it was that built the big Faringfield house in Queen Street. He was of an aspiring
mind, for one in trade, and had even a leaning toward book-knowledge and the ornaments of life.
He was, moreover, an exceedingly proud man, as if a haughty way were needful to a man of business
and an American, in order to check the contempt with which he might be treated as either. His
large business, his pride, his unreasonable hatred of England (which he never saw), and a very
fine and imposing appearance, he passed down to our Mr. Faringfield, by whom all these inheritances
were increased. This gentleman, sensible of the injustice of an inherited dislike not confirmed
by experience, took occasion of some business to make a visit to England, shortly after his
father's death. I believe he called upon his English cousins, now some degrees removed, and,
finding them in their generation ignorant that there were any American Faringfields, was so
coldly received by them, as well as by the men with whom his business brought him in contact,
that he returned more deeply fixed in his dislike, and with a determination that no Faringfield
under his control should ever again breathe the air of the mother island. He even chose a wife
of French, rather than English, descent; though, indeed, the De Lanceys, notwithstanding they
were Americans of Huguenot origin, were very good Englishmen, as the issue proved when the
separation came.

Miss De Lancey, however, at that time, had no views or feelings as between the colonies and
England; or if she had any, scarcely knew what they were. She was a pretty, innocent, small-minded
woman; with no very large heart either, I fancy; and without force of character; sometimes
a little shrewish when vexed, and occasionally given to prolonged whining complaints, which
often won the point with her husband, as a persistent mosquito will drive a man from a field
whence a giant's blows would not move him. She heard Mr. Faringfield's tirades against England,
with neither disagreement nor assent; and she let him do what he could to instil his own antagonism
into the children. How he succeeded, or failed, will appear in time. I have told enough to
show why Master Ned's threatening boast, of knowing how to get to England, struck his father
like a blow in the face.

I looked to see Mr. Faringfield now stride forth at all risk and inflict upon Master Ned some
chastisement inconceivable; and Ned himself took a backward step or two. But his father, after
a moment of dark glowering, merely answered, though in a voice somewhat unsteady with anger:

"To England or the devil, my fine lad, before ever you enter my door, until you change your tune!"

Whereupon he motioned the rest of us children to follow him into the house, leaving his eldest
son to turn and trudge defiantly off into the darkness. From Ned's manner of doing this, I
knew that he was sure of shelter for that night, at least. Noah, the old black servant, having
seen his master through the panel windows, had already opened the door; and so we went in to
the warm, candle-lit hall, Mr. Faringfield's agitation now perfectly under control, and his
anger showing not at all upon his surface of habitual sternness.

As for the others, Phil walked in a kind of deep, troubled study, into which he had been thrown
by Ned's words regarding him; I was awed into breathless silence and a mouse-like tread; and
kind little Fanny went gently sobbing with sorrow and fear for her unhappy brother--a sorrow
and fear not shared in the least degree by her sister Madge, whose face showed triumphant approval
of her father's course and of the outcome.

CHAPTER III.

Wherein 'tis Shown that Boys Are but Boys.

The Faringfield house, as I have said, was flanked by garden space on either side. It was on
the Eastern side of the street, and so faced West, the next house Southward being ours. The
wide hall that we entered ran straight back to a door opening from a wooden veranda that looked
toward the rear garden. At the right of this hall, as you went in, a broad oak stairway invited
you to the sleeping floor above. But before you came to this stairway, you passed a door that
gave into the great parlour, which ran the whole length of the hall, and, being used only on
occasions of festivity or ceremony, was now closed and dark. At the left of the hall, the first
door led to the smaller parlour, as wide but not as long as the great one, and in daily use
as the chief living-room of the house. Its windows were those through which the candle-light
within had welcomed us from the frosty, snowy air that evening. Behind this parlour, and reached
either directly from it, or by a second door at the left side of the hall, was the library,
so-called although a single case of eight shelves sufficed to hold all the books it contained.
Yet Philip said there was a world in those books. The room was a small and singularly cosy
one, and here, when Mr. Faringfield was not occupied at the mahogany desk, we children might
play at chess, draughts, cards, and other games. From this room, one went back into the dining-room,
another apartment endeared to me by countless pleasant memories. Its two windows looked Southward
across the side grounds (for the hall and great parlour came not so far back) to our house
and garden. Behind the dining-room, and separating it from the kitchen and pantry, was a passage
with a back stairway and with a bench of washing-basins, easily supplied with water from a
cistern below, and from the kettle in the adjacent kitchen. To this place we youngsters now
hastened, to put ourselves to rights for supper. The house was carpeted throughout. The great
parlour was panelled in wood, white and gold. The other chief rooms were wainscoted in oak;
and as to their upper walls, some were bright with French paper, while some shone white with
smooth plaster; their ceilings and borders were decorated with arabesque woodwork. There were
tiled fireplaces, with carved mantels, white, like the rectangular window-frames and panelled
doors. Well, well, 'twas but a house like countless others, and why should I so closely describe
it?--save that I love the memory of it, and fain would linger upon its commonest details.

Mighty snug was the dining-room that evening, with its oaken sideboard, its prints and portraits
on the wall, its sputtering fire, and its well-filled table lighted from a candelabrum in the
centre. The sharp odour of the burning pine was keen to the nostrils, and mingled with it was
the smell of the fried ham. There was the softer fragrance of the corn meal mush or porridge,
served with milk, and soft was the taste of it also. We had sausage cakes, too, and pancakes
to be eaten either with butter or with the syrup of the maple-tree; and jam, and jelly, and
fruit butter. These things seem homely fare, no doubt, but there was a skill of cookery in
the fat old negress, Hannah--a skill consisting much in the plentiful use of salt and pepper
at proper stages--that would have given homelier fare a relish to more fastidious tongues.
I miss in the wholesome but limited and unseasoned diet of the English the variety and savouriness
of American food (I mean the food of the well-to-do in the large towns), which includes all
the English and Scotch dishes, corrected of their insipidity, besides countless dishes French,
German, and Dutch, and many native to the soil, all improved and diversified by the surprising
genius for cookery which, in so few generations, the negro race has come to exhibit. I was
a busy lad at that meal; a speechless one, consequently, and for some minutes so engrossed
in the business of my jaws that I did not heed the unwonted silence of the rest. Then suddenly
it came upon me as something embarrassing and painful that Mr. and Mrs. Faringfield, who usually
conversed at meals, had nothing to say, and that Philip Winwood sat gloomy and taciturn, merely
going through a hollow form of eating. As for Fanny, she was the picture of childish sorrow,
though now tearless. Only Madge and little Tom, who had found some joke between themselves,
occasionally spluttered with suppressed laughter, smiling meanwhile knowingly at each other.

Of course this depression was due to the absence of Ned, regarding the cause of which his mother
was still in the dark. Not missing him until we children had filed in to supper after tidying
up, she had then remarked that he was not yet in.

"He will not be home to supper," Mr. Faringfield had replied, in a tone that forbade questioning
until the pair should be alone, and motioning his wife to be seated at the table. After that
he had once or twice essayed to talk upon casual subjects, as if nothing had happened, but
he had perceived that the attempt was hopeless while Mrs. Faringfield remained in her state
of deferred curiosity and vague alarm, and so he had desisted.

After supper, which the lady's impatience made shorter than my appetite would have dictated,
the husband and wife went into the small parlour, closing the door upon us children in the
library. Here I managed to make a pleasant evening, in games with Madge and little Tom upon
the floor. But Philip, though he came in as was his wont, was not to be lured into our play
or our talk. He did not even read, but sat silent and pondering, in no cheerful mood. I, not
reading him as Madge did, knew not what the matter was, and accused him of having vapours,
like a girl. He looked at me heedlessly, in reply, as if he scarce heard. But Madge, apparently,
divined his feeling, and at times respected it, for then she spoke low, and skilfully won me
back from my efforts to enliven him. At other times, his way seemed to irritate her, and she
hinted that he was foolish, and then she was extraordinarily smiling and adorable to me (always,
I now suspect, with the corner of her eye upon him) as if to draw him back to his usual good-fellowship
by that method. But 'twas in vain. I left at bedtime, wondering what change had come over him.

That night, I learned afterward, Philip slept little, debating sorrowfully in his mind. He
kept his window slightly open at night, in all weather; and open also that night was one of
the windows of Mr. and Mrs. Faringfield's great chamber below. A sound that reached him in
the small hours, of Mrs. Faringfield whimpering and weeping, decided him. And the next morning,
after another silent meal, he contrived to fall into Mr. Faringfield's company on the way to
the warehouse, which they had almost reached ere Phil, very down in the mouth and perturbed,
got up his courage to his unpleasant task and blundered out in a boyish, frightened way:

"If you please, sir, I wished to tell you--I've made up my mind to leave--and thank you very
much for all your kindness!"

Mr. Faringfield stared from under his gathered brows, and asked Phil to repeat the strange
thing he had said.

"Leave what, sir?" he queried sharply, when Phil had done so.

"Leave your warehouse, sir; and your house; and New York."

"What do you mean, my boy?"

And Phil, thankful that Mr. Faringfield had paused to have the talk out ere they should come
among the men at the warehouse, explained at first in vague terms, but finally in the explicit
language to which his benefactor's questions forced him, that he seemed, in Master Ned's mind,
to be standing in Ned's way; that he would not for the world appear to supplant any man's son,
much less the son of one who had been so kind to him; that he had unintentionally been the
cause of Ned's departure the evening before; and that he hoped his going would bring Ned back
from the absence which caused his mother grief. "And I wouldn't stay in New York after leaving
you, sir," he said, "for 'twould look as if you and I had disagreed."

To all this Mr. Faringfield replied briefly that Ned was a foolish boy, and would soon enough
come back, glad of what welcome he might get; and that, as for Philip's going away, it was
simply not to be heard of. But Phil persisted, conceding only that he should remain at the
warehouse for an hour that morning and complete a task he had left unfinished. Mr. Faringfield
still refused to have it that Phil should go at all.

When Philip had done his hour's work, he went in to his employer's office to say good-bye.

"Tut, tut," said Mr. Faringfield, looking annoyed at the interruption, "there's no occasion
for goodbyes. But look you, lad. I don't mind your taking the day off, to put yourself into
a reasonable state of mind. Go home, and enjoy a holiday, and come back to your work to-morrow,
fresh and cheerful. Now, now, boy, I won't hear any more. Only do as I bid you." And he assumed
a chilling reserve that indeed froze all further possible discussion.

"But I do say good-bye, sir, and mean it," said Phil, tremulously. "And I thank you from my
heart for all you've done for me."

And so, with a lump in his throat, Phil hastened home, and sped up the stairs unseen, like
a ghost; and had all his things out on his bed for packing, when suddenly Madge, who had been
astonished to hear him moving about, from her mother's room below, flung open his door and
looked in upon him, all amazed.

"Why, Phil, what are you doing home at this hour? What are you putting your things into your
valise for?"

"Oh, nothing," said Phil, very downcast.

"Why, it looks as if--you were going away somewhere."

Phil made a brief answer; and then there was a long talk, all the while he continued to pack
his goods, in his perturbation stowing things together in strange juxtaposition. The end of
it was that Madge, after vowing that if he went she would never speak to him again, and would
hate him for ever, indignantly left him to himself. Phil went on packing, in all the outward
calmness he could muster, though I'll wager with a very pouting and dismal countenance. At
last, his possessions being bestowed, and the bag fastened with much physical exertion, he
left it on the bed, and slipped down-stairs to find his one remaining piece of property. Philip's
cat had waxed plump in the Faringfield household, Master Ned always deterred from harming it
by the knowledge that if aught ill befell it, the finger of accusation would point instantly
and surely at him.

Phil was returning up the stairs, his pet under his arm, when Mistress Madge reappeared before
him, with magic unexpectedness, from a doorway opening on a landing. As she stood in his way
there, he stopped, and the two faced each other.

"Well," said she, with sarcastic bitterness, "I suppose you've decided where you're going to."

"Not yet," he replied. He had thought vaguely of Philadelphia or Boston, either of which he
now had means of reaching, having saved most of his small salary at the warehouse, for he was
not a bound apprentice.

"I make no doubt," she went on, "'twill be the farthest place you can find."

Phil gave her a reproachful look, and asked where her mother and the children were, that he
might bid them good-bye. He wondered, indeed, that Madge had not told her mother of his resolve,
for, from that lady's not seeking him at once, he knew that she was still unaware of it. He
little guessed that 'twas the girl's own power over him she wished to test, and that she would
not enlist her mother's persuasions but as a last resource.

"I don't know," she replied carelessly.

"I shall look for them," said Philip, and turned to go down-stairs again.

But (though how could a boy imagine it?) Miss Faringfield would not have it that his yielding
should be due to her mother, if it could be achieved as a victory for herself. So she stopped
him with a sudden tremulous "Oh, Phil!" and, raising her forearm to the door-post, hid her
face against it, and wept as if her heart would break.

Philip had never before known her to shed a tear, and this new spectacle, in a second's time,
took all the firmness out of him.

"Why, Madge, I didn't know--don't cry, Madgie--"

She turned swiftly, without looking up, and her face, still in a shower of tears, found hiding
no longer against the door-post, but against Phil's breast.

"Don't cry, Madgie dear,--I sha'n't go!"

She raised her wet face, joy sparkling where the lines had not yet lost the shape of grief;
and Phil never thought to ask himself how much of her pleasure was for his not going, and how
much for the evidence given of her feminine power. He had presently another thing to consider,
a not very palatable dose to swallow--the returning to the warehouse and telling Mr. Faringfield
of his change of mind. He did this awkwardly enough, no doubt, but manfully enough, I'll take
my oath, though he always said he felt never so tamed and small and ludicrous in his life,
before or after.

And that scene upon the landing is the last picture, but one, I have to present of childhood
days, ere I hasten, over the period that brought us all into our twenties and to strange, eventful
times. The one remaining sketch is of an unkempt, bedraggled figure that I saw at the back
hall door of the Faringfields one snowy night a week later, when, for some reason or other,
I was out late in our back garden. This person, instead of knocking at the door, very cautiously
tried it to see if it would open, and, finding it locked, stood timidly back and gazed at it
in a quandary. Suspecting mischief, I went to the paling fence that separated our ground from
the Faringfields', and called out, "Who's that?"

"Hallo, Bert!" came in a very conciliating tone, low-spoken; and then, as with a sudden thought,
"Come over here, will you?"

I crossed the fence, and was in a moment at the side of Master Ned, who looked exceedingly
the worse for wear, in face, figure, and clothes.

"Look here," said he, speaking rapidly, so as to prevent my touching the subject of his return,
"I want to sneak in, and up-stairs to bed, without the old man seeing me. I don't just like
to meet him till to-morrow. But I can't sneak in, for the door's locked, and Noah would be
sure to tell dad. You knock, and when they let you in, pretend you came to play with the kids;
and whisper Fanny to slip out and open the door for me."

I entered readily into the strategy, as a boy will, glad of Ned's return for the sake of Phil,
who I knew was ill at ease for Ned's absence being in some sense due to himself.

Old Noah admitted me at my knock, locked the door after me, and sent me into the smaller parlour,
where the whole family happened to be. When I whispered my message to Fanny, she turned so
many colours, and made so precipitately for the entrance hall, that her father was put on the
alert. He followed her quietly out, just in time to see a very shivering, humble, shamefaced
youth step in from the snowy outer night. The sight of his father turned Ned cold and stiff
upon the threshold; but all the father did was to put on a grim look of contempt, and say:

"Well, sir, I suppose you've changed your tune."

"Yes, sir," said the penitent, meekly, and there being now no reason for secrecy he shambled
after his father into the parlour. There, after his mother's embrace, he grinned sheepishly
upon us all. Fanny was quite rejoiced, and so was little Tom till the novelty wore off; while
Madge greeted the prodigal good-humouredly enough, and one could read Phil's relief and forgiveness
on his smiling face. Master Ned, grateful for an easier ordeal than he had feared, made no
exception against Phil in the somewhat sickly amiability he had for all, and we thought that
here were reconciliation and the assurance of future peace.

Ned's home-coming brought trouble in its train, as indeed did his every reappearance afterward.
It came out that he and another boy--the one in whose house he had found refuge on the night
of his running away--had started off for the North to lead the lives of hunters and trappers,
a career so inviting that they could not wait to provide a sufficient equipment. They travelled
afoot by the Albany post-road, soliciting food at farmhouses, passing their nights in barns;
and got as far as Tarrytown, ere either one in his pride would admit to the other, through
chattering teeth, that he had had his fill of snow and hunger and the raw winds of the Hudson
River. So footsore, leg-weary, empty, and frozen were they on their way back, that they helped
themselves to one of Jacob Post's horses, near the Philipse manor-house; and not daring to
ride into town on this beast, thoughtlessly turned it loose in the Bowery lane, never thinking
how certainly it and they could be traced--for they had been noticed at Van Cortlandt's, again
at Kingsbridge, and again at the Blue Bell tavern. After receiving its liberty, the horse had
been seen once, galloping toward Turtle Bay, and never again.

So, a few days after Ned's reentrance into the bosom of his family, there came to the house
a constable, of our own town, with a deputy sent by the sheriff of Westchester County, wanting
Master Edward Faringfield.

Frightened and disgraced, his mother sent for her husband; and for the sake of the family name,
Mr. Faringfield adjusted matters by the payment of twice or thrice what the horse was worth.
Thus the would-be hunter and trapper escaped the discomfort and shame of jail; though by his
father's sentence he underwent a fortnight's detention on bread and water in his bedroom.

That was the first fright and humiliation that Master Ned brought on his people; and he brought
so many of these in after years, that the time came when his parents, and all, were rather
glad than sorry each time he packed off again, and shuddered rather than rejoiced when, after
an absence, he turned up safe and healthy as ever, with his old hangdog smile beneath which
lurked a look half-defiant, half-injured. As he grew older, and the boy in him made room for
the man, there was less of the smile, less injury, more defiance.

I do not remember how many years it was after Philip's coming to New York, that our Dutch schoolmaster
went the way of all flesh, and there came in his place, to conduct a school for boys only and
in more advanced studies, a pedagogue from Philadelphia, named Cornelius. He was of American
birth, but of European parentage, whether German or Dutch I never knew. Certainly he had learning,
and much more than was due alone to his having gone through the college at Princeton in New
Jersey. He was in the early twenties, tall and robust, with a large round face, and with these
peculiarities: that his hair, eyebrows, and lashes were perfectly white, his eyes of a singularly
mild blue, his skin of a pinkish tint; that he was given to blushing whenever he met women
or strangers, and that he spoke with pedantic preciseness, in a wondrously low voice. But despite
his bashfulness, there was a great deal in the man, and when an emergency rose he never lacked
resource.

He it was to whom my education, and Ned Faringfield's, was entrusted, while the girls and little
Tom still strove with the rudiments in the dame-school. He it was that carried us to the portals
of college; and I carried Philip Winwood thither with me, by studying my lessons with him in
the evenings. In many things he was far beyond Mr. Cornelius's highest teaching; but there
had been lapses in his information, and these he filled up, and regulated his knowledge as
well, through accompanying me in my progress. And he continued so to accompany me, making better
use of my books than ever I made, as I went through the King's College; and that is the way
in which Phil Winwood got his stock of learning eked out, and put in due shape and order.

It happened that Philip's taste fastened upon one subject of which there was scarce anything
to be learned by keeping pace with my studies, but upon which much was to be had from books
in the college library, of which I obtained the use for him. It was a strange subject for a
youth to take up at that time, or any time since, and in that colonial country--architecture.
Yet 'twas just like Phil Winwood to be interested in something that all around him neglected
or knew nothing about. What hope an American could have in the pursuit of an art, for which
the very rare demands in his country were supplied from Europe, and which indeed languished
the world over, I could not see.

"Very well, then," said Phil, "'twill be worth while trying to waken this sleeping art, and
to find a place for it in this out-of-the-way country. I wouldn't presume to attempt new forms,
to be sure; but one might revive some old ones, and maybe try new arrangements of them."

"Then you think you'll really be an architect?" I asked.

"Why, if it's possible. 'Faith, I'm not so young any more that I still want to be a soldier,
or a sailor either. One thing, 'twill take years of study; I'll have to go to Europe for that."

"To England?"

"First of all."

"What will Mr. Faringfield say to that?"

"He will not mind it so much in my case. I'm not of the Faringfield blood."

"Egad," said I, "there's some of the Faringfield blood hankers for a sight of London."

"Whose? Ned's?"

"No. Margaret's."

We were young men now, and she would not let us call her Madge any more. What I had said was
true. She had not grown up without hearing and reading much of the great world beyond the sea,
and wishing she might have her taste of its pleasures. She first showed a sense of her deprivation--for
it was a deprivation for a rich man's daughter--when she finished at the dame-school and we
boys entered college. Then she hinted, very cautiously, that her and Fanny's education was
being neglected, and mentioned certain other New York gentlemen's daughters, who had been sent
to England to boarding-schools.

Delicately as she did this, the thought that his favourite child could harbour a wish that
involved going to England, was a blow to Mr. Faringfield. He hastened to remove all cause of
complaint on the score of defective education. He arranged that the music teacher, who gave
the girls their lessons in singing and in playing upon the harpsichord and guitar, should teach
them four days a week instead of two. He engaged Mr. Cornelius to become an inmate of his house
and to give them tuition out of his regular school hours. He paid a French widow to instruct
them in their pronunciation, their book-French and grammar being acquired under Mr. Cornelius's
teaching. And so, poor girls, they got only additional work for Margaret's pains. But both
of them were docile, Fanny because it was her nature to be so, Margaret because she had taken
it into her head to become an accomplished lady. We never guessed her dreams and ambitions
in those years, and to this day I often wonder at what hour in her girlhood the set design
took possession of her, that design which dominated all her actions when we so little guessed
its existence. Besides these three instructors, the girls had their dancing-master, an Englishman
who pretended to impart not only the best-approved steps of a London assembly-room, but its
manners and graces as well.

So much for the education of the girls, Philip, and myself. Ned Faringfield's was interrupted
by his expulsion from King's for gross misconduct; and was terminated by his disgrace at Yale
College (whither his father had sent him in vain hope that he might behave better away from
home and more self-dependent) for beating a smaller student whom he had cheated at a clandestine
game of cards. His home-coming on this occasion was followed by his being packed off to Virginia
to play at superintending his father's tobacco plantations. Neglecting this business to go
shooting on the frontier, he got a Scotch Presbyterian mountaineer's daughter into trouble;
and when he turned up again at the door in Queen Street, he was still shaky with recollections
of the mob of riflemen that had chased him out of Virginia. That piece of sport cost his father
a pretty penny, and resulted in a place being got for Ned with a merchant who was Mr. Faringfield's
correspondent in the Barbadoes. So to the tropics the young gentleman was shipped, with sighs
of relief at his embarkation, and--I have no doubt--with unuttered prayers that he might not
show his face in Queen Street for a long time to come. Already he had got the name, in the
family, of "the bad shilling," for his always coming back unlooked for.

How different was his younger brother!--no longer "little Tom" (though of but middle height
and slim build), but always gay-hearted, affectionate, innocent, and a gentleman. He was a
handsome lad, without and within--yes, "lad" I must call him, for, though he came to manly
years, he always seemed a boy to me. He followed in our steps, in his time, through Mr. Cornelius's
school, and into King's College, too, but the coming of the war cut short his studies there.

It must have been in the year 1772--I remember Margaret spoke of her being seventeen years
old, in which case I was nineteen--when I got (and speedily forgot) my first glimpse of Margaret's
inmost mind. We were at the play--for New York had had a playhouse ever since Mr. Hallam had
brought thither his company, with whom the great Garrick had first appeared in London. I cannot
recall what the piece was that night; but I know it must have been a decent one, or Margaret
would not have been allowed to see it; and that it purported to set forth true scenes of fashionable
life in London. At one side of Margaret her mother sat, at the other was myself, and I think
I was that time their only escort.

"What a fright!" said Margaret in my ear, as one of the actresses came upon the stage with
an affected gait, and a look of thinking herself mighty fine and irresistible. "'Tis a slander,
this."

"Of whom?" I asked.

"Of the fine ladies these poor things pretend to represent."

"How do you know?" I retorted, for I was somewhat taken with the actresses, and thought to
avenge them by bringing her down a peg or two. "Have you seen so much of London fine ladies?"

"No, poor me!" she said sorrowfully, without a bit of anger, so that I was softened in a trice.
"But the ladies of New York, even, are no such tawdry make-believes as this.--Heaven knows,
I would give ten years of life for a sight of the fine world of London!"

She was looking so divine at that moment, that I could not but whisper:

"You would see nothing finer there than yourself."

"Do you think so?" she quickly asked, flashing her eyes upon me in a strange way that called
for a serious answer.

"'Tis the God's truth," I said, earnestly.

For a moment she was silent; then she whispered:

"What a silly whimsy of my father, his hatred of England! Does he imagine none of us is really
ever to see the world?--That reminds me, don't forget the Town and Country Magazine to-morrow."

I had once come upon a copy of that publication, which reflected the high life of England,
perhaps too much on its scandalous side; and had shown it to Margaret. Immediately she had
got me to subscribe for it, and to pass each number clandestinely to her. I, delighted to do
her a favour, and to have a secret with her, complied joyously; and obtained for her as many
novels and plays as I could, as well.

Little I fancied what bee I thus helped to keep buzzing in her pretty head, which she now carried
with all the alternate imperiousness and graciousness of confident and proven beauty. Little
I divined of feminine dreams of conquest in larger fields; or foresaw of dangerous fruit to
grow from seed planted with thoughtlessness. To my mind, nothing of harm or evil could ensue
from anything done, or thought, in our happy little group. To my eyes, the future could be
only radiant and triumphant. For I was still but a lad at heart, and to think as I did, or
to be thoughtless as I was, is the way of youth.

CHAPTER IV.

How Philip and I Behaved as Rivals in Love.

I was always impatient, and restless to settle uncertainties. One fine morning in the Spring
of 1773, Philip and I were breaking the Sabbath by practising with the foils in our back garden.
Spite of all the lessons I had taken from an English fencing-master in the town, Phil was still
my superior in the gentlemanly art. After a bout, on this sunshiny morning, we rested upon
a wooden bench, in the midst of a world of white and pink and green, for the apple and cherry
blossoms were out, and the leaves were in their first freshness. The air was full of the odour
of lilacs and honeysuckles. Suddenly the matter that was in my mind came out.

"I wish you'd tell me something, Phil--though 'tis none of my business,--"

"Why, man, you're welcome to anything I know."

"Then, is there aught between Margaret and you--any agreement or understanding, I mean?"

Phil smiled, comprehending me thoroughly.

"No, there's nothing. I'm glad you asked. It shows there's no promise between her and you, either."

"I thought you and I ought to settle it between ourselves about--Margaret. Because if we both
go on letting time pass, each waiting to see what t'other will do, some other man will slip
in, and carry off the prize, and there will both of us be, out in the cold."

"Oh, there's little fear of that," said Phil.

"Why, the fellows are all coming after her. She's far the finest girl in town."

"But you see how she treats them, all alike; looks down on them all, even while she's pleasant
to them; and doesn't lead any one of them on a step further than the rest."

"Ay, but in time--she's eighteen now, you know."

"Why, did you ever try to imagine her regarding any one of them as a husband; as a companion
to live with day after day, and to agree with, and look up to, and yield to, as a wife does?
Just fancy Margaret accommodating herself to the everlasting company of Phil Van Cortlandt,
or Jack Cruger, or Bob Livingstone, or Harry Colden, or Fred Philipse, or Billy Skinner, or
any of them."

"I know," said I; "but many a girl has taken a man that other men couldn't see anything in."

"Ay, the women have a way of their own of judging men; or perhaps they make the best of what
they can get. But you may depend on't, Margaret has too clear a sight, and too bright a mind,
and thinks too well of herself, to mate with an uncouth cub, or a stupid dolt, or a girlish
fop, or any of these that hang about her."

'Twas not Phil's way to speak ill of people, but when one considered men in comparison with
Margaret, they looked indeed very crude and unworthy.

"You know," he added, "how soon she tires of any one's society."

"But," said I, dubiously, "if none of them has a chance, how is it with us?"

"Why, 'tis well-proved that she doesn't tire of us. For years and years, she has had us about
her every day, and has been content with our society. That shows she could endure us to be
always near her."

It was true, indeed. And I should explain here that, as things were in America then, and with
Mr. Faringfield and Margaret, neither of us was entirely ineligible to the hand of so rich
and important a man's daughter; although the town would not have likened our chances to those
of a De Lancey, a Livingstone, or a Philipse. I ought to have said before, that Philip was
now of promising fortune. He had risen in the employ of Mr. Faringfield, but, more than that,
he had invested some years' savings in one of that merchant's shipping ventures, and had reinvested
the profits, always upon his benefactor's advice, until now his independence was a certain
thing. If he indeed tried architecture and it failed him as a means of livelihood, he might
at any time fall back upon his means and his experience as a merchant adventurer. As for me,
I also was a beneficiary of Mr. Faringfield's mercantile transactions by sea, my mother, at
his hint, having drawn out some money from the English funds, and risked it with him. Furthermore,
I had obtained a subordinate post in the customs office, with a promise of sometime succeeding
to my father's old place, and the certainty of remaining in his Majesty's service during good
behaviour. This meant for life, for I had now learned how to govern my conduct, having schooled
myself, for the sake of my mother's peace of mind, to keep out of trouble, often against my
natural impulses. Thus both Phil and I might aspire to Margaret; and, moreover, 'twas like
that her father would provide well for her if she found a husband to his approval. It did not
then occur to me that my employment in the English service might be against me in Mr. Faringfield's
eyes.

"Then," said I, reaching the main point at last, "as you think we are endurable to her--which
of us shall it be?"

"Why, that question is for her to settle," said Phil, with a smile half-amused, half-surprised.

"But she will have to be asked. So which of us--?"

"I don't think it matters," he replied. "If she prefers one of us, she will take him and refuse
the other, whether he ask first or last."

"But suppose she likes us equally. In that case, might not the first asker win, merely for
his being first?"

"I think it scarce possible but that in her heart she must favour one above all others, though
she may not know it yet."

"But it seems to me--"

"'Faith, Bert, do as you like, I sha'n't say nay, or think nay. If you ask her, and she accepts
you, I shall be sure you are the choice of her heart. But as for me, I have often thought of
the matter, and this is what I've come to: not to speak to her of it, until by some hint or
act she shows her preference."

"But the lady must not make the first step."

"Not by proposal or direct word, of course--though I'll wager there have been exceptions to
that; but I've read, and believe from what I've seen, that 'tis oftenest the lady that gives
the first hint. No doubt, she has already made sure of the gentleman's feelings, by signs he
doesn't know of. If a man didn't receive some leading on from a woman, how would he dare tell
her his mind?--for if he loves her he must dread her refusal, or scorn, beyond all things.
However that be, I've seen, in companies, and at the play, and even in church, how girls contrive
to show their partiality to the fellows they prefer. Why, we've both had it happen to us, when
we were too young for the fancy to last. And 'tis the same, I'll wager, when the girls are
women, and the stronger feeling has come, the kind that lasts. Be sure a girl as clever as
Margaret will find a way of showing it, if she has set her mind on either of us. And so, I'm
resolved to wait for some sign from her before I speak."

He went on to explain that this course would prolong, to the unfortunate one, the possession
of the pleasures of hope. It would save him, and Margaret, from the very unpleasant incident
of a rejection. Such a refusal must always leave behind it a certain bitterness in the memory,
that will touch what friendship remains between the two people concerned. And I know Philip's
wish that, though he might not be her choice, his old friendship with her might continue perfectly
unmarred, was what influenced him to avoid a possible scene of refusal.

"Then I shall do as you do," said I, "and if I see any sign, either in my favour or yours,
be sure I'll tell you."

"I was just about to propose that," said Phil; and we resumed our fencing.

There was, in our plan, nothing to hinder either of us from putting his best foot forward,
as the saying is, and making himself as agreeable to the young lady as he could. Indeed that
was the quickest way to call forth the indication how her affections stood. I don't think Phil
took any pains to appear in a better light than usual. It was his habit to be always himself,
sincere, gentle, considerate, and never thrusting forward. He had acquired with his growth
a playful humour with which to trim his conversation, but which never went to tiresome lengths.
This was all the more taking for his quiet manner, which held one where noise and effort failed.
But I exerted myself to be mighty gallant, and to show my admiration and wit in every opportune
way.

I considered that Phil and I were evenly matched in the rivalry; for when a young fellow loves
a girl, be she ever so divine, and though he feel in his heart that she is too good for him,
yet he will believe it is in him to win her grace. If he think his self-known attractions will
not suffice, he will trust to some possible hidden merits, unperceived by himself and the world,
but which will manifest themselves to her sight in a magical manner vouchsafed to lovers. Or
at worst, if he admit himself to be mean and unlikely, he will put reliance upon woman's caprice,
which, as we all know, often makes strange selections. As for me, I took myself to be quite
a conquering fellow.

In looks, 'twas my opinion that Philip and I were equally gifted. Phil was of a graceful, slender
figure; within an inch of six feet, I should say; with a longish face, narrowing from the forehead
downward, very distinctly outlined, the nose a little curved, the mouth still as delicate as
a boy's. Indeed he always retained something boyish in his look, for all his studiousness and
thoughtfulness, and all that came later. He was not as pale as in boyhood, the sea breezes
that swept in from the bay, past the wharves, having given him some ruddiness. His eyes, I
have said, were blue, almost of a colour with Margaret's. I was an inch or two shorter than
Phil, my build was more heavy and full, my face more of an equal width, my nose a little upturned
so as to give me an impudent look, my eyes a darkish brown.

That I was not Phil's match in sense, learning, talents, self-command, and modesty, did not
occur to me as lessening my chances with a woman. If I lacked real wit, I had pertness; and
I thought I had a manner of dashing boldness, that must do one-half the business with any girl,
while my converse trick of softening my voice and eyes to her on occasion, would do the other half.

But Margaret took her time before giving a hint of her heart's condition. She was the same
old comrade to us, she confided to us her adverse opinions of other people, laughed with us,
and often at us (when it was like as not that she herself had made us ridiculous), told us
her little secrets, let us share her gaiety and her dejection alike, teased us, soothed us,
made us serve her, and played the spoiled beauty with us to the full of the part. And a beauty
she was, indeed; ten times more than in her childhood. The bud was approaching its full bloom.
She was of the average tallness; slender at neck, waist, wrist, and ankle, but filling out
well in the figure, which had such curves as I swear I never saw elsewhere upon earth. She
had the smallest foot, with the highest instep; such as one gets not often an idea of in England.
Her little head, with its ripples of chestnut hair, sat like that of a princess; and her face,
oval in shape, proud and soft by turns in expression--I have no way of conveying the impression
it gave one, but to say that it made me think of a nosegay of fresh, flawless roses, white
and red. Often, by candle-light, especially if she were dressed for a ball, or sat at the play,
I would liken her to some animate gem, without the hardness that belongs to real precious stones;
for indeed she shone like a jewel, thanks to the lustre of her eyes in artificial light. Whether
from humidity or some quality of their substance, I do not know, but they reflected the rays
as I have rarely seen eyes do; and in their luminosity her whole face seemed to have part,
so that her presence had an effect of warm brilliancy that lured and dazzled you. To see her
emerge from the darkness of the Faringfield coach, or from her sedan-chair, into the bright
light of open doorways and of lanterns held by servants, was to hold your breath and stand
with lips parted in admiration, until she made you feel your nothingness by a haughty indifference
in passing, or sent you glowing to the seventh heaven by a radiant smile.

While we were waiting for the heart of our paragon to reveal itself, life in Queen Street was
diversified, in the Fall of 1773, by an unexpected visit.

Mr. Faringfield and Philip, as they entered the dining-room one evening after their return
from the warehouse, observed that an additional place had been made at the table. Without speaking,
the merchant looked inquiringly, and with a little of apprehension, at his lady.

"Ned has come back," she answered, trying to speak as if this were quite cheerful news.

Mr. Faringfield's face darkened. Then, with some sarcasm, he said:

"He did not go out of his way to stop at the warehouse in coming from the landing."

"Why, no doubt the ship did not anchor near our wharf. He came by the Sophy brig. He took some
tea, and changed his clothes, and went out to meet a fellow passenger at the coffee-house.
They had some business together."

"Business with a pack of cards, I make no doubt; or else with rum or madeira."

'Twas the second of these conjectures that turned out right. For Mr. Edward did not come home
in time to occupy at supper the place that had been set for him. When he did appear, he said
he had already eaten. Perhaps it was to strengthen his courage for meeting his father, that
he had imbibed to the stage wherein he vilely smelt of spirits and his eyes and face were flushed.
He was certainly bold enough when he received his father's cold greeting in the parlour, about
nine o'clock at night.

"And, pray, what circumstance gives us the honour of this visit?" asked Mr. Faringfield, not
dissembling his disgust.

"Why," says Mr. Ned, quite undaunted, and dropping his burly form into an armchair with an
air of being perfectly at home, "to tell the truth, 'tis a hole, the place you sent me to;
a very hell-hole."

"By what arrangement with Mr. Culverson did you leave it?" Mr. Culverson was the Barbadoes
merchant by whom Edward had been employed.

"Culverson!" echoed Ned, with a grin. "I doubt there was little love lost between me and Culverson!
'Culverson,' says I, 'the place is a hole, and the next vessel bound for New York, I go on
her.' 'And a damned good riddance!' says Culverson (begging your pardon! I'm only quoting what
the man said), and that was the only arrangement I remember of."

"And so that you are here, what now?" inquired Mr. Faringfield, looking as if he appreciated
Mr. Culverson's sentiments.

"Why, sir, as for that, I think 'tis for you to say."

"Indeed, sir?"

"Yes, sir, seeing that I'm your son, whom you're bound to provide for."

"You are twenty-two, I think," says Mr. Faringfield.

"I take it, a few paltry years more or less don't alter my rights, or the responsibilities
of a parent. Don't think, sir, I shall stand up and quietly see myself robbed of my birthright.
I'm no longer the man to play the Esek, or Esock, or whatever--"

"Esau," prompted Fanny, in a whisper.

"And my mouth isn't to be stopped by any mess of porridge."

"Pottage," corrected Fanny.

"Well, sir," said Mr. Faringfield, rising, and holding himself very stiffly, "I'll think upon
it." Whereupon he went into the library, and closed the door after him.

'Tis certain that he had both the strength and the inclination to chastise his son for these
insulting rum-incited speeches, and to cast him out to shift for his own future; instead of
enduring heedlessly the former, and offering to consider the latter. His strength was equal
to his pride, and he was no colder without than he was passionate within. But there was one
thing his strength of mind fell short of facing, and that was the disgrace to the family, which
the eldest son might bring were he turned looser, unprovided for, in New York. 'Twas the fear
of such disgrace that always led Mr. Faringfield to send Ned far away; and made him avoid any
scene of violence which the youth, now that he was a man and grown bold, might precipitate
in discussions such as the father had but now cut short.

"Now I call that frigid," complained Edward to his mother, staring at the door behind which
Mr. Faringfield had disappeared. "Here was I, in for a pleasant confab with my father, concerning
my future; and before I can put in a word, out he flings, and there's an end of it. 'Tisn't
fatherly, I protest! Well, well, I might have known! He was always stony-hearted; never would
discuss matters. That's the gratitude I get for putting the case to him in a reasonable, docile,
filial fashion. However, he said he'd think upon it. That means I shall stay here, and take
a holiday, till he makes up his mind where to ship me to next. 'Twon't be England, I fancy,
mother. I wouldn't object to France, egad! I could learn to eat frogs as soon as another man,
if it came to that. Well, I need a holiday, after working so hard in that cursed devil's paradise
I've just come from. I suppose I can depend on you for a little pocket-money, ma'am, till dad
comes to a conclusion?"

During the next fortnight, as he passed most of his time in the taverns and the coffee-house,
save when he attended horse-races on Long Island, or chased foxes upon Tom's horse, or lent
the honour of his presence to cock-fights; Mr. Edward found his mother's resources inadequate
to his demands, and so levied tribute not only upon Fanny and Tom but also upon Mr. Cornelius,
who still abode in the Faringfield house, and upon Philip Winwood. To Phil his manner was more
than civil; 'twas most conciliating and flattering, in a pleasantly jocular way.

Ere Mr. Faringfield had announced his mind, the visitor had worn out his welcome in most of
his tavern haunts, and become correspondingly tired of New York. One evening, as Philip was
leaving the warehouse, a negro boy handed him a note, in which Mr. Ned begged him to come immediately,
on a matter of importance, to the King's Arms tavern. There he found Edward seated at a small
table in a corner of the tap-room. Ned would have it that Phil should send home his excuses,
by the negro, and sup at the tavern; which, for the sake of peace, though unwillingly, Philip
finally consented to do.

Edward was drinking rum, in a kind of hot punch of his own mixing. Phil, though fond of madeira
at home, now contented himself with ale; and the two were soon at work upon a fried chicken
prepared in the Maryland fashion.

"You know, Phil," says Ned at last, having talked in a lively strain upon a multitude of matters,
none of which Philip perceived to be important, "'fore gad, I always liked you! Tis so, as
the Lord's my judge. Nay, you think I took a damned odd way of showing it. But we're not all
alike. Now look you! Hearken unto me, as the parson says. I can say a good word for you in
a certain ear."

"Whose?" queried Phil, wondering in what ear he needed a good word said.

"Whose, eh? Now whose would it be? Come, come, I'll speak to the point. I'm no man for palaver.
'Tis an ear you've whispered more than one sweet thing into, I'll warrant. You're young, Philip,
young: you think you can fall in love and nobody find it out. Why, I hadn't been landed two
hours, and asked the news, when I was told that you and Bert Russell were over ears in love
with my sister."

Phil merely looked his astonishment.

"Now, sir, you mayn't think it," says Mr. Ned, "but my word has some weight with Fanny."

"Fanny?" echoed Philip. "What has she to do with it?"

"Why, everything, I fancy. The lady usually has--"

"But Fanny isn't the lady."

"What? Then who the devil is?"

"I don't think 'tis a matter need be talked of now," said Phil.

"But I'd like to know--'gad, it can't be the other sister! Madge--that spitfire! Well, well!
Your face speaks, if your tongue won't. Who'd have thought any man would go soft over such
a vixen? Well, I can't help you there, my lad!"

"I haven't asked your help," says Phil with a smile.

"Now, it's a pity," says Ned, dolefully, "for I thought by doing you a good turn I might get
you to do me another."

"Oh, I see! Why, then, as for my doing you a good turn if it's possible, speak out. What is it?"

"Now, I call that noble of you, Phil; damned noble! I do need a good turn, and that's a fact.
You see I didn't tell my father exactly the truth as to my leaving the Barbadoes. Not that
I don't scorn a lie, but I was considerate of the old gentleman's feelings. I couldn't endure
to shock him in his tenderest place. You understand?"

"I probably shall when you've finished."

"Why, I dare say you know what the old man's tenderest place is. Well, if you won't answer,
'tis his pride in the family name, the spotless name of Faringfield! Oh, I've worked upon that
more than once, I tell you. The old gentleman will do much to keep the name without a blemish;
I could always bring him to terms by threatening to disgrace it--"

"What a rascal you've been, then!"

"Why, maybe so; we're not all saints. But I've always kept my word with father, and whenever
he gave me the money I wanted, or set me up in life again, I kept the name clean--comparatively
clean, that is to say, as far as any one in New York might know. And even this time--at the
Barbadoes--'twasn't with any purpose of punishing father, I vow; 'twas for my necessities,
I made myself free with a thousand pounds of Culverson's."

"The devil! Do you mean you embezzled a thousand pounds?"

"One cool, clean thousand! My necessities, I tell you. There was a debt of honour, you must
know; a damned unlucky run at the cards, and the navy officer that won came with a brace of
pistols and gave me two days in which to pay. And then there was a lady--with a brat, confound
her!--to be sent to England, and looked after. You see, 'twas honour moved me in the first
case, and chivalry in the second. As a gentleman, I couldn't withstand the promptings of noble
sentiments like those."

"Well, what then?"

"Why, then I came away. And I hadn't the heart to break the truth to father, knowing how 'twould
cut him up. I thought of the old gentleman's family pride, his gray hairs--his hair is gray
by this time, isn't it?--"

"And what is it you wish me to do?"

"Why, you see, Culverson hadn't yet found out how things were, when I left. I pretended I was
ill--and so I was, in a way. But he must have found out by this time, and when he sends after
me, by the next vessel, I'm afraid poor father will have to undergo a severe trial--you know
his weakness for the honoured name of Faringfield."

"By the Lord, Ned, this is worse than I should ever have thought of you."

"It is a bit bad, isn't it? And I've been thinking what's to be done--for father's sake, you
know. If 'twere broken to him gently, at once, as nobody but you can break it, why then, he
might give me the money to repay Culverson, and send me back to Barbadoes by the next ship,
and nothing need ever come out. I'm thoroughly penitent, so help me, heaven, and quite willing
to go back."

"And incur other debts of honour, and obligations of chivalry," says Phil.

"I'll see the cards in hell first, and the women too, by gad!" whereat Mr. Edward brought his
fist down upon the table most convincingly.

He thought it best to spend that night at the tavern; whither Phil went in the morning with
news of Mr. Faringfield's reception of the disclosure. The merchant had listened with a countenance
as cold as a statue's, but had promptly determined to make good the thousand pounds to Mr.
Culverson, and that Ned should return to the Barbadoes without the formality of bidding the
family farewell. But the money was to be entrusted not to Mr. Edward, but to Mr. Faringfield's
old clerk, Palmer, who was to be the young man's travelling companion on the Southward voyage.
At word of this last arrangement, Edward showed himself a little put out, which he told Phil
was on account of his father's apparent lack of confidence. But he meditated awhile, and took
on a more cheerful face.

It happened--and, as it afterward came out, his previous knowledge of this had suggested the
trick he played upon Phil and Mr. Faringfield--that, the same day on which the next Barbadoes-bound
vessel sailed, a brig left port for England. Both vessels availed themselves of the same tide
and wind, and so went down the bay together.

On the Barbadoes vessel, Ned and Mr. Palmer were to share the same cabin; and thither, ere
the ship was well out of the East River, the old clerk accompanied Ned for the purpose of imbibing
a beverage which the young gentleman protested was an unfailing preventive of sea-sickness,
if taken in time. Once in the cabin, and the door being closed, Mr. Ned adroitly knocked Palmer
down with a blow from behind; gagged, bound, and robbed him of the money, and left him to his
devices. Returning to the deck, he induced the captain to put him, by boat, aboard the brig
bound for England, which was still close at hand. Taking different courses, upon leaving the
lower bay, the two vessels were soon out of hail, and that before the discovery of the much
puzzled Palmer's condition in his cabin.

The poor old man had to go to the Barbadoes, and come back again, before a word of this event
reached the ears of Mr. Faringfield. When Palmer returned with his account of it, he brought
word from Mr. Culverson that, although Ned had indeed settled a gambling debt at the pistol's
point, and had indeed paid the passage of a woman and child to England, his theft had been
of less than a hundred pounds. Thus it was made manifest that Ned had lied to Philip in order
to play upon his father's solicitude concerning the name of Faringfield for integrity, and
so get into his hands the means of embarking upon the pleasures of the Old World. Very foolish
did poor Philip look when he learned how he had been duped. But Mr. Faringfield, I imagine,
consoled himself with the probability that New York had seen the last of Mr. Edward.

I think 'twas to let Mr. Faringfield recover first from the feelings of this occasion, that
Philip postponed so long the announcement of his intention to go to England. Thus far he had
confided his plans to me alone, and as a secret. But now he was past twenty-one years, and
his resolution could not much longer be deferred. Nevertheless, not until the next June--that
of 1774--did he screw up his courage to the point of action.

"I shall tell him to-day," said Philip to me one Monday morning, as I walked with him part
of the way to the warehouses. "Pray heaven he takes it not too ill."

I did not see Phil at dinner-time; but in the afternoon, a little before his usual home-coming
hour, he came seeking me, with a very relieved and happy face; and found me trimming a grape-vine
in our back garden, near the palings that separated our ground from Mr. Faringfield's. On the
Faringfield side of the fence, at this place, grew bushes of snowball and rose.

"How did he take it?" I asked, smiling to see Phil's eyes so bright.

"Oh, very well. He made no objection; said he had not the right to make any in my case. But
he looked so upset for a moment, so deserted--I suppose he was thinking how his own son had
failed him, and that now his beneficiary was turning from him--that I wavered. But at that
he was the same haughty, immovable man as ever, and I remembered that each of us must live
his own life; and so 'tis settled."

"Well," said I, with a little of envy at his prospect, and much of sorrow at losing him, and
some wonder about another matter, "I'm glad for your sake, though you may imagine how I'll
miss you. But how can you go yet? 'Tis like leaving the field to me--as to her, you know."
I motioned with my head toward the Faringfield house.

"Why," he replied, as we both sat down on the wooden bench, "as I shall be gone years when
I do go, Mr. Faringfield stipulated only that I should remain with him here another year; and
I was mighty glad he did, or I should have had to make that offer. 'Twasn't that I was anxious
to be off so soon, that made me tell him I was going; 'twas that in harbouring the intention,
while he still relied upon my remaining always with him, I seemed to be guilty of a kind of
treachery. As for--her, if she gives no indication within a year, especially when she knows
I'm going, why, 'twill be high time to leave the field to you, I think."

"She doesn't know yet?"

"No; I came first to you. Her father isn't home yet."

"Well, Phil, there's little for me to say. You know what my feelings are. After all, we are
to have you for a year, and then--well, I hope you may become the greatest architect that ever
lived!"

"Why, now, 'tis strange; you remind me of my reason for going. Since Mr. Faringfield gave me
his sanction, I hadn't thought of that. I'm afraid I've been something of a hypocrite. And
yet I certainly thought my desire to go was chiefly on account of my architectural studies;
and I certainly intend to pursue them, too. I must have deceived myself a little, though, by
dwelling on that reason as one that would prevail with Mr. Faringfield; one that he could understand,
and could not fairly oppose. For, hearkee, all the way home, when I looked forward to the future,
the architectural part of it was not in my head. I was thinking of the famous historic places
I should see; the places where great men have lived; the birthplace and grave of Shakespeare;
the palaces where great pageants and tragedies have been enacted; the scenes of great battles;
the abbey where so many poets and kings and queens are buried; the Tower where such memorable
dramas have occurred; the castles that have stood since the days of chivalry; and Oxford; and
the green fields of England that poets have written of, and the churchyard of Gray's Elegy;
and all that kind of thing."

"Ay, and something of the gay life of the present, I'll warrant," said I, with a smile; "the
playhouses, and the taverns, and the parks, and Vauxhall, and the assembly-rooms; and all that
kind of thing."

"Why, yes, 'tis true. And I wish you were to go with me."

"Alas, I'm tied down here. Some day, perhaps--"

"What are you two talking of?" The interruption came in a soft, clear, musical voice, of which
the instant effect was to make us both start up, and turn toward the fence, with hastened hearts
and smiling faces.

Margaret stood erect, looking over the palings at us, backed by the green and flowered bushes
through which she and Fanny had moved noiselessly toward the fence in quest of nosegays for
the supper-table. Fanny stood at her side, and both smiled, Margaret archly, Fanny pleasantly.
The two seemed of one race with the flowers about them, though Margaret's radiant beauty far
outshone the more modest charms of her brown-eyed younger sister. The elder placed her gathered
flowers on the upper rail of the fence, and taking two roses, one in each hand, held them out
toward us.

We grasped each his rose at the same time, and our motions, as we touched our lips with them,
were so in unison that Margaret laughed.

"And what were you talking of?" says she.

"Is it a secret any longer?" I asked Philip.

"No."

"Then we were talking of Phil's going to England, to be a great architect."

"Going to England!" She looked as if she could not have rightly understood.

"Yes," said I, "in a year from now, to stay, the Lord knows how long."

She turned white, then red; and had the strangest look.

"Is it true?" she asked, after a moment, turning to Phil.

"Yes. I am to go next June."

"But father--does he know?"

"I told him this afternoon. He is willing."

"To be sure, to be sure," she said, thoughtfully. "He has no authority over you. 'Tis different
with us. Oh, Phil, if you could only take me with you!" There was wistful longing and petulant
complaint in the speech. And then, as Phil answered, an idea seemed to come to her all at once;
and she to rise to it by its possibility, rather than to fall back from its audacity.

"I would gladly," said he; "but your father would never consent that a Faringfield--"

"Well, one need not always be a Faringfield," she replied, looking him straight in the face,
with a kind of challenge in her voice and eyes.

"Why--perhaps not," said Phil, for the mere sake of agreeing, and utterly at a loss as to her
meaning.

"You don't understand," says she. "A father's authority over his daughter ceases one day."

"Ay, no doubt," says Phil; "when she becomes of legal age. But even then, without her father's
consent--"

"Why, now," she interrupted, "suppose her father's authority over her passed to somebody else;
somebody of her father's own preference; somebody that her father already knew was going to
England: could her father forbid his taking her?"

"But, 'tis impossible," replied mystified Phil. "To whom in the world would your father pass
his authority over you? He is hale and hearty; there's not the least occasion for a guardian."

"Why, fathers do, you know."

"Upon my soul, I don't see--"

"I vow you don't! You are the blindest fellow! Didn't Polly Livingstone's father give up his
authority over her the other day--to Mr. Ludlow?"

"Certainly, to her husband."

"Well!"

"Margaret--do you mean--? But you can't mean that?" Phil had not the voice to say more, emerging
so suddenly from the clouds of puzzlement to the yet uncertain sunshine of joy.

"Why shouldn't I mean that?" says she, with the prettiest laugh, which made her bold behaviour
seem the most natural, feminine act imaginable. "Am I not good enough for you?"

"Madge! You're not joking, are you?" He caught her hands, and gazed with still dubious rapture
at her across the fence.

My sensations may easily be imagined. But by the time she had assured him she was perfectly
in earnest, I had taught myself to act the man; and so I said, playfully:

"Such a contract, though 'tis made before witnesses, surely ought to be sealed."

Philip took my hint; and he and Margaret laughed, and stretched arms across the paling tops;
and I lost sight of their faces. I sought refuge in turning to Fanny, who was nearer to me
than they were. To my surprise, she was watching me with the most kindly, pitying face in the
world. Who would have thought she had known my heart regarding her sister?

"Poor Bert!" she murmured gently, scarce for my hearing.

And I, who had felt very solitary the moment before, now seemed not quite so lonely; and I
continued to look into the soft, compassionate eyes of Fanny, so steadily that in a moment,
with the sweetest of blushes, she lowered them to the roses in her hand.

CHAPTER V.

We Hear Startling News, Which Brings about a Family "Scene".

I have characterised Margaret's behaviour in the matter of this marriage proposal as forward;
though I have admitted that it scarce looked so, so graceful and womanlike was her manner of
carrying it off, which had in it nothing worse than the privileged air of a spoiled beauty.
Now that writing of it has set me thinking of it, I see that 'twas a more natural act than
it appears in the cold recital. For years she had been our queen, and Phil and I her humble
subjects, and the making of the overtures appeared as proper in her, as it would have seemed
presumption in either of us. And over Phil, from that bygone day when she had gone across the
street to his rescue, she had assumed an air of authority, nay of proprietorship, that bade
him wait upon her will ere ever he acted or spoke. And, again, though out of consideration
for his rival he had been purposely silent while awaiting a sign from her, she had read his
heart from the first. His every look and tone for years had been an unconscious act of wooing,
and so when she brought matters to a point as she did, 'twas on her part not so much an overture
as a consent. As for marriage proposal in general, all men with whom I have discussed it have
confessed their own scenes thereof to have been, in the mere words, quite simple and unpoetical,
whether enacted in confusion or in confidence; and to have been such as would not read at all
finely in books.

The less easy ordeal awaited Philip, of asking her father. But he was glad this stood yet in
his way, and that 'twas not easy; for 'twould make upon his courage that demand which every
man's courage ought to undergo in such an affair, and which Margaret's conduct had precluded
in his coming to an understanding with her.

But however disquieting the task was to approach, it could be only successful at the end; for
indeed Mr. Faringfield, with all his external frigidity, could refuse Phil nothing. In giving
his consent, which perhaps he had been ready to do long before Phil had been ready to ask it,
he made no allusion to Phil's going to England. He purposely ignored the circumstance, I fancy,
that in consenting to the marriage, he knowingly opened the way for his daughter's visiting
that hated country. Doubtless the late conduct of Ned, and the intended defection of Philip,
amicable though that defection was, had shaken him in his resolution of imposing his avoidance
of England upon his family. He resigned himself to the inevitable; but he grew more taciturn,
sank deeper into himself, became more icy in his manner, than ever.

Philip and Margaret were married in February, four months before the time set for their departure.
The wedding was solemnised in Trinity Church, by the Rev. Mr. Barclay, on one of those white
days with a little snow in the air, which I for one prefer over sunny days, in winter, as far
more seasonable. The young gentlemen of the town wondered that Miss Faringfield had not made
a better match (as she might have done, of course, in each one's secret opinion by choosing
himself). The young ladies, though some of them may have regretted the subtraction of one eligible
youth from their matrimonial chances, were all of them rejoiced at the removal of a rival who
had hitherto kept the eyes of a score of youths, even more eligible, turned away from them.
And so they wished her well, with smiles the most genuine. She valued not a finger-snap their
thoughts or their congratulations. She had, of late, imperceptibly moved aloof from them. Nor
had she sought the attentions of the young gentlemen. 'Twas not of her will that they dangled.
In truth she no longer had eyes or ears for the small fashionable world of New York. She had
a vastly greater world to conquer, and disdained to trouble herself, by a smile or a glance,
for the admiration of the poor little world around her.

All her thoughts in her first months of marriage--and these were very pleasant months to Philip,
so charming and sweet-tempered was his bride--were of the anticipated residence in England.
It was still settled that Philip was to go in June; and her going with him was now daily a
subject of talk in the family. Mr. Faringfield himself occasionally mentioned it; indifferently,
as if 'twere a thing to which he never would have objected. Margaret used sometimes to smile,
thinking how her father had put it out of his power to oppose her wishes: first by his friendly
sanction to Phil's going, to refuse which he had not the right; and then by his consent to
her marriage, to refuse which he had not the will.

Naturally Philip took pleasure in her anticipations, supposing that, as to their source and
object, they differed not from his. As the pair were so soon to go abroad, 'twas thought unnecessary
to set up in a house of their own in New York, and so they made their home for the time in
the Faringfield mansion, the two large chambers over the great parlour being allotted to them;
while they continued to share the family table, save that Margaret now had her morning chocolate
abed.

"I must initiate myself into London ways, dear," she said, gaily, when Fanny remarked how strange
this new habit was in a girl who had never been indolent or given to late rising.

"How pretty the blue brocaded satin is!" quoth Fanny, looking at one of Margaret's new gowns
hanging in a closet. "Why didn't you wear it at the Watts' dinner yesterday? And your brown
velvet--you've not had it on since it came from the dressmaker's."

"I shall wear them in London," says Margaret.

And so it was with her in everything. She saved her finest clothes, her smiles, her very interest
in life, her capacity for enjoyment, all for London. And Philip, perceiving her indifference
to the outside world, her new equability of temper, her uniform softness of demeanour, her
constant meditative half-smile due to pleasurable dreams of the future, read all these as tokens
of blissful content like that which glowed in his own heart. And he was supremely happy. 'Tis
well for a man to have two months of such happiness, to balance against later years of sorrow;
but sad will that happiness be in the memory, if it owe itself to the person to whom the sorrow
in its train is due.

She would watch for him at the window, in the afternoon, when he came home from the warehouse;
and would be waiting at the parlour door as he entered the hall. With his arm about her, he
would lead her to a sofa, and they would sit talking for a few minutes before he prepared for
supper--for 'twas only on great occasions that the Faringfields dined at five o'clock, as did
certain wealthy New York families who followed the London mode.

"I am so perfectly, entirely, completely, utterly happy!" was the burden of Phil's low-spoken
words.

"Fie!" said Margaret, playfully, one evening. "You must not be perfectly happy. There must
be some cloud in the sky; some annoyance in business, or such trifle. Perfect happiness is
dangerous, mamma says. It can't last. It forbodes calamity to come. 'Tis an old belief, and
she vows 'tis true."

"Why, my poor mother held that belief, too. I fear she had little perfect happiness to test
it by; but she had calamities enough. And Bert Russell's mother was saying the same thing the
other day. 'Tis a delusion common to mothers, I think. I sha'n't let it affect my felicity.
I should be ungrateful to call my contentment less than perfect. And if calamity comes, 'twill
not be owing to my happiness."

"As for that, I can't imagine any calamity possible to us--unless something should occur to
hinder us from going to London. But nothing in the world shall do that, of course."

'Twas upon this conversation that Tom and I broke in, having met as I returned from the custom-house,
he from the college.

"Oho!" cried Tom, with teasing mirth, "still love-making! I tell you what it is, brother Phil,
'tis time you two had eyes for something else besides each other. The town is talking of how
engrossed Margaret is in you, that she ignores the existence of everybody else."

"Let 'em talk," said Margaret, lightly, with an indifference free from malice. "Who cares about
their existence? They're not so interesting, with their dull teas and stupid gossip of one
another! A set of tedious rustics."

"Hear the countess talk!" Tom rattled on, at the same time looking affectionate admiration
out of his mirthful eyes. "What a high and mighty lady is yours, my lord Philip! I should like
to know what the Morrises, and Lind Murray, and the Philipse boys and girls, and our De Lancey
cousins, and the rest, would think to hear themselves called a set of rustics."

"Why," says Phil, "beside her ladyship here, are they not a set of rustics?" With which he
kissed her, and rose to go to his room.

"Merci, monsieur!" said Margaret, rising and dropping him a curtsey, with the prettiest of
glances, as he left the parlour.

She hummed a little French air, and went and ran her fingers up and down the keys of the pianoforte,
which great new instrument had supplanted the old harpsichord in the house. Tom and I, standing
at the fireplace, watched her face as the candle-light fell upon it.

"Well," quoth Tom, "Phil is no prouder of his wife than I am of my sister. Don't you think
she grows handsomer every day, Bert?"

"'Tis the effect of happiness," said I, and then I looked into the fireplace rather than at
her. For I was then, and had been for long months, engaged in the struggle of detaching my
thoughts from her charms, or, better, of accustoming myself to look upon them with composure;
and I had made such good success that I wished not to set myself back in it. Eventually my
success was complete, and I came to feel toward her no more than the friendship of a lifelong
comrade. If a man be honest, and put forth his will, he can quench his love for the woman that
is lost to him, unless there have existed long the closest, tenderest, purest ties between
them; and even then, except that 'twill revive again sometimes at the touch of an old memory.

"You dear boys!" says Margaret, coming over to us, to reward Tom with a kiss on the cheek,
and me with a smile. "What a vain thing you will make me of my looks!"

"Nay," says candid Tom, "that work was done before ever we had the chance of a hand in it."

"Well," retorted Margaret, with good-humoured pertness, "there'll never be reason for me to
make my brother vain of his wit."

"Nor for my sister to be vain of hers," said Tom, not in nettled retaliation, but merely as
uttering a truth.

"You compliment me there," says Margaret, lightly. "Did you ever hear of a witty woman that
was charming?"

"That is true," I put in, remembering some talk of Phil's, based upon reading as well as upon
observation, "for usually a woman must be ugly, before she will take the trouble to cultivate
wit. The possession of wit in a woman seems to imply a lack of other reliances. And if a woman
be pretty and witty both, her arrogance is like to be such as drives every man away. And men
resent wit in a woman as if 'twere an invasion of their own province."

"Sure your explanation must be true, Mr. Philosopher," said Margaret, "'tis so profound. As
for me, I seek no reasons; 'tis enough to know that most witty women are frights; and I don't
blame the men for refusing to be charmed by 'em."

"Well, sis," said Tom, "I'm sure even the cultivation of wit wouldn't make you a fright. So
you might amuse yourself by trying it, ma'am. As for charming the men, you married ladies have
no more to do with that."

"Oh, haven't we? Sure, I think 'tis time little boys were in bed, who talk of things they know
nothing about. Isn't that so, Bert?"

"Why," said I, "for my part, I think 'tis unkind for a woman to exercise her charms upon men
after she has destroyed the possibility of rewarding their devotion."

"Dear me, you talk like a character in a novel. Well, then, you're both agreed I mustn't be
charming. So I'll be disagreeable, and begin with you two. Here's a book of sermons Mr. Cornelius
must have left. That will help me, if anything will." And she sat down with the volume in her
hands, took on a solemn frown, and began to read to herself. After awhile, at a giggle of amusement
from schoolboy Tom, she turned a rebuking gaze upon us, over the top of the book; but the very
effort to be severe emphasised the fact that her countenance was formed to give only pleasure,
and our looks brought back the smile to her eyes.

"'Tis no use," said Tom, "you couldn't help being charming if you tried."

She threw down the book, and came and put her arm around him, and so we all three stood before
the fire till Philip returned.

"Ah," she said, "here is one who will never ask me to be ugly or unpleasant."

"Who has been asking impossibilities, my dear?" inquired Philip, taking her offered hand in his.

"These wise gentlemen think I oughtn't to be charming, now that I'm married."

"Then they think you oughtn't to be yourself; and I disagree with 'em entirely."

She gave him her other hand also, and stood for a short while looking into his innocent, fond eyes.

"You dear old Phil!" she said slowly, in a low voice, falling for the moment into a tender
gravity, and her eyes having a more than wonted softness. The next instant, recovering her
light playfulness with a little laugh, she took his arm and led the way to the dining-room.

And now came Spring--the Spring of 1775. There had been, of course, for years past, and increasing
daily in recent months, talk of the disagreement between the king and the colonies. I have
purposely deferred mention of this subject, to the time when it was to fall upon us in its
full force so that no one could ignore it or avoid action with regard to it. But I now reach
the beginning of the drama which is the matter of this history, and to which all I have written
is uneventful prologue. We young people of the Faringfield house (for I was still as much of
that house as of my own) had concerned ourselves little with the news from London and Boston,
of the concentration of British troops in the latter town in consequence of the increased disaffection
upon the closing of its port. We heeded little the fact that the colonies meant to convene
another general congress at Philadelphia, or that certain colonial assemblies had done thus
and so, and certain local committees decided upon this or that. 'Twould all blow over, of course,
as the Stamp Act trouble had done; the seditious class in Boston would soon be overawed, and
the king would then concede, of his gracious will, what the malcontents had failed to obtain
by their violent demands. Such a thing as actual rebellion, real war, was to us simply inconceivable.
I believe now that Philip had earlier and deeper thoughts on the subject than I had: indeed
events showed that he must have had: but he kept them to himself. And far other and lighter
subjects occupied our minds as he and I started for a walk out the Bowery lane one balmy Sunday
morning in April, the twenty-third day of the month.

Mr. and Mrs. Faringfield, Fanny, and Tom, had gone to church. Philip and I boasted of too much
philosophical reading to be churchgoers, and I had let my mother walk off to Trinity with a
neighbour. As for Margaret, she stayed home because she was now her own mistress and had a
novel to read, out of the last parcel received from London. We left her on the rear veranda,
amidst the honeysuckle vines that climbed the trellis-work.

"I've been counting the weeks," she said to Phil, as we were about to set forth. "Only seven
more Sundays." And she stopped him to adjust the ribbon of his queue more to her taste. "Aren't
you glad?"

"Yes; and a thousand times so because it makes you happy, my dear," said he.

She kissed him, and let him go. "Don't walk too far, dear!" she called after us.

We looked back from the gateway, and saw that she had come to the end of the veranda to see
us from the garden. We doffed our hats, and Phil threw her a kiss; which she returned, and
then waved her hand after us, softly smiling. Philip lingered a moment, smiling back, to get
this last view of her ere he closed the gate.

We had just passed the common, at the Northern end of the town, when we heard a clatter of
galloping hoofs in the Bowery lane before us. Looking up the vista of road shaded by trees
in fresh leafage, we saw a rider coming toward us at a very severe pace. As he approached,
the horse stumbled; and the man on its back, fearing it might sink from exhaustion, drew up
and gave it a moment in which to recover itself. He evidently wished to make a decent entrance
into the town. He was in a great panting and perspiration, like his trembling steed, which
was covered with foam; and his clothes were disturbed and soiled with travel. He took off his
cocked felt hat to fan himself.

"You ride fast, for Sunday, friend," said Phil pleasantly. "Any trouble?"

"Trouble for some folks, I guess," was the reply, spoken with a Yankee drawl and twang. "I'm
bringing news from Massachusetts." He slapped the great pocket of his plain coat, calling attention
to its well-filled condition as with square papers. "Letters from the Committee of Safety."

"Why, has anything happened at Boston?" asked Phil, quickly.

"Well, no, not just at Boston. But out Concord way, and at Lexington, and on the road back
to Boston, I should reckon a few things had happened." And then, leaving off his exasperating
drawl, he very speedily related the terrible occurrence of the nineteenth of April--terrible
because 'twas warlike bloodshed in a peaceful land, between the king's soldiers and the king's
subjects, between men of the same race and speech, men of the same mother country; and because
of what was to follow in its train. I remember how easily and soon the tale was told; how clearly
the man's calm voice, though scarce raised above a usual speaking tone, stood out against the
Sunday morning stillness, with no sound else but the twittering of birds in the trees near by.

"Get up!" said the messenger, not waiting for our thanks or comments; and so galloped into
the town, leaving us to stare after him and then at each other.

"'Faith, this will make the colonies stand together," said Philip at last.

"Ay," said I, "against the rebellious party."

"No," quoth he, "when I say the colonies, I mean what you call the rebellious party in them."

"Why, 'tis not the majority, and therefore it can't be said to represent the colonies."

"I beg your pardon--I think we shall find it is the majority, particularly outside of the large
towns. This news will fly to every corner of the land as fast as horses can carry it, and put
the country folk in readiness for whatever the Continental Congress may decide upon."

"Why, then, 'twill put our people on their guard, too, for whatever the rebels may attempt."

Philip's answer to this brought about some dispute as to whether the name rebels, in its ordinary
sense, could properly be applied to those colonists who had what he termed grievances. We both
showed heat, I the more, until he, rather than quarrel, fell into silence. We had turned back
into the town; choosing a roundabout way for home, that we might observe the effect of the
messenger's news upon the citizens. In a few streets the narrow footways were thronged with
people in their churchgoing clothes, and many of these had already gathered into startled groups,
where the rider who came in such un-Sabbath-like haste had stopped to justify himself, and
satisfy the curiosity of observers, and ask the whereabouts of certain gentlemen of the provincial
assembly, to whom he had letters. We heard details repeated, and opinions uttered guardedly,
and grave concern everywhere expressed.

By the time we had reached home, Mr. and Mrs. Faringfield were already there, discussing the
news with my mother, in the presence of the two daughters and Tom. We found them all in the
parlour. Margaret stood in the library doorway, still holding her novel in her hand, her finger
keeping the page. Her face showed but a languid interest in the tragedy which made all the
others look so grave.

"You've heard the news, of course?" said Mr. Faringfield to us as we entered, curiously searching
Philip's face while he spoke.

"Yes, sir; we were the first in the town to hear it, I think," replied Phil.

"Tis a miracle if we do not have war," said Mr. Faringfield.

"I pray not," says my mother, who was a little less terrified than Mrs. Faringfield. "And I
won't believe we shall, till I see it at our doors."

"Oh, don't speak of it!" cried Mrs. Faringfield, with a shudder.

"Why, ladies," says Philip, "'tis best to think of it as if 'twere surely coming, and so accustom
the mind to endure its horrors. I shall teach my wife to do so." And he looked playfully over
at Margaret.

"Why, what is it to me?" said Margaret. "Tis not like to come before we sail, and in England
we shall be well out of it. Sure you don't think the rebels will cross the ocean and attack
London?"

"Why, if war comes," said Phil, quietly, "we shall have to postpone our sailing."

"Postpone it!" she cried, in alarm. "Why? And how long?"

"Until the matter is settled one way or another."

"But it won't come before we sail. 'Tis only seven weeks. Whatever happens, they'll riddle
away that much time first, in talk and preparation; they always do."

"But we must wait, my dear, till the question is decided whether there's to be war or peace.
If we come round to the certainty of peace, which is doubtful, then of course there's naught
to hinder us. But if there's war, why, we've no choice but to see it out before we leave the
country."

I never elsewhere saw such utter, indignant consternation as came over Margaret's face.

"But why? For what reason?" she cried. "Will not vessels sail, as usual? Are you afraid we
shall be harmed on the sea? 'Tis ridiculous! The rebels have no war-ships. Why need we stay?
What have we to do with these troubles? 'Tis not our business to put them down. The king has
soldiers enough."

"Ay," said Phil, surprised at her vehemence, but speaking the more quietly for that, "'tis
the colonies will need soldiers."

"Then what folly are you talking? Why should we stay for this war."

"That I may take my part in it, my dear."

"Bravo, brother Phil!" cried Tom Faringfield. "You nor I sha'n't miss a chance to fight for
the king!"

"Nor I, either," I added.

"'Tis not for the king, that I shall be fighting," said Phil, simply.

A silence of astonishment fell on the company. 'Twas broken by Mr. Faringfield:

"Bravo, Phil, say I this time." And, losing no jot of his haughty manner, he went over, and
with one hand grasping Phil's, laid the other approvingly on the young man's shoulder.

"What, have we rebels in our own family?" cried Mrs. Faringfield, whose horror at the fact
gave her of a sudden the needful courage.

"Madam, do your sentiments differ from mine?" asked her husband.

"Sir, I am a De Lancey!" she replied, with a chilling haughtiness almost equal to his own.

Tom, buoyed by his feelings of loyalty above the fear of his father's displeasure, crossed
to his mother, and kissed her; and even Fanny had the spirit to show defiantly on which side
she stood, by nestling to her mother's side and caressing her head.

"Good, mamma!" cried Margaret. "No one shall make rebels of us! Understand that, Mr. Philip
Winwood!"

Philip, though an ashen hue about the lips showed what was passing in his heart, tried to take
the bitterness from the situation by treating it playfully. "You see, Mr. Faringfield, if we
are indeed rebels against our king, we are paid by our wives turning rebels against ourselves."

"You cannot make a joke of it, sir," said Margaret, with a menacing coldness in her tone. "'Tis
little need the king has of my influence, I fancy; he has armies to fight his battles. But
there's one thing does concern me, and that is my visit to London.--But you'll not deprive
me of that, dear, will you, now that you think of it better?" Her voice had softened as she
turned to pleading.

"We must wait, my dear, while there is uncertainty or war."

"But you haven't the right to make me wait!" she cried, her voice warming to mingled rage,
reproach, and threat. "Why, wars last for years--I should be an old woman! You're not free
to deny me this pleasure, or postpone it an hour! You promised it from the first, you encouraged
my anticipations until I came to live upon them, you fed my hopes till they dropped everything
else in the world. Night and day I have looked forward to it, thought of it, dreamt of it!
And now you say I must wait--months, at least; probably years! But you can't mean it, Phil!
You wouldn't be so cruel! Tell me!"

"I mean no cruelty, dear. But one has no choice when patriotism dictates--when one's country--"

"Why, you sha'n't treat me so, disappoint me so! 'Twould be breaking your word; 'twould be
a cruel betrayal, no less; 'twould make all your conduct since our marriage--nay, since that
very day we promised marriage--a deception, a treachery, a lie; winning a woman's hand and
keeping her love, upon a false pretence! You dare not turn back on your word now! If you are
a man of honour, of truth, of common honesty, you will let this miserable war go hang, and
take me to England, as you promised! And if you don't I'll hate you!--hate you!"

Her speech had come out in a torrent of increasing force, until her voice was almost a scream,
and this violence had its climax in a hysterical outburst of weeping, as she sank upon a chair
and hid her face upon the back thereof. In this attitude she remained, her body shaking with sobs.

Philip, moved as a man rarely is, hastened to her, and leaning over, essayed to take her hand.

"But you should understand, dear," said he, most tenderly, with what voice he could command.
"God knows I would do anything to make you happy, but--"

"Then," she said tearfully, resigning her hand to his, "don't bring this disappointment upon
me. Let them make war, if they please; you have your wife to consider, and your own future.
Whatever they fight about, 'tis nothing to you, compared with your duty to me."

"But you don't understand," was all he could reply. "If I could explain--"

"Oh, Phil, dear," she said, adopting again a tender, supplicating tone. "You'll not rob me
of what I've so joyously looked forward to, will you? Think, how I've set my heart on it! Why,
we've looked forward to it together, haven't we? All our happiness has been bound up with our
anticipations. Don't speak of understanding or explaining,--only remember that our first thought
should be of each other's happiness, dear, and that you will ruin mine if you don't take me.
For my sake, for my love, promise we shall go to England in June! I beg you--'tis the one favour--I
will love you so! Do, Phil! We shall be so happy!"

She looked up at him with such an eager pleading through her tears that I did not wonder to
see his own eyes moisten.

"My dear," said he, with an unsteady voice, "I can't. I shouldn't be a man if I left the country
at this time. I should loathe myself; I should not be worthy of you."

She flung his hand away from her, and rose in another seizure of wrath.

"Worthy!" she cried. "What man is worthy of a woman, when he cheats her as you have cheated
me! You are a fool, with your talk of loathing yourself if you left the country! In God's name,
what could there be in that to make you loathe yourself? What claim has the country on you,
equal to the claim your wife has? Better loathe yourself for your false treatment of her! You'd
loathe yourself, indeed! Well, then, I tell you this, 'tis I that will loathe you, if you stay!
I shall abominate you, I shall not let you come into my sight! Now, sir, take your choice,
this instant. Keep your promise with me--"

"'Twas not exactly a promise, my dear."

"I say, keep it, and take me to London, and keep my love and respect; or break your promise,
and my heart, and take my hate and contempt. Choose, I say! Which? This instant! Speak!"

"Madge, dear, you are not yourself--"

"Oh, but I am, though! More myself than ever! And my own mistress, too! Speak, I bid you! Tell
me we shall go. Answer--will you do as your wife wishes?"

"I will do as your husband ought."

"Will you go to England?"

"I will stay till I know the fate of the colonies; and to fight for them if need be."

"You give me up, for the sake of a whim, of some silly fustian about patriotism, some fool's
rubbish of high-sounding words! Me, you balance against a crazy notion! Very well, sir! How
I shall hate you for it! Don't come near me--not a step! Cling to your notion; see if it will
fill my place! From this moment, you're not my husband, I'm not your wife--unless you promise
we shall sail in June! And don't dare speak to me, except to tell me that!"

Whereupon, paying no heed to his reproachful cry of "Madge," she swept past him, and across
the parlour, and up the hall staircase to her room; leaving us all in the amazement which had
held us motionless and silent throughout the scene.

Philip stood with his hand upon the chair-back where she had wept; pale and silent, the picture
of abandonment and sorrow.

CHAPTER VI.

Ned Comes Back, with an Interesting Tale of a Fortunate Irishman.

Before any of us knew what to say, a soft tread in the library announced the approach of Mr.
Cornelius. He entered unaware of the scene that had just terminated, and with the stormy character
of which on Margaret's part, nothing could have been in greater contrast than the quiescent
atmosphere that ever accompanied the shy, low-speaking pedagogue. His presence diffused peace
and quietude; and more than formerly was this the case of late, since he had resumed an intention
of entering the Presbyterian ministry.

He had qualified himself for this profession at Princeton. But after his full preparations,
a conscientious scruple had arisen from a sense of his diffidence, which he despaired of conquering,
and by which he believed his attempts at pulpit eloquence were sure to be defeated. Though
he could compass the hardihood to discourse to an assemblage of distracting schoolboys several
hours every week-day, he could not summon the courage to address an audience of somnolent adults
two hours on Sunday.

But latterly he had awakened to a new inward call, and resolved upon a new trial of his powers.
By way of preliminary training, he had set about practising upon the sailors and wharfmen who
ordinarily spent their Sundays in gaming or boozing in low taverns along the water-front. To
as many of these as would gather in some open space, at the sound of his voice raised tremulously
in a hymn, he would preach as a layman, thus borrowing from the Methodists a device by which
he hoped not only his present hearers, but also his own future Presbyterian congregations,
should benefit. It was from one of these informal meetings, broken up by the news from Massachusetts,
that he was but now returned.

The stupefaction in which we all sat, did not prevent our noting the excitement in which Cornelius
came; and Mr. Faringfield looked a mute inquiry.

"Your pardon, friends," said the pedagogue to the company; and then to Mr. Faringfield: "If
I might speak with you alone a moment, sir--"

Mr. Faringfield went with him into the library, leaving us all under new apprehension.

"Dear bless me!" quoth Mrs. Faringfield, looking distressed. "More calamity, I vow."

In a moment we heard Mr. Faringfield's voice raised in a vehement "No, sir!" Then the library
door was reopened, and he returned to us, followed by Cornelius, who was saying in his mildest
voice: "But I protest, sir--I entreat--he is a changed man, I assure you."

"Changed for the worse, I make no doubt," returned the angry merchant. "Let him not darken
my door. If it weren't Sunday, I should send for a constable this moment."

"What is it?" cried Mrs. Faringfield. "Sure it can't be--that boy again!"

"Mr. Edward, madam," said the tutor.

"Dear, dear, what a day! What a terrible day! And Sunday, too!" moaned the lady, lying back
in her chair, completely crushed, as if the last blow of fate had fallen.

"He arrived in the Sarah brig, which anchored yesterday evening," explained Mr. Cornelius,
"but he didn't come ashore till this morning."

"He thought Sunday safer," said Mr. Faringfield, with scornful derision.

"I was returning from my service, when I met him," continued the tutor. "He was at the Faringfield
wharf, inquiring after the health of the family, of Meadows the watchman. I--er--persuaded
him to come home with me."

"You mean, sir, he persuaded you to come and intercede for him," said Mr. Faringfield.

"He is now waiting in the garden. I have been telling Mr. Faringfield, ma'am, that the young
man is greatly altered. Upon my word, he shows the truest signs of penitence. I believe he
is entirely reformed; he says so."

"You'd best let him come in, William," counselled Mrs. Faringfield. "If you don't, goodness
knows what he may do."

"Madam, I resolved long ago to let the law do its utmost upon him, if he should ever return."

"Oh, but think what scandal! What will all my relations say? Besides, if he is reformed--"

"If he is reformed, let him show it by his conduct on my refusing to take him back; and by
suffering the penalty of his crime."

"Oh!--penalty! Don't speak such words! A jailbird in the family! I never could endure it! I
shouldn't dare go to church, or be seen anywhere in public!"

"The same old discussion!" said Mr. Faringfield, with a wearied frown.

"Papa, you won't send him to jail, will you?" ventured Fanny, with eyes rapidly moistening,
and lips turning to a pout in spite of herself.

"Really, sir," put in Cornelius, trembling at his own temerity, "if you could but see him--take
my word, sir, if ever there was a case where forgiveness--"

After much more of this sort of talk, and being shaken in will by the day's previous excitements,
Mr. Faringfield at length gave in so far as to consent to an interview with the penitent, to
whom thereupon Cornelius hastened with the news.

It was indeed a changed and chastened Ned, to all outward appearance, that entered meekly with
the pedagogue a few minutes later. His tread was so soft, his demeanour so tame, that one would
scarce have known him but for a second look at his shapely face and burly figure. The face
was now somewhat hollowed out, darkened, lined, and blotched; and elongated with meek resignation.
His clothes--claret-coloured cloth coat and breeches, flowered waistcoat, silk stockings, lace
ruffles, and all--were shabby and stained. He bowed to the company, and then stood, furtively
watching for some manifestation from the rest before he dared proceed to warmer greetings.

Fanny stepped softly forward and kissed him, in a shy, perfunctory manner; and then good-natured
Tom shook his hand, and Philip followed suit; after which Mrs. Faringfield embraced him somewhat
stiffly, and I gingerly held his fingers a moment, and my mother hoped he found himself well.

"Quite well, I thank you, considering," said he; and then gazed in a half-scared way at his
father. All the old defiance had disappeared under the blows of adversity.

"Well, sir," said his father, coldly, "we had scarce looked for you back among us."

"No, sir," said Ned, still standing. "I had no right to be looked for, sir--no more than the
prodigal son had. I'm a bit like him, sir."

"Don't count upon the fatted calf, however."

"No, sir; not me. Very plain fare will do for me. I--I ask your pardon, sir, for that--that
business about Mr. Palmer."

"The world has put you into a humble mood," said Mr. Faringfield, with sarcastic indifference.

"Yes, sir; the way of transgressors is hard, sir."

"Why don't you sit down?" put in Mrs. Faringfield, who was made uncomfortable by the sight
of others being so.

"Thank you, mother," said Ned, availing himself of the implied permission.

"I hear you've undergone a reformation," said his father.

"I hope so, sir. They tell me I've got religion."

"Who tells you?"

"The Methodists. I went to their meetings in London. I--I thought I needed a little of that
kind of thing. That's how I happened to--to save my soul."

"And how do you conceive you will provide for your body?"

"I don't know yet--exactly. If I might stay here till I could find some employment--"

Mr. Faringfield met the pleading look of Fanny, and the prudent one of his wife. The latter
reflected, as plainly as words, what had manifestly entered his own mind: that immunity from
future trouble on Ned's account might indeed be had without recourse to a step entailing public
disgrace upon the family. So he said:

"My intention was, if you should ever show your face in New York again, to see you punished
for that matter of the money and Mr. Palmer. I don't give up that intention; I shall only postpone
carrying it out, during your good behaviour."

"Thank you, sir; I dare say it's better than I deserve."

And so was Mr. Ned established home again, to be provided for by his father until he should
obtain some means of self-support. In this task his father offered no assistance, being cautious
against vouching for a person hitherto so untrustworthy; and it soon became evident that Ned
was not very vigorously prosecuting the task himself. He had the excuse that it was a bad time
for the purpose, the country being so unsettled in the expectation of continued war. And he
was content to remain an idle charge upon his father's bounty, a somewhat neglected inmate
of the house, his comings and goings not watched or inquired into. His father rarely had a
word for him but of curt and formal greeting. His mother found little more to say to him, and
that in a shy reserved manner. Margaret gave him no speeches, but sometimes a look of careless
derision and contempt, which must have caused him often to grind his teeth behind his mask
of humility. Philip's courtesy to him was distinctly chilly; while Tom treated him rather with
the indifferent amiability of a new and not very close acquaintance, than with any revival
of old brotherly familiarity. I shared Phil's doubts upon Ned's spiritual regeneration, and
many people in the town were equally skeptical. But there were enough of those credulous folk
that delight in the miraculous, who believed fully in this marvellous conversion, and never
tired of discussing the wonder. And so Ned went about, posing as a brand snatched from the
burning, to the amusement of one-half the town, the admiration of the other half, and the curiosity
of both.

"'Tis all fudge, says I," quoth lean old Bill Meadows, the watchman at the Faringfield wharves.
"His story and his face don't hitch. He declares he was convarted by the Methodies, and he
talks their talk about salvation and redemption and the like. But if he really had religion
their way, he'd wear the face o' joy and gladness. Whereas he goes about looking as sober as
a covenanter that expected the day of judgment to-morrow and knew he was predestinated for
one O' the goats. Methodie convarts don't wear Presbyterian faces. Ecod, sir" (this he said
to Phil, with whom he was on terms of confidence), "he's got it in his head that religion and
a glum face goes together; and he thereby gives the lie to his Methodie convarsion."

Ned was at first in rather sore straits for a companion, none of his old associates taking
well to his reformation. He had to fall back upon poor Cornelius, who was always the most obliging
of men and could never refuse his company or aught else to any tolerable person that sought
it. But in a week or so Ned had won back Fanny to her old allegiance, and she, in the kindness
of her heart, and in her pity that the poor repentant fellow should be so misunderstood, his
amendment so doubted, gave him as much of her time as he asked for. She walked with him, rode
with him, and boated with him. This was all greatly to my cost and annoyance; for, ever since
she had so gently commiserated my loss of Margaret, I had learned more and more to value her
sweet consolation, rely upon her sympathy in all matters, and find serenity and happiness in
her society. It had come to be that two were company, three were none--particularly when the
third was Ned. So, if she would go about with him, I left her to go with him alone; and I suffered,
and pined, and raged inwardly, in consequence. 'Twas this deprivation that taught me how necessary
she was to me; and how her presence gave my days half their brightness, my nights half their
beauty, my taste of everything in life half its sweetness. Philip was unreservedly welcome
to Madge now; I wondered I had been so late in discovering the charms of Fanny.

But one day I noticed that a coolness had arisen between her and Ned; a scarce evident repulsion
on her part, a cessation of interest on his. This was, I must confess, as greatly to my satisfaction
as to my curiosity. But Fanny was no more a talebearer than if she had been of our sex; and
Ned was little like to disclose the cause intentionally: so I did not learn it until by inference
from a passage that occurred one night at the King's Arms' Tavern.

Poor Philip, avoided and ignored by Madge, who had not yet relented, was taking an evening
stroll with me, in the soothing company of the pedagogue; when we were hailed by Ned with an
invitation to a mug of ale in the tavern. Struck with the man's apparent wistfulness for company,
and moved by a fellow feeling of forlornness, Philip accepted; and Cornelius, always acquiescent,
had not the ill grace to refuse. So the four of us sat down together at a table.

"I wish I might offer you madeira, gentlemen; or punch, at least," said Ned regretfully, "but
you know how it is. I'm reaping what I sowed. Things might be worse. I knew 'em worse in London--before
I turned over a new leaf."

The mugs being emptied, and the rest of us playing host in turn, they were several times replenished.
Ned had been drinking before he met us; but this was not apparent until he began to show the
effect of his potations while the heads of us his companions were still perfectly clear. It
was evident that he had not allowed his conversion to wean him from this kind of indulgence.
The conversation reverted to his time of destitution in London.

"Such experiences," observed Cornelius, "have their good fruits. They incline men to repentance
who might else continue in their evil ways all their lives."

"Yes, sir; that's the truth!" cried Ned. "If I'd had some people's luck--but it's better to
be saved than to make a fortune--although, to be sure, there are fellows, rascals, too, that
the Lord seems to take far better care of than he does of his own!"

Mr. Cornelius looked a little startled at this. But the truth was, I make no doubt, that the
pretence of virtue, adopted for the purpose of regaining the comforts of his father's house,
wore heavily upon Ned; that he chafed terribly under it sometimes; and that this was one of
the hours when, his wits and tongue loosened by drink, he became reckless and allowed himself
relief. He knew that Philip, Cornelius, and I, never tattled. And so he cast the muzzle of
sham reformation from his mouth.

He was silent for a while, recollections of past experience rising vividly in his mind, as
they will when a man comes to a certain stage of drink.

"Sure, luck is an idiot," he burst out presently, wrathful from his memories. "It reminds me
of a fool of a wench that passes over a gentleman and flings herself at a lout. For, lookye,
there was two of us in London, a rascal Irishman and me, that lived in the same lodgings. We
did that to save cost, after we'd both had dogs' fortune at the cards and the faro-table. If
it hadn't been for a good-natured woman or two--I spoke ill of the breed just now, but they
have their merits--we'd have had no lodgings at all then, except the Fleet, maybe, or Newgate,
if it had come to that. Well, as I was saying, we were both as near starvation as ever I wish
to be, the Irishman and me. There we were, poverty-stricken as rats, both tarred with the same
stick, no difference between us except he was an ugly brute, and a scoundrel, and a man of
no family. Now if either of us deserved good fortune, it certainly was me; there can't be any
question of that. And yet, here I am, driven to the damnedest tedious time of it for bare food
and shelter, and compelled to drink ale when I'm--oh, curse it, gentlemen, was ever such rotten
luck?"

Cornelius, whom disillusion had stricken into speechlessness at this revelation of the old
Ned under the masquerade, sighed heavily and looked pained. But Philip, always curious upon
matters of human experience, asked:

"What of the Irishman?"

"Driving in his chariot, the dog! Swaggering in Pall Mall; eating and drinking at taverns that
it makes my mouth water to think of; laying his hundred guineas a throw, if he likes. Oh, the
devil! The fat of London for that fellow; and me cast off here in New York to the most hellish
dull life! 'Tisn't a fair dispensation; upon my soul it isn't!"

"And what made him so fortunate?" inquired Philip.

"Ay, that's the worst of it! What good are a man's relations? What good are mine, at least?
For that knave had only one relation, but she was of some use, Lord knows! When it came to
the worst with him, he walked to Bristol, and begged or stole passage to Ireland, and hunted
up his sister, who had a few pounds a year of her own. He had thought of borrowing a guinea
or two, to try his fortune with again. But when he saw his sister, he found she'd grown up
into a beauty--no more of a beauty than my sisters, though; but she was a girl of enterprise
and spirit. I don't say Madge isn't that; but she's married and done for. But Fanny--well,
I don't see anything brilliant in store for Fanny."

"What has she to do with the affairs of your Irishman?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing. She's a different kind from this Irish lady. For what did that girl do, after
her brother had seen her and got the idea, than pack up and come to London with him. And he
showed her around so well, and her fine looks made such an impression, that within three months
he had her married to a lord's son--the heir to Lord Ilverton's estates and title. And now
she's a made woman, and he's a made man, and what do you think of that for a lucky brother
and a clever sister? And yet, compared with Fanny--"

"Do you mean to say," interrupted Philip, in a low voice, "that you have ever thought of Fanny
as a partner in such a plan?"

"Little use to think of her," replied Ned, contemptuously. "She hasn't the spirit. I'm afraid
there ain't many sisters like Mullaney's. Poor Fan wouldn't even listen--"

"Did you dare propose it to her?" said Phil. My own feelings were too strong for speech.

"Dare!" repeated Ned. "Why not? 'Twould have made her fortune--"

"Upon my word," put in Mr. Cornelius, no longer able to contain his opinions, "I never heard
of such rascality!"

Something in the pedagogue's tone, I suppose, or in Ned's stage of tipsiness at the moment,
gave the speech an inflammatory effect. Ned stared a moment at the speaker, in amazement. Then
he said, with aroused insolence:

"What's this, Mr. Parson? What have you to say here? My sister is my sister, let me tell you--"

"If she knew you as well as I do now," retorted Cornelius, quietly, "she wouldn't boast of
the relationship."

"What the devil!" cried Ned, in an elevated voice, thus drawing the attention of the four or
five other people in the room. "Who is this, talks of relationships? You cursed parson-pedagogue--!"

"Be quiet, Ned," warned Philip. "Everybody hears you."

"I don't care," replied Ned, rising, and again addressing Cornelius. "Does anybody boast of
relationships to you, you tow-headed bumpkin? Do you think you can call me to account, as you
can the scum you preach to on the wharves? I'll teach you!"

Whereat, Cornelius being opposite him, Ned violently pushed forward the table so as to carry
the tutor over backward in his chair. His head and back struck the floor heavily, and he lay
supine beneath the upset table.

An excited crowd instantly surrounded our group. Philip and I immediately removed the table,
and helped Cornelius to his feet. The pedagogue's face was afire; his fists were clenched;
his chest swelled; and one could judge from his wrists what sturdy arms his sleeves encased.
As he advanced upon Ned, he was all at once become so formidable a figure that no one thought
to interpose. Ned himself, appalled at the approaching embodiment of anger and strength, retreated
a foot or two from the expected blow. Everybody looked to see him stretched flat in a moment;
when Cornelius suddenly stopped, relaxed his muscles, unclosed his fists, and said to his insulter,
in a quiet but virile voice quite different from that of his usual speech:

"By the grace of God, I put my hands behind my back; for I've spoiled handsomer faces than
yours, Edward Faringfield!"

There was a moment's pause.

"The grace of God has no such effect upon me!" said I, rapping Ned over the mouth with the
back of my hand. Before the matter could go any further, Philip caught my arm, and Cornelius's,
and hurried us out of the tavern.

I now knew what had broken the friendship between Fanny and her worthless brother. I feared
a catastrophe when Mr. Faringfield should learn of the occurrence at the tavern. But, thanks
to the silence of us who were concerned, and to the character of the few gentlemen with whom
he deigned to converse, it never came to his ears. Ned, restored to his senses, and fearing
for his maintenance, made no attempt to retaliate my blow; and resumed his weary pretence of
reformation. But years afterward we were to recall his story of the Irishman's sister.

CHAPTER VII.

Enemies in War.

As this is not a history of the wars I shall not dwell upon the talk and preparations that
went on during the weeks ensuing upon our eventful Sunday: which talk was common to both parties,
but which preparations were mainly on the part of the rebels, we loyalists awaiting events
and biding the return from England of Governor Tryon. There were looks of suspicion exchanged,
and among the more violent and uncouth there were open boasts bandied, open taunts reciprocated,
and open threats hurled back and forth. Most of the quality of the town were on the loyal side;
but yet there were some excellent families--such as the Livingstones--who stood first and last
among the so-called Whigs. This was the case in great part of the country, the wealth and culture,
with distinguished exceptions, being for the king and parliament; though, I must own, a great
quantity of the brains being on the other side: but in Virginia and her Southerly neighbours,
strange to say, the aristocracy largely, though not entirely, leaned toward revolt; for what
reason I never knew, unless it was that many of them, descended from younger sons of good English
stock who had been exiled as black sheep or ne'er-do-wells, inherited feelings similar to Mr.
Faringfield's. Or perhaps 'twas indeed a pride, which made them resentful of the superiority
assumed by native Englishmen over them as colonists. Or they may have felt that they should
actually become slaves in submitting to be taxed by a parliament in which they were not represented.
In any case, they (like Philip Winwood and Mr. Faringfield, the Adamses of Boston, and thousands
of others) had motives that outweighed in them the sentiment of loyalty, the passion of attachment
to the land whence we had drawn our race and still drew our culture and all our refinements
and graces. This sentiment, and this passion, made it impossible for Tom Faringfield and me
to see any other course for us than undeviating fidelity to the king and the mother-country.
There were of course some loyalists (or Tories, if you prefer that name) who took higher views
than arose from their mere affections, and who saw harm for America in any revolt from English
government; and there were others, doubtless, whose motives were entirely low and selfish,
such as holders of office under the crown, and men who had powers and privileges of which any
change of system, any disturbance of the royal authority, might deprive them. It was Philip
who called my attention to this last class, and to the effect its existence must have on the
common people in the crisis then present.

"The colonists of America are not like any other people," said he. "Their fathers came to this
land when it was a savage wilderness, tearing themselves from their homes, from civil surroundings;
that they might be far from tyranny, in small forms as well as great. Not merely tyranny of
king or church, but the shapes of it that Hamlet speaks of--'the oppressor's wrong, the proud
man's contumely, the insolence of office.' All for the sake of liberty, they battled with savages
and with nature, fought and toiled, bled and starved. And Tyranny ignored them till they had
transformed their land and themselves into something worth its attention. And then, backed
and sustained by royal authority, those hated things stole in upon them--'the insolence of
office, the proud man's contumely, the oppressor's wrong.' This, lookye, besides the particular
matter of taxation without representation; of being bid to obey laws they have no hand in making;
of having a set of masters, three thousand miles away, and not one of their own land or their
own choosing, order them to do thus and so:--why, 'twere the very soul and essence of slavery
to submit! Man, how can you wonder I am of their side?"

"And with your taste for the things to be found only in the monarchies of Europe; for the arts,
and the monuments of past history, the places hallowed by great events and great men!" said
I, quoting remembered expressions of his own.

"Why," says he, smiling a little regretfully, "we shall have our own arts and hallowed places
some day; meanwhile one's taste must defer to one's heart and one's intelligence."

"Yes," said I, with malicious derision, "when 'tis so great a question as a paltry tax upon tea."

"'Tis no such thing," says he, warming up; "'tis a question of being taxed one iota, the thousandth
part of a farthing, by a body of strangers, a body in which we are not represented."

"Neither were we represented in it when it sent armies to protect us from the French, and toward
the cost of which 'tis right we should pay."

"We paid, in men and money both. And the armies were sent less for our protection than for
the aggrandisement of England. She was fighting the French the world over; in America, as elsewhere,
the only difference being that in America we helped her."

So 'twas disputed between many another pair of friends, between brothers, between fathers and
sons, husbands and wives. I do not know of another civil war that made as many breaks in families.
Meanwhile, the local authorities--those of local election, not of royal appointment--were yet
outwardly noncommittal. When Colonel Washington, the general-in-chief appointed by the congress
of the colonies at Philadelphia, was to pass through New York on his way to Cambridge, where
the New England rebels were surrounding the king's troops in Boston, it was known that Governor
Tryon would arrive from England about the same time. Our authorities, rather than seem to favour
one side, sent a committee to New Jersey to meet the rebel commander and escort him through
the town, and immediately thereafter paid a similar attention to the royal governor. One of
those who had what they considered the honour of riding behind Mr. Washington a part of his
way (he came accompanied by a troop of horse from Philadelphia, and made a fine, commanding
figure, I grant) was Philip Winwood. When he returned from Kingsbridge, I, pretending I had
not gone out of my way to see the rebel generalissimo pass, met him with a smile, as if to
make a joke of all the rebel preparations:

"Well," says I, "what manner of hero is your illustrious chief? A very Julius Cæsar, I make
no doubt."

"A grave and modest gentleman," says Phil, "and worthy of all the admiration you used to have
for him when we would talk of the French War. I remember you would say he was equal to all
the regular English officers together; and how you declared Governor Shirley was a fool for
not giving him a king's commission."

"Well," said I, "'tis a thousand to one, that if Colonel Washington hadn't been disappointed
of a king's commission, he wouldn't now be leader of the king's enemies." I knew I had no warrant
the slightest for attributing Mr. Washington's patriotism to such a petty motive as a long-cherished
resentment of royal neglect; and years afterward, in London, I was to chastise an equally reckless
speaker for a similar slander; but I was young and partisan, and being nettled by the reminder
of my inconsistency, spoke to irritate.

"That is a lie!" said Phil, quietly, looking me straight in the face.

Such a word from Philip made me stare in amazement; but it did not improve my temper, or incline
me to acknowledge the injustice I had uttered. My face burned, my fingers clenched. But it
was Philip that had spoken; and a thing or two flashed into my mind in the pause; and, controlling
myself, I let out a long breath, opened my fists, and, with the best intentions in the world,
and with the quietest voice, gave him a blow far more severe than a blow of the fist had been.

"I will take that from you, Phil," said I: "God knows, your stand in this rebellion has caused
you enough unhappiness."

He winced, and sent me a startled look, stung at my alluding to the estrangement of his wife.
I know not whether he took it as a taunt from so dear a friend, or whether the mere mention
of so delicate a sorrow was too much for him; but his face twitched, and he gave a swallow,
and was hard put to it to hold back the tears.

"Forgive me," I said, stricken to the heart at sight of this. "I am your friend always, Phil."
I put a hand upon his shoulder, and his face turned to a kindly expression of pardon, a little
short of the smile he dared not yet trust himself to attempt.

Margaret's demeanour to him, indeed, had not shown the smallest softening. But to the rest
of the world, after the immediate effects of that Sunday scene had worn off, she seemed vastly
more sparkling and fascinating than ever before: whether she was really so, and of intention,
or whether the appearance was from contrast with her treatment of Philip, I dare not say. But
the impression was Philip's, I think, as well as every one's else; and infinitely it multiplied
the sorrow of which he would not speak, but which his countenance could not conceal. When the
news of the affair at Bunker's Hill was discussed at the supper-table one evening in June,
I being present, and Margaret heard how bravely the British charged the third and successful
time up to the rebel works, after being hurled back twice by a very hell of musketry, she dropped
her fork, and clapped her hands, crying:

"Bravo, bravo! 'Tis such men that grow in England. I could love every one of 'em!"

"Brave men, I allow," said Philip; "but as for their victory, 'twas but a technical one, if
accounts be true. Their loss was greater than ours; and the fight proved that Americans can
stand before British regulars."

Margaret paid no more notice than if Philip had not spoken--'twas her practice now to ignore
his speeches not directed to herself alone--and when he had done, she said, blithely, to one
of the young De Lanceys, who was a guest:

"And so they drove the Yankees out! And what then, cousin?"

"Why, that was all. But as for the men that grow in England, you'll find some of us grown in
America quite as ready to fight for the king, if matters go on. Only wait till Governor Tryon
sets about calling for loyal regiments. We shall be falling over one another in the scramble
to volunteer. But I mean to be first."

"Good, cousin!" she cried. "You may kiss my hand for that--nay, my cheek, if I could reach
it to you."

"Faith," said De Lancey, after gallantly touching her fingers with his lips, "if all the ladies
in New York had such hands, and offered 'em to be kissed by each recruit for the king, there'd
be no man left to fight on the rebel side."

"Why, his Majesty is welcome to my two hands for the purpose, and my face, too," she rattled
on. "But some of our New York rebels were going to do great things: 'tis two months now, and
yet we see nothing of their doings."

"Have a little patience, madam," said Philip, very quietly. "We rebels may be further advanced
in our arrangements than is known in all quarters."

The truth of this was soon evident. In the open spaces of the town--the parade-ground (or Bowling
Green) outside the fort; the common at the head of the town; before the very barracks in Chambers
Street that had just been vacated by the last of the royal troops in New York, they having
sailed for Boston rather for their own safety than to swell the army there--there was continual
instructing and drilling of awkward Whigs. Organisation had proceeded throughout the province,
whose entire rebel force was commanded by Mr. Philip Schuyler, of Albany; subordinate to whom
was Mr. Richard Montgomery, an Irish gentleman who had first set foot in America at Louisbourg,
as a king's officer, and who now resided beyond Kingsbridge.

It was under Montgomery that Philip Winwood took service, enlisting as a private soldier, but
soon revealing such knowledge of military matters that he was speedily, in the off-hand manner
characteristic of improvised armies, made a lieutenant. This was a little strange, seeing that
there was a mighty scramble for commissions, nine out of every ten patriots, however raw, clamouring
to be officers; and it shows that sometimes (though 'tis not often) modest merit will win as
well as self-assertive incompetence. Philip had obtained his acquaintance with military forms
from books; he was, in his ability to assimilate the matter of a book, an exception among men;
and a still greater exception in his ability to apply that matter practically. Indeed, it sometimes
seemed that he could get out of a book not only all that was in it, but more than was in it.
Many will not believe what I have related of him, that he had actually learned the rudiments
of fencing, the soldier's manual of arms, the routine of camp and march, and such things, from
reading; but it is a fact: just as it is true that Greene, the best general of the rebels after
Washington, learned military law, routine, tactics, and strategy, from books he read at the
fire of the forge where he worked as blacksmith; and that the men whom he led to Cambridge,
from Rhode Island, were the best disciplined, equipped, uniformed, and maintained, of the whole
Yankee army at that time. As for Philip's gift of translating printed matter into actuality,
I remember how, when we afterward came to visit strange cities together, he would find his
way about without a question, like an old resident, through having merely read descriptions
of the places.

But rank did not come unsought, or otherwise, to Philip's fellow volunteer from the Faringfield
house, Mr. Cornelius. The pedagogue, with little to say on the subject, took the rebel side
as a matter of course, Presbyterians being, it seems, republican in their nature. He went as
a private in the same company with Philip.

It was planned that the rebel troops of New York province should invade Canada by way of Lake
George, while the army under Washington continued the siege of Boston. Philip went through
the form of arranging that his wife should remain at her father's house--the only suitable
home for her, indeed--during his absence in the field; and so, in the Summer of 1775, upon
a day much like that in which he had first come to us twelve years before, it was ours to wish
him for a time farewell. 

The introduction of extracts enough to give some idea of the mediaeval astronomy would have made
such large demands on the patience of the reader that the Editor has decided with some regret to
omit them altogether. The universe is considered to be a sphere, whose centre is the earth and
whose circumference revolved about two fixed points. Our author does not decide the nice point in
dispute between the philosophers and the theologians, the former holding that there is only one,
the latter insisting on seven heavens-the fairy, ethereal, olympian, fiery, firmament, watery,
and empyrean.

The firmament, that

"Majestical roof, fretted with golden fire,"

is the part of heaven in which the planets move. It carries them round with it; it governs
the tides; it stood with men for the type of irresistible regularity. Each of the planets naturally
has a motion of its own, contrary in direction to that of the firmament,
which was from east to west.

All the fixed stars move in circles whose centre is the centre of the universe, but the courses
of the planets (among which the moon is reckoned) depend on other circles, called eccentric,
since their centre is elsewhere.

Either the centre or the circumference of the circle in which the planet really moves is applied
to the circumference of the eccentric circle, and in this way all
the movements of the planets are fully explained.

Our author is sorely puzzled to account for the existence of the watery heavens above the fiery,
they being cold and moist, but is sure from scriptural reasons that they are there, and ventures
the hypothesis that their presence may account for the sluggish and
evil properties of Saturn, the planet whose circle is nearest them.

Having considered the simpler substances, those composed of pure elemental forms, and those
resembling them--the meteors--we turn to the perfect compounds, those which have assumed substantial
forms, as metals, stones, etc. Our author retains the Aristotelian classification--earthy, and
those of other origin, as beasts, roots, and trees.

Earths may be metals or fossils; metals being defined as hard bodies, generated in the earth or in its veins,
which can be beaten out by a hammer, and softened or liquefied by heat; while fossils include all
other inanimate objects.

A large number of extracts have been made from this part of the subject,
because the book gives the position of positive, as distinguished
from speculative, Alchemy at the time.

It is the Editor's desire to show that at this period there was a system of theory based on the
practical knowledge of the day.

Chemistry took its rise as a science about four hundred years before our era. In the fragments
of two of the four books of Democritus we have probably the earliest
treatise on chemical matters we are ever likely to get hold of.

Whether it is the work of Democritus or of a much later writer is uncertain. But merely taking
it as a representative work of the early stage of chemistry, we remark that the receipts are
practicable, and some of them, little modified, are in use to-day in goldsmith's shops. The
fragments remaining to us are on the manufacture of gold and silver, and one receipt for dyeing
purple.

In this state of the science the collection of facts is the chief point, and no purely chemical
theory seems to have been formed. Tradition, confirmed by the latest researches, associates
this stage with Egypt.

The second stage in the history of Chemistry--the birth of Alchemy
in the Western World--occurred when the Egyptian practical receipts,
the neo-Greek philosophies, and the Chinese dreams of an "elixir vitae"
were fused into one by the Arab and Syriac writers.

Its period of activity ranges from the seventh to the tenth centuries. Little is really known
about it, or can be, until the Arabic texts, which are abundant in Europe, are translated and
classified both from the scholar's and the chemist's standpoint. Many works were translated into
Latin about the end of the tenth century, such as the spurious fourth book of the Meteorics
of Aristotle, the treatises of the Turta Philosophorum, Artis Auriferae, etc., which formed
the starting-point of European speculation. The theoretical chemistry of our author is derived
from them.

The third stage of chemistry begins with the fourteenth and ends with the sixteenth century. It is
characterized by an immense growth of theory, a fertile imagination, and untiring industry. It
reached its height in England about 1440, and is represented by the reputed works of Lully (vixit
circ. 1300), which first appeared about this date. In this period practical alchemy is on its
trial.

The fourth stage begins with Boyle, and closes with the eighteenth century. Still under the dominion
of theoretical alchemy, practical alchemy was rejected by it, and its interest was concentrated
on the collection of facts. It led up to modern chemistry, which begins with Lavoisier, and
the introduction of the balance in the study of chemical change.

Chemical theory, then, in our author's time stood somewhat thus. Metals as regarded their elemental
composition were considered to partake of the nature of earth, water,
and air, in various proportions.

Fossils, or those things generated in the earth which were not metals, were again subdivided
into two classes--those which liquefy on being heated, as sulphur, nitre, etc., and those
which do not. The metals were considered to be composed of sulphur and mercury. These substances are
themselves compounds, but they act as elements in the composition of metals. Sulphur represented
their combustible aspect, and also that which gave them their solid form; while mercury was that
to which their weight and powers of becoming fluid were due.

This theory was due to two main facts. Most ores of metals, especially of copper and lead, contain
much sulphur, which can be either obtained pure from them, or be
recognised by its smell when burning.

This gave rise to the sulphur theory, while the presence of mercury was inferred doubtless from
the resemblance of the more commonly molten metals, silver, tin, and lead, to quicksilver.
The properties of each metal were then put down to the presence of
these substances.

The list of seven metals is that of the most ancient times--gold,
electrum, silver, copper, tin, lead, iron; but it is clearly recognised
that electrum is an alloy of gold and silver.

Most of the facts in this book are derived from Pliny through Isidore, but, that the theory is
Arab in origin, one fact alone would convince us.

A consideration of the composition of the metals shows us that tin
is nearest in properties of all metals to the precious ones, but tin
is precisely the metal chosen by Arab alchemists as a starting-point
in the Chrysopoeia.

Beside their scientific interest these passages have supplied many
analogies.

When Troilus is piling up his lover's oaths to Cressida, his final
words are:

"As iron to adamant, as earth to centre;"

our chapter
on the adamant supplies the origin of this allusion in part, astronomy
gives the other.

Diamonds are still, unfortunately, the precious stones of reconciliation
and of love our author bespeaks them.

The editor has not lengthened the chapter by extracts giving the
occult properties of gems, and has contented himself by quoting from
the chapter on glass a new simile and an old story.

Matter and form are principles of all bodily things; and privation of matter and form is naught
else but destruction of all things. And the more subtle and high matter is in kind, the more
able it is to receive form and shape.

And the more thick and earthly it is, the more feeble is it to receive impression, printing
of forms and of shapes. And matter is principle and beginning of distinction, and of diversity,
and of multiplying, and of things that are gendered. For the thing that gendereth and the thing
that is gendered are not diverse but touching matter. And therefore where a thing is gendered
without matter, the thing that gendereth, and the thing that is gendered, are all one in substance
and in kind: as it fareth of the persons in the Trinity. Of form is diversity, by the which
one thing is diverse from another, and some form is essential, and some accidental. Essential
form is that which cometh into matter, and maketh it perfect; and accordeth therewith to the
perfection of some thing.

And when form is had, then the thing hath its being, and when form
is destroyed nothing of the substance of the thing is found.

And form accidental is not the perfection of things, nor giveth them being. But each form accidental
needeth a form substantial. And each form is more simple and more actual and noble than matter.
And so the form asketh that shall be printed in the matter, the matter
ought to be disposed and also arrayed.

For if fire shall be made of matter of earth, it needeth that the matter of earth be made subtle
and pured and more simple. Form maketh matter known.

Matter is cause that we see things that are made, and so nothing
is more common and general than matter.

And natheless nothing is more unknown than is matter; for matter is never seen without form,
nor form may not be seen in deed, but joined to matter.

Elements are simple, and the least particles of a body that is compound. And it is called least
touching us, for it is not perceived by wits of feeling. For it is the least part and last in undoing
of the body, as it is first in composition. And is called simple, not for an element is simple
without any composition, but for it hath no parts that compound it, that be diverse in kind
and in number as some medlied bodies have: as it fareth in metals of the which some parts be
diverse; for some part is air, and some is earth. But each part of fire is fire, and so of
others. Elements are four, and so there are four qualities of elements, of the which every body
is composed and made as of matter. The four elements are Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, of the which
each hath his proper qualities. Four be called the first and principal qualities, that is,
hot, cold, dry, and moist: they are called the first qualities because they slide first from the
elements into the things that be made of elements.

Two of these qualities are called Active--heat and coldness. The others are dry and wetness and
are called Passive.

The Rainbow is impression gendered in an hollow cloud and dewy, disposed to rain in endless many
gutters, as it were shining in a mirror, and is shapen as a bow, and sheweth divers colours,
and is gendered by the beams of the sun or of the moon.

And is but seldom gendered by beams of the moon, no more but twice in fifty years, as Aristotle
saith. In the rainbow by cause of its clearness be seen divers forms, kinds, and shapes that be
contrary. Therefore the bow seemeth coloured, for, as Bede saith, it taketh colour of the four
elements. For therein, as it were in any mirror, shineth figures and shapes and kinds of elements.
For of fire he taketh red colour in the overmost part, and of earth green in the nethermost, and
of the air a manner of brown colour, and of water somedeal blue in the middle. And first is
red colour, that cometh out of a light beam, that touches the outer part of the roundness of the
cloud: then is a middle colour somedeal blue, as the quality asketh, that hath mastery in the vapour,
that is in the middle of the cloud. Then the nethermost seemeth a green colour in the nether part
of a cloud; there the vapour is more earthly. And these colours are more principal than others.

As
Beda saith, and the master of stories, forty years tofore the doom, the rainbow shall not be seen,
and that shall be token of drying, and of default of elements.

And though dew be a manner of airy substance, and most subtle outward, natheless in a wonder
manner it is strong in working and virtue. For it besprinkleth the earth, and maketh it plenteous,
and maketh flour, pith, and marrow increase in corn and grains: and
fatteth and bringeth forth broad oysters and other shell fish in the
sea, and namely dew of spring time.

For by night in spring time oysters open themselves against dew, and receive dew that cometh in
between the two shells, and hold and keep it; and that dew so holden and kept feedeth the flesh, and
maketh it fat; and by its incorporation with the inner parts of the fish breedeth a full precious gem,
a stone that is called Margarita. Also the birds of ravens, while they are whitish in feathers, ere
they are black, dew feedeth and sustaineth them, as Gregory saith.

Fumosities that are drawn out of the waters and off the earth by strength of heat of heaven
are drawn to the nethermost part of the middle space of the air, and there by coldness of
the place they are made thick, and then by heat dissolving and departing the moisture thereof and
not wasting all, these fumosities are resolved and fall and turn into rain and showers.

If rain be temperate in quality and quantity, and agreeable to the time, it is profitable to infinite
things. For rain maketh the land to bear fruit, and joineth it together, if there be many chines
therein, and assuageth and tempereth strength of heat, and cleareth the air, and ceaseth and
stinteth winds, and fatteth fish, and helpeth and comforteth dry complexion. And if rain be
evil and distemperate in its qualities, and discording to place and time, it is grievous and
noyful to many things. For it maketh deepness and uncleanness and slipperiness in ways and
in paths, and bringeth forth much unprofitable herbs and grass, and corrupteth and destroyeth
fruit and seeds, and quencheth in seeds the natural heat, and maketh
darkness and thickness in the air, and taketh from us the sun beams,
and gathereth mist and clouds, and letteth the work of labouring men,
and tarrieth and letteth ripening of corn and of fruits, and exciteth
rheum and running flux, and increaseth and strengtheneth all moist
ills, and is cause of hunger and of famine, and of corruption and
murrain of beasts and sheep; for corrupt showers do corrupt the grass
and herbs of pasture, whereof cometh needful corruption of beasts.

Of impressions that are gendered in the air of double vapour, the first is thunder, the which
impression is gendered in watery substance of a cloud. For moving and shaking hither and thither
of hot vapour and dry, that fleeth its contrary, is beset and constrained in every side, and
smit into itself, and is thereby set on fire and on flame, and quencheth itself at last in the cloud,
as Aristotle saith. When a storm of full strong winds cometh in to the clouds, and the whirling
wind and the storm increaseth, and seeketh out passage: it cleaveth
and breaketh the cloud, and falleth out with a great rese and strong,
and all to breaketh the parts of the cloud, and so it cometh to the
ears of men and of beasts with horrible and dreadful breaking and
noise.

And that is no wonder: for though a bladder be light, yet it maketh great noise and sound, if it
be strongly blown, and afterward violently broken.

And with the thunder cometh lightning, but lightning is sooner seen, for it is clear and bright;
and thunder cometh later to our ears, for the wit of sight is more subtle than the wit of hearing.
As a man seeth sooner the stroke of a man that heweth a tree, than he heareth the noise of the
stroke.

The lightning which is called Clarum is of a wonderful kind, for it
catcheth and draweth up wine out of the tuns, and toucheth not the
vessel, and melteth gold and silver in purses, and melteth not the
purse.

As wits and virtues are needed to the ruling of kind, so to the perfection thereof needeth needly
some spirits, by whose benefit and continual moving, both wits and
virtues in beasts are ruled to work and do their deeds.

As we speak here of a spirit, a spirit is called a certain substance, subtle and airy, that stirreth
and exciteth the virtues of the body to their doings and works. A spirit is a subtle body, by
the strength of heat gendered, and in man's body giving life by the
veins of the body, and by the veins and pulses giveth to beasts, breath,
life, and pulses, and working, wilful moving, and wit by means of
sinews and muscles in bodies that have souls.

Physicians say that this spirit is gendered in this manner wise. Whiles by heat working in the blood,
in the liver is caused strong boiling and seething, and thereof cometh
a smoke, the which is pured, and made subtle of the veins of the liver.

And turneth into a subtle spiritual substance and airly kind, and
that is called the natural spirit.

For kindly by the might thereof it maketh the blood subtle.

And by lightness thereof it moveth the blood and sendeth it about
into all the limbs.

And this same spirit turneth to heartward by certain veins.

And there by moving and smiting together of the parts of the heart,
the spirit is more pured, and turned into a more subtle kind.

 The rebels made a lieutenant of him, on father's account. I wonder what
his game is."

"I make no doubt, to curry favour with his father."

"Maybe. But perhaps to get an excuse for leaving town, and a way of doing so. I've heard some
talk--they say poor Sally Roberts's condition is his work."

"Very like. Your brother is a terrible Adonis--with ladies of a certain kind."

"Not such an Adonis neither--at least the Adonis that Venus courted in Shakespeare's poem.
Rather a Jove, I should say."

We did not then suspect the depth of Mr. Ned's contrivance or duplicity. He left New York with
the rebels, and 'twas some time ere we saw, or heard of, him again.

And now at last several loyalist brigades were formed as auxiliaries to the royal army, and
Tom and I were soon happy in the consciousness of serving our king, and in the possession of
the green uniforms that distinguished the local from the regular force. We were of Colonel
Cruger's battalion, of General Oliver De Lancey's brigade, and both were so fortunate as to
obtain commissions, Tom receiving that of lieutenant, doubtless by reason of his mother's relationship
to General De Lancey, and I being made an ensign, on account of the excellent memory in which
my father was held by the loyal party. Mr. Faringfield, like many another father in similar
circumstances, was outwardly passive upon his son's taking service against his own cause: as
a prudent man, he had doubtless seen from the first the advantage of having a son actually
under arms for the king, for it gave him and his property such safety under the British occupation
as even his lady's loyalist affiliations might not have sufficed to do. Therefore Tom, as a
loyalist officer, was no less at home than formerly, in the house of his rebel father. I know
not how many such family situations were brought about by this strange war.

CHAPTER VIII.

I Meet an Old Friend in the Dark.

I shall not give an account of my military service, since it entered little into the history
of Philip Winwood. 'Twas our duty to help man the outposts that guarded the island at whose
Southern extremity New York lies, from rebel attack; especially from the harassments of the
partisan troops, and irregular Whiggery, who would swoop down in raiding parties, cut off our
foragers, drive back our wood-cutters, and annoy us in a thousand ways. We had such raiders
of our own, too, notably Captain James De Lancey's Westchester Light Horse, Simcoe's Rangers,
and the Hessian yagers, who repaid the visits of our enemies by swift forays across the neutral
ground between the two armies.

But this warfare did not exist in its fulness till later, when the American army formed about
us an immense segment of a circle, which began in New Jersey, ran across Westchester County
in New York province, and passed through a corner of Connecticut to Long Island Sound. On our
side, we occupied Staten Island, part of the New Jersey shore, our own island, lower Westchester
County, and that portion of Long Island nearest New York. But meanwhile, the rebel main army
was in New Jersey in the Winter of 1776-77, surprising some of our Hessians at Trenton, overcoming
a British force at Princeton, and going into quarters at Morristown. And in the next year,
Sir William Howe having sailed to take Philadelphia with most of the king's regulars (leaving
General Clinton to hold New York with some royal troops and us loyalists), the fighting was
around the rebel capital, which the British, after two victories, held during the Winter of
1777-78, while Washington camped at Valley Forge.

In the Fall of 1777, we thought we might have news of Winwood, for in the Northern rebel army
to which General Burgoyne then capitulated, there were not only many New York troops, but moreover
several of the officers taken at Quebec, who had been exchanged when Philip had. But of him
we heard nothing, and from him it was not likely that we should hear. Margaret never mentioned
him now, and seemed to have forgotten that she possessed a husband. Her interest was mainly
in the British officers still left in New York, and her impatience was for the return of the
larger number that had gone to Philadelphia. To this impatience an end was put in the Summer
of 1778, when the main army marched back to us across New Jersey, followed part way by the
rebels, and fighting with them at Monmouth Court House. 'Twas upon this that the lines I have
mentioned, of British outposts protecting New York, and rebel forces surrounding us on all
sides but that of the sea, were established in their most complete shape; and that the reciprocal
forays became most frequent.

And now, too, the British occupation of New York assumed its greatest proportions. The kinds
of festivity in which Margaret so brilliantly shone, lent to the town the continual gaiety
in which she so keenly delighted. The loyalist families exerted themselves to protect the king's
officers from dulness, and the king's officers, in their own endeavours to the same end, helped
perforce to banish dulness from the lives of their entertainers. 'Twas a gay town, indeed,
for some folk, despite the vast ugly blotches wrought upon its surface by two great fires since
the war had come, and despite the scarcity of provisions and the other inconveniences of a
virtual state of siege. Tom and I saw much of that gaiety, for indeed at that time our duties
were not as active as we wished they might be, and they left us leisure enough to spend in
the town. But we were pale candles to the European officers--the rattling, swearing, insolent
English, the tall and haughty Scots, the courtly Hessians and Brunswickers.

"What, sister, have we grown invisible, Bert and I?" said Tom to Margaret, as we met her in
the hall one night, after we had returned from a ball in the Assembly Rooms. "Three times we
bowed to you this evening, and got never a glance in return."

"'Faith," says she, with a smile, "one can't see these green uniforms for the scarlet ones!"

"Ay," he retorted, with less good-humour than she had shown, "the scarlet coats blind some
people's eyes, I think, to other things than green uniforms."

It was, I fancy, because Tom had from childhood adored her so much, that he now took her conduct
so ill, and showed upon occasion a bitterness that he never manifested over any other subject.

"What do you mean, you saucy boy?" cried she, turning red, and looking mighty handsome. "You
might take a lesson or two in manners from some of the scarlet coats!"

"Egad, they wouldn't find time to give me lessons, being so busy with you! But which of your
teachers do you recommend--Captain Andre, Lord Rawdon, Colonel Campbell, or the two Germans
whose names I can't pronounce? By George, you won't be happy till you have Sir Henry Clinton
and General Knyphausen disputing for the front place at your feet!"

She softened from anger to a little laugh of conscious triumph, tapped him with her fan, and
sped up the stairs. Her prediction had come true. She was indeed the toast of the army. Her
mother apparently saw no scandal in this, being blinded by her own partiality to the royal
side. Her father knew it not, for he rarely attended the British festivities, from which he
could not in reason debar his wife and daughters. Fanny was too innocent to see harm in what
her sister did. But Tom and I, though we never spoke of it to each other, were made sensitive,
by our friendship for Philip, to the impropriety of the situation--that the wife of an absent
American officer should reign as a beauty among his military enemies. I make no doubt but the
circumstance was commented upon, with satirical smiles at the expense of both husband and wife,
by the British officers themselves. Indeed I once heard her name mentioned, not as Mrs. Winwood,
but as "Captain Winwood's wife," with an expression of voice that made me burn to plant my
fist in the leering face of the fellow who spoke--some low-born dog, I'll warrant, who had
paid high for his commission.

It was a custom of Tom's and mine to put ourselves, when off duty together, in the way of more
active service than properly fell to us, by taking horse and riding to the eastern side of
the Harlem River, where was quartered the troop of Tom's relation, James De Lancey. In more
than one of the wild forays of these horsemen, did we take an unauthorised part, and find it
a very exhilarating business.

One cold December afternoon in 1778, we got private word from Captain De Lancey that he was
for a raid up the Albany road, that night, in retaliation for a recent severe onslaught made
upon our Hessian post near Colonel Van Cortlandt's mansion, either ('twas thought) by Lee's
Virginia Light Horse or by the partisan troop under the French nobleman known in the rebel
service as Armand.

At nightfall we were on the gallop with De Lancey's men, striking the sparks from the stony
road under a cloudy sky. But these troops, accustomed to darkness and familiar with the country,
found the night not too black for their purpose, which was, first, the seizing of some cattle
that two or three Whig farmers had contrived to retain possession of, and, second, the surprising
of a small advanced post designed to protect rebel foragers. The first object was fairly well
accomplished, and a detail of men assigned to conduct the prizes back to Kingsbridge forthwith,
a difficult task for which those upon whom it fell cursed their luck, or their commander's
orders, under their breath. One of the farmers, for stubbornly resisting, was left tied to
a tree before his swiftly dismantled house, and only Captain De Lancey's fear of alarming the
rebel outpost prevented the burning down of the poor fellow's barn.

The taking of these cattle had necessitated our leaving the highway. To this we now returned,
and proceeded Northward to where the road crosses the Neperan River, near the Philipse manor-house.
Instead of crossing this stream, we turned to the right, to follow its left bank some way upward,
and then ascended the hill East of it, on which the rebel post was established. Our course,
soon after leaving the road, lay through woods, the margin of the little river affording us
only sufficient clear space for proceeding in single file. De Lancey rode at the head, then
went two of his men, then Tom Faringfield and myself, the troop stringing out behind us, the
lieutenant being at the rear.

'Twas slow and toilsome riding; and only the devil's own luck, or some marvellous instinct
of our horses, spared us many a stumble over roots, stones, twigs, and underbrush. What faint
light the night retained for well-accustomed eyes, had its source in the cloud-curtained moon,
and that being South of us, we were hidden in the shadow of the woods. But 'tis a thousand
wonders the noise of our passage was not sooner heard, though De Lancey's stern command for
silence left no sound possible from us except that of our horses and equipments. I fancy 'twas
the loud murmur of the stream that shielded us. But at last, as we approached the turning of
the water, where we were to dismount, surround the rebels hutted upon the hill before us, creep
silently upon them, and attack from all sides at a signal, there was a voice drawled out of
the darkness ahead of us the challenge:

"Who goes thar?"

We heard the click of the sentinel's musket-lock; whereupon Captain De Lancey, in hope of gaining
the time to seize him ere he could give the alarm, replied, "Friends," and kept riding on.

"You're a liar, Jim De Lancey!" cried back the sentinel, and fired his piece, and then (as
our ears told us) fled through the woods, up the hill, toward his comrades.

There was now nothing for us but to abandon all thought of surrounding the enemy, or even,
we told ourselves, of taking time to dismount and bestow our horses; unless we were willing
to lose the advantage of a surprise at least partial, as we were not. We could but charge on
horseback up the hill, after the fleeing sentinel, in hope of coming upon the rebels but half-prepared.
Or rather, as we then felt, so we chose to think, foolish as the opinion was. Indeed what could
have been more foolish, less military, more like a tale of fabulous knights in some enchanted
forest? A cavalry charge, with no sort of regular formation, up a wooded hill, in a night dark
enough in the open but sheer black under the thick boughs; to meet an encamped enemy at the
top! But James De Lancey's men were noted rather for reckless dash than for military prudence;
they felt best on horseback, and would accept a score of ill chances and fight in the saddle,
rather than a dozen advantages and go afoot. I think they were not displeased at their discovery
by the sentinel, which gave them an excuse for a harebrained onset ahorse, in place of the
tedious manoeuvre afoot that had been planned. As for Tom and me, we were at the age when a
man will dare the impossible.

So we went, trusting to the sense of our beasts, or to dumb luck, to carry us unimpeded through
the black woods. As it was, a few of the animals ran headforemost against trees, and others
stumbled over roots and logs, while some of the riders had their heads knocked nearly off by
coming in contact with low branches. But a majority of us, to judge by the noise we made, arrived
with our snorting, panting steeds at the hill-crest; where, in a cleared space, and fortified
with felled trees, upheaved earth, forage carts, and what not, stood the improvised cabins
of the rebels.

Three or four shots greeted us as we emerged from the thick wood. We, being armed with muskets
and pistols as well as swords, returned the fire, and spurred our horses on toward the low
breastwork, which, as it was not likely to have anything of a trench behind it, we thought
to overleap either on horse or afoot. But the fire that we met, almost at the very barrier,
felled so many of our horses and men, raised such a hellish chorus of wild neighing, cries
of pain and wrath, ferocious curses and shouts of vengeance, that the men behind reined up
uncertain. De Lancey turned upon his horse, waved his sword, and shouted for the laggards to
come on. We had only the light of musketry to see by. Tom Faringfield was unhorsed and down;
and fearing he might be wounded, I leaped to the ground, knelt, and partly raised him. He was
unharmed, however; and we both got upon our feet, with our swords out, our discharged muskets
slung round upon our backs, our intent being to mount over the rebel's rude rampart--for we
had got an impression of De Lancey's sword pointed that way while he fiercely called upon his
troops to disregard the fallen, and each man charge for himself in any manner possible, ahorse
or afoot.

But more and more of the awakened rebels--we could make out only their dark figures--sprang
forward from their huts (mere roofs, 'twere better to call these) to the breastwork, each waiting
to take careful aim at our mixed-up mass of men and horses before he fired into it. As Tom
and I were extricating ourselves from the mass by scrambling over a groaning man or two, and
a shrieking, kicking horse that lay on its side, De Lancey rode back to enforce his commands
upon the men at our rear, some of whom were firing over our heads. His turning was mistaken
for a movement of retreat, not only by our men, of whom the unhurt promptly made to hasten
down the hill, but also by the enemy, a few of whom now leaped from behind their defence to pursue.

Tom and I, not yet sensible of the action of our comrades, were striding forward to mount the
rampart, when this sally of rebels occurred. Though it appalled us at the time, coming so unexpectedly,
it was the saving of us; for it stopped the fire of the rebels remaining behind the barrier,
lest they should hit their comrades. A ringing voice, more potent than a bugle, now called
upon these latter to come back, in a tone showing their movement to have been without orders.
They speedily obeyed; all save one, a tall, broad fellow--nothing but a great black figure
in the night, to our sight--who had rushed with a clubbed musket straight upon Tom and me.
A vague sense of it circling through the air, rather than distinct sight of it, told me that
his musket-butt was aimed at Tom's head. Instinctively I flung up my sword to ward off the
blow; and though of course I could not stop its descent, I so disturbed its direction that
it struck only Tom's shoulder; none the less sending him to the ground with a groan. With a
curse, I swung my sword--a cut-and-thrust blade-of-all-work, so to speak--with some wild idea
of slicing off a part of the rebel's head; but my weapon was hacked where it met him, and so
it merely made him reel and drop his musket. The darkness falling the blacker after the glare
of the firing, must have cloaked these doings from the other rebels. Tom rose, and the two
of us fell upon our enemy at once, I hissing out the words, "Call for quarter, you dog!"

"Very well," he said faintly, quite docile from having had his senses knocked out of him by
my blow, and not knowing at all what was going on.

"Come then," said I, and grasped him by an arm, while Tom held him at the other side; and so
the three of us ran after De Lancey and his men--for the captain had followed in vain attempt
to rally them--into the woods and down the hill. Tom's horse was shot, and mine had fled.

Our prisoner accompanied us with the unquestioning obedience of one whose wits are for the
time upon a vacation. Getting into the current of retreat, which consisted of mounted men,
men on foot, riderless horses, and the wrathful captain whose enterprise was now quite hopeless
through the enemy's being well warned against a second attempt, we at last reached the main road.

Here, out of a chaotic huddle, order was formed, and to the men left horseless, mounts were
given behind other men. Captain De Lancey assigned a beast to myself and my prisoner. The big
rebel clambered up behind me, with the absent-minded acquiescence he had displayed ever since
my stroke had put his wits asleep. As we started dejectedly Southward, full of bruises, aches,
and weariness, there was some question whether the rebels would pursue us.

"Not if their officer has an ounce of sense," said Captain De Lancey, "being without horses,
as he is. He's scarce like to play the fool by coming down, as I did in charging up! Well,
we've left some wounded to his care. Who is their commander? Ask your prisoner, Lieutenant
Russell."

I turned on my saddle and put the query, but my man vouchsafed merely a stupid, "Hey?"

"Shake him back to his senses," said De Lancey, stopping his horse, as I did mine, and Tom his.

But shaking did not suffice.

"This infernal darkness helps to cloud his wits," suggested the captain. "Flash a light before
his eyes. Here, Tippet, your lantern, please."

I continued shaking the prisoner, while the lantern was brought. Suddenly the man gave a start,
looked around into the black night, and inquired in a husky, small voice:

"Who are you? Where are we?"

"We are your captors," said I, "and upon the Hudson River road, bound for Kingsbridge. And
now, sir, who are you?"

But the rays of the lantern, falling that instant upon his face, answered my question for me.

"Cornelius!" I cried.

"What, sir? Why--'tis Mr. Russell!"

"Ay, and here is Tom Faringfield," said I.

"Well, bless my soul!" exclaimed the pedagogue, grasping the hand that Tom held to him out
of the darkness.

"Mr. Cornelius, since that is your name," put in De Lancey, to whom time was precious. "Will
you please tell us who commands yonder, where we got the reception our folly deserved, awhile ago?"

"Certainly, sir," said Cornelius. "'Tis no harm, I suppose--no violation of duty or custom?"

"Not in the least," said I.

"Why then, sir," says he, "since yesterday, when we relieved the infantry there--we are dragoons,
sir, though dismounted for this particular service--a new independent troop, sir--Winwood's
Horse--"

"Winwood's!" cried I.

"Ay, Captain Winwood's--Mr. Philip, you know--'tis he commands our post yonder."

"Oh, indeed!" said De Lancey, carelessly. "A relation of mine by marriage."

But for a time I had nothing to say, thinking how, after these years of separation, Philip
and I had come so near meeting in the night, and known it not; and how, but for the turn of
things, one of us might have given the other his death-blow unwittingly in the darkness.

CHAPTER IX.

Philip's Adventures--Captain Falconer Comes to Town.

Upon the way back to our lines, we were entertained by Mr. Cornelius with an account of Philip's
movements during the past three years. One piece of information interested Captain De Lancey:
the recent attack upon Van Wrumb's Hessians, which it had been our purpose that night to revenge,
was the work of Winwood's troop of horse. Our curiosity upon hearing of Philip as a captain
of independent cavalry, who had left us as a lieutenant of New York foot, was satisfied in
the course of the pedagogue's narrative. The tutor himself had received promotion upon two
sides: first, to the Presbyterian ministry, his admission thereto having occurred while he
was with the rebel army near Morristown, New Jersey, the last previous Winter but one; second,
to the chaplaincy of Winwood's troop.

"Sure the devil's in it," said I, when he had told me this, "if the rebels' praying men are
as sanguinary as you showed yourself to-night--leaping out to pursue your beaten enemy, as
you did."

"Why," he replied, self-reproachfully, in his mildest voice, "I find, do what I can, I have
at bottom a combative spirit that will rise upon occasion. I had thought 'twas long since quelled.
But I fear no man is always and altogether his own master. I saw even General Washington, at
Monmouth--but no matter for that. Especially of late, I have found my demon of wrath--to speak
figuratively--too much for me. 'Twas too violently roused, maybe, that night your General Grey
and his men fell upon us as we slept, yonder across the Hudson, and slaughtered us like sheep
in the barn we lay in."

"Why, were you in that too?" I asked, surprised. "I thought that troop was called Lady Washington's
Light Horse."[3]

"Ay, we were then of that troop, Captain Winwood and I. 'Twas for his conduct in that affair,
his valour and skill in saving the remnant of the troop, that he was put, t'other day, in command
of an independent company. I may take some pride in having helped him to this honour; for his
work the night General Grey surprised us was done so quietly, and his report made so little
of his own share in the business, 'twould have gone unrecognised, but for my account of it.
Though, to be sure, General Washington said afterward, in my hearing, that such bravery and
sagacity, coupled with such modesty, were only what he might expect of Captain Winwood."

Cornelius had shared Philip's fortunes since their departure from New York. When Winwood fell
wounded in the snow, between the two blockhouses at the foot of the cliff, that night the rebels
met defeat at Quebec, the pedagogue remained to succour him, and so was taken prisoner with
him. He afterward helped nurse him in the French religious house, in the walled "upper town,"
to which the rebel wounded were conveyed.

Upon the exchange of prisoners, Philip, having suffered a relapse, was unable to accompany
his comrades homeward, and Cornelius stayed to care for him. There was a Scotchwoman who lived
upon a farm a few miles West of Quebec, and whose husband was serving on our side as one of
Colonel Maclean's Royal Highlanders. She took Winwood and the pedagogue into her house as guests,
trusting them till some uncertain time in the future might find them able to pay.

When at last Philip dared hazard the journey, the rebel siege of Quebec, which had continued
in a half-hearted manner until Spring brought British reinforcements up the river in ship-loads,
had long been raised, and the rebels had long since flown. Provided by Governor Carleton with
the passports to which in their situation they were entitled, the two started for New York,
bound by way of the St. Lawrence, the Richelieu, the lakes, and the Hudson. It was now Winter,
and only Winwood's impatience to resume service could have tempted them to such a journey in
that season.

They came part way afoot, receiving guidance now from some solitary fur-capped courier du bois
clad in skins and hoofed with snow-shoes, now from some peaceful Indian, now from the cowled
brothers of, some forest monastery which gave them a night's shelter also. Portions of the
journey they made upon sledges driven by poor habitans dwelling in the far-apart villages or
solitary farmhouses. At other times they profited by boats and canoes, propelled up the St.
Lawrence by French peasants, befringed hunters, or friendly red men. Their entertainment and
housing were sometimes from such people as I have mentioned; sometimes of their own contriving,
the woods furnishing game for food, fagots for fuel, and boughs for roof and bedding.

They encountered no danger from human foes until they were in the province of New York, and,
having left the lakes behind them, were footing it Southward along the now frozen Hudson. The
Indians in Northern New York had been won to our interest, by Sir John Johnson, of Johnson
Hall, in the Mohawk Valley, and were more than formerly inclined to vigilance regarding travellers
in those lonely regions. Upon waking suddenly one night when camped in the woods, Philip saw
by the firelight that he was surrounded by a party of silent savages; his sword and pistol,
and Cornelius's rifle, being already in their possession. The two soldiers were held as prisoners
for several days, and made to accompany their captors upon long, mysterious peregrinations.
At last they were brought before Sir John Johnson, at one of his forts; and that gentleman,
respecting Governor Carleton's passes, and the fact that Captain Winwood was related by marriage
to the De Lanceys, sent them with a guide to Albany.

Here they reported to General Schuyler; and Philip, having learned by the experience of his
journey that his wound left him incapacitated for arduous service afoot, desired an arrangement
by which he might join the cavalry branch of the army. Mr. Schuyler was pleased to put the
matter through for him, and to send him to Morristown, New Jersey, (where the rebel main force
was then in Winter quarters) with a commendatory letter to General Washington. Cornelius, whose
time of service had expired, was free to accompany him.

Philip, being enrolled, without loss of nominal rank, in Lady Washington's Light Horse, which
Cornelius entered as a trooper, had now the happiness of serving near the person of the commander-in-chief.
He was wounded again at the Brandywine, upon which occasion Cornelius bore him off the field
without their being captured. During the Winter at Valley Forge, and at the battle of Monmouth,
and in the recent partisan warfare on both sides of the Hudson, their experiences were those
of Washington's army as a whole, of which there are histories enough extant: until their troop
was cut to pieces by Earl Grey, and Captain Winwood was advanced to an independent command.
This was but a recent event.

"And did he never think of us in New York," said Tom, "that he sent us no word in all this time?"

"Sure, you must thank your British occupation of New York, if you received none of our messages.
General Washington allowed them to pass."

"Ay, 'tis not easy for rebels to communicate with their friends in New York," quoth I, "despite
the traffic of goods between the Whig country folk and some of our people, that Captain De
Lancey knows about."

"Tut, man!" said De Lancey. "Some things must be winked at; we need their farm stuff as much
as they want our tea and such. But correspondence from rebels must go to headquarters--where
'tis like to stop, when it's for a family whose head is of Mr. Faringfield's way of thinking."

"Well," said Mr. Cornelius, "Captain Winwood and I have discussed more than one plan by which
he might perchance get sight of his people for a minute or so. He has hoped he might be sent
into New York under a flag of truce, upon some negotiation or other, and might obtain permission
from your general to see his wife while there; but he has always been required otherwise when
messengers were to be sent. He has even thought of offering to enter the town clandestinely--"

"Hush!" I interrupted. "You are indiscreet. We are soldiers of the king, remember. But, to
be sure, 'tis nonsense; Phil would not be such a fool as to risk hanging."

"Oh, to be sure; nonsense, indeed!" Cornelius stammered, much upset at the imprudence due to
his thoughtlessness. "And yet," he resumed presently, "never did a man more crave a sight of
those he left behind. He would barter a year of his life, I think, for a minute's speech with
his wife. He talks of her by the hour, when he and I are alone together. There was some coolness,
you will remember, before their parting; but 'twas not on his side, and his lady seemed to
have dropped it when he was taking leave of her; and three years of absence have gone since
then. So I am sure she has softened quite, and that she desires his return as much as he longs
for her presence. And though he knows all this must be so, he keeps me ever reassuring and
persuading him it is. Ah, sir, if ever there was a man in love with his wife!"

I made no reply. I had previously informed him of her good health, in answer to a question
whose eagerness came of his friendship for Philip. I asked myself whether his unsuspecting
mind was like to perceive aught that would pain him for Philip's sake, in her abandonment to
the gaieties of the town, to the attentions of the king's officers, to the business of making
herself twice as charming as the pedagogue had ever seen her.

We got it arranged that our prisoner should be put on parole and quartered at Mr. Faringfield's
house, where his welcome was indeed a glad one. When Margaret heard of his presence in the
town, she gave a momentary start (it seemed to me a start of self-accusation) and paled a little;
but she composed herself, and asked in a sweet and gracious (not an eager) tone:

"And Philip?"

I told her all I had learned from Cornelius, to which she listened with a kindly heedfulness,
only sometimes pressing her white teeth upon her lower lip, and other times dropping her lustrous
eyes from my purposely steady, and perhaps reproachful, gaze.

"So then," said she, as if to be gay at the expense of her husband's long absence, "now that
three years and more have brought him so near us, maybe another three years or so will bring
him back to us!" 'Twas affected gaiety, one could easily see. Her real feeling must have been
of annoyance that any news of her husband should be obtruded upon her. She had entered into
a way of life that involved forgetfulness of him, and for which she must reproach herself whenever
she thought of him, but which was too pleasant for her to abandon. But she had the virtue to
be ashamed that reminders of his existence were unwelcome, and consequently to pretend that
she took them amiably; and yet she had not the hypocrisy to pretend the eager solicitude which
a devoted wife would evince upon receiving news of her long-absent soldier-husband. Such hypocrisy,
indeed, would have appeared ridiculous in a wife who had scarce mentioned her husband's name,
and then only when others spoke of him, in three years. Yet her very self-reproach for disregarding
him--did it not show that, under all the feelings that held her to a life of gay coquetry,
lay her love for Philip, not dead, nor always sleeping?

When Cornelius came to the house to live, she met him with a warm clasp of the hand, and with
a smile of so much radiance and sweetness, that for a time he must have been proud of her on
Phil's behalf; and so dazzled that he could not yet see those things for which, on the same
behalf, he must needs be sorrowful.

Knowing now exactly where Philip was, we were able to send him speedy news of Cornelius's safety,
and of the good health and good wishes of us all; and we got in reply a message full of thanks
and of affectionate solicitude. The transfer of his troop to New Jersey soon removed the possibility
of my meeting him.

In the following Summer (that of 1779), as I afterward learned, Captain Winwood and some of
his men accompanied Major Lee's famous dragoons (dismounted for the occasion) to the nocturnal
surprise and capture of our post at Paulus Hook, in New Jersey, opposite New York. But he found
no way of getting into the town to see us. And so I bring him to the Winter of 1779, when the
main rebel camp was again at Morristown, and Philip stationed near Washington's headquarters.
But meanwhile, in New York, in the previous Autumn some additional British troops had arrived
from England; and one of these was Captain Falconer.

There was a ball one night at Captain Morris's country-house some eight or ten miles North
of the town, which the rebel authorities had already declared confiscate, if I remember aright,
but which, as it was upon the island of Manhattan and within our lines, yet remained in actual
possession of the rightful owner. Here Washington (said to have been an unsuccessful suitor
to Mrs. Morris when she was Miss Philipse) had quartered ere the British chased the rebels
from the island of Manhattan; and here now were officers of our own in residence. 'Twas a fine,
white house, distinguished by the noble columns of its Grecian front; from its height it overlooked
the Hudson, the Harlem, the East River, the Sound, and miles upon miles of undulating land
on every side.[4]

On this night the lights showed welcome from its many windows, open doors, and balconies, and
from the coloured paper lanterns festooned upon its façade and strung aloft over its splendid
lawn and gardens. The house still stands, I hear, and is known as the Jumel Mansion, from the
widow who lives there. But I'll warrant it presents no more such scenes as it offered that
night, when the wealth and beauty of New York, the chivalry of the king's army, arrived at
its broad pillared entrance by horse and by coach in a constant procession. In the great hall,
and the adjacent rooms, the rays of countless candles fell upon brilliant uniforms, upon silk
and velvet and brocade and broadcloth, upon powdered hair, and fans and furbelows, upon white
necks and bosoms, and dazzling eyes, upon jewels and golden buckles and shining sword-hilts.

We that entered from the Faringfield coach were Mrs. Faringfield and my mother, Margaret and
Fanny, Tom and myself. We had just received the greeting of our handsome hostess, and were
passing up the hall, when my eyes alighted upon the figure of an officer who stood alone, in
an attitude of pensive negligence, beside the mantelpiece. He was fully six feet tall, but
possessed a carriage of grace and elegance, instead of the rigid erectness of so many of his
comrades. He had a slender, finely cut, English face, a long but delicate chin, gray eyes of
a beautiful clearness, slightly wavy hair that was now powdered, and the hands and legs of
a gentleman.

"What a handsome fellow! Who is he?" whispered Margaret to Fanny.

I glanced at her. Her eyes showed admiration--an expression I had never before seen in them.
I looked back at the officer. He in turn had seen her. His face, from having worn a look half
melancholy, half languid, had speedily become animated with interest. 'Twas as if each of these
two superb creatures had unexpectedly fallen upon something they had scarce hoped to find in
their present environment.

"A mighty pretty gentleman, indeed," said my mother.

"Nay," said Margaret, with a swift relapse into indifference, "no such Adonis neither, on second
view."

But I saw that she turned the corner of her eye upon him at intervals as she moved forward,
and that she was not sorry or annoyed to find that he kept his gaze boldly upon her all the
while. Presently he looked about him, and singled out an acquaintance, to whom he made his
way. Five minutes later he was being introduced, as Captain Falconer, to Mrs. Winwood.

"'Faith," said he, in a courteous, subdued voice, after bowing very low, "I did not think to
find a lady so recently from St. James', in this place. One might swear, looking at you, madam,
that this was Almack's."

"Sir, you speak to one that never saw St. James' but in imagination," said Margaret, coolly.
"Sure one can be white, and moderately civil, and yet be of New York."

"The deuce, madam! A native? You?"

"Ay, sir, of the aborigines; the daughter of a red Indian!"

"'Fore God, then, 'tis no wonder the American colonists make war upon the Indian race. Their
wives and daughters urge 'em to it, out of jealousy of the red men's daughters."

"Why, if they wished the red ladies exterminated, they couldn't do better than send a number
of king's officers among 'em--famous lady-killers, I've heard."

"Madam, I know naught of that; nor of the art of lady-killing itself, which I never desired
to possess until this evening."

The captain's eyes, so languid with melancholy or ennui a short while before, now had the glow
of pre-determined conquest; his face shone with that resolve; and by this transformation, as
well as by the inconsistency of his countenance with the soft tone and playful matter of his
words, which inconsistency betrayed the gentleness to be assumed, I read the man through once
for all: selfish, resolute, facile, versatile, able to act any part thoroughly and in a moment,
constant to his object till it was won, then quick to leave it for another; unscrupulous, usually
invincible, confident of his proven powers rather than vain of fancied ones; good-natured when
not crossed, and with an irresistible charm of person and manner. And Margaret too--there was
more and other meaning in her looks than in her light, ironical speeches.

He led her through two minuets that night, and was her partner in the Virginia reel (the name
the Americans give the Sir Roger de Coverly); and his was the last face we saw at our coach
window as we started homeward.

"You've made the rest of the army quite jealous of this new captain," growled Tom, as we rolled
Southward over the stony Harlem road. "The way Major Tarleton glared at him, would have set
another man trembling."

"Captain Falconer doesn't tremble so easily, I fancy," said Margaret. "And yet he's no marvel
of a man, as I can see."

Tom gave a sarcastic grunt. His manifestations regarding Margaret's behaviour were the only
exception to the kind, cheerful conduct of his whole life. A younger brother is not ordinarily
so watchful of a sister's demeanour; he has the doings of other young ladies to concern himself
with. Tom did not lack these, but he was none the less keenly sensitive upon the point of Margaret's
propriety and good name. 'Twas the extraordinary love and pride he had centred upon her, that
made him so observant and so touchy in the case. He brooded upon her actions, worried himself
with conjectures, underwent such torments as jealous lovers know, such pangs as Hamlet felt
in his uncertainty regarding the integrity of his mother.

Within a week after the Morris ball, it came to pass that Captain Falconer was quartered, by
regular orders, in the house of Mr. Faringfield. Tom and I, though we only looked our thoughts,
saw more than accident in this. The officer occupied the large parlour, which he divided by
curtains into two apartments, sitting-room and sleeping-chamber. By his courtesy and vivacity,
he speedily won the regard of the family, even of Mr. Faringfield and the Rev. Mr. Cornelius.

"Damn the fellow!" said Tom to me. "I can't help liking him."

"Nor I, either," was my reply; but I also damned him in my turn.

CHAPTER X.

A Fine Project.

Were it my own history that I am here undertaking, I should give at this place an account of
my first duel, which was fought with swords, in Bayard's Woods, my opponent being an English
lieutenant of foot, from whom I had suffered a display of that superciliousness which our provincial
troops had so resented in the British regulars in the old French War. By good luck I disarmed
the man without our receiving more than a small scratch apiece; and subsequently brought him
to the humbleness of a fawning spaniel, by a mien and tone of half-threatening superiority
which never fail of reducing such high-talking sparks to abject meekness. 'Twas a trick of
pretended bullying, which we long-suffering Americans were driven to adopt in self-defence
against certain derisive, contemptuous praters that came to our shores from Europe. But 'tis
more to my purpose, as the biographer of Philip Winwood, to continue upon the subject of Captain
Falconer.

He was the mirror of elegance, with none of the exaggerations of a fop. He brought with him
to the Queen Street house the atmosphere of Bond Street and Pall Mall, the perfume of Almack's
and the assembly rooms, the air of White's and the clubs, the odour of the chocolate houses
and the fashionable taverns. 'Twas all that he represented, I fancy, rather than what the man
himself was, and conquering as he was, that caught Margaret's eye. He typified the world before
which she had hoped to shine, and from which she had been debarred--cruelly debarred, it may
have seemed to her. I did not see this then; 'twas another, one of a broader way of viewing
things, one of a less partial imagination--'twas Philip Winwood--that found this excuse for her.

Captain Falconer had the perception soon to gauge correctly us who were of American rearing,
and the tact to cast aside the lofty manner by which so many of his stupid comrades estranged
us. He treated Tom and me with an easy but always courteous familiarity that surprised, flattered,
and won us. He would play cards with us, in his sitting-room, as if rather for the sake of
our company than for the pleasure of the game. Indeed, as he often frankly confessed, gambling
was no passion with him; and this was remarkable at a time when 'twas the only passion most
fine young gentlemen would acknowledge as genuine in them, and when those who did not feel
that passion affected it. We admired this fine disdain on his part for the common fashionable
occupation of the age (for the pursuit of women was pretended to be followed as a necessary
pastime, but without much real heart) as evidence of a superior mind. Yet he played with us,
losing at first, but eventually winning until I had to withdraw. Tom, having more money to
lose, held out longer.

"Why now," said the captain once, regarding his winnings with a face of perfect ruefulness,
"'tis proven that what we seek eludes us, and what we don't value comes to us! Here am I, the
last man in the world to court success this way, and here am I more winner than if I had played
with care and attention."

Tom once mentioned, to another officer, Captain Falconer's luck at cards as an instance of
fortune befriending one who despised her favours in that way.

"Blood, sir!" exclaimed the officer. "Jack Falconer may have a mind and taste above gaming
as a pleasure, for aught I know. But I would I had his skill with the cards. 'Tis no pastime
with him, but a livelihood. Don't you know the man is as poor as a church-mouse, but for what
he gets upon the green table?"

This revelation a little dampened our esteem for the captain's elevation of intellect, but
I'll take my oath of it, he was really above gaming as a way of entertaining his mind, however
he resorted to it as a means of filling his purse.

Of course Tom's friendly association with him was before there was sure cause to suspect his
intentions regarding Margaret. His manner toward her was the model of proper civility. He was
a hundred times more amiable and jocular with Fanny, whom he treated with the half-familiar
pleasantry of an elderly man for a child; petting her with such delicacy as precluded displeasure
on either her part or mine. He pretended great dejection upon learning that her heart was already
engaged; and declared that his only consolation lay in the fact that the happy possessor of
the prize was myself: for which we both liked him exceedingly. Toward Mrs. Faringfield, too,
he used a chivalrous gallantry as complimentary to her husband as to the lady. Only between
him and Margaret was there the distance of unvaried formality.

And yet we ought to have seen how matters stood. For now Margaret, though she had so little
apparent cordiality for the captain, had ceased to value the admiration of the other officers,
and had substituted a serene indifference for the animated interest she had formerly shown
toward the gaieties of the town. And the captain, too, we learned, had the reputation of an
inveterate conqueror of women; yet he had exhibited a singular callousness to the charms of
the ladies of New York. He had been three months in the town, and his name had not been coupled
with that of any woman there. We might have surmised from this a concealed preoccupation. And,
moreover, there was my first reading of his countenance, the night of the Morris ball; this
I had not forgotten, yet I ignored it, or else I shut my eyes to my inevitable inferences,
because I could see no propriety in any possible interference from me.

One evening in December there was a drum at Colonel Philipse's town house, which Margaret did
not attend. She had mentioned, as reason for absenting herself, a cold caught a few nights
previously, through her bare throat being exposed to a chill wind by the accidental falling
of her cloak as she walked to the coach after Mrs. Colden's rout. As the evening progressed
toward hilarity, I observed that Tom Faringfield became restless and gloomy. At last he approached
me, with a face strangely white, and whispered:

"Do you see?--Captain Falconer is not here!"

"Well, what of that?" quoth I. "Ten to one, he finds these companies plaguey tiresome."

"Or finds other company more agreeable," replied Tom, with a very dark look in his eyes.

He left me, with no more words upon the subject. When it was time to go home, and Mrs. Faringfield
and Fanny and I sought about the rooms for him, we found he had already taken his leave. So
we three had the chariot to ourselves, and as we rode I kept my own thoughts upon Tom's previous
departure, and my own vague dread of what might happen.

But when Noah let us in, all seemed well in the Faringfield house. Margaret was in the parlour,
reading; and she laid down her book to ask us pleasantly what kind of an evening we had had.
She was the only one of the family up to receive us, Mr. Faringfield having retired hours ago,
and Tom having come in and gone to bed without an explanation. The absence of light in Captain
Falconer's windows signified that he too had sought his couch, for had he been still out, his
servant would have kept candles lighted for him.

The next day, as we rode out Northward to our posts, Tom suddenly broke the silence:

"Curse it!" said he. "There are more mysteries than one. Do you know what I found when I got
home last night?"

"I can't imagine."

"Well, I first looked into the parlour, but no one was there. Instead of going on to the library,
I went up-stairs and knocked at Margaret's door. I--I wanted to see her a moment. It happened
to be unlatched, and as I knocked rather hard, it swung open. No one was in that room, either,
but I thought she might be in the bedchamber beyond, and so I crossed to knock at that. But
I chanced to look at her writing-table as I passed; there was a candle burning on it, and devil
take me if I didn't see a letter in a big schoolboy's hand that I couldn't help knowing at
a glance--the hand of my brother Ned!"

"Then I'll engage the letter wasn't to Margaret. You know how much love is lost between those two."

"But it was to her, though! 'Dear M.,' it began--there's no one else whose name begins with
M in the family. And the writing was fresh--not the least faded. I saw that much before I thought
of what I was doing. But when I remembered 'twasn't my letter, I looked no more."

"But how could he send a letter from the rebel camp to her in New York?"[5]

"Why, that's not the strangest part of it. There's no doubt Washington has spies in the town,
and ways of communicating with the rebel sympathisers here; I've sometimes thought my father--but
no matter for that. The fact is, there the letter was, as certainly from Ned as I'm looking
at you; and we know he's in the rebel army. But the wonder, the incredible thing, is that he
should write to Margaret."

"'Tis a mystery, in truth."

"Well, 'tis none of ours, after all, and of course this will go no further--but let me tell
you, the devil's in it when those two are in correspondence. There's crookedness of some kind
afoot, when such haters combine together!"

"You didn't ask her, of course?"

"No. But I knocked at her chamber door, and getting no answer I went down-stairs again. This
time she was in the parlour. She had been in the library before, it seemed; 'twas warmer there."

But, as I narrowly watched the poor lad, I questioned whether he was really convinced that
she had been in the library before. He had said nothing of Captain Falconer's sitting-room,
of which the door was that of the transformed large parlour, and was directly across the hall
from the Faringfields' ordinary parlour, wherein Tom had first sought and eventually found her.

'Twas our practice thus to ride back to our posts when we had been off duty, although our rank
did not allow us to go mounted in the service. For despite the needs of the army, the Faringfields
and I contrived to retain our horses for private use. All of that family were good riders,
particularly Margaret. She often rode out for a morning's canter, going alone because it was
her will thereto, which was not opposed, for she had so accustomed us to her aloofness that
solitary excursions seemed in place with her. One day, a little later in that same December,
Tom and I had taken the road by way of General De Lancey's country mansion at Bloomingdale,
rather than our usual course, which lay past the Murray house of Incledon. As I rode Northward
at a slow walk, some distance ahead of my comrade, I distinctly heard through a thicket that
veiled the road from a little glade at the right, the voice of Captain Falconer, saying playfully:

"Nay, how can you doubt me? Would not gratitude alone, for the reparation of my fortunes, bind
me as your slave, if you had not chains more powerful?"

And then I caught this answer, in a voice that gave me a start, and sent the blood into my
face--the voice of Margaret:

"But will those chains hold, if this design upon your gratitude fail?"

She spoke as in jest, but with a perceptible undercurrent of earnestness. This was a new attitude
for her, and what a revelation to me! In a flash I saw her infatuation for this fine fellow,
some fear of losing him, a pursuit of some plan by which she might repair his fortunes and
so bind him by obligation. Had Margaret, the invincible, the disdainful, fallen to so abject
a posture? And how long had these secret meetings been going on?

There was new-fallen snow upon the road, and this had deadened the sound of our horses' feet
to those beyond the thicket. Tom was not yet so near as to have heard their voices. I saw the
desirability of his remaining in ignorance for the present, so I uttered a loud "chuck," and
gave a pull at my reins, as if urging my horse to a better gait, my purpose being to warn the
speakers of unseen passers-by ere Tom should come up. I had not let my horse come to a stop,
nor had I otherwise betrayed my discovery.

But, to my dread, I presently heard Tom cry sharply, "Whoa!" and, looking back, saw he had
halted at the place where I had heard the voices. My warning must have failed to hush the speakers.
Never shall I forget the look of startled horror, shame, and anger upon his face. For a moment
he sat motionless; then he turned his horse back to an opening in the thicket, and rode into
the glade. I galloped after him, to prevent, if possible, some fearful scene.

When I entered the glade, I saw Margaret and Captain Falconer seated upon their horses, looking
with still fresh astonishment and discomfiture upon the intruder. Their faces were toward me.
Tom had stopped his horse, and he sat regarding them with what expression I could not see,
being behind him. Apparently no one of the three had yet spoken.

Tom glanced at me as I joined the group, and then, in a singularly restrained voice, he said:

"Captain Falconer, may I beg leave to be alone with my sister a few moments? I have something
to ask her. If you would ride a little way off, with Mr. Russell--"

'Twas, after all, a most natural request. A brother may wish to speak to his sister in private,
and 'tis more fitting to put a gentleman than a lady to the trouble of an absence. Seeing it
thus, and speaking with recovered composure as if nothing were wrong, the captain courteously
replied:

"Most certainly. Mr. Russell, after you, sir--nay, no precedence to rank, while we are simply
private gentlemen."

He bowed low to Margaret, and we two rode out to the highway, there to pace our horses up and
down within call. Of what passed between brother and sister, I afterward received a close account.

"I must have a straight answer," Tom began, "for I must not be put to the folly of acting without
cause. Tell me, then, upon your honour, has there been reason between you and Captain Falconer
for me to fight him? The truth, now! Of course, I shall find another pretext. It looks a thousand
to one, there's reason; but I must be sure."

"Why, I think you have lost your wits, Tom," said she. "If a gentleman known to the family
happens to meet me when I ride out, and we chance to talk--"

"Ay, but in such a private place, and in such familiar tones, when you scarce ever converse
together at home, and then in the most formal way! Oh, sister, that it should come to this!"

"I say, you're a fool, Tom! And a spy too--dogging my footsteps! What right have you to call
me to account?"

"As your brother, of course."

"My younger brother you are; and too young to understand all you see, for one thing, or to
hold me responsible to you for my actions, for another."

"I understand when your honour calls for my actions, however! Your very anger betrays you.
I will kill Falconer!"

"You'll do nothing of the kind!"

"You shall see! I know a brother's duties--his rights, by heaven!"

"A brother has no duties nor rights, concerning a sister who is married."

"Then, if not as your brother, I have as your husband's friend. For, by God, I am Phil's friend,
to the death; and while he's not here to see what's passing, I dare act on his behalf. If I
may not have a care of my sister's honour, I may of Philip Winwood's! And now I'll go to your
captain!"

"But wait--stay, Tom--a moment, for God's sake! You're mistaken, I tell you. There's naught
against Philip Winwood's honour in my meeting Captain Falconer. We have conferences, I grant.
But 'tis upon a matter you know nothing of--a matter of the war."

"What nonsense! To think I should believe that! What affair of the war could you have to do
with? It makes me laugh!"

"I vow there's an affair I have to do with. What do you know of my secrets, my planning and
plotting? 'Tis an affair for the royal cause, I'll tell you that much. Nay, I'll tell you all;
you won't dare betray it--you'd be a traitor to the king if you did. You shall be let into
it, you and Bert. Call back Captain Falconer and him."

Puzzled and incredulous, but glad to test any assertion that might clear his sister of the
suspicion most odious, Tom hallooed for us. When we re-entered the glade, Margaret spoke ere
any one else had time for a word:

"Captain Falconer, I think you'll allow me the right to admit these gentlemen into the secret
of our interviews. They are both loyal, both so dear to me that I'd gladly have them take a
part in the honour of our project--of which, heaven knows, there'll be enough and to spare
if we succeed."

"Madam," said he, "its chance of success will be all the greater, for the participation of
these gentlemen."

"Well?" said Tom, looking inquiringly at his sister.

"You promise your aid, then, both?" she asked.

"Let us hear it first," he replied.

She obtained our assurances of secrecy in any event, and proceeded:

"Everybody knows what this rebellion costs England, in money, men, and commerce; not to speak
of the king's peace of mind, and the feelings of the nation. Everybody sees it must last well-nigh
for ever, if it doesn't even win in the end! Well, then, think what it would mean for England,
for the king, for America, if the war could be cut short by a single blow, with no cost; cut
short by one night's courage, daring, and skill, on the part of a handful of men!"

Tom and I smiled as at one who dreams golden impossibilities.

"Laugh if you will," said she; "but tell me this: what is the soul of the rebellion? What is
the one vital part its life depends on? The different rebel provinces hate and mistrust one
another--what holds 'em together? The rebel Congress quarrels and plots, and issues money that
isn't worth the dirty paper it's printed on; disturbs its army, and does no good to any one--what
keeps the rebellion afoot in spite of it? The rebel army complains, and goes hungry and half-naked,
and is full of mutiny and desertion--what still controls it from melting away entirely? What
carries it through such Winters as the rebels had at Valley Forge, when the Congress, the army,
and the people were all at sixes and sevens and swords' points? What raises money the Lord
knows how, finds supplies the Lord knows where, induces men to stay in the field, by the Lord
knows what means, and has got such renown the world over that now France is the rebels' ally?
I make you stare, boys; you're not used to seeing me play the orator. I never did before, and
I sha'n't again, for heaven forbid I should be a woman of that kind! But I've studied this
matter, and I hope I have a few ideas upon it."

"But what has done all these things you mention? May I ask that?" said I, both amused and curious.

"Washington!" was her reply. "Remove him, and this rebellion will burst like a soap-bubble!
And that's the last of my speechmaking. Our project is to remove Washington--nay, there's no
assassination in it. We'll do better--capture him and send him to England. Once he is in the
Tower awaiting trial, how long do you think the rebellion will last? And what rewards do you
think there'll be for those that sent him there?"

"Why," said Tom, "is that a new project? Hasn't the British army been trying to wipe out Washington's
army and take him prisoner these four years?"

"But not in the way that we have planned it," replied Margaret, "and that Captain Falconer
shall execute it. Tell them, captain."

"'Tis very simple, gentlemen," said the English officer. "If the honour of the execution is
to be mine, and the men's whom I shall lead, the honour of the design, and of securing the
necessary collusion in the rebel camp, is Mrs. Winwood's. My part hitherto has been, with Sir
Henry Clinton's approval, to make up a chosen body of men from all branches of the army; and
my part finally shall be to lead this select troop on horseback one dark night, by a devious
route, to that part of the rebel lines nearest Washington's quarters; then, with the coöperation
that this lady has obtained among the rebels, to make a swift dash upon those quarters, seize
Washington while our presence is scarce yet known, and carry him back to New York by outriding
all pursuit. Boats will be waiting to bring us across the river. I allow such projects have
been tried before, but they have been defeated through rebel sentries giving the alarm in time.
They lacked one advantage we possess--collusion in the rebel camp--"

"And 'twas you obtained that collusion?" Tom broke in, turning to Margaret. "Hang me if I see
how you in New York--oh, but I do, though! Through brother Ned!"

"You're a marvel at a guess," quoth she.

"Ay, ay! But how did you carry on your correspondence with him? 'Twas he, then, originated
this scheme?"

"Oh, no; 'twas no such thing! The credit is all mine, if you please. I make no doubt, he would
have originated it, if he had thought of it. But a sister's wits are sometimes as good as a
brother's--remember that, Tom. For I had the wit not only to devise this project, but to know
from the first that Ned's reason for joining the rebels was, that he might profit by betraying
them."

"Ay, we might have known as much, Bert," said Tom. "But we give you all credit for beating
us there, sister."

"Thank you! But the rascal never saw the way to his ends, I fancy; for he's still in good repute
in the rebel army. And when I began to think of a way to gain--to gain the honour of aiding
the king's cause, you know, I saw at once that Ned might help me. Much as we disliked each
other, he would work with me in this, for the money 'twould bring him. And I had 'lighted upon
something else, too--quite by chance. A certain old person I know of has been serving to carry
news from a particular Whig of my acquaintance (and neither of 'em must ever come to harm,
Captain Falconer has sworn) to General Washington." (As was afterward made sure, 'twas old
Bill Meadows, who carried secret word and money from Mr. Faringfield and other friends of the
rebellion.) "This old person is very much my friend, and will keep my secrets as well as those
of other people. So each time he has gone to the rebel camp, of late--and how he gets there
and back into New York uncaught, heaven only knows--he has carried a message to brother Ned;
and brought back a reply. Thus while he knowingly serves the rebel cause, he ignorantly serves
ours too, for he has no notion of what my brother and I correspond about. And so 'tis all arranged.
Through Ned we have learned that the rebel light horse troop under Harry Lee has gone off upon
some long business or other, and, as far as the army knows, may return to the camp at any time.
All that our company under Captain Falconer has to do, then, is to ride upon a dark night to
a place outside the rebel pickets, where Ned will meet them. How Ned shall come there unsuspected,
is his own affair--he swears 'tis easy. He will place himself at the head of our troop, and
knowing the rebel passwords for the night, as well as how to speak like one of Major Lee's
officers, he can lead our men past the sentries without alarm. Our troop will have on the blue
greatcoats and the caps the rebel cavalry wear--General Grey's men took a number of these last
year, and now they come into use. And besides our having all these means of passing the rebel
lines without hindrance, Ned has won over a number of the rebels themselves, by promising 'em
a share of the great reward the parliament is sure to vote for this business. He has secured
some of the men about headquarters to our interest."

"What a traitor!" quoth Tom, in a tone of disgust.

"Why, sure, we can make use of his treason, without being proud of him as one of the family,"
said Margaret. "The matter now is, that Captain Falconer offers you two gentlemen places in
the troop he has chosen."

"The offer comes a little late, sir," said Tom, turning to the captain.

"Why, sir," replied Falconer, "I protest I often thought of you two. But the risk, gentlemen,
and your youth, and my dislike of imperilling my friends--however, take it as you will, I now
see I had done better to enlist you at the first. The point is, to enlist you now. You shall
have your commander's permission; General Clinton gives me my choice of men. 'Twill be a very
small company, gentlemen; the need of silence and dash requires that. And you two shall come
in for honour and pay, next to myself--that I engage. 'Twill make rich men of us three, at
least, and of your brother, sir; while this lady will find herself the world's talk, the heroine
of the age, the saviour of America, the glory of England. I can see her hailed in London for
this, if it succeed; praised by princes, toasted by noblemen, envied by the ladies of fashion
and the Court, huzza'd by the people in the streets and parks when she rides out--"

"Nay, captain, you see too far ahead," she interrupted, seeming ill at ease that these things
should be said before Tom and me.

"A strange role, sure, for Captain Winwood's wife," said Tom; "that of plotter against his
commander."

"Nay," she cried, quickly, "Captain Winwood plays a strange rôle for Margaret Faringfield's
husband--that of rebel against her king. For look ye, I had a king before he had a commander.
Isn't that what you might call logic, Tom?"

"'Tis an unanswerable answer, at least," said Captain Falconer, smiling gallantly. "But come,
gentlemen, shall we have your aid in this fine adventure?"

It was a fine adventure, and that was the truth. The underhand work, the plotting and the treason
involved, were none of ours. 'Twas against Philip Winwood's cause, but our cause was as much
to us as his was to him. The prospect of pay and honour did not much allure us; but the vision
of that silent night ride, that perilous entrance into the enemy's camp, that swift dash for
the person of our greatest foe, that gallop homeward with a roused rebel cavalry, desperate
with consternation, at our heels, quite supplanted all feelings of slight in not having been
invited earlier. Such an enterprise, for young fellows like us, there was no staying out of.

We gave Captain Falconer our hands upon it, whereupon he told us he would be at the pains to
secure our relief from regular duty on the night set for the adventure--that of the following
Wednesday--and directed us to be ready with our horses at the ferry at six o'clock Wednesday
evening. The rebel cavalry caps and overcoats were to be taken to the New Jersey side previously,
and there put on, this arrangement serving as precaution against our disguise being seen within
our lines by some possible rebel spy who might thereupon suspect our purpose and find means
of preceding us to the enemy's camp.

Tom and I saw the English captain and Margaret take the road toward the town, whereupon we
resumed our ride Northward. I could note the lad's relief at being able to account for his
sister's secret meeting with Falconer by a reason other than he had feared.

"By George, though," he broke out presently, "'tis plaguey strange Margaret should grow so
active in loyalty! I never knew her zeal to be very great for any cause of a public nature.
'Tisn't like her; rabbit me if it is!"

"Why," quoth I, "maybe it's for her own purposes, after all--the reward and the glory. You
know the pleasure she takes in shining."

"Egad, that's true enough!" And Tom's face cleared again.

Alas, I knew better! Besides the motive I had mentioned, there had been another to stimulate
her wits and industry--the one her words, overheard by me alone, had betrayed too surely--the
desire of enriching and advancing Captain Falconer. Well, she was not the first woman, nor
has been the last, scheming to pour wealth and honour into a man's lap, partly out of the mere
joy of pleasing him, partly in hope of binding him by gratitude, partly to make him seem in
the world's eyes the worthier her devotion, and so to lessen her demerit if that devotion be
unlawful.

"Poor Philip!" thought I. "Poor Philip! And what will be the end of this?"

CHAPTER XI.

Winwood Comes to See His Wife.

'T were scarce possible to exaggerate the eagerness with which Margaret looked forward to the
execution of the great project. Her anticipations, in the intensity and entirety with which
they possessed her, equalled those with which she had formerly awaited the trip to England.
She was now as oblivious of the festivities arising from the army's presence, as she had been
of the town's tame pleasures on the former occasion. She showed, to us who had the key to her
mind, a deeper abstraction, a more anxious impatience, a keener foretaste (in imagination)
of the triumphs our success would bring her. Her favourable expectations, of course, seesawed
with fears of failure; and sometimes there was preserved a balance that afflicted her with
a most irritating uncertainty, revealed by petulant looks and tones. But by force of will,
'twas mainly in the hope of success that she passed the few days between our meeting in the
glade and the appointed Wednesday evening.

"Tut, sister," warned Tom, with kind intention, "don't raise yourself so high with hope, or
you may fall as far with disappointment."

"Never fear, Tom; we can't fail."

"It looks all clear and easy, I allow," said he; "but there's many a slip, remember!"

"Not two such great slips to the same person," she replied. "I had my share of disappointment,
when I couldn't go to London. This war, and my stars, owe me a good turn, dear."

But when, at dusk on Wednesday evening, Tom and I took leave of her in the hall, she was trembling
like a person with a chill. Her eyes glowed upon us beseechingly, as if she implored our Herculean
endeavours in the attempt now to be made.

We had to speak softly to one another, lest Mr. Faringfield might hear and infer some particular
enterprise--for we were not to hazard the slightest adverse chance. Captain Falconer had been
away from his quarters all day, about the business of the night, and would not return till
after its accomplishment. Thus we two were the last to be seen of her, of those bound to the
adventure; and so to us were visible the feelings with which she regarded the setting forth
of our whole company upon the project she had designed, for which she had laboriously laid
preparations even in the enemy's camp, and from which she looked for a splendid future. Were
it realised, she might defy Mr. Faringfield and Philip: they would be nobodies, in comparison
with her: heroines belong to the whole world, and may have their choice of the world's rewards:
they may go where they please, love whom they please, and no father nor husband may say them
nay. Though I could not but be sad, for Philip's sake, at thought of what effect our success
might have upon her, yet for the moment I seemed to view matters from her side, with her nature,
and for that moment I felt that to disappoint her hopes would be a pity.

As for myself (and Tom was like me) my cause and duty, not Margaret's private ambitions, bade
me strive my utmost in the business; and my youthful love of danger sent me forth with a most
exquisite thrill, as into the riskiest, most exhilarating game a man can play. So I too trembled
a little, but with an uplifting, strong-nerved excitement far different from the anxious tremor
of suspense that tortured Margaret.

"For pity's sake, don't fail, boys!" she said, as if all rested upon us two. "Think of me waiting
at home for the news! Heaven, how slow the hours will pass! I sha'n't have a moment's rest
of mind or body till I know!"

"You shall know as soon as we can get back to New York," said I.

"Ay--if we are able to come back," added Tom, with a queer smile.

She turned whiter, and new thoughts seemed to sweep into her mind. But she drove them back.

"Hush, Tom, we mustn't think of that!" she whispered. "No, no, it can't come to that! But I
shall be a thousand times the more anxious! Good night!--that's all I shall say--good night
and a speedy and safe return!"

She caught her brother's head between her hands, bestowed a fervent kiss upon his forehead,
swiftly pressed my fingers, and opened the door for us.

We passed out into the dark, frosty evening. There was snow on the ground but none in the air.
We mounted our waiting horses, waved back a farewell to the white-faced, white-handed figure
in the doorway; and started toward the ferry. Margaret was left alone with her fast-beating
heart, to her ordeal of mingled elation and doubt, her dread of crushing disappointment, her
visions of glorious triumph.

At the ferry we reported to Captain Falconer, who was expeditiously sending each rider and
horse aboard one of the waiting flat-boats as soon as each arrived. Thus was avoided the assemblage,
for any length of time, of a special body of horsemen in the streets--for not even the army,
let alone the townspeople, should know more of our setting forth than could not be hid. The
departure of those who were to embark from the town was managed with exceeding quietness and
rapidity. Captain Falconer and the man who was to guide us to Edward Faringfield's trysting-place
were the last to board.

Upon rounding the lower end of the town, and crossing the Hudson to Paulus Hook, which post
our troops had reoccupied after the rebel capture of its former garrison, we went ashore and
were joined by men and horses from up the river, and by others from Staten Island. We then
exchanged our hats for the caps taken from the rebel cavalry, donned the blue surtouts, and
set out; Captain Falconer and the guide riding at the head.

For a short distance we kept to the Newark road, but, without proceeding to that town, we deviated
to the right, and made Northwestwardly, the purpose being to pass through a hiatus in the semicircle
of rebel detached posts, turn the extremity of the main army, and approach Morristown--where
Washington had his headquarters--from a side whence a British force from New York might be
the less expected.

Each man of us carried a sword and two pistols, having otherwise no burden but his clothes.
At first we walked our horses, but presently we put them to a steady, easy gallop. The snow
on the ground greatly muffled the sound of our horses' footfalls, and made our way less invisible
than so dark a night might have allowed. But it made ourselves also the more likely to be seen;
though scarce at a great distance nor in more than brief glimpses, for the wind raised clouds
of fine snow from the whitened fields, the black growth of tree and brush along the road served
now as curtain for us, now as background into which our outlines might sink, and a stretch
of woods sometimes swallowed us entirely from sight. Besides, on such a night there would be
few folk outdoors, and if any of these came near, or if we were seen from farmhouses or village
windows, our appearance of rebel horse would protect our purpose. So, in silence all, following
our captain and his guide, we rode forward to seize the rebel chief, and make several people's
fortunes.

I must now turn to Philip Winwood, and relate matters of which I was not a witness, but with
which I was subsequently made acquainted in all minuteness.

We had had no direct communication with Philip since the time after our capture of Mr. Cornelius,
who, as every exchange of prisoners had passed him by, still remarked upon parole at Mr. Faringfield's.
If Mr. Faringfield received news of Winwood through his surreptitious messenger, Bill Meadows,
he kept it to himself, naturally making a secret of his being in correspondence with General
Washington.

Though Philip knew of Meadows's perilous employment, he would not risk the fellow's discovery
even to Margaret, and so refrained from laying upon him the task of a message to her. How she
found out what Meadows was engaged in, I cannot guess, unless it was that, unheeded in the
house as she was unheeding, she chanced to overhear some talk between her father and him, or
to detect him in the bringing of some letter which she afterward took the trouble secretly
to peep into. Nor did I ever press to know by what means she had induced him to serve as messenger
between her and Ned, and to keep this service hidden from her father and husband and all the
world. Maybe she pretended a desire to hear of her husband without his knowing she had so far
softened toward him, and a fear of her father's wrath if he learned she made Ned her correspondent
in the matter. Perhaps she added to her gentler means of persuasion a veiled threat of exposing
Meadows to the British if he refused. In any event, she knew that, once enlisted, he could
be relied on for the strictest obedience to her wishes. It needed not, in his case, the additional
motive for secrecy, that a knowledge of his employment on Margaret's business would compromise
him with General Washington and Mr. Faringfield.

How Meadows contrived to meet Ned, to open the matter to him, to convey the ensuing correspondence,
to avoid discovery upon this matter in the rebel camp, as he avoided it upon Washington's business
in New York, is beyond me: if it were not, I should be as skilful, as fit for such work, as
Meadows himself. 'Tis well-known now what marvellously able secret agents Washington made use
of; how to each side many of them had to play the part of spies upon the other side; how they
were regarded with equal suspicion in both camps; and how some of them really served their
enemies in order finally to serve their friends. More than one of them, indeed, played a double
game, receiving pay from both sides, and earning it from both, each commander conceiving himself
to be the one benefited. In comparison with such duplicity, the act of Meadows, in undertaking
Margaret's private business as a secret matter adjunctive to his main employment, was honesty
itself.

'Tis thus explained why, though Margaret might communicate with her brother in the enemy's
camp, she got no word from her husband there. But his thoughts and his wishes had scarce another
subject than herself. The desire to see her, possessed him more and more wholly. He imagined
that her state of mind must in this be a reflection of his own. Long ago her anger must have
died--nay, had it not passed in that farewell embrace when she held up her face to invite his
kiss? The chastening years of separation, the knowledge of his toils and dangers, must have
wrought upon her heart, to make it more tender to him than ever. She must grieve at their parting,
long for his home-coming. So convinced was he of such feelings on her part, that he pitied
her for them, felt the start of many a tear in sorrow for her sorrow.

"Poor girl!" he thought. "How her face would gladden if I were to walk into her presence at
this moment!"

And the thought gave birth to the resolution. The joy of such a meeting was worth a thousand
risks and efforts.

His first step was to get leave of absence and General Washington's permission to enter New
York. The former was quickly obtained, the latter less so. But if he failed to demonstrate
to the commander the possible profit of his secretly visiting the enemy's town, he convinced
him that the entrance was not too difficult to one who knew the land so well, and who could
so easily find concealment. Sympathising with Philip's private motive in the case, trusting
him implicitly, and crediting his ability to take care of himself in even so perilous a matter,
Washington finally gave consent.

Philip rode in proper manner from the rebel camp, bound apparently Southward, as if perchance
he bore despatches to the rebel civil authorities at Philadelphia. Once out of observation,
he concealed his uniform cap and outer coat, and provided himself at a New Jersey village with
an ordinary felt hat, and a plain dark overcoat. He then turned from the Southward road, circled
widely about the rebel camp, and arrived at a point some distance north of it. Here, in a hospitable
farmhouse, he passed the night. The next day, he rode Eastward for the Hudson River, crossing
undiscovered the scanty, ill-patrolled line of rebel outposts, and for the most part refraining
from use of the main roads, deserted as these were. By woods and by-ways, he proceeded as best
the snow-covered state of the country allowed. 'Twas near dusk on the second day, when he came
out upon the wooded heights that looked coldly down upon the Hudson a few miles above the spot
opposite the town of New York.

He looked across the river and Southeastward, knowing that beyond the low hills and the woods
lay the town, and that in the town was Margaret. Then he rode back from the crest of the cliff
till he came to the head of a ravine. Down this he led his beast, arriving finally at the narrow
strip of river-bank at the cliff's foot. He followed this some distance Southward, still leading
the horse. 'Twas not yet so dark that he could not make out a British sloop-of-war, and further
down the river the less distinct outline of a frigate, serving as sentinels and protectors
of this approach to the town. From these he was concealed by the bushes that grew at the river's
edge.

At last he turned into the mouth of a second ravine, and, rounding a sharp side-spur of the
interrupted cliff, came upon a log hut built upon a small level shelf of earth. At one end
of this structure was a pent-roof. Philip tied his horse thereunder, and, noting a kind of
dim glow through the oiled paper that filled the cabin's single window, gave two double knocks
followed by a single one, upon the plank door. This was soon opened, and Philip admitted to
the presence of the single occupant, an uncouth fellow, fisherman and hunter, whose acquaintance
he had made in patrolling the New Jersey side at the head of his troop. The man was at heart
with the rebels, and Winwood knew with whom he had to deal. Indeed Philip had laid his plans
carefully for this hazardous visit, in accordance with his knowledge of the neighbourhood and
of what he might rely upon.

"I wish to borrow one of your canoes, Ellis," said he, "and beg your attention to my horse,
which is in the shed. Be so kind as to give it feed, and to cover it with a blanket if you
have such a thing. But leave it in the shed, and ready saddled; I may have to ride in a hurry.
I sha'n't need you with me in the canoe--nor any supper, I thank you, sir."

For the man, with the taciturn way of his kind, had motioned toward some pork frying at a fire.
With no thought to press, or to question, he replied:

"I'll fetch the canoe down the gully, cap'n. You stay here and warm yourself a minute. And
don't worry about your hoss, sir."

A few minutes later, Philip was launched upon the dark current of the Hudson, paddling silently
toward the Eastern shore. Darkness had now fallen, and he trusted it to hide him from the vigilance
of the British vessels whose lights shone dim and uncertain down the river.

Much larger craft landed much larger crews within our lines, on no darker nights--as, for one
case, when the Whigs came down in whaleboats and set fire to the country mansion of our General
De Lancey at Bloomingdale. Philip made the passage unseen, and drew the canoe up to a safe
place under some bushes growing from the face of a low bluff that rose from the slight beach.
His heart galloped and glowed at sense of being on the same island with his wife. He was thrilled
to think that, if all went well, within an hour or two he should hold her in his arms.

He saw to the priming of his pistols, and loosened the sword that hung beneath his overcoat;
and then he glided some way down the strip of beach. Coming to a convenient place, he clambered
up the bluff, to a cleared space backed by woods.

"Who goes there?"

'Twas the voice of a man who had suddenly halted in the clearing, half-way between the woods
and the crest of the bluff. The snow on the ground enabled the two to descry each other. Winwood
saw the man raise a musket to his shoulder.

"A word with you, friend," said Philip, and strode swiftly forward ere the sentinel (who was
a loyalist volunteer, not a British regular) had the wit to fire. Catching the musket-barrel
with one hand, Winwood clapped his pistol to the soldier's breast with the other.

"Now," says he, "if you give a sound, I'll send a bullet through you. If I pass here, 'twill
bring you no harm, for none shall know it but us two. Let go your musket a moment--I'll give
it back to you, man."

A pressure of the pistol against the fellow's ribs brought obedience. Philip dropped the musket,
and, with his foot, dug its lock into the snow, spoiling the priming.

"Now," he continued, "I'll leave you, and remember, if you raise an alarm, you'll be blamed
for not firing upon me."

Whereupon Philip dashed into the woods, leaving the startled sentinel to pick up his musket
and resume his round as if naught had occurred. The man knew that his own comfort lay in secrecy,
and his comfort outweighed his military conscience.

Through woods and fields Winwood proceeded, skirted swamps and ponds, and waded streams, traversing
old familiar ground, the sight of which brought back memories of countless holiday rambles
in the happy early days. Margaret's bright face and merry voice, her smiles, and her little
displays of partiality for him, were foremost in each recollection; and that he was so soon
to see her again, appeared too wonderful for belief. He went forward in the intoxication of
joy, singing to himself as a boy would have done.

He knew where there were houses and barns to avoid, and where there were most like to be British
cantonments. At length he was so near the town, that he was surprised to have come upon no
inner line of sentries. Even as he wondered, he emerged from a copse into a field, and received
the usual challenge--spoken this time in so quick, machine-like a manner, and accompanied by
so prompt and precise a levelling of the musket, that he knew 'twas a British regular he had
to deal with.

He made a pretence of raising a pistol to shoot down the sentry. This brought the sentry's
fire, which--as it too was of a British regular of those days--Philip felt safe in risking.
But though the shot went far wide, he gave a cry as if he had been hit, and staggered back
into the woods. He was no sooner within its cover, than he ran swiftly Eastward with all possible
silence. He had noted that the sentry had been pacing in that direction; hence the first of
the sentry's comrades to run up would be the one approaching therefrom. This would leave a
break in the line, at that part of it East of the scene of the alarm. Philip stopped presently;
peered forth from the woods, saw the second sentry hasten with long steps Westward; and then
made a dash across the latter's tracks, bending low his body as he went. He thus reached a
cover of thicket, through which he forced his way in time to emerge toward the town ere any
results of the alarming gun-shot were manifest.

Unless he were willing to attempt crossing what British defences he knew not, or other impediments
that might bar passage to the town elsewhere than at the Bowery lane entrance, he must now
pass the guard there, which served for the town itself as the outer barriers at Kingsbridge
served for the whole island of Manhattan. He chose the less tedious, though more audacious
alternative of facing the guard.

He could not employ in this case the method used in passing the shore patrol, or that adopted
in crossing the line of sentinels above the town; for here the road was the only open way through,
it was flanked by a guardhouse, it was lighted by a lantern that hung above the door, and the
sentinels were disciplined men. Philip gathered these facts in a single glance, as he approached
by slinking along the side of the road, into which he had crawled, through a rail fence, from
an adjoining field.

He was close upon the sentinels who paced before the guardhouse, ere he was discovered. For
the third time that night, he heard the challenge and saw the threatening movement.

"All's well," he replied. "I'll give an account of myself." And he stepped forward, grasping
one of his pistols, not by the breech, but by the barrel.

"Stop where you are!" said the sentry, menacingly.

Philip stood still, raised the pistol, flung it at the lantern, and instantly dropped to his
knees. The sentinel's musket flashed and cracked. Total darkness ensued. Philip glided forward
between the two men, his footfalls drowned by the sound of their curses. When past them, he
hurled his remaining pistol back over his shoulder toward a mass of bushes on the further side
of the sentinels. Its descent through the brush had some sound of a man's leap, and would,
he hoped, lead the enemy to think he might have escaped in that direction. By the time the
noise of a commotion reached him, with orders to turn out the guard, he was past the building
used as a prison for his fellow rebels, and was hastening along the side of the common--now
diverted to camp uses of the British as it had been to those of the rebels--able to find the
rest of his way in Egyptian blackness. He knew what alleys to take, what short cuts to make
by traversing gardens, what ways were most like to be deserted. The streets in the part of
the town through which he had to pass were nearly empty, the taverns, the barracks, and most
of the officers' quarters being elsewhere. And so, with a heart elated beyond my power of expression,
he leaped finally into the rear garden of the Faringfield mansion, and strode, as if on air,
toward the veranda.

He had guessed that the family would be in the smaller parlour, or the library, and so he was
not surprised to see all the lower windows dark that were visible from the direction of his
approach. But, which gave him a thrill of delightful conjecture, two upper windows shone with
light--those above the great parlour and hence belonging to one of the chambers formerly occupied
by Margaret and him. He knew no reason why his wife should not still retain the same rooms.
She would, then, be there, and probably alone. He might go to her while none was present to
chill their meeting, none before whom her pride might induce her to conceal the completeness
of her reconciliation, or to moderate the joy of her greeting. Would she weep? Would she laugh?
Would she cry out? Would she merely fall into his arms with a glad smile and cling in a long
embrace under his lingering kiss? He trembled like a schoolboy as he climbed the trellis-work
to enter by a window.

Creeping up the sloping, snow-covered roof of the veranda, he came at length to the window,
and looked in. The chamber was empty, but the door was ajar that led to the apartment in front,
used as a sitting-room. She must be in that room, for his first glance had recognised many
of her trinkets and possessions in the first chamber. He asked himself if the years had changed
her: they would have made her a little graver, doubtless.

He opened the window so slowly that the noise was scarce perceptible. Then he clambered over
the ledge into the chamber; strode tiptoe toward the next room, catching a mirrored glimpse
of his face as he passed her dressing-table--the most joyous, eager face in the world. He pushed
the door further open, and stepped across the threshold. She was there, in the centre of the
room, standing in meditation, her face turned by chance toward the door through which he entered.

"My dear," said he, in a voice scarce above a whisper; and started toward her, with arms held
out, and (I am sure) a very angel's smile of joy and love upon his face.

She opened her eyes and lips in wonder, and then stood pale and rigid as marble, and made a
faint gesture to check his approach. As he halted in astonishment, his joy dying at her look,
she whispered hoarsely:

"You! You, of all men? And to-night, of all nights!"

'Twas the night of our setting forth upon her great design of seizing his commander-in-chief.

CHAPTER XII.

Their Interview.

Philip took note, at the time, rather of her look than of her words.

"Why, dear," said he, "don't be frightened. Tis I, Philip--'tis not my ghost."

"Yes, 'tis you--I know that well enough."

"Then--" he began, and stepped toward her.

But she retreated with such a movement that he stopped again.

"What's the matter?" he questioned. "Why do you look so?--This is scarce the welcome I had
imagined."

"Why are you here?" she asked, in a low voice, regarding him steadily. "How did you come? What
does it mean?"

"It means I love you so much, I could stay no longer from seeing you. I came by horse, boat,
and foot. I passed the British sentries."

"You risked your life, then?"

"Oh, of course. If they caught me inside their lines, they would hang me as a spy. But--"

She could not but be touched at this. "Poor Philip!" she murmured, with a tremor in her voice.

"Not poor," said he, "now that I am with you--if you would not draw back, and look so. What
is wrong? Am I--unwelcome?"

She saw that, to be true to her design, to her elaborate plan for the future, she must not
soften toward him--for his reappearance, with the old-time boyish look and manner, the fond
expression now wistful and alarmed, the tender eyes now startled and affrighted, revived much
that had been dormant in her heart, and made Captain Falconer seem a very far-off and casual
person. Against the influence of Philip's presence, and the effect of his having so imperilled
himself to see her, she had to arm herself with coldness, or look upon the success of her project
as going for naught to her advantage. She dared not contemplate the forfeit; so she hardened
her heart.

"Why," she said, with a forced absence of feeling, "so many years have passed--so many things
have happened--you appear so much a stranger--"

"Stranger!" echoed he. "Why, not if you had thought of me half as constantly as I have of you!
You have been in my mind, in my heart, every hour, every minute since that day--Can it be?
Is it my Margaret that stands there and speaks so? So unmoved to see me! So cold! Oh, who would
have expected this?"

He sat down and gazed wretchedly about the room, taking no cognisance of what objects his sight
fell upon. Margaret seated herself, with a sigh of annoyance, and regarded him with a countenance
of displeasure.

"Margaret, do you mean what you say?" he asked, after a short silence.

"I'm sure you shouldn't blame me," said she. "You enabled me to learn how to endure your absence.
You stayed away all these years. Naturally I've come to consider you as--"

"Nay, don't attempt to put me in the wrong. My heart is as warm to you as ever, in spite of
the years of absence. Those years have made no change in me. Why should they have changed you,
then? No--'tis not their fault if you are changed, nor mine neither. There is something wrong,
I see. Be frank, dear, and tell me what it is. You need not be afraid of me--you know I wouldn't
hurt a hair of your head. Oh, sweetheart, what has come between us? Tell me, I beg!"

"Why, nothing, of course--nothing but the gulf that time has widened. That's all--sure 'tis
enough."

"But 'tis more than that. Were that all, and I came back to you thus, a minute's presence would
bridge that gulf. All the old feelings would rush back. Why, if I were but a mere acquaintance
whom you had once known in a friendly way, you wouldn't have greeted me so coldly. There would
have been cordiality, smiles, a warm clasp of the hand, questions about my health and doings,
at least a curiosity as to how I had passed the years. But you meet me, not merely with lack
of warmth, but with positive coldness. Nay, you were shocked, startled, frightened! You turned
white, and stood still as if you saw a spirit, or as if you were caught in some crime! Yes,
'twas for all the world like that! And what was't you said? It passed me then, I was so amazed
at my reception--so different from the one I had pictured all the way thither, all the weeks
and months. What was't you said?"

"Some word of surprise, I suppose; something of no meaning."

"Nay, it had meaning, too. I felt that, though I put it aside for the time. Something about
the night--ah, yes: 'to-night of all nights.' And me of all men. Why so? Why to-night in particular?
Why am I the most inconvenient visitor, and why to-night? Tell me that! Tell me--I have the
right to know!"

"Nay, if you work yourself up into a fury so--"

"'Tis no senseless fury, madam! There's reason at the bottom of it, my lady! I must know, and
I will know, what it is that my visit interferes with. You were not going out, I can see by
your dress. Nor expecting company. Unless--no, it couldn't be that! You're not capable of that!
You are my wife, you are Margaret Faringfield, William Faringfield's daughter. God forgive
the mistrust--yet every husband with an imagination has tortured himself for an instant sometime
with that thought, suppose his wife's heart might stray? I've heard 'em confess the thought;
and even I--but what a hell it was for the moment it lasted! And how swiftly I put it from
me, to dwell on your tenderness in the old days, your pride that has put you above the hopes
of all men but me, the unworthy one you chose to reach down your hand to from your higher level!"

"So you have harboured that suspicion, have you?" she cried, with flashing eyes.

"No, no; harboured it never! Only let my perverse imagination 'light, for the space of a breath,
on the possibility, to my unutterable torment. All men's fancies play 'em such tricks now and
then, to torture them and take down their vanity. Men would rest too easy in their security,
were it not so."

"A man that suspects his wife, deserves to lose her allegiance," cried Margaret, with a kind
of triumphant imputation of blame, which was her betrayal.

He gazed at her with the dawning horror of half-conviction.

"Then I have lost yours?" he asked, in a tone stricken with doubt and dread.

"I didn't say so," she replied, reddening.

"But your words imply that. You seemed to be justifying yourself by my suspicion. But there
was no suspicion till now--nothing but a tormenting fancy of what I believed impossible. So
you cannot excuse yourself that way."

"I'm not trying to excuse myself. There's nothing to excuse."

"I'm not sure of that! Your manner looks as if you realised having said too much--having betrayed
yourself. Margaret, for God's sake, tell me 'tis not so! Tell me my fears are wrong! Assure
me I have not lost you--no, no, I won't even ask you. 'Tis not possible. I won't believe it
of you--that you could be inconstant! Forgive me, dear--your strange manner has so upset me--but
forgive me, I beg, and let me take you in my arms." He had risen to approach her.

"No, no! Don't. Don't touch me!" she cried, rising in turn, for resistance. She kept her mind
fixed upon the expected rewards of her project, and so fortified herself against yielding.

"By heaven, I'll know what this means!" he cried. He looked wildly about the room, as if the
explanation might somewhere there be found. Her own glance went with his, as if there might
indeed be some evidence, which she must either make shift to conceal, or invent an innocent
reason for its presence. Her eye rested an instant upon a book that lay on the table. Philip
noted this, picked up the book, turned the cover, and read the name on the first leaf.

"'Charles Falconer.' Who is he?"

"No matter," she said quickly, and made to snatch the book away. "He is a--an acquaintance.
He is quartered in the house, in fact--a British officer."

"An acquaintance? But why do you turn red? Why look so confused? Why try to take the book away
from me? Oh, my God, it is true! it is true!" He dropped the volume, sank back upon a chair,
and regarded her with indescribable grief.

"Why," she blundered, "a gentleman may lend a lady a novel--"

"Oh, the lending is nothing! 'Twas your look and action when I read his name. 'Tis your look
now, your look of guilt. Oh, to see that flush of discovered shame on your face! You care for
this man, I can see that!"

"Well, what if I do?"

"Then you confess it? Oh, can it be you that say this?--you that stand there with eyes that
drop before mine for shame--nay, eyes that you raise with defiance! Brazen--oh, my God, my
God, tell me 'tis all a mistake! Tell me I wrong you, dear; that you are still mine, my Margaret,
my Madge--little Madge, that found me a home that day I came to New York; my pretty Madge,
that cried when I was going to leave on Ned's account; that I loved the first moment I saw
her, and--always--"

He broke down at this, and leaned forward upon the table, covering his face with his hands.
When he next looked up, with haggard countenance, he saw her lips twitching and tears in her eyes.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, with a flash of hope, and half rose to go to her.

"No, no! Let me alone!" she cried, escaping narrowly from that surrender to her feelings which
would have meant forfeiting the fruits of her long planning.

His mood changed.

"I'll not endure this," he cried, rising and pacing the floor. "You'll find I'm no such weakling,
though I can weep for my wife when I lose her love. He shall find it so, too! I understand
now what you meant by 'to-night of all nights.' He was to meet you to-night. He's quartered
in the house, you say. He was to slink up, no doubt, when all were out of the way--your father
divines little of this, I'll warrant. Well, he may come--but he shall find me waiting at my
wife's door!"

"You'll wait in vain, then. He is very far from here to-night."

"I'll believe that when it's proven. I find 'tis well that I, 'of all men,' came here to-night." 

They died--they died next day. My two beautiful boys, gentlemen, died in my arms, and I was too
weak even to bury them!"

There was another long pause, and the man's head was bowed in his hands once more. Presently
he went on again, but at first without lifting his head.

"We did it, gentlemen," he said--"we did it.

We crawled into San Cristobel at the end of five days; and from that moment my dear wife has
never once stood upright on her feet. So we came out of it, and the baby, Claire, was the
one that suffered least. She was too young to understand, and her
mother--her mother saved her, when I could not save the boys!"

He paused again, and presently sat up, pale, but in full command of himself. "You will excuse me,
gentlemen, I am sure, and make allowances for my feelings," he said. "There is not a great deal
more to tell. Mayes did not last long in Hayti.

Domingue was overthrown, and Mayes left the island, I was told, and
made for another part of the world.

Years afterward I heard of his being in China, though what truth there may have been in the
rumour I cannot say.

"My friend in San Cristobel--he was a cousin, in fact--put me on my legs again, and after a while
he helped me to begin business at San Domingo, under my present name,
Peytral, which, in fact, was my mother's maiden name.

There came a sudden push in trade with the United States about this
time, and I went into my affairs with the more energy to distract
my thoughts.

In fifteen years--to cut a long story short--I had made the small
competency which I have brought to England with me, with the idea
of a peaceful end to my life and my wife's; though I doubt if I am
to have that now.

I doubt it, and I will tell you why.

Mr. Hewitt, when I went away without warning on Thursday night I was dogging Mayes!"

Hewitt nodded, with no sign of surprise. "And the man killed in the barn?"

"That is one more of his thousand crimes, without a doubt.

Though it differs. Do you know what drew my attention to the murders of the men Denson and
Mason, and so set me thinking? In each case the murder was by strangulation, and the medical evidence
at the inquests showed that it was effected by means of a tourniquet.

In fact, in the second case, the tourniquet itself was left behind."

"Yes," Hewitt replied, "I loosened it myself--but, unfortunately,
I was too late."

"Well, now," Peytral went on, "in Hayti, in my time, Mayes's enemies
had a habit of dying suddenly in the night, by strangulation, and
a tourniquet was always the instrument.

And just as murder was quite a popular procedure in that accursed place, so strangulation by tourniquet
became for a while the most common form of the crime.

It was rapid, effective, and silent, you see. So that a murder by tourniquet, quite an unknown
thing in this country, took my attention at once, and when another
followed it so soon, I felt something like certainty. And the triangle
was suggestive, too."

"Were Mayes's victims marked in that way in
Hayti?" There is danger, then--ay, there's
always the possibility. The devil's in it, that I must tear myself from you now; that I must
part with you while matters are so wrong between us; that I must leave you when I would give
ten years of life for one hour to win your love back! But you will take my hand, let me kiss
you once--you will do that for the sake of the old times--and then I will be gone!"

"Be gone? Where?"

"Back to camp, of course, to give warning of this expedition."

"'Tis impossible! Tis hours--"

"'Tis not impossible--I will outride them. They wouldn't have started before dark."

"You would only overtake them, at your best. Do you think they would let you pass?"

"Poh! I know every road. I can ride around them. I'll put the army in readiness for 'em, treason
or no treason! For the present, good-bye--"

The look in his face--of power and resolution--gave her a sudden sense of her triumph slipping
out of her grasp.

"You must not go!" she cried, quite awakened to the peril of the situation to her enterprise.

"I must! Good-bye! One kiss, I beg!"

"But you sha'n't go!" As he came close to her, she clasped him tightly with both arms. She
made no attempt to avoid his kiss, and he, taking this for acquiescence, bestowed the kiss
upon unresponsive lips.

"Now let me go," said he, turning to stride toward the door by which he had entered from the
rear chamber.

"No, no! Stay. Time to win back my love, you said. Take the time now. You may find me not so
difficult of winning back. Nay, I have never ceased to love you, at the bottom of my heart.
I love you now. You shall stay."

"I must not, I dare not. Oh, I would to God I could believe you! But whether 'tis true, or
a device to keep me here, I will not stay. Let me go!"

"I will not! You will have to force me from you, first! I tell you I love you--my husband!"

"If you love me, you will let me go."

"If you love me, you will stay."

"Not a moment--though God knows how I love you! I will come to see you soon again."

"If you go now, I will never let you see me again!--Nay, you must drag me after you, then!"

He was moving toward the door despite her hold; and now he caught her wrists to force open
the clasp in which she held him.

"Oh! you are crushing my arms!" she cried.

"Ay, the beautiful, dear arms--God bless them! But let me go, then!"

"I won't! You will have to kill me, first! You shall not spoil my scheme!"

"Yours!"

"Yes, mine! Mine, against your commander, against your cause!" She was wrought up now to a
fury, at the physical force he exerted to release himself; and for the time, swayed by her
feelings only, she let policy fly to the winds. "Your cause that I hate, because it ruined
my hopes before! You are a fool if you think my being your wife would have kept me from fighting
your hateful cause. I became your wife that I might go to England, and when that failed I was
yours no longer. Love another? Yes!--and you shall not spoil his work and mine--not unless
you kill me!"

For a moment his mental anguish, his overwhelming shame for her, unnerved him, and he stared
at her with a ghastly face, relaxing his pressure for freedom. But this weakness was followed
by a fierce reaction. His countenance darkened, and with one effort, the first into which he
had put his real strength, he tore her arms from him. White-faced and breathing fast, with
rage and fear of defeat, she ran to a front window, and flung it open.

"By heaven, I'll stop you!" she cried. "Help! A rebel--a spy! Ah, you men yonder--this way!
A rebel spy!"

Philip looked over her head, out of the window. Far up the street swaggered five or six figures
which, upon coming under a corner lamp whose rays yellowed a small circle of snow, showed to
be those of British soldiers. Their unaltered movements evidenced that they had not heard her
cry. Thereupon she shouted, with an increased voice:

"Soldiers! Help! Surround this house! A rebel--"

She got no further, for Philip dragged her away from the window, and, when she essayed to scream
the louder, he placed one hand over her mouth, the other about her neck. Holding her thus,
he forced her into the rear chamber, and then toward the window by which he meant to leave.
At its very ledge he let her go, and made to step out to the roof of the veranda. But she grasped
his clothes with the power of rage and desperation, and set up another screaming for help.

In an agony of mind at having to use such painful violence against a woman, and how much more
so against the wife he still loved; and at the grievous appearance that she was willing to
sacrifice him upon the British gallows rather than let him mar her purpose, he flung her away
with all necessary force, so that, with a final shriek of pain and dismay, she fell to the
floor exhausted.

He cast an anguished glance upon her, as she lay defeated and half-fainting; and, knowing not
to what fate he might be leaving her, he moaned, "God pity her!" and stepped out upon the sloping
roof. He scrambled to the edge, let himself half-way down by the trellis, leaped the rest of
the distance, and ran through the back garden from the place he had so well loved.

While his wife, lying weak upon the floor of her chamber, gazed at the window through which
he had disappeared, and, as if a new change had occurred within her, sobbed in consternation:

"Oh, what have I done? He is a man, indeed!--and I have lost him!"

CHAPTER XIII.

Wherein Captain Winwood Declines a Promotion.

Philip assumed that the greatest risk would lie in departing the town by the route over which
he had made his entrance, and in which he had left a trail of alarm. His best course would
be in the opposite direction.

Therefore, having leaped across the fence to the alley behind the Faringfield grounds, he turned
to the right and ran; for he had bethought him, while fleeing through the garden, that he might
probably find a row-boat at the Faringfield wharves. He guessed that, as the port of New York
was open to all but the rebel Americans and their allies the French, Mr. Faringfield would
have continued his trade in the small way possible, under the British flag, that his loss by
the war might be the less, and his means of secretly aiding the rebel cause might be the more.
So there would still be some little shipping, and its accessories, at the wharves.

Though the British occupation had greatly changed the aspect of the town by daylight, it had
not altered the topography of that part which Philip had to traverse, and the darkness that
served as his shield was to him no impediment. Many a time, in the old days, we had chased
and fled through those streets and alleys, in make-believe deer-hunts or mimic Indian warfare.
So, without a collision or a stumble, he made his way swiftly to the mouth of a street that
gave upon the water-front, by the Faringfield warehouse where so many busy days of his boyhood
and youth had passed, and opposite the wharves.

He paused here, lacking knowledge whether the river front was guarded or not. He saw no human
being, but could not be sure whether or not some dark form might emerge from the dimness when
he should cross to the wharves. These, like the street and the roofs, were snow-covered. Aloft
beyond them, but close, two or three faint lights, tiny yellow islets in a sea of gloom, revealed
the presence of the shipping on which he had counted. He could hear the slap of the inky water
against the piles, but scarce another sound, save his own breathing.

He formed the intention of making a noiseless dash across the waterside street, with body bent
low, to the part of the wharf where a small boat was most like to be. He was standing close
to one side of a wooden building that fronted toward the wharf.

He sprang forward, and, just as he passed the corner of the edifice, his head struck something
heavy but yielding, which toppled over sidewise with a grunt, and upon which Philip fell prone,
forcing from it a second grunt a little less vigorous than the first. 'Twas a human body, that
had come from the front of the house at the same instant in which Philip had darted from along
the side.

"Shall I choke him to assure silence?" Phil hurriedly asked himself, and instinctively made
to put his hands to the man's neck. But the body under him began to wriggle, to kick out with
its legs, and to lay about with its hands.

"What the hell d'yuh mean?" it gasped. "Git off o' me!"

Philip scrambled promptly to his feet, having recognised the voice.

"I'll stake my life, it's Meadows!"

"Yes, it is, and who in the name of hellfire an' brimstone--?"

"Hush, Bill! Don't you know my voice? Let me help you up. There you are. I'm Philip Winwood!"

"Why, so y'are, boy! Excuse the way I spoke. But what on airth--?"

"No matter what I'm doing here. The thing is to get back to camp. Come! Is the wharf a safe
place for me?"

"Yes, at this hour of a dark night. But I'd like to know--"

"Keep with me, then," whispered Philip, and made for the wharf, holding the old watchman's
arm. "Show me where there's a small boat. I must row to the Jersey side at once, and then ride--by
heaven, I wish I might get a horse, over there, without going as far as Dan Ellis's! I left
mine with him."

"Mebbe I can get you a hoss, yonder," said Meadows. "An' I reckon I can row you round an' acrost,
'thout their plaguey ships a-spyin' us."

"Then, by the Lord," said Philip, while Meadows began letting himself down the side of the
wharf to the skiff which he knew rode there upon the black water, "'tis enough to make one
believe in miracles, my running into you! What were you doing out so late?"

"Mum, sir! I was jest back from the same camp you're bound fur. 'Tain't five minutes since
I crawled up out o' this yer skift."

"What! And did you meet a party going the other way--toward our camp, I mean?"

"Ay," replied Meadows, standing up in the boat and guiding the legs of Philip as the latter
descended from the wharf. "I watched 'em from the patch o' woods beyont Westervelt's. I took
'em to be Major Lee's men, or mebbe yours, from their caps and plumes; but I dunno: I couldn't
see well. But if they was goin' to the Morristown camp, they was goin' by a roundabout way,
fur they took the road to the right, at the fork t'other side o' them woods!"

"Good, if 'twas a British troop indeed! If I take the short road, I may beat 'em. Caps and
plumes like ours, eh! Here, I'll pull an oar, too; and for God's sake keep clear of the British
ships."

"Trust me, cap'n. I guess they ain't shifted none since I come acrost awhile ago. I'll land
yuh nearest where we can get the hoss I spoke of. 'Tis the beast 'ut brung me from the camp--but
mum about that." The two men moved at the oars, and the boat shot out from the sluggish dock-water
to the live current, down which it headed. "Don't you consarn yerse'f about them ships--'tis
the dark o' the moon an' a cloudy night, an' as fur our course, I could smell it out, if it
come to that!"

They rounded the end of the town, and turned into the Hudson, gliding black over the surface
of blackness. They pulled for some distance against the stream, so as to land far enough above
our post at Paulus Hook. Going ashore in a little cove apparently well-known to Meadows, they
drew up the boat, and hastened inland. Meadows had led the way about half a mile, when a dark
mass composed of farmhouse and outbuildings loomed up before them.

"Here's where the hoss is; Pete Westervelt takes keer of him," whispered the watchman, and
strode, not to the stables, but to the door of what appeared to be an outer kitchen, which
he opened with a key of his own. A friendly whinny greeted him from the narrow dark space into
which he disappeared. He soon came out, leading the horse he used in his journeys to and from
the American camp, and bearing saddle and bridle on his arm. The two men speedily adjusted
these, whereupon Philip mounted.

"Bring or send the beast back by night," said Meadows, handing over the key, with which he
had meanwhile relocked the door of his improvised stable. "Hoss-flesh is damn' skeerce these
times." This was the truth, the needs of the armies having raised the price of a horse to a
fabulous sum.

Philip promised to return the horse or its equivalent; gave a swift acknowledgment of thanks,
and a curt good-night; and made off, leaving old Meadows to foot it, and row it, once more
back to New York.

'Twas now, till he should reach the camp, but a matter of steady galloping, with ears alert
for the sound of other hoof-beats, eyes watchful at crossroads and open stretches for the party
he hoped to forestall. While he had had ways and means to think of, and had been in peril of
detection by the British, or in doubt of obtaining a horse without a long trudge to Ellis's
hut, his mind had been diverted from the unhappy interview with Margaret. But now that swept
back into his thoughts, inundating his soul with grief and shame, of the utmost degree of bitterness.
These were the more complete from the recollection of the joyous anticipations with which he
had gone to meet her.

Contemplation of this contrast, sense of his desertion, overcame his habitual resistance to
self-pity, a feeling against which he was usually on the stronger guard for his knowledge that
it was a concomitant of his inherent sensibility. He quite yielded to it for a time; and though
'twas sharpened by his comparison of the Margaret he had just left, with the pretty, soft-smiling
Madge of other days, that comparison eventually supplanted self-pity with pity for her, a feeling
no less laden with sorrow.

He dared not think of what her perverseness might yet lead her to. For himself he saw nothing
but hopeless sorrow, unless she could be brought back to her better self. But, alas, he by
whose influence that end might be achieved--for he could not believe that her heart had quite
cast him out--was flying from her, and years might pass ere he should see her again: meanwhile,
how intolerable would life be to him! His heart, with the instinct of self-protection, sought
some interest in which it might find relief.

He thought of the cause for which he was fighting. That must suffice; it must take the place
of wife and love. Cold, impersonal, inadequate as it seemed now, he knew that in the end it
would suffice to fill great part of that inner heart which she had occupied. He turned to it
with the kindling affection which a man ever has for the resource that is left him when he
is scorned elsewhere. And he felt his ardour for it fanned by his deepened hate for the opposing
cause, a hate intensified by the circumstance that his rival was of that cause. For that rival's
sake, he hated with a fresh implacability the whole royal side and everything pertaining to
it. He pressed his teeth together, and resolved to make that side pay as dearly as lay in him
to make it, for what he had lost of his wife's love, and for what she had lost of her probity.

And the man himself, Falconer! 'Twas he that commanded this night's wild attempt, if she had
spoken truly. Well, Falconer should not succeed this night, and Philip, with a kind of bitter
elation, thanked God 'twas through him that the attempt should be the more utterly defeated.
He patted his horse--a faithful beast that had known but a short rest since it had travelled
over the same road in the opposite direction--and used all means to keep it at the best pace
compatible with its endurance. Forward it sped, in long, unvarying bounds, seeing the road
in the dark, or rather in the strange dusky light yielded by the snow-covered earth and seeming
rather to originate there than to be reflected from the impenetrable obscurity overhead.

From the attempt which he was bent upon turning into a ridiculous abortion, if it lay in the
power of man and horse to do so, Philip's thoughts went to the object of that attempt, Washington
himself. He was thrilled at once with a greater love and admiration for that firm soul maintaining
always its serenity against the onslaughts of men and circumstance, that soul so unshakable
as to seem in the care of Fate itself. Capture Washington! Philip laughed at the thought.

And yet a British troop had seized General Charles Lee when he was the rebels' second in command,
and, in turn, a party of Yankees had taken the British General Prescott from his quarters in
Rhode Island. True, neither of these officers was at the time of his seizure as safely quartered
and well guarded as Washington was now; but, on the other hand, Margaret had spoken of treachery
in the American camp. Who were the traitors? Philip hoped he might find out their chief, at least.

It was a long and hard ride, and more and more an up-hill one as it neared its end. But Philip's
thoughts made him so often unconscious of his progress, and of the passage of the hours, that
he finally realised with a momentary surprise that he had reached a fork of the road, near
which he should come upon the rebel pickets, and that the night was far spent. He might now
take one road, and enter the camp at its nearest point, but at a point far from Washington's
headquarters; or he might take the other road and travel around part of the camp, so as to
enter it at a place near the general's house. 'Twas at or near the latter place that the enemy
would try to enter, as they would surely be so directed by the traitors within the camp.

Heedless of the apparent advantage of alarming the camp at the earliest possible moment, at
whatever part of it he could then reach, he felt himself impelled to choose the second road.
He ever afterward held that his choice of this seemingly less preferable road was the result
of a swift process of unconscious reasoning--for he maintained that what we call intuition
is but an instantaneous perception of facts and of their inevitable inferences, too rapid for
the reflective part of the mind to record.

He felt the pressure of time relaxed, for a troop of horse going by the circuitous route Meadows
had indicated could not have reached the camp in the hours since they had passed the place
where Meadows had seen them. So he let his horse breathe wherever the road was broken by ascents.
At last he drew up, for a moment, upon an eminence which gave, by daylight, a wide view of
country. Much of this expanse being clear of timber, and clad in snow, it yielded something
to a night-accustomed eye, despite the darkness. A low, far-off, steady, snow-muffled beating,
which had imperceptibly begun to play on Winwood's ear, indicated a particular direction for
his gaze. Straining his senses, he looked.

Against the dusky-white background of snow, he could make out an indistinct, irregular, undulating
line of moving dark objects. He recognised this appearance as the night aspect of a distant
band of horsemen. They were travelling in a line parallel to his own. Presently, he knew, they
would turn toward him, and change their linear appearance to that of a compact mass. But he
waited not for that. He gently bade his horse go on, and presently he turned straight for the
camp, having a good lead of the horsemen.

He was passing a little copse at his right hand, when suddenly a dark figure stepped from behind
a tree into the road before him. Thinking this was a soldier on picket duty, he recollected
the word of the night, and reined in to give it upon demand. But the man, having viewed him
as well as the darkness allowed, seemed to realise having made a mistake, and, as suddenly
as he had appeared, stalked back into the wood.

"What does this mean?" thought Philip; and then he remembered what Margaret had said of treachery.
Was this mysterious night-walker a traitor posted there to aid the British to their object?

"Stop or I'll shoot you down!" cried Philip, remembering too late that he had parted with both
his pistols at the Bowery lane guard-house.

But the noise of the man's retreat through the undergrowth told that he was willing to risk a shot.

Philip knew the importance of obtaining a clue to the traitors. The rebels had suffered considerably
from treachery on their own side; had been in much danger from the treason of Doctor Church
at Boston; had owed the speedier loss of their Fort Washington to that of Dumont; and (many
of them held) the retreat which Washington checked at Monmouth, to the design of their General
Charles Lee. So the capture of this man, apart from its possible effect upon the present business,
might lead to the unearthing of a nest of traitors likely at some future time, if not to-night,
to menace the rebel cause.

Philip leaped from his horse, and, trusting to the animal's manifest habit of awaiting orders,
stopped not to tie it, but plunged directly into the wood, drawing his sword as he went.

The sound of the man's flight had ceased, but Philip continued in the direction it had first
taken. He was about to cross a row of low bushes, when he unexpectedly felt his ankle caught
by a hand, and himself thrown forward on his face. The man had crouched amongst the bushes
and tripped him up as he made to pass.

The next moment, the man was on Philip's back, fumbling to grasp his neck, and muttering:

"Tell me who you are, quick! Who are you from? You don't wear the dragoon cap, I see. Now speak
the truth, or by God I'll shoot your head off!"

Philip knew, at the first word, the voice of Ned Faringfield. It took him not an instant to
perceive who was a chief--if not the chief--traitor in the affair, or to solve what had long
been to him also a problem, that of Ned's presence in the rebel army. The recognition of voice
had evidently not been mutual; doubtless this was because Philip's few words had been spoken
huskily. Retaining his hoarseness, and taking his cue from Ned's allusion to the dragoon cap,
he replied:

"'Tis all right. You're our man, I see. Though I don't wear the dragoon cap, I come from New
York about Captain Falconer's business."

"Then why the hell didn't you give the word?" said Ned, releasing his pressure upon Philip's body.

"You didn't ask for it. Get up--you're breaking my back."

Ned arose, relieving Philip of all weight, but stood over him with a pistol.

"Then give it now," Ned commanded.

"I'll be hanged if you haven't knocked it clean out of my head," replied Philip. "Let me think
a moment--I have the cursedest memory."

He rose with a slowness, and an appearance of weakness, both mainly assumed. He still held
his sword, which, happily for him, had turned flat under him as he fell. When he was quite
erect, he suddenly flung up the sword so as to knock the pistol out of aim, dashed forward
with all his weight, and, catching Ned by the throat with both hands, bore him down upon his
side among the briars, and planted a knee upon his neck. Instantly shortening his sword, he
held the point close above Ned's eye.

"Now," said Phil, "let that pistol fall! Let it fall, I say, or I'll run my sword into your
brain. That's well. You traitor, shall I kill you now? or take you into camp and let you hang
for your treason?"

Ned wriggled, but finding that Philip held him in too resolved a grasp, gave up.

"Is it you, brother Phil?" he gasped. "Why, then, you lied; you said you came from New York,
about Falconer's business. I'd never have thought you'd stoop to a mean deception!"

"I think I'd better take you to hang," continued Philip. "If I kill you now, we sha'n't get
the names of the other traitors."

"You wouldn't do such an unbrotherly act, Phil! I know you wouldn't. You've too good a heart.
Think of your wife, my sister--"

"Ay, the traitress!"

"Then think of my father; think of the mouth that fed you--I mean the hand that fed you! You'll
let me go, Phil--sure you'll let me go. Remember how we played together when we were boys.
I'll give you the names of the other traitors. I'm not so much to blame: I was lured into this--lured
by your wife--so help me God, I was--and you're responsible for her, you know. You ought to
be the last man in the world--"

Philip's mood had changed at thought of Ned's father; the old man's pride of the name, his
secret and perilous devotion to the rebel cause: he deserved better of that cause than that
his son should die branded as a traitor to it; and better of Phil than that by his hand that
son should be slain.

"How can you let me have the names without loss of time, if I let you go, on condition of your
giving our army a wide berth the rest of your days?" Philip asked, turning the captive over
upon his back.

"I can do it in a minute, I swear," cried Ned. "Will you let me go if I do?"

"If I'm convinced they're the right names and all the names; but if so, and I let you go, remember
I'll see you hanged if you ever show your face in our army again."

"Rest easy on that. I take you at your word. The names are all writ down in my pocketbook,
with the share of money each man was to get. If I was caught, I was bound the rest should suffer,
too. The book is in my waistcoat lining--there; do you feel it? Rip it out."

Philip did so, and, sitting on Ned's chest, with a heel ready to beat in his skull at a treacherous
movement, contrived to strike a light and verify by the brief flame of the tow the existence
of a list of names. As time was now of ever-increasing value, Philip took it for granted that
the list was really what Ned declared it. He then possessed himself of Ned's pistol, and rose,
intending to conduct him as far as to the edge of the camp, and to release him only when Philip
should have given the alarm, so that Ned could not aid the approach of Falconer's party. But
Philip had no sooner communicated this intention than Ned suddenly whipped out a second pistol
from his coat pocket, in which his hand had been busy for some time, and aimed at him. Thanks
to a spoiled priming, the hammer fell without effect.

"You double traitor!" cried Philip, rushing upon Ned with threatening sword. But Ned, with
a curse, bent aside, and, before Philip could bring either of his weapons into use, grappled
with him for another fall. The two men swayed together an instant; then Philip once more shortened
his sword and plunged the point into Ned's shoulder as both came down together.

"God damn your soul!" cried Ned, and for the time of a breath hugged his enemy the tighter.
But for the time of a breath only; the hold then relaxed; and Philip, rising easily from the
embrace of the limp form, ran unimpeded to the road, mounted the waiting horse, and galloped
to the rebel lines.

When our party, all the fatigue of the ride forgotten in a thrill of expectation, reached the
spot where Ned Faringfield was to join us, our leader's low utterance of the signal, and our
eager peerings into the wood, met no response. As we stood huddled together, there broke upon
us from the front such a musketry, and there forthwith appeared in the open country at our
left such a multitude of mounted figures, that we guessed ourselves betrayed, and foresaw ourselves
surrounded by a vastly superior force if we stayed for a demonstration.

"'Tis all up, gentlemen!" cried Captain Falconer, in a tone of resignation, and without even
an oath; whereupon we wheeled in disappointment and made back upon our tracks; being pursued
for some miles, but finally abandoned, by the cavalry we had seen, which, as we did not learn
till long afterward, was led by Winwood. We left some dead and wounded near the place where
we had been taken by surprise; and some whose horses had been hurt were made prisoners.

For his conduct in all this business, an offer was made to Philip of promotion to a majority;
but he firmly declined it, saying that he owed the news of our expedition to such circumstances
that he chose not, in his own person, to profit by it.[6]

CHAPTER XIV.

The Bad Shilling Turns up Once More in Queen Street.

"This will be sad news to Mrs. Winwood, gentlemen," said Captain Falconer to Tom and me, as
we rode toward the place where we should take the boats for New York. The day was well forward,
but its gray sunless light held little cheer for such a silent, dejected crew as we were.

The captain was too much the self-controlled gentleman to show great disappointment on his
own account, though he had probably set store upon this venture, as an opportunity that he
lacked in his regular duties on General Clinton's staff, where he served pending the delayed
enlistment of the loyalist cavalry troop he had been sent over to command. But though he might
hide his own regrets, now that we were nearing Margaret, it was proper to consider our failure
with reference to her.

"Doubtless," he went on, "there was treachery against us somewhere; for we cannot suppose such
vigilance and preparation to be usual with the rebels. But we must not hint as much to her.
The leak may have been, you see, through one of the instruments of her choosing--the man Meadows,
perhaps, or--" (He stopped short of mentioning Ned Faringfield, whose trustworthiness on either
side he was warranted, by much that he had heard, in doubting.) "In any case," he resumed,
"'twould be indelicate to imply that her judgment of men, her confidence in any one, could
have been mistaken. We'd best merely tell her, then, that the rebels were on the alert, and
fell upon us before we could meet her brother."

We thought to find her with face all alive, expectant of the best news, or at least in a fever
of impatience, and that therefore 'twould be the more painful to tell her the truth. But when
the captain's servant let the three of us in at the front door (Tom and I had waited while
Falconer briefly reported our fiasco to General Clinton) and we found her waiting for us upon
the stairs, her face was pale with a set and tragic wofulness, as if tidings of our failure
had preceded us. Cæsar's bridge rested on sesquipedalian beams of solid timber. The Belgian bridge
is supported on tubular piles of steel of sesquipedalian diameter driven by steam or screwed
down into the sand to a depth of fifty feet.

There have been other bridges near this very spot [Page 42] with which it might be compared.
One of them was called Ta-liang, the "Great Bridge," and gave name to a city. Another was Pien-liang,
"The Bridge of Pien," one of the names of the present city of K'ai-fung-fu. That bridge has
long since disappeared; but the name adheres to the city.

What an unstable foundation on which to erect a seat of empire! Yet the capital has been located
in this vicinity more than once or twice within the last twenty-five
centuries.

The first occasion was during the dynasty of Chou (1100 B. c.), when the king, to be more central,
or perhaps dreading the incursions of the Tartars, forsook his capital in Shensi and followed
the stream down almost to the sea, braving the quicksands and the
floods rather than face those terrible foes.

Again, in the Sung period, it was the seat of government for a century and a half.

The safest refuge for a fugitive court which, once established there, has no reason to fear attack
by sea or river, it is somewhat strange that in 1900 the Empress
Dowager did not direct her steps toward K'ai-fung-fu, instead of escaping
to Si-ngan.

Being, however, herself a Tartar, she might have been expected to act in a way contrary to precedents
set by Chinese dynasties. Obviously, she chose the latter as a place
of refuge because it lay near the borders of Tartary.

It is noteworthy that a loyal governor of Honan at that very time prepared a palace for her
accommodation in K'ai-fung-fu, and when the court was invited to
return to Peking, he implored her not to risk herself in the northern
capital.

Honan is a province rich in agricultural, and probably [Page 43] in mineral, resources, but it
has no outlet in the way of trade. What a boon this railway is destined to be, as a channel of
communication with neighbouring provinces!

I crossed the Yellow River in 1866, but there was then no bridge of any kind. Two-thirds of a mile
in width, with a furious current, the management of the ferry-boat was no easy task. On that occasion
an object which presented stronger attractions than this wonderful bridge had drawn me to K'ai-fung-fu--a
colony of Jews, a fragment of the Lost Tribes of Israel. As mentioned in a previous chapter, I
had come by land over the very track now followed by the railroad,
but under conditions in strong contrast with the luxuries of a railway
carriage--"Alone, unfriended, solitary, slow," I had made my way painfully,
shifting from horse to cart, and sometimes compelled by the narrowness
of a path to descend to a wheelbarrow.

How I longed for the advent of the iron horse. Now I have with me a jovial company; and we may
enjoy the mental stimulus of an uninterrupted session of the Oriental Society, while making
more distance in an hour than I then made in a day.

Of the condition of the Jews of K'ai-fung-fu, as I found them, I have given a detailed account
elsewhere.[*] Suffice it to say here that the so-called colony consisted of about four hundred
persons, belonging to seven families or clans. Undermined by a flood of the Yellow River, their
synagogue had become ruinous, and, being unable to repair it, they had disposed of its timbers
to relieve the pressure of their dire poverty. [Page 44] Nothing remained but the vacant space,
marked by a single stone recording the varying fortunes of these forlorn Israelites. It avers
that their remoter ancestors arrived in China by way of India in the Han dynasty, before the Christian
era, and that the founders of this particular colony found their way to K'ai-fung-fu in the
T'ang dynasty about 800 A. D. It also gives an outline of their Holy
Faith, showing that, in all their wanderings, they had not forsaken
the God of their fathers.

They still possessed some rolls of the Law, written in Hebrew, on sheepskins, but they no longer
had a rabbi to expound them. They had forgotten the sacred tongue, and some of them had wandered
into the fold of Mohammed, whose creed resembled their own. Some too had embraced the religion
of Buddha.

[Footnote *: See "Cycle of Cathay." Revell & Co., New York.]

My report was listened to with much interest by the rich Jews of Shanghai,
but not one of them put his hand in his pocket to rebuild the ruined
synagogue; and without that for a rallying-place the colony must ere
long fade away, and be absorbed in the surrounding heathenism, or
be led to embrace Christianity.

I now learn that the Jews of Shanghai
have manifested enough interest to bring a few of their youth to that
port for instruction in the Hebrew language. There were eight of us, at the two card-tables: Mr. Faringfield and
his lady, my mother, Margaret and Fanny, Mr. Cornelius, Tom, and myself. And every one of us,
looking from face to face, showed the same thought, the same recognition of that half-cowardly,
half-defiant thump, though for so long we had not heard it. How it knocked away the years,
and brought younger days rushing back upon us!

Mr. Faringfield's face showed a sweep of conjectures, ranging from that of Ned's being in New
York in service of his cause, to that of his being there as a deserter from it. Margaret flushed
a moment, and then composed herself with an effort, for whatever issue this unexpected arrival
might portend. The rest of us waited in a mere wonder touched with the old disquieting dread
of painful scenes.

Old Noah, jealous of the single duty that his years had left him, and resentful of its frequent
usurpation by Falconer's servant, always stayed up to attend the door till the last of the
family had retired. We now heard him shuffling through the hall, heard the movement of the
lock, and then instantly a heavy tread that covered the sound of Noah's. The parlour door from
the hall was flung open, and in strode the verification of our thoughts.

Ned's clothes were briar-torn and mud-spattered; his face was haggard, his hair unkempt, his
left shoulder humped up and held stiff. He stopped near the door, and stared from face to face,
frowning because of the sudden invasion of his eyes by the bright candlelight. When his glance
fell upon Margaret, it rested; and thereupon, just as if he were not returned from an absence
of three years and more, and heedless of the rest of us, confining his address to her alone,
he bellowed, with a most malignant expression of face and voice:

"So you played a fine game with us, my lady--luring us into the dirty scheme, and then turning
around and setting your husband on us in the act! I see through it all now, you underhanded,
double-dealing slut!"

"Are you speaking to me, sir?" asked Margaret, with dignity.

"Of course I am; and don't think I'll hold my tongue because of these people. Let 'em hear
it all, I don't care. It's all up now, and I'm a hanged man if ever I go near the American
camp again. But I'm safe here in New York, though I was damn' near being shot when I first
came into the British lines. But I've been before General Knyphausen,[7] and been identified,
and been acknowledged by your Captain Falconer as the man that worked your cursed plot at t'other
end; and I've been let go free--though I'm under watch, no doubt. So you see there's naught
to hinder me exposing you for what you are--the woman that mothered a British plot, and worked
her trusting brother into it, and then betrayed him to her husband."

"That's a lie!" cried Margaret, crimson in the face.

"What does all this mean?" inquired Mr. Faringfield, rising.

Paying no attention to his father, Edward retorted upon Margaret, who also rose, and who stood
between him and the rest of us:

"A lie, is it? Perhaps you can make General Knyphausen and Captain Falconer believe that, now
I've told 'em whose cursed husband it was that attacked me at the meeting-place, and alarmed
the camp. You didn't think I'd live to tell the tale, did you? You thought to hear of my being
hanged, and your husband promoted for his services, and so two birds killed with one stone!
But providence had a word to say about that. The Lord is never on the side of plotters and
traitors, let me tell you, and here I am to outface you. A lie, is it? A lie that your husband
spoiled the scheme? Why, you brazen hussy, he came from New York that very night--he told me
so himself! He had seen you, and you had told him all, I'll lay a thousand guineas!"

'Twas at the time a puzzle to me that Margaret should condescend to explanations with him as
she forthwith did. But I now see how, realising that proofs of Philip's visit might turn up
and seem to bear out Ned's accusation, she must have felt the need of putting herself instantly
right with Tom and me, lest she might eventually find herself wrong with General Clinton and
Captain Falconer.

"I own that Philip saw me that night," she said, with a self-control compelled by her perilous
situation. "He came here by stealth, and took me by surprise. He found reason to suspect our
plot, but till now I never knew 'twas really he that put the rebels on their guard. I thought
he would be too late. 'Twas through no intention of mine that he guessed what was afoot. I
never told Tom and Bert" (these words were meant for our ears) "--or Captain Falconer--of his
visit, for fear they might think, as you seem to, that I was to blame. That's all the truth,
and we shall see whether Captain Falconer will believe you or me."

Here Mr. Faringfield, whose patience at being so far ignored, though 'twas supported by the
hope of receiving the desired enlightenment from their mutual speeches, was at length exhausted,
put in with some severity.

"Pray, let us into these mysteries, one of you. Margaret, what is it I hear, of a visit from
Philip? of a British plot? By heaven, if I thought--but explain the matter, if you please."

"I have no right to," said she, her face more and more suffused with red. "'Tis not my secret
alone; others are concerned."

"It appears," rejoined Mr. Faringfield, "it is a secret that abides in my house, and therefore
I have a right to its acquaintance. I command you to explain."

"Command?" she echoed lightly, with astonishment. "Is a married woman subject to her father's
commands?"

"An inmate of my house is subject to my commands," he replied, betraying his hidden wrath by
a dark look.

"I beg your pardon," said she. "That part of the house which Philip has paid, or will pay,
for my living in, is my own, for the time being. I shall go there--"

"You shall not leave this room," cried her father, stalking toward the door. "You fall back
upon Philip's name. Very well, he has delegated the care of you to me in his absence. 'Tis
time I should represent his authority over you, when I hear of your plotting against his country."

"I have a right to be loyal to the king, above the authority of a husband."

"If your loyalty extends to plotting against your husband's cause, you have not the right under
my roof--or under Philip Winwood's part of it. I will know what this scheme is, that you have
been engaged in."

"Not from me!" said Margaret, with a resolution that gave a new, unfamiliar aspect to so charmingly
feminine a creature.

"Oh, let her alone, father," put in Ned, ludicrously ready for the faintest opportunity either
to put his father under obligation or to bring down Margaret. "I'll be frank with you. I've
no reason to hide what's past and gone. She and Captain Falconer had a plan to make Washington
a prisoner, by a night expedition from New York, and some help in our camp--"

"Which you were to give, I see, you treacherous scoundrel!" said his father, with contempt.

"Oh, now, no hard names, sir. You see, several of us--some good patriots, too, with the country's
best interests at heart--couldn't swallow this French alliance; we saw that if we ever did
win by it, we should only be exchanging tyrants of our own blood for tyrants of frog-eaters.
We began to think England would take us back on good terms if the war could be ended; and we
considered the state of the country, the interests of trade--indeed, 'twas chiefly the thought
of your business, the hope of seeing it what it once was, that drove me into the thing."

"You wretched hypocrite!" interposed Mr. Faringfield.

"Oh, well; misunderstand me, as usual. Call me names, if you like. I'm only telling the truth,
and what you wished to know--what she wouldn't tell you. I'm not as bad as some; I can up and
confess, when all's over. Well, as I was about to say, we had everything ready, and the night
was set; and then, all of a sudden, Phil Winwood swoops down on me; treats me in a most unbrotherly
fashion, I must say" (Ned cast an oblique look at his embarrassed shoulder); "and alarmed the
camp. And when the British party rode up, instead of catching Washington they caught hell.
And I leave it to you, sir, whether your daughter there, after playing the traitor to her husband's
cause, for the sake of her lover; didn't turn around and play the traitor to her own game,
for the benefit of her husband, and the ruin of her brother. Such damnableness!"

"'For the sake of her lover,'" Mr. Faringfield repeated. "What do you mean by that, sir?" The
phrase, indeed, had given us all a disagreeable start.

"What I say, sir. How could he be otherwise? I guessed it before; and I became sure of it this
evening, from the way he spoke of her at General Knyphausen's quarters."

"What a lie!" cried Margaret. "Captain Falconer is a gentleman; he's not of a kind to talk
about women who have given him no reason to do so. 'Tis ridiculous! You maligning villain!"

"Oh, 'twasn't what he said, my dear; 'twas his manner whenever he mentioned you. When a man
like him handles a woman's name so delicate-like, as if 'twas glass and might break--so grave-like,
as if she was a sacred subject--it means she's put herself on his generosity."

Margaret affected a derisive laugh, as at her brother's pretensions to wisdom.

"Oh, I know all the stages," he continued, watching her with a malicious calmness of self-confidence.
"When gentry of his sort are first struck with a lady, but not very deep, they speak out their
admiration bold and gallant; when they find they're hit seriously, but haven't made sure of
her, they speak of her with make-believe carelessness or mere respect: they don't like to show
how far gone they are. But when she's come to an understanding with 'em, and put 'em under
obligations and responsibilities--it's only then they touch her name so tender and considerate,
as if it was so fragile. But that stage doesn't last for ever, my young lady--bear that in mind!"

"You insolent wretch!" said Margaret, ready to cry with rage and confusion.

"This is outrageous," ventured Mrs. Faringfield, daring to look her indignation at Ned. "William,
how can you tolerate such things said about your daughter?"

But Mr. Faringfield had been studying his daughter's countenance all the while. Alas for Margaret,
she had never given pains to the art of dissimulation, or taken the trouble to learn hypocrisy,
or even studied self-control: a negligence common to beauties, who rely upon their charms to
carry them through all emergencies without resort to shifts. She was equal to a necessary lie
that had not to be maintained with labour, or to a pretence requiring little effort and encountering
no suspicion, but to the concealment of her feelings when she was openly put to the question,
her powers were inadequate. If ever a human face served its owner ill, by apparently confessing
guilt, where only folly existed, Margaret's did so now.

"What I may think of the rascal who says these things," replied Mr. Faringfield, with the unnatural
quietness that betrays a tumult of inward feelings, "I will tolerate them till I am sure they
are false." His eyes were still fixed on Margaret.

"What!" said she, a little hysterically. "Do you pay attention to the slanders of such a fellow?
To an accusation like that, made on the mere strength of a gentleman's manner of mentioning me?"

"No, but I pay attention to your manner of receiving the accusation: your telltale face, your
embarrassment--"

"'Tis my anger--"

"There's an anger of innocence, and an anger of guilt. I would your anger had shown more of
contempt than of confusion." Alas! he knew naught of half-guilt and its manifestations.

"How can you talk so?--I won't listen--such insulting innuendoes!--even if you are my father--why,
this knave himself says I betrayed Captain Falconer's scheme: how could he think that, if--"

"That proves nothing," said Ned, with a contemptuous grin. "Women do unaccountable things.
A streak of repentance, maybe; or a lovers' quarrel. The point is, a woman like you wouldn't
have entered into a scheme like that, with a man like him, if there hadn't already been a pretty
close understanding of another kind. Oh, I know your whole damn' sex, begad!--no offence to
these other ladies."

"William, this is scandalous!" cried Mrs. Faringfield. My mother, too, looked what it was not
her place to speak. As for Tom and me, we had to defer to Mr. Faringfield; and so had Cornelius,
who was very solemn, with an uneasy frown between his white eyebrows. Poor Fanny, most sensitive
to disagreeable scenes, sat in self-effacement and mute distress.

Mr. Faringfield, not replying to his wife, took a turn up and down the room, apparently in
great mental perplexity and dismay.

Suddenly he was a transformed man. Pale with wrath, his lips moving spasmodically, his arms
trembling, he turned upon Margaret, grasped her by the shoulders, and in a choked, half-articulate
voice demanded:

"Tell the truth! Is it so--this shame--crime? Speak! I will shake the truth from you!"

"Father! Don't!" she screamed, terrified by his look; and from his searching gaze, she essayed
to hide, by covering her face with her hands, the secret her conscience magnified so as to
forbid confession and denial alike. I am glad to recall this act of womanhood, which showed
her inability to brazen all accusation out.

But Mr. Faringfield saw no palliating circumstance in this evidence of womanly feeling. Seeing
in it only an admission of guilt, he raised his arms convulsively for a moment as if he would
strike her down with his hands, or crush her throat with them. But, overcoming this impulse,
he drew back so as to be out of reach of her, and said, in a low voice shaken with passion:

"Go! From my house, I mean--my roof--and from Philip's part of it. God! that a child of mine
should plot against my country, for England--that was enough; but to be false to her husband,
too--false to Philip! I will own no such treason! I turn you out, I cast you off! Not another
hour in my house, not another minute! You are not my daughter, not Philip's wife!--You are
a thing I will not name! We disown you. Go, I bid you; let me never see you again!"

She had not offered speech or motion; and she continued to stand motionless, regarding her
father in fear and sorrow.

"I tell you to leave this house!" he added, in a slightly higher and quicker voice. "Do you
wait for me to thrust you out?"

She slowly moved toward the door. But her mother ran and caught her arm, and stood between
her and Mr. Faringfield.

"William!" said the lady. "Consider--the poor child--your favourite, she was--you mustn't send
her out. I'm sure Philip wouldn't have you do this, for all she might seem guilty of."

"Ay, the lad is too kind of heart. So much the worse her treason to him! She shall go; and
you, madam, will not interfere. 'Tis for me to command. Be pleased to step aside!"

His passion had swiftly frozen into an implacable sternness which struck fear to the childish
heart of his wife, and she obeyed him dumbly. Dropping weakly upon a chair, she added her sobs
to those of Fanny, which had begun to break plaintively upon the tragic silence.

Margaret raised her glance from the floor, in a kind of wistful leave-taking, to us who looked
on and pitied her.

"Indeed, sir," began Mr. Cornelius softly, rising and taking a step toward Mr. Faringfield.
But the latter cut his good intention short, by a mandatory gesture and the harshly spoken words:

"No protests, sir; no intercessions. I am aware of what I do."

"But at midnight, sir. Think of it. Where can she find shelter at this hour?"

"Why," put in my mother, "in my house, and welcome, if she must leave this one."

"Thank you, Mrs. Russell," said Margaret, in a stricken voice. "For the time being, I shall
be glad--"

"For all time, if you wish," replied my mother. "And we shall have your things moved over tomorrow."

"By the Lord, sis," cried Ned, with a sudden friendliness quite astonishing after the part
he had taken, and to be accounted for only by the idea that had struck him, "here's a blessing
in disguise! There's a ship sails next Wednesday--so I found out this evening--and damn me
if you sha'n't go to London with me! That's the kind of a forgiving brother I am!"

She had utterly ignored his first words, but when he reached the point, she looked at him thoughtfully,
with a check upon her resentment. She made no reply, however; but he had not missed her expression.
Tom and I exchanged side glances, remembering Ned's former wish that he might imitate his Irish
friend by taking his sister to London to catch a fortune with. As for Margaret, as matters
stood, it would be something to go to London, relying on her beauty. I fancied I saw that thought
in her look.

Mr. Faringfield, who had heard with cold heedlessness my mother's offer and Ned's, now rang
the bell. Noah appeared, with a sad, affrighted face--he had been listening at the door--and
cast a furtive glance at Margaret, in token of commiseration.

"Bring Mrs. Winwood's cloak," said Mr. Faringfield to the old negro. "Then open the door for
her and Mr. Edward."

While Noah was absent on this errand, and Margaret waited passively, Tom went to her, kissed
her cheek, and then came away without a word.

"You'll accept Mrs. Russell's invitation, dear," said Mrs. Faringfield, in tears, "and we can
see you every day."

"Certainly, for the present," replied Margaret, who did not weep, but spoke in a singularly
gentle voice.

"And I, too, for to-night, with my best thanks," added Ned, who had not been invited, but whom
my mother preferred not to refuse.

Noah brought in the cloak, and placed it around Madge with an unusual attentiveness, prolonging
the slight service to its utmost possible length, and keeping an eye for any sign of relenting
on the part of his master.

My mother and I stood waiting for Margaret, while Mrs. Faringfield and Fanny weepingly embraced
her. That done, and with a good-night for Tom and Mr. Cornelius, but not a word or a look for
her father, who stood as silent and motionless as marble, she laid her hand softly upon my
arm, and we went forth, leaving my mother to the unwelcome escort of Ned. The door closed upon
us four--'twas the last time it ever closed upon one of us--and in a few seconds we were at
our steps. And who should come along at that moment, on his way to his quarters, but Captain
Falconer? He stopped, in pleased surprise, and, peering at our faces in the darkness, asked
in his gay, good-natured way what fun was afoot.

"Not much fun," said Margaret. "I have just left my father's house, at his command."

He stood in a kind of daze. As it was very cold, we bade him good night, and went in. Reopening
the door, and looking out, I saw him proceeding homeward, his head averted in a meditative
attitude. I knew not till the next day what occurred when he arrived in the Faringfield hall.

"Sir," said Tom Faringfield, stepping forth from where he had been leaning against the stair-post,
"I must speak low, because my parents and sister are in the parlour there, and I don't wish
them to hear--"

"With all my heart," replied Falconer. "Won't you come into my room, and have a glass of wine?"

"No, sir. If I had a glass of wine, I should only waste it by throwing it in your face. All
I have to say is, that you are a scoundrel, and I desire an opportunity to kill you as soon
as may be--"

"Tut, tut, my dear lad--"

"I'll think of a pretext, and send my friend to you to-morrow," added Tom, and, turning his
back, went quietly up-stairs to his room; where, having locked the door, he fell face forward
upon his bed, and cried like a heart-broken child.

CHAPTER XV.

In Which There Is a Flight by Sea, and a Duel by Moonlight.

It appeared, from Ned Faringfield's account of himself, that after his encounter with Philip,
and his fall from the shock of his wound, he had awakened to a sense of being still alive,
and had made his way to the house of a farmer, whose wife took pity on him and nursed him in
concealment to recovery. He then travelled through the woods to Staten Island, where, declaring
himself a deserter from the rebel army, he demanded to be taken before the British commander.

Being conveyed to headquarters in the Kennedy House, near the bottom of the Broadway, he told
his story, whereupon witnesses to his identity were easily found, and, Captain Falconer having
been brought to confront him, he was released from bodily custody. He must have had a private
interview with Falconer, and, perhaps, obtained money from him, before he came to the Faringfield
house to vent his disappointment upon Madge. Or else he had got money from some other source;
he may have gambled with what part of his pay he received in the early campaigns. He may, on
some occasion, have safely violated Washington's orders against private robbery under the cover
of war. He may have had secret dealings with the "Skinners" or other unattached marauders.
In any case, his assured manner of offering Madge a passage to England with him, showed that
he possessed the necessary means.

He had instantly recognised a critical moment of Madge's life, the moment when she found herself
suddenly deprived of all resource but a friendly hospitality which she was too proud to make
long use of, as a heaven-sent occasion for his ends. At another time, he would not have thought
of making Madge his partner in an enterprise like the Irishman's--he feared her too much, and
was too sensible of her dislike and contempt.

He set forth his scheme to her the next day, taking her acquiescence for granted. She listened
quietly, without expressing her thoughts; but she neither consented nor refused. Ned, however,
made full arrangements for their voyage; considering it the crowning godsend of a providential
situation, that a vessel was so soon to make the trip, notwithstanding the unlikely time of
year. When Margaret's things were brought over to our house, he advised her to begin packing
at once, and he even busied himself in procuring additional trunks from his mother and mine,
that she might be able to take all her gowns to London. The importance of this, and of leaving
none of her jewelry behind, he most earnestly impressed upon her.

Yet she did not immediately set about packing, Ned probably had moments of misgiving, and of
secret cursing, when he feared he might be reckoning without his host. The rest of us, at the
time, knew nothing of what passed between the two: he pretended that the extra trunks were
for some mysterious baggage of his own: nor did we then know what passed between her and Captain
Falconer late in the day, and upon which, indeed, her decision regarding Ned's offer depended.

She had watched at our window for the captain's passing. When at length he appeared, she was
standing so close to the glass, her eyes so unmistakably met his side-look, that he could not
pretend he had not seen her. As he bowed with most respectful civility, she beckoned him with
a single movement of a finger, and went, herself, to let him in. When he had followed her into
our parlour, his manner was outwardly of the most delicate consideration, but she thought she
saw beneath it a certain uneasiness. They spoke awhile of her removal from her father's house;
but he avoided question as to its cause, or as to her intentions. At last, she said directly,
with assumed lightness:

"I think of going to London with my brother, on the Phoebe."

She was watching him closely: his face brightened wonderfully.

"I vow, you could do nothing better," he said. "There is your world. I've always declared you
were a stranger in this far-off land. 'Tis time you found your proper element. I can't help
confessing it; 'tis due to you I should confess it--though alas for us whom you leave in New York!"

She looked at him for a moment, with a slight curling of the lip; witnessed his recovery from
the fear that she might throw herself upon his care; saw his comfort at being relieved of a
possible burden he was not prepared to assume; and then said, very quietly:

"I think Mrs. Russell is coming. You had best go."

With a look of gallant adoration, he made to kiss her hand first. But she drew it away, and
put her finger to her lip, as if to bid him depart unheard. When he had left the house, she
fell upon the sofa and wept, but only for wounded vanity, for chagrin that she had exposed
her heart to one of those gentry who will adore a woman until there is danger of her becoming
an embarrassment.

Before long, she arose, and dried her eyes, and went up-stairs to pack her trunks. Thus ended
this very light affair of the heart; which had so heavy consequences for so many people.

But Captain Falconer's inward serenity was not to escape with this unexpectedly easy ordeal.
When he reached his room, he found me awaiting him, as the representative of Tom Faringfield.
I had, in obedience to my sense of duty, put forth a few conventional dissuasions against Tom's
fighting the captain; and had presumed to hint that I was nearer to him in years and experience
than Tom was. But the boy replied with only a short, bitter laugh at the assured futility of
my attempts. Plainly, if there was to be fighting over this matter, I ought not to seek a usurpation
of Tom's right. And fighting there would be, I knew, whether I said yea or nay. Since Tom must
have a second, that place was mine. And I felt, too, with a young man's foolish faith in poetic
justice, that the right must win; that his adversary's superiority in age--and therefore undoubtedly
in practice, Falconer being the man he was--would not avail against an honest lad avenging
the probity of a sister. And so I yielded countenance to the affair, and went, as soon as my
duty permitted, to wait upon Captain Falconer.

"Why," said he, when I had but half told my errand, "I was led to expect this. The young gentleman
called me a harsh name, which I'm willing to overlook. But he finds himself aggrieved, and,
knowing him as I do, I make no doubt he will not be content till we have a bout or two. Hart
gilded the dose and she took it. Obtaining leave to go home to get married, he proposed that
he should be accompanied by his teacher, Pinchun, a learned Manchu, as unofficial envoy--with
the agreeable duty to see and report. If one or other of us should be hurt, there'd be the devil
to pay, you know. I dare say the General would be quite obdurate, and go the whole length of
the law. There's that to be thought of. Have a glass of wine, and think of it."

Tom and I had already thought of it. We had been longer in New York than the captain had, and
we knew how the embarrassment to which he alluded could be provided against.

"'Tis very simple," said I, letting him drink alone, which it was not easy to do, he was still
so likeable a man. "We can go from Kingsbridge as if we meant to join Captain De Lancey in
another of his raids. And we can find some spot outside the lines; and if any one is hurt,
we can give it out as the work of rebel irregulars who attacked us."

He regarded me silently a moment, and then said the plan seemed a good one, and that he would
name a second with whom I could arrange details. Whereupon, dismissing the subject with a civil
expression of regret that Tom should think himself affronted, he went on to speak of the weather,
as if a gentleman ought not to treat a mere duel as a matter of deep concern.

I came away wishing it were not so hard to hate him. The second with whom I at length conferred--for
our duties permitted not a prompt despatching of the affair, and moreover Captain Falconer's
disposition was to conduct it with the gentlemanly leisure its pretended unimportance allowed--was
Lieutenant Hugh Campbell, one of several officers of that name who served in the Highland regiment
that had been stationed earlier at Valentine's Hill; he therefore knew the debatable country
beyond Kingsbridge as well as I. He was a mere youth, a serious-minded Scot, and of a different
sort from Captain Falconer: 'twas one of the elegant captain's ways, and evidence of his breadth
of mind, to make friends of men of other kinds than his own. Of some of these it might be said,
as Voltaire remarked of Peter the Great, "They civilised their people, but themselves were
savages." The world forgets how much the great czar was indebted
for education and guidance to Le Fort, a Genevese soldier of fortune. Captain Falconer's
duties made a daylight meeting difficult to contrive without exposing his movements to curiosity,
and other considerations of secrecy likewise preferred a nocturnal affair. We therefore planned
that the four of us, and an Irish surgeon named McLaughlin, should appear at the Kingsbridge
tavern at ten o'clock on a certain night for which the almanac promised moonlight, and should
repair to the meeting-place when the moon should be high enough to illumine the hollow. The
weapons were to be rapiers. Next MR. SHADBOLT says, and rightly, that when the pictures are
seen from a less distance than the focal length of the lens, they appear to be increased in bulk.
But the "obvious remedy" I pronounce to be wrong, as it must produce error.


The duel was to occur upon a Wednesday night. On that afternoon I was in the town, having carried
some despatches from our outpost to General De Lancey, and thence to General Knyphausen; and
I was free for a few minutes to go home and see my mother.

"What do you think?" she began, handing me a cup of tea as soon as I had strode to the parlour
fire-place.

"I think this hot tea is mighty welcome," said I, "and that my left ear is nigh frozen. What else?"

"Margaret has gone," she replied, beginning to rub my ear vigorously.

"Gone! Where?" I looked around as if to make sure there was no sign of her in the room.

"With Ned--on the Phoebe."

"The deuce! How could you let her do it--you, and her mother, and Fanny?"

"We didn't know. I took some jelly over to old Miss Watts--she's very feeble--and Madge and
Ned went while I was out; they had their trunks carted off at the same time. 'Twasn't for an
hour or two I became curious why she kept her room, as I thought; and when I went up to see,
the room was empty. There were two letters there from her, one to me and one to her mother.
She said she left in that way, to save the pain of farewells, and to avoid our useless persuasions
against her going. Isn't it terrible?--poor child! Why it seems only yesterday--" And my good
mother's lips drew suddenly down at the corners, and she began to sniff spasmodically.

