A COLUMBUS OF SPACE

                          BY GARRETT P. SERVISS

                            TO THE READERS OF
                          JULES VERNE'S ROMANCES
                          THIS STORY IS DEDICATED

Not because the author flatters himself that he can walk in the Footsteps of that Immortal
Dreamer, but because, like Jules Verne, he believes that the World of Imagination is as legitimate
a Domain of the Human Mind as the World of Fact.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I.  A MARVELOUS INVENTION

   II.  A TRIP OF TERROR

  III.  THE PLANETARY LIMITED

   IV.  THE CAVERNS OF VENUS

    V.  OFF FOR THE SUN LANDS

   VI.  LOST IN THE CRYSTAL MOUNTAINS

  VII.  THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN

 VIII.  LANGUAGE WITHOUT SPEECH

   IX.  AN AMAZING METROPOLIS

    X.  IMPRISONMENT AND A WONDERFUL ESCAPE

   XI.  BEFORE THE THRONE OF VENUS

  XII.  MORE MARVELS

 XIII.  WE FALL INTO TROUBLE AGAIN

  XIV.  THE SUN GOD

   XV.  AT THE MERCY OF FEARFUL ENEMIES

  XVI.  DREADFUL CREATURES OF THE GLOOM

 XVII.  EARTH MAGIC ON VENUS

XVIII.  WILD EDEN

  XIX.  THE SECRET OF THE CAR

   XX.  THE CORYBANTIA OF THE SUN

  XXI.  THE EARTH

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"Standing on the steps ... was a creature shaped like a man, but more savage than a gorilla"

"We were in the heart of the Crystal Mountains!"

"'Who and what are you, and whence do you come?'"

"It curled itself over the edge of the hovering air ship and drew it down"

CHAPTER I

A MARVELOUS INVENTION

I am a hero worshiper; an insatiable devourer of biographies; and I say that no man in all
the splendid list ever equaled Edmund Stonewall. You smile because you have never heard his
name, for, until now, his biography has not been written. And this is not truly a biography;
it is only the story of the crowning event in Stonewall's career.

Really it humbles one's pride of race to see how ignorant the world is of its true heroes.
Many a man who cuts a great figure in history is, after all, a poor specimen of humanity, slavishly
following old ruts, destitute of any real originality, and remarkable only for some exaggeration
of the commonplace. But in the case of Edmund Stonewall the world cannot be blamed for its
ignorance, because, as I have already said, his story remains to be written, and hitherto it
has been guarded as a profound secret.

I do not wish to exaggerate; yet I cannot avoid seeming to do so in simply telling the facts.
If Stonewall's proceedings had become Matter  of common knowledge the world would have been--I
must speak plainly--revolutionized. He held in his hands the means of realizing the wildest
dreams of power, wealth, and human mastery over the forces of nature, that any enthusiast ever
treasured in his prophetic soul. It was a part of his originality that he never entertained
the thought of employing his advantage in any such way. His character was entirely free from
the ordinary forms of avidity. He cared nothing for wealth in itself, and as little for fame.
All his energies were concentrated upon the attainment of ends which nobody but himself would
have regarded as of any practical importance. Thus it happened that, having made an invention
which would have put every human industry upon a new footing, and multiplied beyond the limits
of calculation the activities and achievements of mankind, this extraordinary person turned
his back upon the colossal fortune which he had but to stretch forth his hand and grasp, refused
to seize the unlimited power which his genius had laid at his feet, and used his unparalleled
discovery for a purpose so eccentric, so wildly unpractical, so utterly beyond the pale of
waking life, that to any ordinary man he must have seemed a lunatic lost in an endless dream
of bedlam. And to this day I cannot, without a nervous thrill, think how the desire of all
the ages, the ideal that has been the loadstar for thousands of philosophers, savants, inventors,
prophets, and dreamers, was actually realized upon the earth; and yet of all its fifteen hundred
million inhabitants but a single one knew it, possessed it, controlled it--and he would not
reveal it, but hoarded and used his knowledge for the accomplishment of the craziest design
that ever took shape in a human brain.

Now, to be more specific. Of Stonewall's antecedents I know very little. I only know that,
in a moderate way, he was wealthy, and that he had no immediate family ties. He was somewhere
near thirty years of age, and held the diploma of one of our oldest universities. But he was
not, in a general way, sociable, and I never knew him to attend any of the reunions of his
former classmates, or to show the slightest interest in any of the events or functions of society,
although its doors were open to him through some distant relatives who were widely connected
in New York, and who at times tried to draw him into their circle. He would certainly have
adorned it, but it had no attraction for him. Nevertheless he was a member of the Olympus Club,
where he frequently spent his evenings. But he made very few acquaintances even there, and
I believe that except myself, Jack Ashton, Henry Darton, and Will Church, he had no intimates.
And we knew him only at the club. There, when he was alone with us, he sometimes partly opened
up his mind, and we were charmed by his variety of knowledge and the singularity of his conversation.
I shall not disguise the fact that we thought him extremely eccentric, although the idea of
anything in the nature of insanity never entered our heads. We knew that he was engaged in
recondite researches of a scientific nature, and that he possessed a private laboratory, although
none of us had ever entered it. Occasionally he would speak of some new advance of science,
throwing a flood of light by his clear expositions upon things of which we should otherwise
have remained profoundly ignorant. His imagination flashed like lightning over the subject
of his talk, revealing it at the most unexpected angles, and often he roused us to real enthusiasm
for things the very names of which we almost forgot amidst the next day's occupations.

There was one subject on which he was particularly eloquent--radioactivity; that most strange
property of matter whose discovery had been the crowning glory of science in the closing decade
of the nineteenth century. None of us really knew anything about it except what Stonewall taught
us. If some new incomprehensible announcement appeared in the newspapers we skipped it, being
sure that Edmund would make it all clear at the club in the evening. He made us understand,
in a dim way, that some vast, tremendous secret lay behind it all. I recall his saying, on
one occasion, not long before the blow fell:

"Listen to this! Here's Professor Thomson declaring that a single grain of radium contains
in its padlocked atoms energy enough to lift a million tons three hundred yards high. Professor
Thomson is too modest in his estimates, and he hasn't the ghost of an idea how to get at that
energy. Neither has Professor Rutherford, nor Lord Kelvin; but somebody will get at it, just
the same."

He positively thrilled us when he spoke thus, for there was a look in his eyes which seemed
to penetrate depths unfathomable to our intelligence. Yet we had not the faintest conception
of what was really passing in his mind. If we had understood it, if we had caught a single
clear glimpse of the workings of his intellect, we should have been appalled. And if we had
known how close we stood to the verge of an abyss of mystery about to be lighted by such a
gleam as had never before been emitted from the human spirit, I believe that we would have
started from our chairs and fled in dismay.

But we understood nothing, except that Edmund was indulging in one of his eccentric dreams,
and Jack, in his large, careless, good-natured way broke in with:

"Well, Edmund, suppose you could 'get at it,' as you say; what would you do with it?"

Stonewall's eyes gleamed for a moment, and then he replied, with a curious emphasis:

"I might do what Archimedes dreamed of."

None of us happened to remember what it was that Archimedes had dreamed, and the subject was
dropped.

For a considerable time afterwards we saw nothing of Stonewall. He did not come to the club,
and we were beginning to think of looking him up, when one evening, quite unexpectedly, he
dropped in, wearing an unusually cheerful expression. We had greatly missed him, and we now
greeted him with effusion. His animation impressed us all, and he had no sooner shaken hands
than he said, with suppressed excitement in his voice:

"Well, I've 'got at it.'"

"Got at what?" drawled Jack.

"The inter-atomic energy. I've got it under control."

"The deuce you have!" said Jack.

"Yes, I've arrived where a certain professor dreamed of being when he averred that 'when man
knows that every breath of air he draws has contained within itself force enough to drive the
workshops of the world he will find out some day, somehow, some way of tapping that energy.'
The thing is done, for I've tapped it!"

We stared at one another, not knowing what to say, except Jack, who, inspired by the spirit
of mischief, drawled out:

"Ah, yes, I remember. Well then, Edmund, as I asked you before, what are you going to do with it?"

There was not really any thought among us of poking fun at Edmund; we respected and admired
him far too much for that; nevertheless, catching the infection of banter from Jack, we united
in demanding, in a manner which I can now see must have appeared most provoking:

"Why, yes, Edmund, tell us what you are going to do with it."

And then Jack added fuel by mockingly, though with perfectly good-natured intention, taking
Edmund by the hand and swinging him in front of us with:

"Gentlemen, Archimedes junior."

Stonewall's eyes flashed and his cheek darkened, but for a moment he said nothing. Presently,
with a return of his former affability, he said:

"I wish you would come over to the laboratory and let me show you what I am going to do."

Of course we instantly assented. Nothing could have pleased us better than this invitation,
for we had long been dying to see the inside of Edmund's laboratory. We all got our hats and
started out with him. We knew where he lived, occupying a whole house though he was a bachelor,
but none of us had ever seen the inside of it, and our curiosity was on the qui vive. He led
us through a handsome hallway and a rear apartment directly into the back yard, half of which
we were surprised to find inclosed and roofed over, forming a huge shanty, like a workshop.
Edmund opened the door of the shanty and ushered us in.

A remarkable object at once concentrated our attention. In the center of the place was the
queerest-looking thing that you can well imagine. I can hardly describe it. It was round and
elongated like a boiler, with bulging ends, and seemed to be made of polished steel. Its total
length was about eighteen feet, and its width ten feet. Edmund approached it and opened a door
in the end, which was wide and high enough for us to enter without stooping or crowding.

"Step in, gentlemen," he said, and unhesitatingly we obeyed him, all except Church, who for
some unknown reason remained outside, and when we looked for him had disappeared.

Edmund turned on a bright light, and we found ourselves in an oblong chamber, beautifully fitted
up with polished woodwork, and leather-cushioned seats running round the sides. Many metallic
knobs and handles shone on the walls.

"Sit down," said Edmund, "and I will tell you what I have got here."

He stepped to the door and called again for Church but there was no answer. We concluded that,
thinking the thing would be too deep to be interesting, he had gone back to the club. That
was not what he had done, as you will learn later, but he never regretted what he did do. Getting
no response from Church, Edmund finally sat down with us on one of the leather-covered benches,
and began his explanation.

"As I was telling you at the club," he said, "I've solved the mystery of the atoms. I'm sure
you'll excuse me from explaining my method" (there was a little raillery in his manner), "but
at least you can understand the plain statement that I've got unlimited power at my command.
These knobs and handles that you see are my keys for turning it on and off, and controlling
it as I wish. Mark you, this power comes right out of the heart of what we call matter; the
world is chock full of it. We have known that it was there at least ever since radioactivity
was discovered, but it looked as though human intelligence would never be able to set it free
from its prison. Nevertheless I have not only set it free, but I am able to control it as perfectly
as if it were steam from a boiler, or an electric current from a dynamo."

Jack, who was as unscientific a person as ever lived, yawned, and Edmund noticed it. But he
showed no irritation, merely smiling, and saying, with a wink at me and Henry:

"Even this seems to be rather too deep, so perhaps I had better show you, instead of telling
you, what I mean. Excuse me a moment."

He stepped out of the door, and we remained seated. We heard a noise outside like the opening
of a barn door, and immediately Edmund reappeared and closed the door of the chamber in which
we were. We watched him with growing curiosity. With a singular smile he pressed a knob on
the wall, and instantly we felt that the chamber was rising in the air. It rocked a little
like a boat in wavy water. We were startled, of course, but not alarmed.

"Hello!" exclaimed Jack. "What kind of a balloon is this?"

"It's something more than a balloon," was Edmund's reply, and as he spoke he touched another
knob, and we felt the car, as I must now call it, come to rest. Then Edmund opened a shutter
at one side, and we all sprang up to look out. Below us we saw roofs and the tops of two trees
standing at the side of the street.

"We're about a hundred feet up," said Edmund quietly. "What do you think of it now?"

"Wonderful! wonderful!" we exclaimed in a breath. And I continued:

"And do you say that it is inter-atomic energy that does this?"

"Nothing else in the world," returned Edmund.

But bantering Jack must have his quip:

"By the way, Edmund," he demanded, "what was it that Archimedes dreamed? But no matter; you've
knocked him silly. Now, what are you going to do with your atomic balloon?"

Edmund's eyes flashed:

"You'll see in a minute."

The scene out of the window was beautiful, and for a moment we all remained watching it. The
city lights were nearly all below our level, and away off over the New Jersey horizon I noticed
the planet Venus, near to setting, but as brilliant as a diamond. I am fond of star-gazing,
and I called Edmund's attention to the planet as he happened to be standing next to me.

"Lovely, isn't she?" he said with enthusiasm. "The finest world in the solar system, and what
a strange thing that she should have one side always day and the other always night."

I was surprised by his exhibition of astronomic lore, for I had never known that he had given
any attention to the subject, but a minute later the incident was forgotten as Edmund suddenly
pushed us back from the window and closed the shutter.

"Going down again so soon?" asked Jack.

Edmund smiled. "Going," he said simply, and put his hand to one of the knobs. Immediately we
felt ourselves moving very slowly.

"That's right, Edmund," put in Jack again, "let us down easy; I don't like bumps."

We expected at each instant to feel the car touch the cradle in which it had evidently rested,
but never were three mortals so mistaken. What really did happen can better be described in
the words of Will Church, who, you will remember, had disappeared at the beginning of our singular
adventure. I got the account from him long afterwards. He had written it out carefully and
put it away in a safe, as a sort of historic document. Here is Church's narrative, omitting
the introduction, which read like a law paper:

"When we went over from the club to Stonewall's house, I dropped behind the others, because
the four of them took up the whole width of the sidewalk. Stonewall was talking to them, and
my attention was attracted by something uncommon in his manner. He had an indefinable carriage
of the head which suggested to me the suspicion that everything was not just as it should be.
I don't mean that I thought him crazy, or anything of that kind, but I felt that he had some
scheme in his mind to fool us.

"I bitterly repented, after things turned out as they did, that I had not whispered a word
to the others. But that would have been difficult, and, besides, I had no idea of the seriousness
of the affair. Nevertheless, I determined to stay out of it, so that the laugh should not be
on me at any rate. Accordingly when the others entered the car I stayed outside, and when Stonewall
called me I did not answer.

"When he came out to open the roof of the shed, he did not see me in the shadow where I stood.
The opening of the roof revealed the whole scheme in a flash. I had had no suspicion that the
car was any kind of a balloon, and even after he had so significantly thrown the roof open,
and then entered the car and closed the door, I was fairly amazed to see the thing began to
rise without the slightest noise, and as if it were enchanted. It really looked diabolical
as it floated silently upward and passed through the opening, and the sight gave me a shiver.

"But I was greatly relieved when it stopped at a height of a hundred feet or so, and then I
said to myself that I should have been less of a fool if I had stayed with the others, for
now they would have the laugh on me alone. Suddenly, while I watched, expecting every moment
to see them drop down again, for I supposed that it was merely an experiment to show that the
thing would float, the car started upward, very slowly at first, but increasing its speed until
it had attained an elevation of perhaps five hundred feet. There it hung for a moment, like
some mail-clad monster glinting in the quavering light of the street arcs, and then, without
warning, made a dart skyward. For a minute it circled like a strange bird taking its bearings,
and finally rushed off westward until I lost sight of it behind some tall buildings. I ran
into the house to reach the street, but found the outer door locked, and not a person visible.
I called but nobody came. Returning to the yard I discovered a place where I could get over
the fence, and so I escaped into the street. Immediately I searched the sky for the mysterious
car, but could see no sign of it. They were gone! I almost sank upon the pavement in a state
of helpless excitement, which I could not have explained to myself if I had stopped to reason;
for why, after all, should I take the thing so tragically. But something within me said that
all was wrong. A policeman happened to pass.

"'Officer! officer!' I shouted, 'have you seen it?'

"'Seen what?' asked the blue-coat, twirling his club.

"'The car--the balloon,' I stammered.

"'Balloon in your head! You're drunk. Get long out o' here!'

"I realized the impossibility of explaining the matter to him, and running back to the place
where I had got over the fence I climbed into the yard and entered the shed. Fortunately the
policeman paid no further attention to my movements after I left him. I sat down on the empty
cradle and stared up through the opening in the roof, hoping against hope to see them coming
back. It must have been midnight before I gave up my vigil in despair, and went home, sorely
puzzled, and blaming myself for having kept my suspicions unuttered. I finally got to sleep,
but I had horrible dreams.

"The next day I was up early looking through all the papers in the hope of finding something
about the car. But there was not a word. I watched the news columns for several days without
result. Whenever the coast was clear I haunted Stonewall's yard, but the fatal shed yawned
empty, and there was not a soul about the house. I cannot describe my feelings. My friends
seemed to have been snatched away by some mysterious agency, and the horror of the thing almost
drove me crazy. I felt that I was, in a manner, responsible for their disappearance.

"One day my heart sank at the sight of a cousin of Jack Ashton's motioning to me in the street.
He approached, with a troubled look. 'Mr. Church,' he said, 'I think you know me; can you tell
me what has become of Jack? I haven't seen him for several days.' What could I say? Still believing
that they would soon come back, I invented, on the spur of the moment, a story that Jack, with
a couple of intimate friends, had gone off on a hunting expedition. I took a little comfort
in the reflection that my friends, like myself, were bachelors, and consequently at liberty
to disappear if they chose.

"But when more than a week had passed with out any news of them I was thrown into despair.
I had to give up all hope. Remembering how near we were to the coast, I concluded that they
had drifted out over the sea and gone down. It was hard for me, after the lie I had told, to
let out the truth to such of their friends as I knew, but I had to do it. Then the police took
the matter in hand and ransacked Stonewall's laboratory and the shanty without finding anything
to throw light on the mystery. It was a newspaper sensation for a few days, but as nothing
came of it everybody soon forgot all about it--all except me. I was left to my loneliness and
my regrets.

"A year has now passed with no news from them. I write this on the anniversary of their departure.
My friends, I know, are dead--somewhere! Oh, what an experience it has been! When your friends
die and are buried it is hard enough but when they disappear in a flash and leave no token--!
It is almost beyond endurance!"

CHAPTER II

A TRIP OF TERROR

I take up the story at the point where I dropped it to introduce Church's narrative.

As minute after minute elapsed and we continued in motion we changed our minds about the descent,
and concluded that the inventor was going to give us a much longer ride than we had anticipated.
We were startled and puzzled but not really alarmed, for the car traveled so smoothly that
it gave one a sense of confidence. On the other hand, we felt a little indignation that Edmund
should treat us like a lot of boys, without wills of our own. No doubt we had provoked him,
though unintentionally, but this was going too far on his part. I am sure we were all hot with
this feeling and presently Jack flamed out:

"Look here, Edmund," he exclaimed, dropping his customary good-natured manner, "this is carrying
things with a pretty high hand. It's a good deal like kidnapping, it seems to me. I didn't
give you permission to carry me off in this way, and I want to know what you mean by it and
what you are about. I've no objection to making a little trip in your car, which is certainly
mighty comfortable, but first I'd like to be asked whether I want to go or no."

Edmund shrugged his shoulders and made no reply. He was very busy just then with the metallic
knobs. Suddenly we were jerked off our feet as if we had been in a trolley driven by a green
motorman. Edmund also would have fallen if he had not clung to one of the handles. We felt
that we were spinning through the air at a fearful speed. Still Edmund uttered not a word,
but while we staggered upon our feet, and steadied ourselves with hands and knees on the leather-cushioned
benches like so many drunken men, he continued pulling and pushing at his knobs. Finally the
motion became more regular and it was evident that the car had slowed down from its wild rush.

"Excuse me," said Edmund, then, quite in his natural manner, "the thing is new yet and I've
got to learn the stops by experience. But there's no occasion for alarm."

But our indignation had grown hotter with the shake-up that we had just had, and as usual Jack
was spokesman for it:

"Maybe there is no occasion for alarm," he said excitedly, "but will you be kind enough to
answer my question, and tell us what you're about and where we are going?"

And Henry, too, who was ordinarily as mute as a clam, broke out still more hotly:

"See here! I've had enough of this thing! Just go down and let me out. I won't be carried off
so, against my will and knowledge."

By this time Edmund appeared to have got things in the shape he wanted, and he turned to face
us. He always had a magnetism that was inexplicable, and now we felt it as never before. His
features were perfectly calm, but there was a light in his eyes that seemed electric. As if
disdaining to make a direct reply to the heated words of Jack and Henry he began in a quiet voice:

"It was my first intention to invite you to accompany me on a very interesting expedition.
I knew that none of you had any ties of family or business to detain you, and I felt sure that
you would readily consent. In case you should not, however, I had made up my mind to go alone.
But you provoked me more than you knew, probably, at the club, and after we had entered the
car, and, being myself hot-tempered, I determined to teach you a lesson. I have no intention,
however, of abducting you. It is true that you are in my power at present, but if you now say
that you do not wish to be concerned in what I assure you will prove the most wonderful enterprise
ever undertaken by human beings, I will go back to the shed and let you out."

We looked at one another, in doubt what to reply until Jack, who, with all his impulsiveness
had more of the milk of human kindness in his heart than anyone else I ever knew, seized Edmund's
hand and exclaimed:

"All right, old boy, bygones are bygones; I'm with you. Now what do you fellows say?"

"I'm with you, too," I cried, yielding to the spur of Jack's enthusiasm and moved also by an
intense curiosity. "I say go ahead."

Henry was more backward. But his curiosity, too, was aroused, and at length he gave in his
voice with the others.

Jack swung his hat.

"Three cheers, then, for the modern Archimedes! You won't take that amiss now Edmund."

We gave the cheers, and I could see that Edmund was immensely pleased.

"And now," Jack continued, "tell us all about it. Where are we going?"

"Pardon me, Jack," was Edmund's reply, "but I'd rather keep that for a surprise. You shall
know everything in good time; or at least everything that you can understand," he added, with
a slightly malicious smile.

Feeling a little more interest than the others, perhaps, in the scientific aspects of the business,
I asked Edmund to tell us something more about the nature of his wonderful invention. He responded
with great good humor, but rather in the manner of a schoolmaster addressing pupils who, he
knows, cannot entirely follow him.

"These knobs and handles on the walls," he said, "control the driving power, which, as I have
told you, comes from the atoms of matter which I have persuaded to unlock their hidden forces.
I push or turn one way and we go ahead, or we rise; I push or turn another way and we stop,
or go back. So I concentrate the atomic force just as I choose. It makes us go, or it carries
us back to earth, or it holds us motionless, according to the way I apply it. The earth is
what I kick against at present, and what I hold fast by; but any other sufficiently massive
body would serve the same purpose. As to the machinery, you'd need a special education in order
to understand it. You'd have to study the whole subject from the bottom up, and go through
all the experiments that I have tried. I confess that there are some things the fundamental
reason of which I don't understand myself. But I know how to apply and control the power, and
if I had Professor Thomson and Professor Rutherford here, I'd make them open their eyes. I
wish I had been able to kidnap them."

"That's a confession that, after all, you've kidnapped us," put in Jack, smiling.

"If you insist upon stating it in that way--yes," replied Edmund, smiling also. "But you know
that now you've consented."

"Perhaps you'll treat us to a trip to Paris," Jack persisted.

"Better than that," was the reply. "Paris is only an ant-hill in comparison with what you are
going to see."

And so, indeed, it turned out!

Finally all got out their pipes, and we began to make ourselves at home, for truly, as far
as luxurious furniture was concerned, we were as comfortable as at the Olympus Club, and the
motion of the strange craft was so smooth and regular that it soothed us like an anodyne. It
was only those unnamed, subtle senses which man possesses almost without being aware of their
existence that assured us that we were in motion at all.

After we had smoked for an hour or so, talking and telling stories quite in the manner of the
club, Edmund suddenly asked, with a peculiar smile:

"Aren't you a little surprised that this small room is not choking full of smoke? You know
that the shutters are tightly closed."

"By Jo," exclaimed Jack, "that's so! Why here we've been pouring out clouds like old Vesuvius
for an hour with no windows open, and yet the air is as clear as a bell."

"The smoke," said Edmund impressively, "has been turned into atomic energy to speed us on our
way. I'm glad you're all good smokers, for that saves me fuel. Look," he continued, while we,
amazed, stared at him, "those fellows there have been swallowing your smoke, and glad to get it."

He pointed at a row of what seemed to be grinning steel mouths, barred with innumerable black
teeth, and half concealed by a projecting ledge at the bottom of the wall opposite the entrance,
and as I looked I was thrilled by the sight of faint curls of smoke disappearing within their
gaping jaws.

"They are omnivorous beasts," said Edmund. "They feed on the carbon from your breath, too.
Rather remarkable, isn't it, that every time you expel the air from your lungs you help this
car to go?"

None of us knew what to say; our astonishment was beyond speech. We began to look askance at
Edmund, with creeping sensations about the spine. A formless, unacknowledged fear of him entered
our souls. It never occurred to us to doubt the truth of what he had said. We knew him too
well for that; and, then, were we not here, flying mysteriously through the air in a heavy
metallic car that had no apparent motive power? For my part, instead of demanding any further
explanations, I fell into a hazy reverie on the marvel of it all; and Jack and Henry must have
been seized the same way, for not one of us spoke a word, or asked a question; while Edmund,
satisfied, perhaps, with the impression he had made, kept equally quiet.

Thus another hour passed, and all of us, I think, had fallen into a doze, when Edmund aroused
us by saying:

"I'll have to keep the first watch, and all the others, too, this night."

"So then we're not going to land to-night?"

"No, not to-night, and you may as well turn in. You see that I have prepared good, comfortable
bunks, and I think you'll make out very well."

As Edmund spoke he lifted the tops from some of the benches along the walls, and revealed excellent
beds, ready for occupancy.

"I believe that I have forgotten nothing that we shall really need," he added. "Beds, arms,
instruments, books, clothing, furs, and good things to eat."

Again we looked at one another in surprise, but nobody spoke, although the same thought probably
occurred to each--that this promised to be a pretty long trip, judging from the preparations.
Arms! What in the world should we need of arms? Was he going to the Rocky Mountains for a bear
hunt? And clothing, and furs!

But we were really sleepy, and none of us was very long in taking Edmund at his word and leaving
him to watch alone. He considerately drew a shade over the light, and then noiselessly opened
a shutter and looked out. When I saw that, I was strongly tempted to rise and take a look myself,
but instead I fell asleep. My dreams were disturbed by visions of the grinning nondescripts
at the foot of the wall, which transformed themselves into winged dragons, and remorselessly
pursued me through the measureless abysses of space.

When I woke, windows were open on both sides of the car, and brilliant sunshine was streaming
in through one of them. Henry was still asleep, Jack was yawning in his bunk, and Edmund stood
at one of the windows staring out. I made a quick toilet, and hastened to Edmund's side.

"Good morning," he said heartily, taking my hand. "Look out here, and tell me what you think
of the prospect."

As I put my face close to the thick but very transparent glass covering the window, my heart
jumped into my mouth!

"In Heaven's name, where are we?" I cried out.

Jack, hearing my agitated exclamation, jumped out of his bunk and ran to the window also. He
gasped as he gazed out, and truly it was enough to take away one's breath!

We appeared to be at an infinite elevation, and the sky, as black as ink, was ablaze with stars,
although the bright sunlight was streaming into the opposite window behind us. I could see
nothing of the earth. Evidently we were too high for that.

"It must lie away down under our feet," I murmured half aloud, "so that even the horizon has
sunk out of sight. Heavens, what a height!"

I had that queer uncontrollable qualm that comes to every one who finds himself suddenly on
the edge of a soundless deep.

Presently I became aware that straight before us, but afar off, was a most singular appearance
in the sky. At first glance I thought that it was a cloud, round and mottled, But it was strangely
changeless in form, and it had an unvaporous look.

"Phew!" whistled Jack, suddenly catching sight of it and fixing his eyes in a stare, "what's that?"

"That's the earth!"

It was Edmund who spoke, looking at us with a quizzical smile. A shock ran through my nerves,
and for an instant my brain whirled. I saw that it was the truth that he had uttered, for,
as sure as I sit here, his words had hardly struck my ears when the great cloud rounded out
and hardened, the deception vanished, and I recognized, as clearly as ever I saw them on a
school globe, the outlines of Asia and the Pacific Ocean!

In a second I had become too weak to stand, and I sank trembling upon a bench. But Jack, whose
eyes had not accommodated themselves as rapidly as mine to the gigantic perspective, remained
at the window, exclaiming:

"Fiddlesticks! What are you trying to give us? The earth is down below, I reckon."

But in another minute he, too, saw it as it really was, and his astonishment equaled mine.
In fact he made so much noise about it that he awoke Henry, who, jumping out of bed, came running
to see, and when we had explained to him where we were, sank upon a seat with a despairing
groan and covered his face. Our astonishment and dismay were too great to permit us quickly
to recover our self-command, but after a while Jack seized Edmund's arm, and demanded:

"For God's sake, tell us what you've been doing."

"Nothing that ought to appear very extraordinary," answered Edmund, with uncommon warmth. "If
men had not been fools for so many ages they might have done this, and more than this long
ago. It's enough to make one ashamed of his race! For countless centuries, instead of grasping
the power that nature had placed at the disposal of their intelligence, they have idled away
their time gabbling about nothing. And even since, at last, they have begun to do something,
look at the time that they have wasted upon such petty forces as steam and 'electricity,' burning
whole mines of coal and whole lakes of oil, and childishly calling upon winds and tides and
waterfalls to help them, when they had under their thumbs the limitless energy of the atoms,
and no more understood it than a baby understands what makes its whistle scream! It's inter-atomic
force that has brought us out here, and that is going to carry us a great deal farther."

We simply listened in silence; for what could we say? The facts were more eloquent than any
words, and called for no commentary. Here we were, out in the middle of space; and there was
the earth, hanging on nothing, like a summer cloud. At least we knew where we were if we didn't
quite understand how we had got there.

Seeing us speechless, Edmund resumed in a different tone:

"We made a fairly good run during the night. You must be hungry by this time, for you've slept
late; suppose we have breakfast."

So saying, he opened a locker, took out a folding table, covered it with a white cloth, turned
on something resembling a little electric range, and in a few minutes had ready as appetizing
a breakfast of eggs and as good a cup of coffee as I ever tasted. It is one of the compensations
of human nature that it is able to adjust itself to the most unheard-of conditions provided
only that the inner man is not neglected. The smell of breakfast would almost reconcile a man
to purgatory--anyhow it reconciled us for the time being to our unparalleled situation, and
we ate and drank, and indulged in as cheerful good comradeship as that of a fishing party in
the wilderness after a big morning's catch.

When the breakfast was finished we began to chat and smoke, which reminded me of those gulping
mouths under the wainscot, and I leaned down to catch a glimpse of their rows of black fangs,
thinking to ask Edmund for further explanation about them; but the sight gave me a shiver,
and I felt the hopelessness of trying to understand their function.

Then we took a turn at looking out of the window to see the earth. Edmund furnished us with
binoculars which enabled us to recognize many geographical features of our planet. The western
shore of the Pacific was now in plain sight, and a few small spots, near the edge of the ocean,
we knew to be Japan and the Philippines. The snowy Himalayas showed as a crinkling line, and
a huge white smudge over the China Sea indicated where a storm was raging and where good ships,
no doubt, were battling with the tossing waves.

After a time I noticed that Edmund was continually going from one window to the other and looking
out with an air of anxiety. He seemed to be watching for something, and there was a look of
mingled expectation and apprehension in his eyes. He had a peephole at the forward end of the
car and another in the floor, and these he frequently visited. I now recalled that even while
we were at breakfast he had seemed uneasy and occasionally left his seat to look out. At last
I asked him:

"What are you looking for, Edmund?"

"Meteors."

"Meteors, out here!"

"Of course. You're something of an astronomer; don't you know that they hang about all the
planets? They didn't give me any rest last night. I was on tender hooks all the time while
you were sleeping. I was half inclined to call one of you to help me. We passed some pretty
ugly fellows while you slept, I can tell you! You know that this is an unexplored sea that
we are navigating, and I don't want to run on the rocks."

"But we seem to be a good way off from the earth now," I remarked, "and there ought not to
be much danger."

"It's not as dangerous as it was, but there may be some of them yet around here. I'll feel
safer when we have put a few more million miles behind us."

A few more million miles! We all stood aghast when we heard the words. We had, indeed, imagined
that the earth looked as if it might be a million miles away, but, then, it was merely a passing
impression, which had given us no sense of reality; but now when we heard Edmund say that we
actually had traveled such a distance, the idea struck us with overwhelming force.

"In the name of all that's good, Edmund," cried Jack, "at what rate are we traveling, then?"

"Just at present," Edmund replied, glancing at an indicator, "we're making twenty miles a second."

Twenty miles a second! Our excited nerves had another shock.

"Why," I exclaimed, "that's faster than the earth moves in its orbit!"

"Yes, a trifle faster; but I'll probably have to work up to a little better speed in order
to get where I want to go before our goal begins to run away from us."

"Ah, there you are," said Jack. "That's what I wanted to know. What is our goal? Where are
we going?"

Before Edmund could reply we all sprang to our feet in affright. A loud grating noise had broken
upon our ears. At the same instant the car gave a lurch, and a blaze of the most vicious lightning
streamed through a window.

"Confound the things!" shouted Edmund, springing to the window, and then darting to one of
his knobs and beginning to twist it with all his force.

In a second we were sprawling on the floor--all except Edmund, who kept his hold on the knob.
Our course had been changed with amazing quickness, and our startled eyes beheld a huge misshapen
object darting past the window.

"Here comes another!" cried Edmund, again seizing the knob.

I had managed to get my face to the window, and I certainly thought that we were done for.
Apparently only a few rods away, and rushing straight at the car, was a vast black mass, shaped
something like a dumb-bell, with ends as big as houses, tumbling over and over, and threatening
us with annihilation. If it hit us, as it seemed sure that it would do, I knew that we should
never return to the earth, unless in the form of pulverized ashes!

CHAPTER III

THE PLANETARY LIMITED

But Edmund had seen the meteor sooner than I, and as quick as thought he swerved the car, and
threw us all off our feet once more. But we should have been thankful if he had broken our
heads, since he had saved us from instant destruction.

The danger, however, was not yet passed. Scarcely had the immense dumb-bell (which Edmund declared
must have been composed of solid iron, so great was its effect on his needles) disappeared,
before there came from outside a blaze so fierce that it fairly slapped our lids shut.

"A collision!" Edmund exclaimed. "The thing has struck another big meteor, and they are exchanging
fiery compliments."

He threw himself flat on the floor, and stared out of the peephole. Then he jumped to his feet
and gave us another tumble.

"They're all about us," he faltered, breathless with exertion; then, having drawn a deep inspiration,
he continued: "We're like a boat in a raging freshet, with rocks, tree trunks, and cakes of
ice threatening it on all sides. But we'll get out of it. The car obeys its helm as if it appreciated
the danger. Why, I got away from that last fellow by setting up atomic reaction against it,
as a boatman pushes with his pole."

Even in the midst of our terror we could not but admire our leader. His resources seemed boundless,
and our confidence in him grew with every escape. While he kept guard at the peepholes we watched
for meteors from the windows. We must have come almost within striking distance of a thousand
in the course of an hour, but Edmund decided not to diminish our speed, for he said that he
could control the car quicker when it was under full headway.

So on we rushed, dodging the things like a crow in a flock of pestering jays, and we really
enjoyed the excitement. It was more fascinating sport than shooting rapids in a careening skiff,
and at last we grew so confident in the powers of our car and its commander that we were rather
sorry when the last meteor passed, and we found ourselves once more in open, unimpeded space.

After that the time passed quietly. We ate our meals and went to bed and rose as regularly
as if we had been at home. In one respect, however, things were very different from what they
were on the earth. We had no night! The sun shone continually, although the sky was black and
always glittering with stars. None of us needed to be told by our conductor that this was due
to the fact that we no longer had the shadow of the earth to make night for us when the sun
was behind it. The sun was now never behind the earth, or any other great opaque body, and
when we wished to sleep we made an artificial night, for our special use, by closing all the
shutters. And there was no atmosphere about us to diffuse the sunlight, and so to hide the
stars. We kept count of the days by the aid of a calendar clock; there seemed to be nothing
that Edmund had forgotten. This,
     this, ma bad toos. So you see the caseritas pa. No can one trust
     of her. Goodbye, caseritas! Many Salu.

Ida came the butcher, the baker with the bread basket at the head of a black man who followed
him steps, as the real shadow of his body. Then sign Josefa was agreed that prepare lunch. As
we said at the beginning of this story, the fire was in the patio, beneath a canopy of table,
no fire or anything like it. There was the old using the link fire, flint, sulfur, the candle
and a few coals vegetables, and little lunch was ready. Meanwhile Cecilia set the table and both
women She sat down. For a long time were unable to eat, look up the plate, not speaking a word.
It is expected that each time the grandmother's granddaughter read him the blame the face,
and dared not face her, to step it seemed very nervous and upsetting. Several times he tried
to say something sick he was known by the movement of the lips, and many others went through his
voice in my throat, because instead of just articulated sounds sobs escaped him. Finally, he made
an effort and said:

- I should die now.

- Jesus, Mommy!

Do not say that, "said Cecilia without raising his head.

- Why not,
if that is what I feel?

What am I doing in the world? What's the point? Of obstruction, nothing more than a hindrance.

-
I had never spoken and his mercy.

- Maybe, but my sorrows, though great, I could manage it so far. I'm old, but I have the strength,
I can.

I was thinking I'd better give me to die.

- Does not your worship is sinful murmur of work and penalties that
God commands us?

Remember Jesus Christ carried the cross to Calvary.

- Poor me! I have long since gone the way of the cross, and that I am at Calvary. It remains
my crucifixion, and it seems that I have ordered the same as those most I want in this world.

- If mommy says about me, look at your mercy that makes a real injustice.

God knows that removes the evil, willingly give blood in my veins.

- Do not show it, do not you know. On the contrary, you seem to delight
in always doing What I do not want you to do, like I forbid.

If you say you love me like you do not certain things ...

- Hey! I see where it goes at his mercy.

- I go where I go, where is every mother who believes in something the future of their children
and its own decorum.

- If your worship would not listen to gossip, long tongue, it would save more than a disappointment.

-
It happens, girl, this time the gossip is good about what I saw with
my own eyes and heard with these ears that have been eating the earth.

In the heat of argument the girl had taken breath and said:

- What has been seen or heard their mercy than a gossip? Come on, say so.

- Cecilia, what I see clear as daylight that despite my warnings and my advice, you seek your
doom like the butterfly in the light of the candle.

- And if a certain person, that is who their market level, marry me, fills me with riches and gives
me many silk robes, and I am a woman and brings me to another land where I am known, what would
you say your grace?

     - I'd say that's
     a pipe dream, a folly,
     a folly. First, he is white
     and you color, though it conceals your shell and your complexion
and silky black hair.

         In Second, he is rich and famous family from Havana, and you poor
and obscure ... Third ... But what weary?

There is another problem even more, bigger, Unsurpassed ... You are
a frivolous little girl ... Women lost without remedy.

My God! What I have done to punish me so?

The last gasp of Josefa beckoned, and standing with his hands in his ears, as not hear from
the mouth of the granddaughter confirmation misjudgments that had
formed on their views on marriage.

Cecilia also got up and wanted to go to grandma, is with intent to reassure her, either in the
clear himself, explaining or extending their idea, but suddenly stopped because at that time
looked out the front door ajar the Nemesia well known face.

CHAPTER XII

... But put me that hand in the chest. Do not you feel it, Matilda A volcano? So are my jealousy!

JJ
MILANÉS

- Holy days here, came in saying very cheerful Nemesia without knocking.

But she was quiet and still not well began to see the face and attitude of his two friends.
The grandmother had again collapsed in the chair, your favorite site,
the granddaughter remained in Standing by the table, on which rested
a hand, visibly fluctuating between pain and despair.

Could not be more timely appearance of the friend in the circumstances. The old woman had that
more than prudence advised, and she was afraid to find out the intimate sense of the last
words of the grandmother. What did she know? Why use a language so
muffled?

"Serious ground for suspecting or only intended to intimidate?

The truth is that in the dispute, with the alarmed conscience, if
not in possession of facts, both had advanced to a slippery slope,
until there closed to them, where the first had entered to collect
long harvest of sorrow and remorse.

     For his part, did not believe Josefa signal time to find out their
     true Cecilia standing in the world. Such Once the dairy was mistaken
     about the identity of the young, perhaps it merely passed through
     the front door. If you want to keep the innocence of a maiden,
     not the accused, without proof of having sinned.

     For these reasons Josefa sign, although uneasy, and full of deep
regret from the depths of chest greeted with joy the coming unexpectedly
of Nemesia.

Fortunately also, to remove the three wives of his embarrassing situation, then called to the
front door with a blow of the knocker, so unusual call.

Password Josefa always ready for these cases, ran to open, receive,
along with a profound salute, a role handed him a black and gray,
dress decently clean.

He had all the air the main house coachman. Given the letter, she left saying: - No answer.

He had, in fact, defense, or had been directed to sign Joseph, but the "Dr. Don Thomas Montes
de Oca.

In their own hands. " Arrived in time to calm the anxiety over his spirit troubled. With the
help of glasses, which reached Cecilia, she was able to mutter to
himself:

"Dear Sir: In accordance with what we discussed, I now submit
to the carrier, which will be submitted today, so explain it to you
what shall be done in the familiar case.

Needless to repeat that responds to everything and to live SSS and friend forever QBSM recognized [39]

C.
and Ruiz de Gamboa. "

And again read the letter to find out more about the content, peered over his glasses, first
granddaughter, then Nemesia, who was quietly to await the outcome
of that scene change, knowingly absorbed, and as doubtful of the party
should take.

But "today same "to the letter made her into a resolution asking

-
What time is it?

- It is eight o'clock, Nemesia answered promptly.

Just moved the guards swine.

As I hear the drums entodavía.

- And I'm glad! sign said Josefa.

Are you very quickly you today, my daughter? added speaking with
Nemesia.

- No, ma'am, no tantico.

He went to the tailor's shop in search of sewing Uribe. But if life hard, the time is long.
I'll go later. It does not matter.

- Now, daughter, you're going to do me a favor and stay here in the
company of Cecilia, meanwhile give a little jump to the Merced and
back in a heartbeat.

Will you stay?

Without waiting for an answer he put on his new belt, threw her shawl
over her head canvas and out into the street.

And no sooner did when Nemesia suddenly turned to Cecilia, caught
by both hands and said:

- What I tell you, China?

I run into him.

- Who? asked Cecilia.

- With your beloved torment.

- What goods come to us with this grace?

- Is it possible a woman? You say that like you do not care.

When I say that I have found it is because I think you want to know how, when and where they've
seen.

I come to fetch you.

- I can not get out.

- For these cases always do a power of hairy-chested women like you.

- Mommy can come back soon and I do not want me outside.

- Who cares? Who's afraid? It is not far away either.

Behind Santa Teresa.

- I do not know what'll take to go there.

- Perhaps a disappointment.

- As for that I will not. I do not want so early disappointments.

- We need to come, woman. Interested, I repeat. Pronto.

- I'm not dressed or groomed.

- It does not do. At a time when you wear the tunic, you straighten hair, pound the blanket by
Naide head and knows you. I'll help.

- Nene, how we leave the house?

- I threw the key to the door, and eyes that saw you go, mourning dove. Come on, come on. No
no time to lose. We can come later when the birds flew Haygan.

- I'm embarrassed to go out of trapillos.

- Naide see you. Man! Not that you were going to lose so the marriage. Are you coming? It would
be a take pity disappointment.

- What is it? Cecilia thought of entering the room to prepare, as he did, in no time.

Nemesia had managed to arouse curiosity and even alarm in the minds of friends, and advance enjoying
the pleasure of seeing her die of jealousy.

Cost a lot of work the two girls the closing door.

The rusty lock angle was fixed on the frame and the cross on one side, attached to the eyebolt
Picolet male in the road to the other, ill-fitting on the spike which was his support, and therefore
not fit the lock on the socket to make the catch prey. Finally achieved its object, using
more skill than Cecilia force, and they walked a step often under the shadow of the roofs,
towards the south of the city.

Behind the walls of the convent of Santa Teresa, as opposed to a house high bench windows and
cantilever gates, a carriage had stopped, which engaged three horses were paired head for
Wall Street. The coachman sat on the left, armed with machete Long and other gadgets of the trade,
are running on. The abutment was immediately to the curb a young man taking the last farewells
to a young lady dressed as a journey, sat to the right of a gentleman
advanced in years and respectable air.

Occupied the bench of the window above a group of several ladies and gentlemen, known all our,
that is, the family Gamez, and Francisco Meneses Diego Solfa, bye Isabel Ilincheta that, together
with his father, he turned to Alquízar. Almost at once all those addressed him from the window
and she'd say, sometimes protruding head below the helmet, without neglecting the young to the stirrup,
which supported a foot in it while his left hand clutching clamp chitin.

In this two girls came from the northern part of the street. From afar recognized Cecilia the young
man who was a lackey, Leonardo Gamboa. And although he had not yet seen the lady in the carriage,
nor knew right either, who could be guessed.

Walking, walking, formed the resolution to give a scare to the two, they serve as a punishment,
if not a salutary lesson. To do this, stepped forward with his partner, hit a strong push
Leonardo, who, not being prevented, lost his balance, slipped and gave the side on the shell of chitin,
at the feet of the surprised lady. This, not knowing what was happening, or judging that it was
not a joke, but heavy, stuck his head under the curtain to see the
assailant, at which time believing recognize, among frightened and
laughed and exclaimed: - Adela!

Indeed, Cecilia, no disguise, since he had shot her veil for the shoulders,
black hair floating, subject only to the height of the forehead by
a red ribbon, her cheeks burning and eyes sparkling with anger, was
the transcript of Leonardo's younger sister Gamboa, although more
pronounced and hard features.

But alas! She soon recognized his mistake. As soon as their eyes met, that prototype of the
sweet and tender friend became a real bitch, giving him a word, a single epithet, but as indecent
and dirty like an arrow hit her and forced her to hide her face in the corner of the carriage.
The epithet consisted of two syllables only. Cecilia you said a low voice, slowly, without
opening almost lips: - Pu ...!

Nemesia is led inevitably to Cecilia, joined Leonardo as he could, Mr. Ilincheta gave the marching
orders, the coachman with his foot stuck in the horse's flanks beam, leaving fall at the same
time the tip of the whip on the backs of the outside and the carriage went at a good pace, so a little
more out of sight at the corner of the street immediately where it turned right toward the
gate of the city walls, called Land. In vain the ladies and gentlemen on the bench by the window
waiting to see rise shutter curtain back of chitin and put his white handkerchief to say the
last goodbye. Nor that move or not he appeared, touting the fact, of course, unpleasant impression
he had produced the set in the minds of travelers unnoticed. But even when we think about what
had just happened, and there were not the mulatto, Leonardo had disappeared along with the
coach.

In Merced Street, near the convent of that name, like going to the mall Paula, on the right hand,
there is a house roof, the one on the block.

The input, although extensive, as he admitted to two carriages in a row, was not properly calls
the hall.

Before the door had parked a bad wheel which was engaged between poles, a horse that does not
contradict the former had more than Rocinante that Bucephalus.

Perched in the altered past chair, made so by the multitude of sweatshirts for better backup
from the loins of the beast, lay astride the black coachman, whose dress and appearance desdecían
not a point of the other luggage. While waiting for the owner, or slept, or had more liquor in
his pate than necessary, because it was hard to keep your head erect and high, sometimes given
before the front on the horse's neck, which by its immobility seemed of stone.

He approached the side Josefa sign in and spoke to him several times,
without get awake or showed signs of life.

It is she, out of respect or natural timidity, or rather the voice
rose, and dare to touch.

I did not know his name either, but suspecting named Joseph, said it repeatedly in an affectionate
tone: - Joseph, Joseph, Joseíto, is Hence the Doctor?

Medium black incorporated in the chair, and grinned horrible in the rush to open my eyes, nearly
blinded by the white powder on the street, and finally said: - I
do not Nama Jose, I Ciliro Nama, and my master is there AEntry Dotor,
if you have not left.

Inside, inside.

After giving thanks to the friendly coachman, came, in fact, the old lady. Had in room several
poor-looking people waiting for the male and female doctor, who at that time was not present.
Password Josefa knew him, and since then I looked everywhere with some concern, because perhaps he
had gone, but the fact of the steering wheel to the door and the
presence of patients in the room indicated that if he was out, it
was not for Regular visits of patients who spun every day after lunch.

Finally reached to see him in the yard, leaning over a man sitting in a chair, issued from
time then moans off, more painful, where it was known that the Doctor
ran a surgery difficult.

Montes de Oca was skilled surgeon, no doubt, at least atrevidísimo in handling the knife,
chopping human flesh like someone chopping loaves of bread, always is true, quite rightly,
perhaps by the same blood ran cold with which such operations butchers. Auditors, in fact that
once you opened the womb to an individual to remove an abscess that had formed in the liver,
which was executed with the greatest fortune it is not the patient died in his hands, but
healed, at least for that ailment. Yes, it was so clever as interested and greedy for money.
No one cure for nothing, or moved from his house but to pay cash visits violent or explicit
promise that would be paid well his ability, generally recognized, sooner or later.

Josefa sign came after he had finished the operation, because he had
ceased to complain the patient, such as the Doctor, holding the instrument
with which he had executed, said:

- Hey!

You already, dispatched.

See what he had in his ear: a bean, like a pea, because with the
moisture in that part grew two goals of his natural size.

- Thank
you, Doctor, thank you.

God bless him and grant him good health.

I do not know how much you has plagued the bean in his ear.

For more than ten days without sleep, not eating or ...

- I believe, the Doctor interrupted him with a triumphant air and
not a little suspicious.

Good job me it cost to extract the foreign body. Then, the part that is so delicate, that little
pulse fails I could slip the clamps and damage your eardrums and leave you deaf ear for the rest
of his days. Well. Now you pay me my job, goes home and gives a Cook bañito of mauve with a few
drops of laudanum to soothe irritation ...

- How much is it Doctor? asked the trembling man, not of pain but
the fear of beg Him that much money for a transaction executed, and
that briefly.

- Half an ounce of gold, Montes de Oca said dryly and
impatience.

Man had no choice but to get his hand on his pants and pull out a
handkerchief nothing clean one of whose arms were tied several currencies,
which certainly did not do much greater amount from which the surgeon
was required for healing.

Returning it to the room, as usual with bowed head and right shoulder
down, when he found himself face to face, which is said, Josefa sign,
which said in her shrill voice

- What do you good woman?

For answer Josefa sign handed him the letter of recommendation.

-
Ah! said the surgeon after reading it. News already had this. The
same man Don Candido was here very early and told me about the matter.
But I tell you what I told him, namely that I have never seen the
patient, I do not know the case and that without knowing guess would
be to decide what should be done.

- He did not tell Mr. Don Candido,
dared to see the old woman, trembling, which the case is hopeless,
I say, can not wait, because it depends on the life or death ...?

-
Yes, yes, the surgeon interrupted. Something told me about it the
Don Candido. The case is that I can not attend to everything. If I
divided in ten did not seem to me accoutrement. Do you see The wait
here for me? For the outside I hope many more, all in haste. I believe
Mr. Don Candido, I know that is kind, generous and knows how to acknowledge
the favors is asked. I wish, I can and serve is in my hand, I think
that if I serve this time, it took advantage of me well. But you are
a wise woman, know that I need time, which I consider For myself before
venturing a diagnosis. You may not have a cure, perhaps a remedy worse
than the disease. I am not the witch doctor who went blind and so
decided it. However, perhaps you can give me better reporting of what
has been the Don Candido, who, from what I understand, he knows the
case heard. Who is the patient?

- My daughter!, Don Thomas.

- Daughter
of you eh? How old now?

- Go in the thirty-seven.

- Come on, not
old. Body in there yet, and there will be resistance. How long have
you been sick?

- Oh, sir! Long, the life of a Christian, will now
eighteen years rather more less.

- No, I do not mean that. How long
have you entered the hospital for Paula?

- Shortly after being sick.
It is now just under seventeen, because she was about two months old
when you can not hold it to be at home, I had to put Paula in the
hospital as the doctor advised me Rosaín. Now you can imagine Mr.
Doctor what it cost this separation. It tore my soul ...

- By luck,
he added thoughtfully Montes de Oca, so that the child ...

- Does
my granddaughter? sign said Josefa.

- Yes, you granddaughter, daughter
of the patient, will it ...?

- Go in the eighteen years of age.

-
What about?

- Thank God, good and healthy.

- No, not that. It looked like a natural
formation, such as the vertical entrance to a limestone cavern, or the throat of a sleeping
volcano. But whatever the nature of the pit might be, I was convinced that the steps were of
artificial origin. They were reasonably regular in height and broad enough for two, or even
three, persons to go abreast.

When we had descended perhaps as much as two hundred feet, we suddenly found ourselves in a
broad cavern with a surprisingly level floor. The temperature had been steadily rising all
the time, and here it was as warm as in an ordinary living room. The cavern appeared to be
about twenty yards broad and eight or ten feet in height, with a flat roof of rock. It was
dimly illuminated by a small heap of what seemed to be hard coal, burning in a very roughly
constructed brazier, which, as far as looks went, one would have said was constructed of iron.

You will imagine our surprise upon seeing these things. The appearance of the gorilla-like
beast with the awful eyes had certainly not led us to anticipate the finding in his lair of
any such evidences of human intelligence, and we stood fast in our tracks for a minute or two,
nobody speaking a word. Then Edmund said:

"This is far better than I hoped. I had not thought about caverns, though I ought to have foreseen
the probability of something of the kind. It is hard to drive out life as long as a world has
solid foundations, and air for breathing. I shall be greatly surprised now if these creatures
do not turn out to be at least as intelligent as our African or Australian savages."

"But," said I, "the fellow that we saw surely cannot have more intelligence than a beast. There
must be some more highly developed creatures living here."

"I'm not so sure of that," Edmund responded. "Looks go for nothing in such a case. He had arms
and hands, and his brain may be well organized."

"If his brain is as big as his eyes," Jack put in, "he ought to be able to give odds to old
Solomon and beat him easy. My, but I'd like to see their spectacles--if they ever wear any!"

Jack's humor recalled us from our meditation, and we began to look about more carefully. There
was not a living creature in sight, but over in a corner I detected a broad hole, down which
the steps continued to descend.

"Here's the way," said Edmund, discovering the steps at the same moment. "Down we go."

He again led the way, and we resumed the descent. As we stumbled along downward we began to
talk of a strange but agreeable odor which we had noticed in the cavern. Edmund said that it
was due, perhaps, to some peculiar quality of the atmosphere.

"I think," he continued, "that it is heavily charged with oxygen. You have noticed that none
of us feels the slightest fatigue, notwithstanding the precipitancy of our long descent."

I reflected that this might also be the cause of our rising courage, for I was sure that not
one of us felt the slightest fear in thus pushing on toward dangers of whose nature we could
form no idea. The steps, precisely like those above, wound round and round and led us down
I should say as much as three hundred feet before we entered another cavern, larger and loftier
than the first.

And there we found them!

There was never another such sight! It made our blood run cold once more, rather with surprise
than fear, though the latter quickly followed.

Ranged along the farther side of the cavern, and visible in the light of another glowing heap
in the center, were as many as thirty of those huge hairy creatures, standing shoulder to shoulder,
their great eyes glaring like bull's-eye lanterns. But the thing that filled us with terror
was their motions.

You have read, with thrilling nerves, how a huge cobra, reared on his coils, sways his terrible
head from side to side before striking. Well, all those black heads before us were swaying
in unison, but with a sickening circular movement, which was regularly reversed in direction.
Three times by the right and then three times by the left those heads circled, in rhythmic
cadence, while the luminous eyes seemed to leave phosphorescent rings in the air, intersecting
one another in consequence of the rapidity of the motion.

It was such a spectacle as I had never beheld in the wildest dream. It was baleful. It was
the charm of the serpent fascinating his terrified prey. In an instant I felt my brain turning,
and I staggered in spite of my utmost efforts. A kind of paralysis stiffened my limbs.

Presently, all moving together, and uttering a hissing, whistling sound, they began slowly
to approach us, keeping in line, each shaggy leg lifted at the same moment, like so many soldiers
on parade, while the heads continued to swing, and the glowing eyes to cut linked circles in
the air. But for Edmund we should certainly have been lost. Standing a little to the fore,
he spoke to us over his shoulder, in a low voice:

"Take out your pistols, but don't shoot unless they make a rush. Then kill as many as you can.
I'll knock over the leader in the center, and I think that will be enough."

We could as easily have stirred our arms if we had been marble statues, but he promptly raised
his pistol, and the explosion followed on the instant. The report was like an earthquake. It
shocked us into our senses and almost out of them again. The weight of the air and the confinement
of the cavern magnified and concentrated the sound so that it was awful beyond belief. The
fellow in the center was hurled back as if shot from a catapult, and the others fell at flat
as he, and lay there groveling, their big eyes filming and swaying, but no longer in unison.

The charm was broken, and as we saw our fearful enemies prostrate, our courage returned at a bound.

"I thought as much," said Edmund coolly. "But I'm sorry now that I aimed at that fellow; the
sound alone would have sufficed. It was not necessary to take life. However, we should probably
have had to come to it eventually, and now we have them thoroughly cowed. Our safety consists
in keeping them terrified."

Thus speaking, Edmund boldly approached the groveling row, and pushed with his foot the furry
body of the one he had shot. The bullet had gone through his head. At Edmund's approach the
creatures sank lower on the rocky floor, and those nearest him turned up their moon eyes with
an expression of submission and supplication that was grotesque. He motioned us to join him
and, imitating him, we began to pat and smooth the shrinking bodies until, understanding that
we would not hurt them, they gradually acquired confidence.

In the meantime the crowd in the cavern increased, others coming in through side passages,
and exhibiting the utmost astonishment at the spectacle which greeted them. It was clear that
those who had taken part in the opening scene imparted to the newcomers a knowledge of the
situation of affairs, and we could see that our prestige was thoroughly established. It remained
to utilize our advantage, and we looked to Edmund to show how it should be done. He was equal
to the undertaking, but I shall not trouble you with the details of his diplomacy. Let it suffice
to say that by a combination of gentleness and firmness he quickly reduced almost the entire
population of the caverns (for, as we afterwards discovered, there were a dozen or more of
these underground dwellings connected by horizontal passages through the rocks) into subjection
to his will. I say "almost," because, as you will see in a little while, there were certain
members of this extraordinary community who possessed a spirit of independence too strong to
be so easily subdued.

As we became better acquainted with the cave dwellers we found that they were by no means as
savage as they looked. Their appearance was certainly grotesque, and even unaccountable. Why,
for instance, should their heads have been covered with coarse black disordered hair while
their bodies, from the neck down, were almost beautiful with a natural raiment of golden white,
as soft as silk and as brilliant as floss? I never could explain it, and Edmund was no less
puzzled by this peculiarity. The immense size of their eyes did not seem astonishing after
we began to reflect upon the consequences of the relative lack of light in their world. It
was but a natural adjustment to their environment; with such eyes they could see in the dark
better than cats. Their feet were bare and covered on the soles with thick soft skin, while
the insides of their long hands were almost as white and delicate as those of a human being.

Their intelligence was sufficiently demonstrated by the construction of the hundreds of rocky
steps leading from the caverns to the surface of the ground, and by their employment of fire,
and manufacture of the metallic braziers which contained it. But this was not all. We found
that in some of the winding passages connecting the caverns they cultivated food. It consisted
entirely of vegetables of various kinds, and all unlike any that I ever saw on the earth. Water
dripped from the roofs of these particular passages, and the almost colorless vegetation thrived
there with astonishing luxuriance. They had many simple ways of cooking their food, and it
was evident that they possessed some form of salt, though we did not discover the deposit from
which they must have drawn it. They collected water in cisterns hollowed in the rock.

Although we still had abundance of food in the car, Edmund insisted on trying theirs, and it
proved to be very palatable.

"This is fortunate, though hardly surprising," said Edmund. "If we had found the food on Venus
uneatable, we should indeed have been in a fine fix. While we remain here we will eat as the
natives eat, and save our own supplies for future need."

The only brute animals that we saw in the caverns were some doglike creatures, about as large
as terriers, but very furry, which showed the utmost terror whenever we appeared.

One of the first things that we discovered outside the main cavern where we had made our debut
was the burial ground of the community. This happened when they came to dispose of the fellow
that Edmund had shot. They formed a regular procession, which greatly impressed us, and we
followed them as they bore the body through several winding ways into a large cavern, at a
considerable distance from any of the others. Here they had dug a grave, and, to our astonishment,
there appeared to be something resembling a religious ceremony connected with the interment.
And then, for the first time, we distinguished the females from the others. But a still greater
surprise awaited us. It was no less than plain evidence of regular family relationship.

As the body was lowered into the grave one of the females approached with every sign of distress
and sorrow. Jack declared that he saw tears running down her hairy cheeks. She held two little
ones by the hand, and this spectacle produced an astonishing effect upon Edmund, revealing
an entirely new side of his character. I have told you that he expressed regret for having
killed the fellow in the cavern, but now, at the sight before him, he seemed filled with remorse.

"I wish I had never come here!" he said bitterly. "The first thing I have done is to kill an
inoffensive and intelligent creature."

"Intelligent, perhaps," said Jack, "but inoffensive--not by a long shot! Where'd we have been
if you hadn't killed him? They'd have made mincemeat of us."

"No," replied Edmund, sorrowfully shaking his head, "it wasn't necessary. The noise would have
sufficed; and I ought to have known it."

"Why didn't you shout, then? That scared the first one," put in Henry, whose soul, it must
be said, was not overflowing with sympathy.

"I did what I thought was best at the moment," Edmund replied, with a broken voice. "They were
so many and so threatening that I imagined my voice alone might not be effective. But I'm sorry,
sorry!"

"Henry, you're a fool!" cried the sympathetic Jack. "Come now, Edmund," he continued, kindly
laying a hand on his shoulder, "what you did was the only thing under heaven that could have
been done. You're wrong to blame yourself. By Jo, if you hadn't done it I would!"

But Edmund only shook his head, as if refusing to be comforted. It was the first sign of weakness
that we had seen in our incomparable leader, but I am sure it only increased our respect for
him--at least that's true of Jack and me. After that I noticed that Edmund was far more gentle
than before in his relations with the people of the caverns.

Not long after this painful incident we made a discovery of extreme interest. It was nothing
less than a big smithy! Edmund had foretold that we should find something of the kind.

"Those braziers and cooking pots," he had said, "and the tools that must have been needed to
build the steps and to dig their graves, prove that they know how to work in iron. If it is
not done in these caverns, then they get it from some other similar community. But I think
it likely that we shall come upon some signs of the work hereabouts."

"Maybe they import it from Pittsburg," was the remark that fun-loving Jack could not refrain
from making.

"Well, you'll see," said Edmund.

And, as I have already told you, he was right. We did find the smithy, with several stout fellows
pounding out rude tools with equally rude hammers of iron. Of course we could ask them no questions,
for their language was only a kind of squeak, and they seemed to converse mostly by means of
expressive signs. But Edmund was not long in drawing his conclusions.

"This," he said, after closely examining the metal, "is native iron. There's nothing remarkable
in the fact that it should be here. All the solid planets, as you know" (turning to me), "are
very largely composed of iron, and Venus, being nearer the center of the system, may have proportionally
more of it than the earth. And these fellows have found out its usefulness, and how to work
it. There's nothing surprising in that, either, for some of our savages have done as much on
the earth. Now I'll make another prediction--we are going to find coal here. That is inevitable,
since we know that they burn it in the caverns. I shouldn't wonder if it were close at hand,
from the look of these rocks."

He approached the wall of the cavern containing the smithy, and immediately exclaimed:

"Look here! Here it is!"

And sure enough, on joining him we saw a seam of as fine anthracite as Pennsylvania ever produced.

"A Carboniferous Age on Venus!" Edmund continued. "What do you think of that? But, of course,
it was sure to be so; all the planets that are old enough have been through practically the
same stages. Think of it! The plants that gave origin to this coal must have flourished here
when Venus still rotated on her axis rapidly enough to have day and night succeeding one another
on all sides of her, for now no vegetation except the insignificant plants that grow in these
caverns can live on this hemisphere. And think, too, of the countless ages that must have been
consumed in slowing down her rotation by the friction of her ocean tides."

"Has Venus got any oceans?" asked Jack.

"I haven't a doubt of it; but we shall find none on this side, although they must once have
been here."

We all mused for a time on the subject that Edmund had started, when suddenly his face lighted
up with the greatest animation, and he exclaimed, but as if speaking to himself rather than to us:

"Capital! It couldn't have happened better!"

"What's capital?" drawled Jack.

"Why, this smithy, and these Tubal Cains here. Unconsciously they have solved for me a problem
that has given me considerable trouble. Almost as soon as we got acquainted with the people
of the caverns the idea occurred to me that I should like to take some of them with us when
we visit the other hemisphere. There are many interesting observations that their presence
on that side of Venus would give rise to, and, besides, they might be of great use to us. Of
course I meant to bring them back to their home. But the puzzling question has been how to
transport them. The car has a full load already."

"They've got good legs; make 'em walk," said Jack.

Edmund burst into a laugh.

"Why, Jack," he asked, "how far do you think it is to the other side of Venus?"

"I don't know," said Jack, "but I suppose it's not very far round her. How far is it?"

"Five thousand miles, at least, to the edge of the sunlit hemisphere."

Jack whistled.

"By Jo! I wouldn't have believed it."

"Well, it's a fact," said Edmund, "and of course I don't propose to take several months to
make the journey. Now the sight of these fellows at work has shown me just how it can be done
in short order. It's this way: I'll have iron sleds made, put the natives that I propose to
take along upon them, hitch them by wire cables, which luckily I've got, to the car, and away
we'll spin. The power of the car is practically unlimited, and, as you have observed, the ground
is as flat and smooth as a prairie, and, moreover, is coated with an icy covering."

Jack glowed with enthusiasm over this project, and was about to indulge in one of his characteristic
outbreaks, when there came an interruption which ended in a drama that put silver streaks among
my coal-black locks! Some one came in where we were and called off the workmen, who went out
with the others in great haste. Of course we followed at their heels. On reaching the principal
cavern, we found a singular scene. Two natives, whom we had never seen before, were evidently
in charge of some kind of a ceremony. They wore tall, conical hats made of polished metal and
covered with hieroglyphics, and carried staves of iron in their hands.

"Priests," Edmund immediately whispered. "Now we'll see something interesting."

The "priests" marshaled all the others, numbering several hundreds, into a long column, and
then began a slow, solemn march up the steps. The leaders produced a squeaking music by blowing
into the ends of their staves. Women were mingled with men, and even the children were there,
too. We followed at the tail of the procession, our curiosity at the highest pitch. At the
rate we went it must have taken nearly an hour to mount the steps, but at last all emerged
in the open air, where the cold struck to our marrow. The natives didn't seem to mind it, but
we ran back and donned our furs. Then we re-ascended and stepped out into the Arctic night,
finding the crowd assembled not far from the entrance to the cavern. The frosty sky was ablaze
with stars, and directly overhead shone a planet of amazing size and splendor with a little
one beside it.

"The earth and the moon!" exclaimed Edmund.

I cannot describe the flood of feeling that went over me at that sight! But in a moment Edmund
interrupted my meditation by saying, in a quick, nervous way:

"Look at that!"

The natives had formed themselves in a circle with the two priests standing alone in the center.
All but these two had dropped on their knees, while the leaders, elevating their long arms
toward the zenith, gazed upward, uttering a kind of chant in their queer, squeaking voices.

"Don't you see what they're about?" demanded Edmund, twitching me irritably by the sleeve.
"They're worshipping the earth!"

It was the truth--the amazing truth! They were worshipping our planet in the sky! And, indeed,
she looked worth worshipping. Never have I seen so splendid a star. She was twenty times as
bright as the most brilliant planet that any terrestrial astronomer ever beheld; and the moon,
glowing beside her like an attendant, redoubled the beauty of the sight.

"It's just the moment of the conjunction," said Edmund. "This is their religion; the earth
is their goddess, and when she is nearest and brightest they perform this ceremony in her honor.
I wouldn't have missed this for a world."

Suddenly the two priests began to pirouette, and as they whirled more and more rapidly, their
huge glowing eyes made phosphorescent circles in the gloom like those that had so alarmed and
fascinated us in the cavern. They gyrated round the ring of worshipers with accelerated speed,
and all those poor creatures fell under the fascination and drooped with heads to the ground.
Now for the first time I caught sight of an oblong object rising a couple of feet above the
ground in the center of the circle. I was wondering what it might be when the spinning priests,
who had gradually drawn closer to the ring of worshipers, dived into the circle, and, catching
each a native in his arms, ran with their captives to the curious object that I have just described.

"It's a sacrificial stone!" exclaimed Edmund. "They're going to kill them as an offering to
the earth and her child the moon." The general belief is that however the Poldy, but madly in love Jewish, did not yield or
surrender to their reasons. Quite the contrary, all by giving a purpose beyond tragic and mysterious
to this story.

Liebestein Castle is lonely and dilapidated.

In his dark and dreary rooms, covered with dust and cobwebs, it is
stated that roam and circulate throughout the night elves and souls.

Count
Henry went from teacher to not know what to university, where he still
lives. The fugitive passed close by us, and Jack shouted as he darted past:

"Good boy!"

The enraged priest was after him like lightning, and as he came near us his awful eyes seemed
to emit actual flames. But the runner had vanished. Without an instant's hesitation the priest
shot out his great arm and caught me by the throat! In another second I felt myself carried
in a bound, as if a tiger had seized me, over the drooping heads of the worshipers and toward
the horrible altar.

CHAPTER V

OFF FOR THE SUN LANDS

Dreadful as the moment was, I did not lose my senses. On the contrary, my mind was fearfully
clear and active. There was not a horror that I missed. The strength and agility of my captor
were astounding. I could no more have struggled with him than with a lion. Only one thing flashed
upon me to do; I yelled with all the strength of my lungs. But they had become accustomed to
our voices now, and the maddened creature was so intent upon his fell purpose that a cannon-shot
would not have diverted him from it.

He got me to the altar, where the preceding victim already lay with his heart torn out, and,
pressing me against it with all his bestial force, raised the pointed staff to transfix me.
With dying eyes I saw the earth gleaming, magnificent, directly over my head, and my heart
bounded with unreasoning hope at the sight. It was my mother planet, powerful to save!

All this passed in a second, while the dreadful spear was poised for its work. Even in that
fraction of time I noticed the bunching muscles of the murderer's hairy arm, and then I pressed
my eyes shut.

Bang!

Something touched me, and I felt the warm blood gushing. Then I knew no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the midst of a dream of boyhood scenes a murmur of familiar voices awoke me. I opened my
eyes, but as I could not make out where I was, closed them again.

Then I heard Edmund saying:

"He's coming out all right."

Thereupon, I reopened my eyes, but still the scene puzzled me. I saw Edmund's face, and behind
those of Jack and Henry, wearing anxious looks. But this was not my room! It seemed to be a
cave, with faint firelight reflections on the walls.

"Where am I?" I asked.

"Back in the cavern, and coming along all right," said Edmund.

Back in the cavern! What did he mean? Then, suddenly, memory returned.

"So he didn't sacrifice me!" I cried.

"Not on your life!" Jack's hearty voice responded. "Edmund was too quick for that."

"But only by a fraction of a second!" said Edmund, smiling.

"What happened, then?" I asked, my recollections coming back stronger and stronger.

"A mighty good shot happened," said Jack. "The best I ever saw."

I looked inquiringly at Edmund. He saw that I could bear it, and he began:

"When that fellow snatched you up and leaped inside the circle I had my furs wrapped so closely
around me, not anticipating any danger, that for quite ten seconds I was unable to get out
my pistol. I tore the garment open just in time, for already he was pressing you against the
accursed altar with his spear poised. I didn't waste any time finding my aim, but even as it
was the iron point had touched you when the bullet crashed through his brain. The shock swerved
the weapon a little and you were only wounded in the shoulder. You got a scratch which might
have been serious but for your Arctic coat. The fellow fell dead beside you, and under the
circumstances I felt compelled to shoot the other one also, for he was insane with the delirium
of their bloody rite, and I knew that our lives would never be safe if he remained ready for
mischief.

"I'm sorry to have had to begin killing right and left again, but I guess that's the lot of
all invaders, wherever they may go. It's the second lesson for these savages, and I believe
it will prove final. When their priests were dead and the others had no fight in them, even
if they had intended any harm to us.  Nobody knows to what those chaps might have led them,
and my conscience is easy this time."

"How long have I been here?" I asked.

"Two days by the calendar clock?" replied Jack.

"Yes, two days," Edmund assented. "I never saw a man so knocked out by a shock, for the wound
wasn't much; I fixed that up in five minutes. But I don't blame you. In your place I should
have been scared to the bottom of my soul also. But look at yourself."

He held a pocket mirror before me, and then I saw that my hair was streaked with gray!

"But we haven't been idle in the meanwhile," Edmund went on. "I've got two sleds nearly completed,
and to-morrow at midnight--earth time--I mean to set out for the sunny lands of Venus."

"How in the world could you have worked so fast?" I asked in surprise.

"Because I had certain tools in the car which vastly facilitated the operation; but I must
admit that the savage blacksmiths worked well, too, and showed surprising intelligence in comprehending
my directions. Perhaps that was because I had learned their language."

"Learned their language!" I exclaimed, staring in amazement.

"Well, perhaps that's putting it a little too strong; but I have learned enough to establish
a pretty good understanding with them. There's nothing like working together to make intelligent
creatures comprehend one another."

"But what kind of a language is it, then?" I asked.

"A language to make your hair stand on end," put in Jack. "The language that ghosts speak,
I reckon! Not that I understand the least little bit of it, but I judge from what Edmund says."

With increasing bewilderment I looked at our leader. He smiled, and then looked thoughtful
for a moment before again speaking. At last he said:

"It's a subject that I may be better able to discuss after I have learned more about it. All
I can say at present is that it appears to be a kind of telepathy. You know that their voices
seem hardly more cultivated, or capable of regular articulation, than those of mere brutes;
and, besides, they have a certain horror of sound. These smiths wear coverings over their ears
to minify the noise of their hammering. Yet they are able to converse, partly by physical signs,
but more, I am sure, by some means which they possess of transferring thought without the mediation
of any senses familiar to us. Sometimes I imagine that their extraordinary eyes play a large
part in the phenomenon. But, however that may be, they certainly are able to read some of my
thoughts, when we are in close relations and working together. One of them is especially gifted
in this way, and what do you think? I have discovered his name!"

"Now, Edmund--" I began incredulously.

"Yes," he persisted, "it's a fact. You are to remember that they do interchange some of their
ideas by means of sounds, and they have certain words, among which I am disposed to think are
their individual designations. One of these words particularly attracted my attention because
I observed that it was always addressed to the person I have just spoken of, and I finally
concluded that it was his name. As near as I can imitate it, it sounds something like 'Juba.'
So that's what I call him, and he's going to be the chief of the party that I propose to take
with us. His services may be invaluable to us."

A great deal more was said on this curious subject, but since we did not arrive at a complete
understanding of it until after we had reached the other side of the planet, I shall postpone
any further explanation to the chapters which will be devoted to our astonishing adventures
on that part of Venus.

My wound, as Edmund had said, was very slight, and the effects of the shock having passed off
during the period of my unconsciousness, I was soon busy with the others in making the final
preparations for our departure. The sleds were, of course, very rude affairs, but they were
also very strong. Among the innumerable stores which Edmund's foresight had led him to put
into the car were a number of exceedingly strong but light metallic cables. With these the
two sleds were hitched, one behind the other, and a line about a hundred feet long connected
them with the car. The latter could thus rise to a considerable height without lifting the
sleds from the ground.

The sleds were provisioned from the stores of the natives, and we also took some of their food
in the car, not only to eke out our own but because we had come to like it.

Edmund had already chosen the fellows who were to accompany us, and among them were two of
the smiths besides Juba. In all they were eight. How he succeeded in persuading them I do not
know, but not the slightest objection was apparent on their part, or on the part of their compatriots
in the caverns. We were all ready at the predetermined time, and the scene at our departure
was a strange one.

At least five hundred natives had assembled in a furry crowd around the entrance to the caverns
to see us off. When we started, the fellows on the sleds, being unused to the motion, clung
together like so many awkward white bears taking a ride in the circus. Their friends stood
about the ill-omened sacrificial altar, waving their long arms, while their huge eyes goggled
in the starlight.

Jack, in a burst of enthusiasm, fired four or five parting shots from his pistol. As the reports
crashed through the heavy air, you should have seen the crowd vanish down the hole! The sight
made me wince, for they must have gone down like a cataract, all heaped together. But they
were tough, and I trust no heads were broken. The effect on the eight fellows on the sleds
came near being disastrous. I expected to see them leap off and run, which no doubt they would
have done if Edmund had not taken, for other reasons, the precaution to tie them fast. But
they strained at their bonds, and squealed in terror.

"Give me your pistol!" commanded Edmund, in a voice of thunder, and with blazing eyes.

Jack was almost twice his size, but he handed over the pistol with the air of a rebuked schoolboy.

"When you learn how to use it, I'll give it back to you," said Edmund sternly, and that closed
the incident.

Then we began gradually to put on speed, and as the ground was icy smooth and entirely unobstructed,
we were soon traveling at the rate of sixty miles an hour. The plan of the sleds worked like
magic, and after their first terror had passed away it was plain to be seen that the natives
enjoyed the new sensation immensely. And, indeed, it was a glorious spin!

But in a little while a danger developed which we had not thought of. It arose from the existence
of other caverns whose mouths opened upon the plain. To have precipitated the sleds into these
would have been fatal. Luckily, shafts of light issued from all of them, and warned by these,
we managed to avoid the danger. But it was not entirely passed before we had traveled at least
a hundred miles. It was like an immense city of prairie dogs without mounds. The cavern that
we had discovered on our arrival was evidently situated on the outskirts of the group, and
now we were passing through the center of it. Occasionally we saw a huge white form disappear
in one of the holes as we swiftly approached, but that was all we beheld of the inhabitants.
But the spectacle of the shafts of light rising all around us was amazing. When we were in
the midst of it Edmund hesitated for a moment, muttering that we had been too hasty and should
have remained longer to study the peculiarities of this wonderful world of night; but finally
he decided to keep on, and soon afterwards we saw the last of the caverns. Then, as there appeared
to be no obstructions of any kind, the speed was worked up to a hundred miles an hour. Going
straight ahead as we did, there was no danger of the sleds being overturned.

Having, as Edmund had calculated, about five thousand miles to go before reaching the edge
of the sun-illuminated hemisphere, it was evident that, at our present rate of progress, we
should arrive there in a little over two days by the calendar clock. We guided our course by
the stars, and for me one of the most interesting things was to see the earth sinking toward
the horizon, accompanied by the stars, as if the heavens were revolving in a direction opposed
to our line of travel. We smoked and talked and ate and slept in the old way, while the marvelous
mouths in the wall resumed their strange deglutition. Thus the time passed, without ennui,
until, unexpectedly, a new phenomenon captured our attention.

Ahead, through the peephole, Edmund had descried again the flaming spires which had so astonished
us on our approach to Venus. But now their appearance was splendid and imposing beyond words.
Above them rose an arc of pearly light which grew higher every hour. And with the arc of light
rose the flames also. At the same time they seemed to spread to the right and the left, until
they were simultaneously visible from both of the side windows of the car. Their colors were
wonderful--red, green, purple, orange--all the hues of the prism.

"There is the old mystery again," exclaimed Edmund, "and I can no more explain it now than
I could when we first saw it on nearing the planet. The arc of light above is natural enough;
it's simply the dawn. The sun never rises on this side of Venus, but it will rise for us because
we are approaching it, and the light is the first indication that we are getting near enough
to the border between day and night for some of the sun's rays to be bent over the horizon
by refraction. But those flames! See how steady they are as a whole, and yet how they change
color like a slowly turning prism."

"Don't, for God's sake, run us into a conflagration," said Jack. "I'm ready to believe anything
of this topsy-turvy old planet, and I shouldn't be surprised if the other side is all fire
as this one is all frost.  I can stand these hairy beasts, but I'll be hanged if I want to
be introduced among salamanders."

"That's not real fire," said Edmund. "When we get a little nearer we can see what it is. In
the meantime I'll try to think it out."

The result of Edmund's meditations, when he announced it to us, an hour later, awoke as much
amazement in our minds as anything that had yet occurred. He had been sitting silent in his
corner, occasionally taking a glimpse through the peephole, or one of the windows, when suddenly
he slapped his thigh, and springing to his feet, exclaimed:

"They're mountains of crystal!"

"Mountains of crystal!" we echoed.

"Nothing else in the world, and I am ashamed not to have foreseen the thing. It's plain enough
when you come to think about it. Remember that Venus being a world lying half in the daylight
and half in the night, is necessarily as hot on one side as it is cold on the other. All of
the clouds and floating vapors are on the day side, where the sunbeams act. The heated air
charged with moisture rises over the sunward hemisphere, and flows off above, on all sides,
toward the night side, while from the latter cold air flows in beneath to take its place. Along
the junction of the two hemispheres the clouds and moisture are condensed by the intense cold,
and fall in ceaseless snowstorms. This snow descending for ages has piled up in mountainous
masses whose height may be increased in some places by real mountain ranges buried beneath.
The atmospheric moisture cannot pass very far into the night hemisphere without being condensed,
and so it is all arrested within a ring, or band, extending completely around the planet, and
marking the division between perpetual day and perpetual night. The appearance of gigantic
flames is produced by the sunbeams striking these mountains of ice and snow from behind and
breaking into prismatic fire."

We listened to this explanation, so simple and yet so wonderful, with mingled feelings of astonishment
and admiration. And then we turned again to regard the phenomenon, which now, with our nearer
approach, had become splendid and awful beyond description.

In a few minutes Edmund addressed us again. "I foresee now," he said, "considerable trouble
for us. There has been a warning of that, too, if I had but heeded it. I've noticed for some
time that a wind, getting gradually stronger, has been following us, sometimes dying out and
then coming on again stronger than before. It is likely that this wind gets to be a perfect
hurricane in the neighborhood of those strange mountains. It is the back suction, caused, as
I have already told you, by the rising of the heated air on the sunny side of the planet. It
may play the deuce with us when we get into the midst of it. I shall have to be cautious."

He immediately reduced the speed to not more than ten miles an hour, and at once we noticed
the wind of which he had spoken. It came now in great gusts from behind, rapidly increasing
in frequency and fury. Soon it was strong enough to drive the sleds without any pull upon the
cable, and sometimes they were forced directly under the car, and even ahead of it, the natives
clinging to one another in the utmost terror. Edmund managed to govern the motions of the car
for a time, holding it back against the storm, but as he confessed, this was a contingency
he had made no provision for, and eventually we became almost as helpless as a ship in a typhoon.

"Of course I could cut loose from the sleds and run right out of this," said Edmund, "but that
would never do. I've taken them into my service and I'm bound to look out for them. If there
was room for them in the car it would be all right. Let's see. Yes! I've got it. I'll fetch
up the sleds and fasten them underneath the car, like baskets to a balloon, and so carry the
whole thing. There's plenty of power; it's only room that's wanting."

No sooner said than done with Edmund. By this time we were getting into the ice, huge hills
of which surrounded us. Edmund dropped the car in the lee of one of these strange hummocks.
Here the force of the wind was broken, and the sky directly over us was free from clouds, but
a short distance ahead we could see them whirling and tumbling in mighty masses of tumultuous
vapor. Lashing the two sleds together we attached them about ten feet below the bottom of the
car. Then the natives, who had been unbound, and had stood looking on in utter bewilderment,
were securely fastened on the sleds. We entered the car and the power was turned on.

"We'll rise straight up," said Edmund, "and as soon as we are out of the wind current we will
sail over the mountains and come down on the other side as nice as you please. Strange that
I didn't think of carrying the sleds in this way to begin with."

It was a beautiful program that Edmund had outlined, and we had complete confidence in our
leader's ability to carry it through; but it didn't work as expected. Even his genius had met
its match this time.

No sooner had we risen out of the protection of the hill of ice than the hurricane caught us.
It was a blast of such power and ferocity that in an instant it had the car spinning like a
teetotum, and then it shot us ahead, banging the sleds against the car as if they had been
tassels. It is a wonder of wonders that the poor creatures on them were not flung off, but
fortunately we had taken particular pains with their lashings, and as for knocks, they could
stand them like so many bears.

In the course of twenty minutes we must have traveled twice as many miles, perfectly helpless
to arrest our mad rush because, Edmund said, the atomic reaction partly refused to work, and
he could not rise as he had expected to do. We were pitched hither and thither, and were sprawling
on the floor more than half the time. The noise was awful, and nobody tried to speak after
Edmund had shouted his single communication about the power, which would have filled us with
dismay if we had had leisure to think.

The shutters were open, and suddenly I saw through one of the windows a sight which I thought
must surely be my last. The car had been sweeping through a dense cloud of boiling vapors,
and these had without warning split open before my eyes--and there, almost in contact with
the car, was a glittering precipice of solid ice, gleaming with wicked blue flashes, and we
were rushing upon it as if shot out of a cannon!

The next instant came a terrific shock, which I thought must have crushed the car like an eggshell,
and down we fell--down and down!

CHAPTER VI

LOST IN THE CRYSTAL MOUNTAINS

If we had seen the danger earlier, and had not been so tumbled about by the pitching of the
car, it is possible that Edmund would have prevented the collision, in spite of the partial
disablement of his apparatus. The blow against the precipice of ice was not as severe as it
had seemed to me, and the car was not smashed; but the fall was terrible! There was only one
thing which saved us from destruction. At the base of the mighty cliff against which the wind
had hurled the car an immense deposit of snow had collected, and into this we plunged. We were
all thrown together in a heap, the car and the sleds being entangled with the wire ropes.

Fortunately the stout glass windows were not broken, and after we had struggled to our feet
Edmund managed to open the door. No: it was impossible. Poldy took a decision extreme,
but in his case, quite justified. He spread the word that he had died, Catholic married the
converted Jew, and changing, or rather a reflection of their name, came to live with him in
the United States.

Isidore was brought all the money he had and no small part of the precious knickknacks, their
jewelry and antiques bazaar.

The rest, as well as urban and rural properties that in Austria was the owner, left the care of
an uncle very reliable and very skillful.

In the United States went to large companies and property speculation and increased his fortune rather
than decrease.

He came to New York two or three days each week to transact business which, having very knowledgeable
dependent on his desk, did not require his presence continually.

Hence that most of the time you pass a house which had been built on the banks Hudson, imitating
as far as possible the trace and Liebestein castle architecture. As the fifth was on a rock,
like the castle, was the occurrence of giving Isidoro almost the same name, but in Spanish and
a very romantic recalling that there between Antequera and Archidona. The fifth of Poldy called
the Peña de los Enamorados.

The fifth was far more of New York at Albany, State capital of New
York, but, like the railroad trains are extremely fast in the land,
and delicious navigation in the magnificent steamers up and down the
river, just annoyed Isidore to and from that distance was somewhat
larger.

Rather like the calm Poldy and the quiet of the country and hated the noise unhealthy heavily
populated cities.

Poldy rarely went to Albany and even more rarely went to New York. In its fifth she enjoyed
every comfort, luxury and gift offered by modern civilization to
those who are rich.

Poldy even out soon, and look in the mirror, and saw that her husband, dressed the latest fashion,
with care, taste and elegance unblemished.

Isidore took me to the fifth, introduced me to Poldy and had the pleasure and satisfaction to
admire. Although it was nearing and in the forty years, the sun shone in her beauty and her zenith
like a goddess.

So wonderful hospitality was welcomed in his house guests to contribute to this end the privileged
talent of his cook, an artist of the highest order.

Poldy had two children: a girl of eight and a six, which were two
angels of pure beautiful.

Garuda, the white stork, an animal has extremely long life, lived gentle, and happy home in the
fifth, as if for her time is not. Rather had won than lost, because the plumage of the breast,
which was formerly a gray sheen, luster and had acquired the whiteness of the snow. Garuda
seemed familiar spirit of the house, the living summary of the Lares penates of that home
and transported from central Europe to the opposite side of the Atlantic.

I do not mean more happiness to more expensive that Poldy Isidoro and enjoyed, in order not
envied by those who read me. I go to finish, making a plea to readers: to shut what I reveal here
and not write it at thirty or forty Count and Countess, brothers, uncles, brothers and nephews
of Poldy, not to grieve or be offended.

THE CAPTIVE OF DOÑA MENCÍA

I

A few days ago I received the prospect of a very interesting book to be published in Cordoba.
Contain the history of cities, towns and fortresses of that ancient kingdom. This made me remember
certain events, I told my friend D. John Fresco, as occurred four ago thirty years in the castle
of the population in which he lives. I do not know if these events are all fiction, or if you
have some historical foundation. And be responsible for clarifying the to write the said book,
now consulting other former gait to be printed Reports now considering
manuscripts and other documents must have in abundance.

I do not want to get into such Honduras. I am inclined, however, believe that in my story if there
is a fiction, there is also much truth in that fiction is founded: the serious testimony my
dear and learned friend D. Aureliano Fernández-Guerra, who was heard to refer non-small part of the
events whose narration I am pleased to now devote his unforgettable spirit.

D. Aureliano had olive farm and vineyard in the nearby site of Zuheros, would often there, and
took pride in knowing, and insurance had investigated and knew all that from many centuries had
happened in that region. Nevertheless, I give up to find out, for not commit, what is truth
and what is falsehood in the story, and I will refer here and told me my namesake.

The strong walls and eight towers are today as the day they were built. No lack even a turret.
Within that enclosure can be housed well over two hundred laborers
and eighty horses.

From the comfortable manor house is not a trace. Have come to replace an oil mill with alfarge,
granaries and presses, which at harvest also serve winery, a still larger with running water,
and extensive warehouses for oil, brandy, vinegar and wine.

Back in the 1470s was all that much different. Extraordinary strategic importance had the strength,
and built on a hill, over huge boulders, which largely served as his foundation. In the center
room was comfortable, almost a palace, which housed the governor
or lord who commanded the army.

Twenty years ago that the governor, full of fire youth had gone in reckless expedition against
the Moors of Granada. Alcalá through the Royal, had entered the Vega for Pinos de la Puente,
causing much damage, cutting some plantations and crops, and collecting loot in no small farmhouses
and farmsteads. But to get rich and triumphant to his castle, in citrus hills and thick forest
of oaks there between Pines and Alcalá, fell into a trap that the
Moors, over a thousand in number, had prepared and he died heroically
fighting against them.

The widow of D. Jaime, as he was called the dead leader, was the only lady and warden the castle.

Dona
Mencia was his name. Niece of the Count of Cabra, had grown up in the house of that illustrious
hero. Passionately in love with the gentle knight D. Jaime, who came from Aragon Count to serve,
and very pointed and by his skill and spirit in all exercises chivalry, for their remarkable prowess
and even their talent and expertise in the gay science, Count had no reason to oppose anti-marriage,
and agreed that Don Jaime and Dona Mencia to marry, giving dowry to the girl in the domain and the
warden of the castle that I am speaking.

No doubt to be more worthy of his eminence, D. Jaime undertook the very risky company that
caused his death. I had just turned seventeen when she became Mrs. Mencia widow. Bitter and bitterly
mourned the death of his gentle and idolized husband. Dressed scathing mourning, was a retired
life, and in the twenty years that followed until the day that begins this story, did not leave
the castle but to give solitary walks.

At that time, the land all the King of Castile were full of strife and turmoil. There was no peace
or security anywhere, but robberies, bloody battles, deaths and destruction. The great lords, by
private quarrels and conflicting interests, they became cruel war each other. The kingdom also
was divided into two main and opposing sides.

Faithful D. a King Henry, struggled to sustain on the throne. The other had refused obedience
Avila had been deposed in with cruel and infamous ceremony, and recognized as sovereign prince
D. Alfonso, brother of the king.

The kingdom of Córdoba burned dissensions, like the rest the country. Singular prudence and fortitude
rarely heard Dona Mencia show to be preserved in a remain as divided as neutral spirits, while
remaining faithful to litigation and without missing tribute to his home and family was due them.

Everyone
respected Dona Mencia, which, thanks to his austerity and meditation, was santa's view. Made
her even more respectable, giving something mysterious and supernatural which had few people who
boast of having seen, much less spoken. Ensured, however, it was very beautiful woman, thirty-seven
years, but seemed much more the slender young man, lift and grace of his body. It was said that
her hair was black as endrin, his eyes shone like two suns, which was very beautiful and aristocratic
hands, and the pallor of his face was white and smooth gently softened by the rosy and vague
nuance their fresh cheeks flushed. Doña Mencia just talked to more people With the Father Athanasius
his chaplain, Nuno, and his squire, steward, and the daughter Nuño,
Leonor, who was his intimate servant and confidante.

Dona Mencia much lamented, in his conversations with Father Athanasius, scandals and the civil
strife that ravaged the country and had to be worth more armed men about against others.

Doña Mencia had deplored the violent resolution taken by D. Alonso de Aguilar to turn in the same
house the City of Cordoba quarterback D. Diego, cousin of hers, and to have him locked for
several weeks in the castle of Cañete, but still deplored lawlessness D. Diego defying D. Alonso,
against the express will and command of King, who wanted peace between them, and to pursue
the challenge under the aegis of the Moorish King, who gave field and Palenque in the plain
of Granada. Cited there and waited D. Diego D. Alonso, and as it does not resorted to the challenge,
D. Diego was declared winner by the Moorish King, tied his horse's tail a poster which was
written the name of D. Alonso de Aguilar with the qualification of
treacherous, and dragged him along the ground with shame.

Terrible was the insult, but D. Alonso suffered magnanimous patience, reserving his most patriotic
value and high efforts, she learned display it in the rest of his life and his most glorious
and tragic death.

II

The loneliness and monotony of existence of the warden had not had
the slightest alteration despite a strange novelty was in the castle
for a week.

Dona Mencia guarding him as a host, or, rather, to a prisoner. His cousin D. Diego had demanded
who guarded him, as well as imposing a duty to refrain from asking the name of host, which,
in turn, had also promised not to reveal his name. Don Diego was great interest in not knew
the name of his prisoner, and even to ignore I had one prisoner. Therefore he would not take either
or Baena Cabra, and took him to Dona Mencia castle, where there were more people lining, and under
whose protection there had founded the town that still exists today. Doña Mencia had to submit
to the imposition of his cousin, but so fond of solitude, and was so little cared events the
world, who would not see the prisoner brought his cousin, and he confided to Nuno for it will
monitor, house and care with care, as main person, and according to D. Diego wanted.

The lady of the castle knew only that his guest or prisoner was a beardless prey, which would sixteen
years at most, and that D. Diego had taken over, surprising and unarmed in the company of other
raptors hunting birds with a net and league, decoy and claims, in banks of a creek not far
from Monturque.

On the bench was Dona Mencia, alone and given to their prayers, on a beautiful morning in the
month April, when her maid Leonor rushed, scared and weeping, and
began to his feet begging forgiveness and shelter.

- I have no guilt,
madam, I have no guilt.

My father is angry with me, and wants kill without just cause. The boy who is imprisoned is the
most insolent and impudent to predators. I was surprised to pass by the gallery myself, woo
me with ease, I then grabbed her arms, and despite my resistance and my cries, gave me lots
of kisses. I do not know how many, because it gave me so fast I did not have time to count. Here
came my father and seized the prey of an ear, trying to punish him but the boy, who must be
strong and agile, the trip gave him, threw him to the ground and ran off with laughter. My father
got up limping, and, anxious to avenge an injury received came furious
with me.

I Madam, I take refuge here, and I place myself under your protection. Defend me, madam, look
I'm innocent.

Dona Mencia Severe frowned upon hearing the story of that set, but in the face, in the accent
and phrases Leonor recognized his sincerity and he was not guilty, the rose soil that was on
his knees and said he would defend. All his anger exploded with vehemently against the bold
rapacious contempt so light that offended his home. Called Nuño, demanded that her daughter absolve
of guilt that I really had, and ordered that without entering a new fight with the boy, and without
resorting either to others so they do not Whole anyone what happened, bring the predator to its
presence so that she reprimands him hard, as he deserved.

Nuno fulfilled orders, and a few moments after the boy appeared before the beautiful lady who
received him as a judge scathing, with impressive authority and composure. Nuno and Leonor retreated
into a signal of the lady.

This was sitting in an armchair, as if tribunal or throne. The boy was standing in front of her,
very respectful gesture indeed but in no way afraid or embarrassed. With strong words the lady
upbraided her ugly behavior, warned him to be corrected, and demanded that he apologize for
his guilt. He replied thus:

- I, my lady, I confess, blame, and am willing to humbly ask forgiveness, knees in front of
you. If I have any apologies, as such my green válganme mocedades and my complete lack of experience
of things in the world.

I figured, madam, that I was in the summit of a mountain, and close
to a cloud that looked like carmine and gold, so it tasted as I dared
to hug and even kiss her, but the cloud vanished me and apart, and
then the sun came the cloud hid me, and whose divine reflexes were
those who had given the cloud brilliant hues that I fell in love,
seduced me and made me incur failure, as such regret, though, on the
other hand, I am glad I almost committed.

Committing it have separated from the cloud and I managed to finally see the sun, which for a
longed weeks and now I see I look ecstatic.

Red as scarlet, partly from anger and tasty surprise was Dona Mencia to hear the speech of that bold
hearted boy. Despite its austerity, as proven and unblemished for twenty years, he felt deep
in his chest and he struggled to get out frolic laughter to notice much youthful impudence, but
finally won the austere condition of the proud lady, and sent the boy, saying:

- Okay, kid, but better would be if your teacher or your tutor I have taught less rhetoric and
more restraint and circumspection and no disrespect to an illustrious lady should and that
is also due to his house and servants. Go and Make amends, and do so no I have to resort to
painful lengths to curb the behavior that seems bold who brag rather than repent.

He wanted to replicate the raptor, but the lady was so imperious gesture of disgust and dismissal,
and fulminated against him so terrible look in his dark eyes, silenced him and threw him of the
stay as if you were to shove materials.

III

Chastened young captive and perhaps even more captive of his own courtesy and veneration and
affection he had inspired the lady with only her, was conducted during the ten days that applied
to the correction more fulfilled, showing exemplary patience to suffer without its sad and annoying
complaints captivity.

The severe Dona Mencia meanwhile warned that tormented sometimes its true soul regret having
used the severity on prey. Beyond their own thought of him almost constantly, and was pleased to
know how much his reprimand had used, and how wisely the boy was driving. Then he remembered
his face and his whole gentle figure, who had failed to deal with when I was in front of her.
And under This memory came to be born in his soul the most singular hallucination, the most
curious and rare fantasy that can be dreamed. Sought in vain out of his mind he dreams dangerous.
The dream came back with tenacity on it, and neither sleep nor wake the left free and peace.
Imagined that the insolent raptor who had rebuked was the spitting image of D. Jaime, her
late husband, and going forward in these meditations, he came to suspect fairies or suspect
charities, or some other supernatural beings or spirits to rewarded for his long years of widowhood
rigid, it returned alive to the spouse who had all the while enchanted and hidden in a magical
underwater palace, not preserved young, but putting younger and more
handsome than he was before.

And as the imagination do not come alone, but are born from each
other, tangling and locking as golden chain Dona Mencia was not content
to pretend the past that has just been said, but knowing it was believed
and divining of the present and even inspired prophet to see the future
things clear.

That certainly gave the boy, his captive, he had on his forehead the mark and the mark of a almost
superhuman genius, and that opened before him glory bright and long horizons road victories
and greatness.

Whatever it was, Dona Mencia could not resist the temptation of seeing the prey. To provide coverage,
rather than fall into it, he offered three reasonable reasons. It was the first that under the
good conduct of the young, it should sweeten the bitterness of his reprimand calling and giving
absolution. It was the second for the large age difference between the two media, her affection
for him had a lot of maternal and little or no sinful. And it was
the third, that the mind is always a thousand times more poetic than
the look, where maybe when she looked back the boy, would fall into
that account no resemblance to her late husband, that he was not happy
or loved her, and that dreams were empty and without substance all
forecasts in that it provided to the predatory greatness and the triumphs
that are expressed. In short, Dona Mencia man, took pity on isolation
of his captive, and instead of letting him eat alone in the tower
in which he lived, he invited to eat at his table.

IV

With this
familiar and everyday, Dona Mencia gave assured that would eventually
fade soon something unhealthy illusions that she had conceived, but,
unfortunately, just the opposite happened its good intentions and
very honest attempt.

Don Juan Fresco happens here and on edge, or
determine anything unclear. I shall not be more explicitly and unequivocally
that my namesake. I will just say that a few days later, appeared
Dona Mencia more beautiful, rejuvenated, her face lighting up sweet
joy and great satisfaction and contentment, dressing with more delicacy
and riding out on long walks by the loneliest and rough roads, accompanied
only youth and elderly Nuño captive, whom the boy had won the will
and who was very well-matched. But the loss of the sleds was a good thing now that their
occupants were gone, for it eased off the weight and the car rose much higher in the water.
Moreover, it gave way more readily when pressed by the ice. To be sure, it rolled more than
before, but still, being well ballasted, it did not turn turtle, and most of the time we were
able to keep on our feet by holding fast to the inside window bars.

Once we took a terrible plunge, over a vertical fall of not less than twenty or thirty feet.
But the water below the fall was very deep, a profound hole having been quickly scooped out
in the unfathomable ice beneath, so that we did not strike bottom, as I had feared, but came
bobbing to the top again like a cork. Below this fall there was a very long series of rapids,
extending, it seemed, for miles upon miles, and we shot down them with the speed of an express
train, lurching from side to side, and colliding with hundreds of ice floes. It must not be
supposed that we went through this experience without suffering any injuries. On the contrary,
our hands were all bleeding, our faces cut, Henry had one eye closed by a blow, and our clothing,
for we were not wearing our Arctic outfit, was badly used up. Yet none of our injuries was
really serious, although we looked as if we had just come out of the toughest kind of a street
brawl.

But there is no use in prolonging the story of this awful ride. It seemed to us to last for
days upon days, though, in fact, the worst of it was over within twelve hours after we were
lifted from our moorings in the valley. The tumbling stream gradually broadened out as it left
the region of the high mountains, and then we found ourselves in a district covered with icy
hills of no great elevation. But we could still see, by glances, as the stream curved this
way and that, the glittering peaks behind. It was an appalling thing to watch many of the nearer
hills as they suddenly sank, collapsed, and disappeared, like pinnacles of loaf sugar melting
and falling to pieces in a basin of water.

Edmund said that all of the ice-hills and mounds through which we were passing no doubt owed
their existence to pressure from behind, in the belt where the sun never rose, and where the
ice was piled up in actual mountains. These foothills were, in fact, enormous glaciers thrust
out toward the sunward hemisphere.

After a long time the now broad river widened yet more until it became a great lake, or bay.
The surface of the planet around appeared nearly level, and, as far as we could see, was mostly
covered by the water. Here vast fields of ice floated, and the water was not muddy, as it would
have been if it had passed over soil, but of crystal purity and wonderfully blue in places
where shafts of sunlight penetrated to great depths--for now the sun was high above the horizon
ahead, and shining in an almost clear sky. Presently we began to notice the wind again. It
came fitfully, first from one quarter and then another, rapidly increasing until, at times,
it rose into a tempest. It lifted the water in huge combing waves, but the car rode them like
a lifeboat.

"There is peril for us in this," said Edmund, at last. "We are being carried by the current
into a region where the contending winds may play havoc. It is the place where the hot air
from the sunward side begins to be chilled and to descend, meeting the colder air from the
night side. It must form a veritable belt of storms, which may be as difficult to pass, circumstanced
as we are, as the crystal mountains themselves."

"Suppose it should turn out that there is nothing but an ocean on this side of the planet,"
I suggested.

"That I believe to be impossible," Edmund responded. "This hemisphere must be, as a whole,
broken up into highlands and depressions. The geological formation of the other side, as far
as I could make it out from the appearance of the rocks in the caverns, indicates that Venus
has undergone the same experience of upheavals and fracturings of the crust that the earth
has been through. If that is true of one side it must be true of the other also, for during
a large part of these geological changes she undoubtedly rotated rapidly on her axis like the
earth."

"But we traveled five thousand miles on the other side without encountering anything but a
frozen prairie," I objected.

"True enough, and yet I would lay a wager that all of that side of the planet is not equally
level. Remember the vast plains of Russia and Siberia."

"Well," put in Jack, whose spirits were beginning to revive, "if there's a shore somewheres,
let's find it. I want to see the other kind of inhabitants. These that we've met don't accord
with my ideas of Venus."

"We shall find them," responded Edmund, "and I think I can promise you that they will not disappoint
your expectations."

Yet there seemed to be nothing in our present situation to warrant the confidence expressed
by our leader's words and manner. The current that had carried us out of the crystal mountains
gradually disappeared in a vast waste of waters, and we were driven hither and thither by the
tempestuous wind. Its force increased hour by hour, and at last the sky, which at brief intervals
had been clear and exquisitely blue, became choked with black clouds, sweeping down upon the
face of the waters, and often whirled into great trombes by the tornadic blasts. Several times
the car was deluged by waterspouts, and once it was actually lifted up into the air by the
mighty suction. An ordinary vessel would not have lived five minutes in that hell of winds
and waters. But the car, if it had been built for this kind of navigation, could not have behaved
better.

I do not know how long all this lasted. It grew worse and worse. Sometimes a flood of rain
fell, and then would come a storm of lightning, and a downpour of gigantic hailstones that
rattled upon the steel shell of the car like a rain of bullets from a battery of machine guns.
Half the time one window or the other was submerged by the waves, and when we got an opportunity
to glance out, we saw nothing but torn streamers of cloud whipping the face of the waters.
But when the change came at last, it was as sudden as the dropping of a curtain. The clouds
broke away, a soft light filled the atmosphere, the waves ceased to break and rolled in long
undulations, and a marvelous dome appeared overhead.

That dome, at its first dramatic appearance, was one of the most astonishing things that we
saw in the whole course of our adventures. It was not a cerulean vault like that which covers
the earth in halcyon weather, but an indescribably soft, pinkish-gray concavity that seemed
nearer than the sky and yet farther than the clouds. Here and there, far beneath it, but still
at a vast elevation, floated delicate gauzy curtains, tinted like sheets of mother-of-pearl.
The sun was no longer visible, but the air was filled with a delicious luminousness, which
bathed the eyes as if it had been an ethereal liquid.

Below each window was a steel ledge, broad enough to stand on, with convenient hold-fasts for
the hands. These had evidently been prepared for some such contingency, and Edmund, throwing
open the windows, invited us to go outside. We gladly accepted the invitation, and all, except
Juba, issued into the open air. The temperature was that of an early spring day, and the air
was splendidly fresh and stimulating. The rolling of the car had now nearly ceased, and we
had no difficulty in maintaining our positions. For a long while we admired, and talked of,
the great dome overhead, which drew our attention, for the time, from the sea that had so strangely
brought us hither.

"There," said Edmund, pointing to the dome, "is the inside of the shell of cloud whose exterior,
gleaming in the sunshine, baffles our astronomers in their efforts to see the surface of Venus.
I believe that we shall find the whole of this hemisphere covered by it. It is a shield for
the inhabitants against the fervors of an unsetting sun. Its presence prevents their real world
from being seen from outside."

"Well," said Jack, laughing, "I never heard before that Venus was fond of a veil."

"Not only can they not be seen," continued Edmund, "but they cannot themselves see beyond the
screen that covers them."

"Worse and worse!" exclaimed Jack. "The astronomers have certainly made a mistake in naming
this bashful planet Venus."

We continued for a long time to gaze at the great dome, admiring the magnificent play of iridescent
colors over its vast surface, until suddenly Jack, who had gone to the other side of the car,
called out to us:

"Come here and tell me what this is."

We hurried to his side and were astonished to see a number of glittering objects which appeared
to be floating in the atmosphere. They were arranged in an almost straight row, at an elevation
of perhaps two thousand feet, and were apparently about three miles away. After a few moments
of silence, Edmund said, in his quiet way:

"Those are air ships."

"Air ships!"

"Yes, surely. An exploring expedition, I shouldn't wonder. I anticipated something of that
kind. You know already how dense the atmosphere of Venus is. It follows that balloons, and
all sorts of machines for aerial navigation, can float much more easily here than over the
earth. I was prepared to find the inhabitants of Venus skilled in such things, and I'm not
surprised by what we see."

"Venus with wings!" cried Jack. "Now, Edmund, that sounds more like it. I guess we've struck
the right planet after all."

"But," I said, "you spoke of an exploring expedition. How in the world do you make that out?"

"It seems perfectly natural to me," replied Edmund. "Remember the two sides of the planet,
so wonderfully different from one another. If we on the earth are so curious about the poles
of our planet, simply because they are unlike other parts of the world, don't you think that
the inhabitants of Venus should be at least equally curious concerning a whole hemisphere of
their world, which differs in toto from the half on which they live?"

"That does seem reasonable," I assented.

"Of course it's reasonable, and I imagine that we, ourselves, are about to be submitted to
investigation."

"By Jo!" exclaimed Jack, running his hands through his hair, and smoothing his torn and rumpled
garments, "then we must make ready for inspection. But I'm afraid we won't do much honor to
old New York. Can I get a shave aboard your craft, Edmund?"

"Oh, yes," Edmund replied, laughing. "I didn't forget soap and razors."

But Jack would have had no time to make his toilet even if he had seriously thought of it.
The strange objects in the air approached with great rapidity, and we soon saw that Edmund
had correctly divined their nature. They were certainly air ships, and I was greatly interested
in the observation that they seemed to be constructed somewhat upon the principles upon which
our inventors were then working on the earth. But they were neither aeroplanes nor balloons.
They bore a resemblance to mechanical birds, and seemed to be sustained and forced ahead by
a wing-like action.

This, of course, did not escape Edmund's notice.

"Look," he said admiringly, "how easily and gracefully they fly. Perhaps with our relatively
light atmosphere we shall never be able to do that on the earth; but no matter," he added,
with a flush, "for with the inter-atomic energy at our command, we shall have no need to imitate
the birds."

"Perhaps they have made that discovery here, too," I suggested.

"No, it is evident that they have not, else they would not be employing mechanical means of
flight. Once let me get the car fixed up and we'll give them a surprise."

"Yes, and if you had used common sense," growled Henry, nursing his injured eye, "you would
not be here fooling away your time and ours, and risking our lives every minute, but you'd
be making millions and revolutionizing life at home."

"And where'd the Columbus of Space be then?" demanded Jack. "Hanged if Edmund is not right!
I'd rather be here meeting these doves of Venus than grinding out dollars on the earth. And
can't we go back and scoop in the money when we get ready?"

The discussion went no further, for, by this time, two of the air ships were close at hand.
And now we perceived, for the first time, the beings that they carried. Our surprise at the
sight was even greater than that which we had experienced upon meeting the inhabitants of the
dark hemisphere. The latter were extraordinary--but we were looking for extraordinary things.
Indeed they were, except for certain peculiarities, much more like some members of our own
race than we should have deemed possible. How great, then, was our astonishment upon seeing
the two air ships apparently in charge of real human beings!

At least that was our first impression. In the midst of the strange apparatus, which evidently
fulfilled the function of wings for the air ships, we saw decks, spacious enough to contain
twenty persons, and surmounted with deck houses, and along the railings inclosing the decks
were gathered the crews, among whom we believed that we could recognize their officers. The
two vessels had approached within a hundred yards before being suddenly arrested. Then they
settled gracefully down upon the water, where they floated like swans.

At first, as I have said, the resemblance of their crews to inhabitants of the earth seemed
complete. One would have said that we had met a yachting party, composed of tall, well-formed,
light-complexioned, yellow-haired Englishmen, the pick of their race. At a distance their dress
alone appeared strange, though it, too, might easily be imitated on the earth. As well as I
can describe it, it bore some resemblance, in general effect, to the draperies of a Greek statue,
and it was specially remarkable for the harmonious blending of soft hues in its texture.

During a space of at least five minutes we gazed at them, and they at us. Probably their surprise
was greater than ours, because we had been on the lookout for strange sights, being, of our
own volition, in a foreign world, while they could have had no expectation of such an encounter,
even if, as Edmund had conjectured, they were engaged in exploration. We could read their astonishment
in their gesticulations. Slowly the car and the nearer of the two air ships drifted closer
together. When we were within less than fifty yards of one another, Jack suddenly called out:

"A woman! By Jo, it's Venus herself!"

His excited voice rang like a rattle of musketry in the heavy air, and the beings on the air
ship started back in alarm. But although, like the inhabitants of the dark hemisphere, they
were, evidently, unaccustomed to hearing sounds of such forcefulness issue from a living creature
no larger than themselves, they were not faint-hearted, and the air ship did not, as we half
expected it would, take flight. The momentary commotion was quickly quieted, and our visitors
continued their inspection. All of us immediately recognized the personage whom Jack had singled
out as the subject of his startling exclamation. It was clear that he had rightly guessed her
sex, and she appeared worthy of his admiring designation. Even at the distance of a hundred
feet we could see that she was very beautiful. Her complexion was light, with a flame upon
the cheeks; her hair a chestnut blond; and her large, round eyes were sapphire blue, and seemed
to radiate a light of their own. This last statement (about the eyes) must not be taken for
a conventional exaggeration, such as writers of fiction employ in describing heroines who never
existed. On the contrary, it expresses a literal fact; and moreover, as the reader will see
further on, this peculiarity of the eyes was shared, in varying degrees, by all these people
of Venus, and was connected with the most amazing of all our discoveries on that planet. I
should say here that, while the eyes of the inhabitants of the day side were larger than ours,
they did not, in respect of size, resemble the extraordinary organs of vision possessed by
the compatriots of Juba.

In a few minutes we became aware that the beautiful creature we had been admiring was not the
only representative of the female sex on the air ship. Several others surrounded her, and the
fact quickly became manifest that they recognized her as a superior. Still more surprising
was the discovery, which we were not long in making, that she was actually the commander of
the craft. We could see that the orders which determined its movements emanated from her.

"Amazons!" exclaimed Jack, taking pains this time to moderate his voice. "And what a queen
they've got!"

During all this time the car and the air ship were slowly drifting nearer to one another, drawn
by that strange attraction which seems to affect inanimate things when in close neighborhood,
and when they were not more than fifteen yards apart the personage we had been watching slowly
lifted her arm, revealing a glittering bracelet, and, with an ineffably winning smile, made
a gesture which said plainer than any words could have done:

"Welcome, strangers."

CHAPTER VIII

LANGUAGE WITHOUT SPEECH

"That breaks the ice," said the irrepressible Jack. "We're introduced! Now for the conquest
of Venus."

We had all instinctively returned the smile of our beautiful interlocutor, with bows and gestures
of amity, and it looked as though we might soon be within touch of her hand, for the vessels
continued to drift nearer, when suddenly Juba clambered out of the window and stood beside
us, his moon eyes blinking in the unaccustomed light. The greatest agitation was immediately
manifest among the crowd on the deck of the air ship. They seemed to be even more startled
than they had been by the sound of Jack's voice. They interchanged looks, and, apparently,
a few words, spoken in very low voices, and glanced from Juba to us in a way which plainly
showed that they were astonished at our being together.

Edmund, whose perspicacity never deserted him, immediately penetrated their thoughts.

"It is clear," he said, "that these people recognize Juba as an inhabitant of the dark hemisphere,
while, as to us, they are puzzled, and all the more so now that Juba has made his appearance.
I think it certain that they have never actually met any representative of Juba's race before,
but no doubt he bears, to their eyes, ethnological characteristics which escape our discernment,
and it is likely that tradition has handed down to them facts about the inhabitants of the
other side of their planet which accord with his appearance."

"Then, they must conclude that we have come from the other side, and brought Juba along as
a captive," I said.

"Undoubtedly."

"And what must they think of us--that we are inhabitants of the dark hemisphere also?"

"What else can they think?"

I do not know into what train of speculation this might have led us if a new incident had not
suddenly changed the current of our thoughts. Unnoticed by us the second air ship had drawn
near. Signals were interchanged between it and the first, and we observed that she who seemed
to be the commander in chief gave orders that the second air ship should lay us aboard. The
order was no sooner given than executed, and we found ourselves face to face with a dozen of
the blond-haired natives, led by one who was clearly their captain. The deck of the air ship
touched the side of the car, and, as if instinctively recognizing our leader, the captain laid
his hand on Edmund's arm, but with a smile which gave assurance that no violence was intended.

"Come," said Edmund, in a low voice, "it is best that we should go aboard their craft. We are
in their hands, and luckily so, for they will take us where we want to go."

Accordingly, all, including Juba, passed upon the deck of the air ship. You will readily imagine
the intensity of interest with which we studied the faces and forms of those whom I will call
our captors. Now that we were in contact with them we could better observe their resemblances
to, and differences from, ourselves. In all the main features of body they were human beings,
but of a somewhat superior stature. Noses and mouths were small and delicate; hair long, silken,
and either light gold or rich chestnut in color; skin white and smooth; ears small and peculiarly
formed, with a curious mobility; and eyes large, round, invariably light blue, and possessing
that strange luminousness of which I have already spoken. One could not look directly into
these eyes without a certain shrinking, for some wonderful power seemed to radiate from them,
and one had the feeling that the intelligence behind them could dip to the bottom of his mind.
We were gently treated and could perceive no indication of peril to ourselves. Nevertheless,
we were glad to feel our pistols in our pockets. There were seats on the deck to which we were
civilly conducted, but Edmund refused to sit.

"I must see the commander herself," he whispered. "These are only subordinates, and I cannot
deal with them. It will not do to leave the car here at the mercy of the waves. I must find
the means of making them understand that it is to go with us."

Accordingly, he approached the captain, and we watched him with beating hearts, not being able
to divine what an attempt to dictate terms on our part might lead to. Jack shook his head,
and put his hand on his pistol, which Edmund had restored to him while we were in the ice mountains.

"I'll drop the jackanapes in his tracks if he shows up ugly," he said.

"You'd better keep quiet," I whispered, "and don't let them see your weapon. They appear to
have no arms, and you should trust to Edmund to manage the affair. When he gives the word it
will be time enough to begin shooting."

Jack grumbled, but kept the pistol in his pocket, although he did not withdraw his hand from it.

I have already told you how, at the caverns, Edmund had discovered that the inhabitants there
possessed a means of converse which he likened to telepathy, and from what I had seen of the
people here I was convinced that they had the same mysterious power, and probably in a higher
degree. To be sure, they used words occasionally, but for the most part they communed together
in some other way. I felt sure that Edmund was now about to apply what he had learned, and
his actions quickly demonstrated that my conjecture was well founded. Just what he did, I do
not know, but the result of his conference was promptly apparent.

The first air ship had withdrawn a short distance when the other boarded the car, but now the
two mutually approached until it was possible to step from one deck to the other. As soon as
they touched, Edmund was conducted by the captain, at whose side he had remained standing,
to the presence of the important personage whom Jack had begun to designate as the queen. We
remained where we were, watching with all eyes, while Jack persisted in keeping his hand on
the pistol in his pocket. A crowd immediately surrounded Edmund and we were unable to see exactly
what went on, a fact that rendered Jack so much the more impatient. But it turned out that
there was no cause for alarm. In about ten minutes the crowd opened and Edmund appeared. Uninterfered
with, he came to the edge of the deck, close by us, and said:

"It is all arranged. The car will be towed by one of the air ships. I am to stay here and you
will remain where you are until we reach our destination."

"Have you had a talk with her?" asked Jack.

"Not in any language that you understand," Edmund responded, smiling. "But I have made good
use of what I learned in the caverns. These people are intellectually vastly superior to the
others, and, as I guessed, they possess a more perfect command of the sort of telepathy that
I told you about. I have not found much difficulty in making my wish understood, and your amazon
is a very obliging person. It is only necessary to be discreet and we shall have no trouble."

"But why are you to be separated from us?" asked Jack anxiously. "That looks bad, for it is
exactly what they would do if they meant to kill us one at a time."

"Why should they kill us?" retorted Edmund.

"And why should we be separated?" persisted Jack. "I tell you, Edmund, I don't like it."

"Very well, then," Edmund said, after a moment's thought; "if that's the way you feel about
it, I'll see what I can do. It will be another exercise for me in this new kind of language.
But, mark this, if I succeed in persuading the chieftainess to keep us together, you will have
to acknowledge that your fears were groundless. Perhaps it's worth trying on that very account."

He disappeared from our eyes again--for as soon as he approached their leader the people of
the air ship crowded close around as if to afford her protection--and, after another ten minutes'
conference, came back smiling to the edge of the deck.

"Dismiss your fears, friend Jack," he said cheerfully. "You are all to come aboard here with
me. So you see there could have been no thought of treachery; but I'm glad that we are not
to be separated, and I thank you for your solicitude on my account.  I'm sure that the original
arrangement was made only because of lack of room aboard this craft, and you'll see that that
was the reason."

He was right, for immediately half a dozen of the crew of the principal air ship were sent
aboard ours while we were transferred to take their place.

We now had an opportunity to study the countenance of the "amazon" commander, and we found
her to be an even more remarkable personage than she had appeared at a distance. Of the beauty
of her features and form I shall say no more, but about her eyes I could write a chapter. The
pupils, widely expanded amidst their circles of sky-blue iris, seemed to speak. I can describe
the impression that they made in no other way. I no longer wondered at Edmund's ability to
converse with her, for I felt that, with a little instruction, and more of our leader's mental
penetration, I could do it myself. At times I shrank from encountering her gaze, for I verily
believed that she read my inmost thoughts. And I could see that thought came out of her eyes,
but it escaped all my efforts to grasp it; it was too evanescent, or I was too dull. Sometimes
I imagined that the meaning was at the threshold of comprehension, but yet it evaded me, like
forgotten words whose general sense dimly irradiates the mind, while they refuse to take a
definite shape, and keep flitting just beyond the reach of memory. Still, charity and good
will shone out so plainly that anybody could read them, and I do not know how to express the
feeling that came over me at this evidence of friendliness exhibited by an inhabitant of a
world so far from our own. It was as if a dim sense of ultimate fraternity bound her to us.
Jack's enthusiasm, as you may guess, was without bounds, and strangely enough it rendered him
almost speechless.

"By Jo!" he kept repeating to himself in an undertone, without venturing upon any further expression
of his feelings.

Henry, as usual, was silent, but I know that he felt the influence no less than the rest of
us. Edmund, too, said nothing, but it was plain that he was continually studying the phenomenon,
and I felt sure that his analytic mind would find a more complete explanation than we yet possessed.
Of course you are not to suppose that the power that I have been trying to describe was peculiar
to this woman. On the contrary, as I have already intimated, it was common to all of them;
but with her it seemed to have reached a higher development, and, what was of special interest,
she alone exhibited a marked benevolence toward us.

The car was attached by a cable to the air ship that we had just quitted, and our voyage into
a new unknown began. The other air ships, which had been hovering about, moved up into line,
and, with the exception of the one which towed the car, all rose to an elevation of perhaps
a thousand feet, and moved rapidly away from a row of dark clouds which we could now see low
on the horizon behind. We found the air ship splendidly fitted up, with everything that could
contribute to the comfort of its inmates. And what a voyage it was! "Yachting on Venus," as
Jack called it. We sat on the deck, with a pleasant breeze, produced by the swift, steady motion,
fanning our faces; the temperature was delightful; the air was wonderfully stimulating; the
light, softly and evenly diffused from the great shell-like dome of the sky, seemed to bewitch
the eyesight; and the sea beneath us, reflecting the dome, was a marvel of refluent colors.

We had left the calendar clock in the car, but, with our watches, which we had never ceased
to wind up regularly, we were able to measure the time. The voyage lasted about seventy-two
hours, but could, perhaps, have been performed in less time if we had not been somewhat delayed
by the towing of the car. They had on the air ship ingenious clocks, driven by weights, and
governed by pendulums, but the divisions of time were unlike ours, and there was nothing corresponding
to our days. This, of course, arose from the fact that there was never any night, and, being
unable to see either sun or stars, they had no measure of the year. With them time was simply
endless duration, with no return in cycles.

"What interests me most," said Edmund, "is the fact that they should have established any chronological
measure at all. It would puzzle some of our metaphysicians on the earth to account for the
origin of their sense of time. To me it seems evident that the consciousness of duration is
fundamental in all intelligent life, and does not necessarily demand natural recurrences, like
the succession of day and night, and the passage of sun and stars across the meridian, to give
it birth. Did you ever read St. Augustine's reply to the question, 'What is time'--'I know
if you don't ask me'?"

"If they haven't any years," said Jack, "how do they know when they are old enough to die?"

"They have the years, but no measure for them," replied Edmund, and then added quizzically,
"Perhaps they don't die."

"Well, I shouldn't wonder," Jack returned, "for this seems to me to be Paradise for sure."

When we felt sleepy, we imitated the natives themselves, and, just as we had done during the
voyage from the earth, created an artificial night by shutting ourselves up in the cabins that
had been assigned to us. Rest was taken by all of them in this manner as regularly as it is
taken at night on the earth.

One subject which we frequently discussed during the voyage was the astonishing resemblance
of our hosts to the genus homo. Influenced by speculations which I had read at home about the
probable unlikeness to one another of the inhabitants of different planets, I was particularly
insistent upon this point, and declared that the facts as we found them were utterly inexplicable.

"Not at all," Edmund averred. "It is perfectly natural, and quite as I expected. Venus resembles
the earth in composition, in form, in physical constitution, and in subordination to the sun,
the great ruler of the entire system. Here are the same chemical elements, and the same laws
of matter. The human type is manifestly the highest possible that could be developed with such
materials to work upon. Why, then, should you be surprised to find that it prevails here as
well as upon our planet? Intelligent life could find no more suitable abode than in a human
body. The details are simply varied in accordance with the environment--a principle that works
on the earth also."

I was not altogether satisfied with the reasoning--but as to the facts, we had to believe our eyes.

Palatable food was served to us, and during the waking time Edmund was frequently engaged in
his mysterious conversation with the "queen." Within forty-eight hours after we had set out
in the air ship, he came to us, wearing one of his enigmatic smiles, and said:

"I've got another aphroditic word for you to remember. It is the name of our hostess--Ala."

We were not so much surprised by this news as we should have been but for what had occurred
at the caverns, where he had discovered the patronymic of Juba.

"Good!" cried Jack, "it's a fine name. I was going to call her Aphrodite, myself, but this
is better as well as shorter."

"But, Edmund," I said, "how does it happen that these people, if they converse by 'telepathy'
as you say, and as I fully believe, nevertheless occasionally use sounds and words? I should
think it would be all one thing or all the other."

"Think a moment," he replied. "Is it so with us? Do we not use signs and gestures as well as
words? And what do we mean by 'silent converse,' when mind speaks to mind and soul to soul
without the intervention of spoken language? We have the potentiality of telepathic intercommunication,
but we have not yet developed it into a kinetic form as these people have done. Ah, when will
men begin to appreciate what mind means?"

I made no reply, and after a moment's musing, he continued:

"I suspect that here, too, speech preceded the higher form of converse, and that the spoken
language remains only as a survival, presenting certain advantages for particular cases. But
we shall learn more as time goes on."

There was no disputing Edmund's conclusions. He was the greatest accepter and defender of facts
as he found them that I have ever known.

It was written that before this voyage ended we should have another phase of language without
speech presented for our wonderment. It came about near the end of the trip. We were standing
apart in a group, greatly interested and excited by the discovery, which had just been made,
of land ahead. Far in advance we could see a curving, yellow shore line, and, dim in the distance
behind it, a range of mountains. Edmund had just called our attention to these, with the remark
that now I must admit that he had reasoned correctly about the existence of elevated regions
on this side of Venus, when Jack, always the first to note a new phenomenon, exclaimed:

"Hurrah! Here they come! We're going to have a royal reception."

He pointed toward the land in a different direction from that in which we had been gazing,
and immediately we beheld an extraordinary assemblage of air ships, perhaps ten miles off,
but rapidly making toward us. More were coming up from behind, as if rising out of the land,
and soon they resembled flocks of large birds all converging to a common center. In a little
while they became almost innumerable, but their number soon ceased to be as great a cause of
surprise to us as their peculiar appearance. Viewed with our binoculars they showed an infinite
variety of shapes and sizes. Chinese kites could not, for a moment, be compared in grotesqueness
with the forms which many of them presented. Some soared in vast circles at a great height,
with the steady flight of eagles; others spread out to right and left, as if to flank us on
either hand; and in the center, directly ahead, about a hundred advanced in column deployed
in a semicircle, each keeping its place with the precision of a soldier in line of battle.

As we continued to gaze, fascinated by the splendor and strangeness of the spectacle, suddenly
the air was filled with fluttering colors. I do not mean flags and streamers, but colors in
the air itself! Colors the most exquisite that ever the eye looked upon! They changed, flickered,
melted, brightened, flowed over one another in iridescent waves, mingled, separated, turned
the whole atmosphere into a spectral kaleidoscope. And it was evident that, in some inexplicable
way, the approaching squadrons were the sources of this marvelous display. Presently from the
craft that carried us, answering colors flashed out, as if the air around us had suddenly been
changed to crystal with a thousand quivering rainbows shot through it, their beautiful arches
shifting and interchanging so rapidly that the eye could not follow them.

Then I began to notice that all this incessant play of colors was based upon an unmistakable
rhythm. I can think of no better way to describe it than to say that it was as if a great organ
should send forth from its keys harmonic vibrations consisting not of concordant sounds but
of even more perfectly related undulations of color. The permutations and combinations of this
truly chromatic scale were marvelous and magical in their infinite variety. It thrilled us
with awe and wonder. But none was so rapt as Edmund himself. He gazed as if his soul were in
his eyes, and finally he turned to us, with a strange look, and said, almost under his breath:

"This, too, is language, and more than that--it is music!"

"Impossible!" I exclaimed.

"No, not impossible, since it is. They are not only exchanging intelligence in this way, but
we are being greeted with a great anthem played in the heaven itself!"

There was the force of enthusiastic conviction in Edmund's words, and we could only look at
him, and at one another, in silent astonishment.

"Oh, what a people! What a people!" he muttered. "And yet I am not surprised. I dimly fore-read
this in Ala's eyes."

Even Jack's levity was subdued for the time, but after a while he said to me with a shrug,
half in earnest, half in derision:

"Well, this Yankee-doodling in the air gets me! I'd prefer a little plain English and the Old
Folks at Home."

After about ten minutes the display ceased as suddenly as it had begun, and the nearer of the
approaching air craft began to circle around us. Finally one of them ran so close alongside
that an officer of high rank, for such he seemed to be, leaped aboard us, and was quickly at
Ala's side. There was a rapid interchange of communications between them, and then the newcomer
was, I may say, presented. Ala led him to where we were standing, and I could read in his eyes
the astonishment that the sight of such strangers produced in him.

CHAPTER IX

AN AMAZING METROPOLIS

If I should undertake to describe in detail all the events that now followed in rapid succession,
this history would take a lifetime to write. I must choose only the more significant facts.

The newcomer, whose remarkable face had immediately impressed me, and not altogether favorably,
proved to be a personage of very great importance, second only, as we could see, to Ala herself.
And, what was particularly important for us, he showed none of her friendly disposition. I
do not mean to suggest that he seemed inclined to any active hostility, but evidently we were,
in his eyes, no better than savages, and consequently entitled to no special consideration,
and especially to no favors. 

Elizabeth blushed and then said:

- It has become a habit with me to try you everyone.

Even with my own slaves, especially if they are old, escapes me Dad
telling you the same thing happens frequently.

- The more loving
you.

- Did you think so?

 Hang him! I'm going to keep my pistol handy when he's around."

Edmund, who happened to overhear Jack's remark, interposed:

"See here, Master Jack, this is no time to be talking of pistols. I trust that we are done
with shooting."

We were not done with it; but that comes later.

It was not long before Edmund had discovered a name for the newcomer also; he called him Ingra.
It was singular, he said, that all the names seemed to be characterized by the prevalence of
vowels sounds, but he thought it likely that this arose from the greater ease with which they
could be enunciated. They were like Spanish words, which are the easiest of all for foreigners,
and probably also for natives, to pronounce.

After we reached the coast we descended to the ground, at Edmund's request, I believe, because
he wished to superintend the loading of the car upon one of the largest air ships, and it was
an unforgettable sight to watch him managing the work as coolly and effectively as if he had
been in charge of a gang of workmen at home! And, while I looked, I found myself again doubting
if, after all, this was not a dream. Never left their remote farms, and only saw and spoke
with her Father Athanasius, Leonor and Nuno.

One Sunday morning, something happened that there could pass for new,
as only occasionally in the warden later received visits from their
relatives.
No! I could not be awake. But yet I was.

When we started again, we were escorted by a hundred air ships, forming a complete circle about
us. Now I noticed, what had escaped attention during the extraordinary atmospheric display,
viz., that these craft were painted in colors that I should call gorgeous if they had not been
so perfectly harmonious and pleasing. Every one looked like the careful creation of an artist,
and the variety of tints exhibited was incredible. Our own air ship, and its consorts, on the
other hand, were very plain in their decorations. I called Edmund's attention to this and immediately
he said:

"Remember what I told you--this has been an exploring expedition, and the craft taking part
in it have been fitted up for rough work. That reminds me that I have not yet made the inquiries
that I intended on that subject. I shall go to Ala now and see what I can learn."

She was standing on the deck near the other end, with Ingra beside her. As Edmund approached
them, Jack nudged me:

"Look at that fellow," he said. "Wasn't I right?"

There was no doubt about it; Ingra scowled and showed every sign of displeasure at Edmund's
presence. But Ala greeted him graciously, and, apparently, Ingra did not dare to interfere.
I could see that Jack was grasping his pistol again, but I did not anticipate that there would
be any occasion to use it. Nevertheless, I watched them closely for a time, hoping to discover
Edmund's method of reading her meaning; as to her comprehension of his I had no question about
that. But I got no light on the subject, and, as it soon became evident, even to Jack, that
there was no danger this time, we fell to examining the land over which we were passing.

We flew at a height of about two thousand feet, so that the range of vision was very wide.
The sea behind us curved into the land in three great scallops, separated by acuminate promontories,
whose terminal bluffs of sand were as yellow as gold. Away ahead the line of mountains, that
we had noticed before, appeared as a dark sierra, and between it and the sea the country seemed
to be very little broken by hills. Large forests were visible, but from our elevation it was
impossible to tell whether the trees composing them bore any resemblance to terrestrial forms.
The open land was about equally divided in area between bare yellowish soil (or what we took
to be soil) and bright green expanses whose color suggested vegetation. Scattered here and
there we saw what appeared to be habitations, but we could not be sure of their nature; and,
upon the whole, the land seemed to us to be very thinly populated.

Many birds accompanied us in our flight, frequently alighting on the deck and other parts of
the air ship. They were remarkably tame, allowing us to approach them closely, and we were
delighted by their beautiful plumage and their singular forms. 

Created his concept in the minds of men of my caste, they were revealed to the rest the human
race, idolatry and blind. King Solomon also was founding Tadmor, a splendid oasis for caravans
going to the banks of the Euphrates, and sent their ships together winners with those of Hiram,
to Ophir and Lanka at one end, and Gadir, to Tarshish, and even to remote Cassiterides on
the other. From there, brought him to authorities, leisure and pleasure of it and of his subjects,
copper, tin and amber, candid ermine fur and swans, Jimi and parrots spices and perfumes, pearls and
diamonds, ivory and gold.

Depriving someone of my family with Cyrus the Great and returned with Zerubbabel to rebuild
the City Santa. My family was also the glorious pontiff who instilled in the minds smug triumph
of the Macedonian Alexander, suddenly compliance and healthy fear of divine things. Someone
in my family fought gloriously for his country by the Maccabees and defeated Syrian King Antiochus
Epiphanes. You go on thinking as I recall these events as I can show you, in that little hut or
that miserable Razorfen was involved then you ragged and wild relatives. The brutal persecution
of Demetrius Soter, after the fateful battle and the heroic and glorious death of the Maccabees,
moved my family to emigrate to Spain. Do not want to be too neat or be labeled a braggart, and
therefore often do not count here extraordinary things in Spain did. I tell you, however, that was
my close relative the great rabbi of Toledo who wrote the show and was the first sign, turning Caiaphas
and trying to convince, not to condemn the Son of Mary most holy. Next King Alfonso VI of Castile
as heroes my ancestors fought against the barbaric invasion of the Almoravids in the bloody broken
Zalaca. I count in my family inspired poets and admirable philosophers and theologians, the glory
of the Spanish Synagogue and all of Judaism. Among Jehuda Levi excels them the Castilian, whom
Heine celebrated with fervent enthusiasm. The kiss that God, in creating it, he gave his soul,
seeing her so beautiful, the songs still resonates of that admirable and produces divine minstrel
charm in the noble spirits which are capable feel and understand him. My family later settled
in Lucena, Córdoba, thriving center of Jewish academies and colleges, where science and the arts were
cultivated with plenty of fruit. From there came doctors, astronomers, statesmen and ministers finance
for many monarchs, Christians and Moslems, of whom reigned in the peninsula. We owned a picturesque
castle or fifth pleasure in entertaining source of the river, near the village (now city) of Cabra,
so we took the surname of Cabra Castle, that I have now translated into German. Expelled from
Spain by the anti-Semitic bigotry, came ended up in Austria, where we are today victims of no
less absurd fanaticism. And it's not the worst hatred, contempt unfounded but you treat us. What
have I done, what has made my breed for us to be so underrated? The money my father earned
money I won, has been honestly earned. And to not be tired, do not say anything more about
me here nobility. Only I dare to suggest that in Spain there are still families in the highest
class who converted to Christianity in the fifteenth century, and which I would be very easy
to prove my relationship. Suffice it to that lean, oh beautiful Poldy, to dismiss your crazy disgust,
improper understanding of the very clear that God has given you, and come back to meet me,
love me and be mine. "
 We did not kill the Esquimaux that our polar explorers brought from the Arctic regions,
and for these people, we are a greater curiosity than ever the Esquimaux, or the Pygmies of
Africa, were for us. Instead of encountering any danger, I anticipate that we shall be very
well treated."

"Perhaps they'll put us in a cage," said Jack, with a ludicrous grimace, "and tote us about
as a great moral show for children. If there's a Barnum on Venus, our fate is sealed."

Jack's humorous suggestion struck home, for there seemed to be probability behind it, and Henry
groaned, while, for my part, I confess that I felt rather uncomfortable over the prospect.
But Edmund did not pursue the conversation, and soon we fell to regarding again the landscape
beneath and far around us. We were gradually nearing the mountains, although they were still
distant, and presently we caught sight of what resembled, as much as anything, gigantic cobwebs
glittering with dew, and rising out of the plain between us and the mountains.

"There, Edmund," said Jack, "there's another chance to exercise your genius for explaining
mysteries. What are those things?"

Edmund watched the objects for several minutes before replying. At length he said, with the
decision characteristic of him:

"Palaces."

Jack burst out laughing.

"Castles in Spain, I reckon," he said. "But, really, Edmund, what do you think they can be?"

"I have already told you, palaces, or castles, if you prefer."

"You are serious?" I asked.

"Perfectly so. They cannot be anything else."

Seeing our astonishment and incredulity, Edmund added:

"Since they retain their places, it is evident that they are edifices of some kind, attached
to the ground. But their great height and aerial structure indicate that they are erected in
the air--floating, I should say, but firmly anchored at the bottom. Really, I cannot see anything
astonishing about it; it accords with everything else that we have seen. Your minds are too
hidebound to terrestrial analogies, and you do not give your imaginations sufficient play with
the new materials that are here offered.

"This atmosphere," he continued, after a pause, "is exactly suited for such things. It is a
region of atmospheric calm. If we were not moving, you would hardly feel a breeze, and I doubt
if there is ever a high wind here. To build their habitations in the air and make them float
like gossamers--could any idea be more beautiful than that, or more in harmony with the nature
of this planet, which is the favorite of the sun, for first he inundates it with a splendor
unknown to the earth, and then generously covers it with a gorgeous screen of cloud which cuts
off his scorching beams but suffers the light to pass, filtered to opalescent ether?"

When Edmund spoke like that, as he sometimes did, suffusing his words with the fervor of his
imagination, even Henry, I believe, felt his soul lifted to unaccustomed heights. We hung upon
his lips, and, without a word, waited for him to continue. Presently he murmured, in an undertone:

"Yes, all this I foresaw in my dream. A world of crystal, houses that seemed not made with
hands, reaching toward heaven, and a people, beautiful beyond compare, dwelling in the aerial
home of birds"; and then, addressing us, in his ordinary tones: "You will see that the capital,
which we are unquestionably approaching, is to a large extent composed of this airy architecture."

And it turned out to be as he had said--when, indeed, was it ever otherwise? As we drew nearer,
the aerial structures which we had first seen began to tower up to an amazing height, just
perceptibly swaying and undulating with the gentle currents of air that flowed through their
traceried lattices, while behind them began to loom an immense number of floating towers, rising
stage above stage, like the steel monsters of New York before they have received their outer
coverings, but incomparably lighter in appearance, and more delicate and graceful; truly fairy
constructions, bespangled with countless brilliant points. Yet nearer, and we could see cables
attached to the higher structures, and running downward as if anchored to the ground beneath,
but the ground itself we could not see, because now we had dropped lower in the air, and a
long hill rose between us and the fairy towers, whose slight sinuous motion, affecting so many
together, produced a trifling sense of dizziness as we gazed. Still nearer, and we believed
that we could see people in the buoyant towers. A minute later there was no doubt about their
presence, for the colors broke forth, and that marvelous interchange of chromatic signals,
which had so astonished us as we drew near the coast, was resumed.

"It is my belief," said Edmund, "that, notwithstanding the buoyancy of the heavy atmosphere,
those structures cannot be maintained at such elevations without mechanical aid. You will see
when we get nearer that every stage is furnished with some means of support, probably vertical
screws reacting upon the air."

Again he had guessed right, for in a little while we were near enough to see the screws, working
in a maze of motion, like the wings of a multitude of insects. The resemblance was increased
by their gauzy structure, and, as they turned, they flashed and glittered as if enameled. (The
supernatant structures that they maintained were, as we afterwards ascertained, framed of hollow
beams and trusses--a kind of bamboo, of great strength and lightness.)

Now we rose over the intervening hill, and as we did so a cry burst from our lips. A vast city
made its appearance as by magic, a magnified counterpart of the aerial city above it. Put all
the glories of Constantinople, Damascus, Cairo, and Bombay, with all their spires, towers,
minarets, and domes together, and multiply their splendor a thousand times, and yet your imagination
will be unable to picture the scene of enchantment on which our eyes rested.

"It is the capital of Venus," exclaimed Edmund. "There can be nothing greater than this!"

It must, indeed, be the capital, for in the midst of it rose an edifice of unparalleled splendor,
which could only be the palace of a mighty monarch. Above this magnificent building, which
gleamed with metallic reflections, although it was as light and airy in construction as frostwork,
rose the loftiest of the aerial towers, a hundred, two hundred--I cannot tell you how many
stories in height, for I never succeeded in counting them.

The other air ships now dropped back, and ours alone approached this stupendous tower, making
apparently for its principal landing stage. Along the sides of the tower a multitude of small
air ships ran up and down, stopping at various stages to discharge their living cargoes.

"Elevators," said Edmund.

Glancing round we saw that similar scenes were occurring at all the towers. They were filling
up with people, and the continual rising and descending of the little craft that bore them,
the holiday aspect of the gay colors everywhere displayed, and the brilliancy of the whole
spectacle moved us beyond words. But the most astonishing scene still awaited us.

Just before our vessel reached the landing stage, the enormous tower, from foot to apex, broke
out with all the hues of the rainbow, like an enchanted rose tree covered with millions of
brilliant flowers at the touch of a wand. The effect was overwhelming. The air became tremulous
with rippling colors, whose vibrant waves, with quick succession of concordant tints afforded
to the eye an exquisite pleasure akin to that which the ear receives from a carillon of bells.
Our companions, and the people crowded on the towers, seemed to be transported with ecstatic
delight.

"Again the music of the spectrum!" cried Edmund. "The diapason of color! It is their national
hymn, or the hymn of their race, written on a prismatic, instead of a sonometric, staff. And,
mark me, this has a significance beyond your conjectures!"

I believe that our enjoyment of this astonishing spectacle was hardly less than that of the
natives themselves, but the pleasure was suddenly broken off by a tragedy that struck cold
to our hearts.

We had nearly touched the landing, when we observed that a discussion was going on between
Ala and Ingra, and it quickly became evident that we were the subject of it. Before we could
exchange a word, they approached us, and Ingra, in a threatening manner, laid his hand on Edmund's
shoulder. In a second Jack had his pistol covering Ingra. Edmund saw the motion, and struck
Jack's arm aside, but the weapon exploded, and, clutching her breast, Ala fell at our feet!

CHAPTER X

IMPRISONMENT AND A WONDERFUL ESCAPE

The shock of this terrible accident, the full import of which must have flashed simultaneously
through the mind of every one of us, drove the blood from Edmund's face, while Jack staggered,
uttering a pitiful moan, Henry collapsed, and I stood trembling in every limb. The report of
the pistol produced upon the natives the effect that was to have been expected. Ingra sprang
backward with a cry like that of a startled beast, and many upon the deck fell prostrate, either
through terror or the effect of collision with one another in their wild flight. What occurred
among the waiting crowd on the tower I do not precisely know, but a wind of fear seemed to
pass through the air--a weird, heart-quaking shadow of sound.

For a few moments, I believe, no one but ourselves understood what had happened to Ala. Ingra
may have thought, if he thought at all in his terror and surprise, that she had fallen as the
result of nervous shock. This moment of paralysis on the part of those whom we had now to regard
as our enemies, whatever they may have been before, afforded the opportunity for escape--if
there had been any way to escape. But we were completely trapped; there was no direction in
which we could flee. Yet I doubt if the thought of flight occurred to any of us. Certainly
it did not to Edmund, who was the first to recover his self-command.

"We have shot down our only friend!" he said with terrible emphasis, and, as he spoke, he lifted
Ala in his arms and laid her on a seat. Her breast was stained with blood.

At the sight of this, a flash of comprehension passed over the features of Ingra; then, instantly,
his face changed to a look of fury, and he sprang upon Edmund. With trembling hand, I tried
to draw my pistol, but before I could get it from my pocket there was a rush, a hairy form
darted past me, and Ingra lay sprawling on his back. Over him, with foot planted on his breast,
stood the burly form of Juba, with his muscular arms uplifted, and his enormous eyes blazing fire!

God only knows what would have happened next, but at this instant Ala--to my amazement, for
I had thought that the bullet had gone through her heart--rose to an upright posture, and made
a commanding gesture, which arrested those who were now hurrying to take a part in the scene.
All, natives as well as ourselves, stood as motionless as stone. Her face was pale and her
eyes were wonderful to look upon. With a gasp of thankfulness, I noticed that the blood on
her breast was but a narrow streak Juba, staring at her, slowly withdrew his foot from his
prostrate opponent, and Ingra first sat up, and then got upon his feet. Ala, who had been seated,
rose at the same moment, and looked Ingra straight in the face. I saw Edmund glancing from
one to the other, and I knew he was trying to follow the communication that was taking place
between them.

The general sense of it I could follow, myself. Ingra, metaphorically, stormed and Ala commanded.
That she was defending us was plain, and it was but natural that my admiration for this wonderful
woman should rise to the highest pitch. I thanked God, in my heart, that her wound could be
no more than a scratch--and yet it was a wound, inflicted upon the person of her who, there
could be no doubt, was the ruler of a powerful empire. It was less majesty, or worse, and she,
herself, might not be able to protect us against its consequences.

At last, it became evident that a decision had been made. Ala turned to us with a smile, which
we took for an assurance of encouragement, at least, and started to leave the deck. Edmund
instantly stepped in front of her, and pointed to the stain of blood, with a gesture and a
look which meant, at the same time, an inquiry as to the nature of the wound and an expression
of the wish to do something to repair the injury. She shook her head and smiled again, in a
manner which clearly said that the hurt was not serious and that she understood that it was
an accident. Then, surrounded by her female attendants, she passed out of our sight in the
crowd on the landing. Edmund turned to us:

"We shall probably get out of it all right," he said, "but not without some difficulty. They
will surely imprison us. Make no resistance. Leave all to me. Jack's pistol will, no doubt,
be seized, but if the rest of you keep yours concealed, they may not search for them, as they
know nothing about the weapons."

Edmund had spoken hurriedly, and had hardly finished when a dozen stout fellows, under Ingra's
directions, took us in charge, Juba included, and we were led from the deck, through the vast
throng on the platform, who made room for our passage, while devouring us with curious, though
frightened eyes. In a minute we embarked on one of the "elevators," and made a thrillingly
rapid descent. Arrived at the bottom, we were conducted, through long, stone-walled passages,
into a veritable dungeon. And there they left us. I wondered if this had been done at Ala's
order, or in defiance of her wishes. After all, I reflected, what claim have we upon her?

In the absolute darkness where we now found ourselves, we remained silent for a minute or two,
feeling about for one another, until the quiet voice of Edmund said:

"Fortune still favors us."

As he spoke, a light dazzled our eyes. He had turned on a pocket electric lamp. We looked about
and found that we were in a square chamber, about fifteen feet on a side, with walls of heavy
stone.

"They make things solid enough down here," said Jack, with some return of his usual spirits,
"however airy and fairy they may be above."

"All the better for us," returned Edmund enigmatically.

Henry sank upon the floor, the picture of dejection and despair. I expected another outbreak
from him, but he spoke not a word. His heart was too full for utterance, and I pitied him so
much that I tried to reanimate his spirits.

"Come, now," I said, "don't take it this way, man. Have confidence in Edmund. He has never
yet been beaten."

"I reckon he's got his hands full this time," put in Jack. "What do you think, Edmund, can
your atomic energy bore a hole through these walls?"

"If I had it here, you'd see," Edmund replied. "But there's no occasion to worry, we'll come
out all right."

It was his unfailing remark when in difficulties, and somehow it always enheartened us. Juba,
more accustomed to such situations, seemed the least disturbed member of the party. He rolled
his huge eyes around the apartment once or twice, and then lay down on the floor, and seemed
at once to fall asleep.

"That's a good idea of Juba's," said Edmund, smiling; "it's a long time since we have had a
nap. Let's all try a little sleep. I may dream of some way out of this."

It was a fact that we were all exhausted for want of sleep, and, in spite of our situation,
I soon fell into deep slumber, as peaceful as if I had been in my bed at home. Edmund had turned
out the lamp, and the silence and darkness were equally profound.

I dreamt that I was at the Olympus Club on the point of trumping an ace, when a flash of light
in the eyes awoke me. I started up and found Edmund standing over me. The others were all on
their feet. Edmund immediately whispered:

"Come quietly; I've found a way out."

"What have you found?"

"Something extremely simple. This is no prison cell, but a part of what appears to be the engine
rooms--probably it is an unused storeroom. They have put us here for convenience, trusting
more to the darkness than to the lock, for the corridors outside are as black as Erebus and
as crooked as a labyrinth."

"How do you know?"

"Because, while you were all asleep, I made an exploration. The lock was nothing; the merest
tyro could pick it. Fortunately they never guessed that I had a lamp. In this world of daylight,
it is not likely that pocket lamps have ever been thought of. Just around the corner, there
is another door opening into a passage that leads by a power house. That passage gives access
to a sort of garage of air craft, and when I stole into it five minutes ago, there was not
a soul in sight. We'll simply slip in there, and if I can't run away with one of those fliers,
then I'm no engineer. To tell the truth, I'm not altogether sure that it is wise for us to
escape, for I have a feeling that Ala will help us; still, when Providence throws one a rope,
it's best, perhaps, to test its strength. Come on, now, and make no noise."

Accompanied by Juba, we stepped noiselessly outside, extinguishing the light, and, led by Edmund,
passed what he had called the power house, where we saw several fellows absorbed in their work,
lighted somehow from above. Then we slipped into the "garage." A gesture,
Antonia took the seat vacated by the captain, and was able to sit Leonardo and say Rosa's ear:

-
Is it possible, mother, you consent to the soldier peel the turkey
with Antonia in your presence?

- Shut up!

Rosa said seriously. This gentleman has come to bring a message from
your father which can not come for us until one and I think you'll
have to join.

Of I rejoice with the occurrence of two reasons, the one because I can go when you want or give
me sleep, the other because you will not get you from behind, or I'll spend another sleepless
night.

- I accompany Isabel Gámez Ilincheta and home, as his coach has suffered a fault and can not
use it tonight.

- What! Isabel is here and not come to greet us?

- Do not be surprised, because no doubt she knew that Vds. had come
to dance, and then has been an extraordinary turnout.

- Well, send
in your chitin your friends to your home.

- First, however, need
to see Vds.

Elizabeth, or Isabel greet Vds.

- Have you already love with her?

You are a weathervane. Do not think of making fun of that girl too. Bring it here and see.

-
No. I thought we had to drink on the table and meet us all.

Say the buffet which is less abundant than exquisite.

What do you think, Adela?

- Approved, said it happy.

- But it is the case, said Leonardo, that if any of you helps me not, I will have to which
cover the expenditure.

- Well, what about two ounces of gold you put on the jacket in the evening when you were sleeping
the siesta? Rosa asked seriously.

- I have not seen such money, Mama.

Well, if you put it in his pocket vest This morning, back in my room
was.

I have just three or four dollars on this vest I started the ride to come back to the dance.

Leonardo
did this explanation with the candor that he used, blushed and hesitated several times. I warned
her mother and asked:

- Why did you come onto the dance so late? I thought you were not coming, and why you came home
before us. Who knows where you went.

- Had meeting and piano at the home of the Gámez occasion being the saint of Florence ...

- They did not come with you, to my knowledge. You do not tell the truth, Leonardo, I know
and you really say you do wrong, very wrong. I'm your best friend, son, and I have the sorrow
of see every day are less frank with me. We go to the buffet, added not a little upsetting,
I pay the costs and here's my purse, containing about six ounces of gold.

Point was red silk, forming two separate breasts by a knot or loop in the middle, to divide
the entire gold and silver often.

The breast is removed, because the ladies in that time did not wear
skirts pockets as at present, but is hanging bag lace dress belt or
home.

Leonardo took the money with her cheeks flushed with shame, because the humiliation of receiving
twice the sum he had lost the game, So the lies were added had tried
to cover up their failure.

The mother, perhaps without not wanting or knowing it, had read in
the depths of his soul as through a glass.

"I served this as a corrective? It is not time yet to review it. But this incident had past
for the child and the mother no more, for the last certainly not in all its genuine deformity
it can be said that without consciousness of it had hit the nail
on the head. Shock been working to recover cost Leonardo, who told
his mother after they got in foot and took her arm to lead her to
the room of ambiguous

- And where was Dad?

- Remained in the house
of Don Joaquin Gomez, where they have attended several other landowners,
among Sama them, Martiartu, Manero, Suarez Argudín, Lombillo, Laza
...

- You do not know what the purpose of such a meeting?

- Captain
Miranda was unable to explain, probably because he ignores it, but
what little I did your father when he left home, I get a result to
be treated expeditions to the coast of Africa. Air impossibly rare for them
is all right for us, and that's what I am in search of, and we shall find it if we can get
high enough."

The beauty and simplicity of this unexpected plan struck us all with admiration, and Jack,
his doubts instantly turning to enthusiasm, cried:

"By Jo, Edmund, you're a trump! I'd like to get a gaff into the gills of that catfish, Ingra,
when he begins to blow. By Jo, I'd pickle him and make a present of him to the Museum of Natural
History. 'Catfishia Venusensis, presented by Jack Ashton, Esq.'--how'd that look on a label, hey?"

And Jack hugged himself with delight over his conceit.

In a short time the accuracy of Edmund's conjecture became apparent. Our pursuers, one by one,
dropped off. Their own strategy, to which Jack had called attention, was simply a playing into
our hands. They had really thought to catch us in the center of a contracting circle, when,
to their amazement, we rose straight up into air so rare that they could not live in it. Edmund
roared with laughter when he saw the assured success of his maneuver.

But there was one thing which even he had overlooked, and it struck to our hearts when we became
aware of it. Poor, faithful Juba, who had so recently proved his devotion to us, could endure
this rare air no better than our pursuers. Already, unnoticed in the excitement, he had fallen
upon the deck, where he lay gasping.

"Good God, he's dying!" exclaimed Jack.

"He shall not die!" responded Edmund, setting his lips, and turning to his machinery.

"But, you're not going back down there!"

"I'll run beyond the edge of the circle, and drop down far enough to revive him. Then we can
keep dodging up and down just out of their reach, and so be out of danger both ways."

No sooner said than done. We ran rapidly on a horizontal course until we had cleared the air
ships below, and then dropped like a shot. Juba came to his senses in a few moments after we
entered the denser air. But now our pursuers, thinking, no doubt, that we had found it impracticable
to remain where they knew they could not go, began to close in upon us. I reflected that here
was the only mistake that Edmund had made--I mean the bringing along with us of the natives
of the dark hemisphere. It was only their presence that had prevented us from sailing triumphantly
over the crystal mountains; it was because of them that we had wrecked the car; and now it
was Juba who baffled our best chance of escape. And yet--and I am glad to be able to say it--I
could not regret his presence, for had he not made himself one of us; had he not proved himself
entitled to all the privileges of comradeship?

But Henry (I am sorry to write it) did not share these feelings.

"Edmund," he said, "why do you insist upon endangering our lives for the sake of this--this--animal
here?"

Never have I beheld such a blaze of anger as that which burst from Edmund's eyes as he turned
upon Henry:

"You cowardly brute!" he shouted. "I ought to throw you overboard!"

He seemed about to execute his threat, dropping the controller from his hand as he spoke, and
Henry, with ashen face, ran from him like a madman. I caught him in my arms, fearing that he
would tumble overboard in his fright, and Edmund, instantly recovering his composure, turned
back to his work.

Finding Juba sufficiently recovered, although yet weak and almost helpless, he rose again,
but more cautiously than before. And now our pursuers, plainly believing that these maneuvers
could have but one ending, began to set their net, and I could not help admiring their plan,
which would surely have succeeded if they had not made a fundamental error in their calculations,
but one for which they were not to blame. There was such a multitude of their craft, fresh
ones coming up all the while, that they were able to form themselves into the shape of a huge
bag net, the edge of which was carried as high as they dared to go, while the sides and receding
bottom were composed of air ships so numerous that they were packed almost as closely as meshes.
Edmund laughed again as he looked down into this immense net.

"No, no," he shouted. "We're no gudgeons! You'll have to do better than that!"

"See here, Edmund," Jack suddenly exclaimed, "why don't you make off and leave them? By keeping
just above their reach we could easily escape."

"And leave the car?" was the reply.

"By Jo," returned Jack, "I never thought of that. But, then, what did you run away for at all?"

"Because," said Edmund quietly, "I thought it better to parley than to lie in prison."

"Parley! How are you going to parley?"

"That remains to be seen; but I guess we'll manage it."

We were now, as far as I could estimate, five or six miles high. When we were highest, the
great cloud dome seemed to be but a little way above our heads, and I thought, at first, that
Edmund intended to run up into it and thus conceal our movements. The highest of our pursuers
were about half a mile below us. They circled about, and were evidently parleying on their
own account, for waves of color flowed all about them, making a spectacle so brilliant and
beautiful that sometimes I almost forgot our critical situation in watching it.

"I suppose you'll play them a prismatic symphony," said Henry mockingly.

I looked at him in surprise. Evidently his fear of Edmund had vanished; no doubt because he
knew in his heart the magnanimity of our great leader.

"Who knows?" Edmund replied. "I've no doubt the materials are aboard, and if I had been here
a month, I'd probably try it. As things stand, we shall have to resort to other methods."

While we were talking, Edmund did not relax his vigilance, and two or three times, when he
had dropped to a lesser elevation for Juba's sake, he baffled a dash of the enemy. At last
we noticed a movement in the crowd which betokened something of importance, and in a moment
we saw what it was. A splendid air ship, by far the most beautiful that we had yet seen, was
swiftly approaching from below.

"It's the queen," said Edmund. "I thought she'd come."

The approaching ship made its way straight toward us, and, without the slightest hesitation,
Edmund dropped down to meet it. Those who had been our pursuers now made no attempt to interfere
with us; they recognized the presence of a superior authority. Soon we were so near that we
could recognize Ala, who looked like Cleopatra in her barge on the charmed waves of Cydnus.
Beside her, to the intense disappointment of Jack and myself, stood Ingra.

"Confound him!" growled Jack. "He's always got to have his oar in the puddle. Blamed if I'm
not sorry Edmund spoiled my aim. I'd have had his scalp to hang up at the Olympus to be smoked at!"

Of what now occurred, I can give no detailed account, because it was all beyond my comprehension.
We approached almost within touch, and then Edmund stood forth, fearless and splendid as Caesar,
and conducted his "parley." When it was over, there was a flashing of aerial colors between
Ala's ship and the others, and then all, including ours, set out to return to the capital.
After a while Edmund, who had been very thoughtful, turned to us and said:

"You can make your minds easy. Of course you'll understand there is a certain amount of guesswork
in what I tell you, but you can depend upon the correctness of my general conclusions. I believe
that I have made it perfectly clear that we intended no harm, and that we are not dangerous
characters. At least Ala understands it perfectly. As for Ingra, perhaps he doesn't want to
understand it. I can't make out the cause of his enmity, but it is certain that he doesn't
like us, and if it all depended upon him, it would go hard with us. I believe that we shall
have to stand a trial of some kind, but remember that we've got a powerful advocate. I don't
regret our running off, for, as I anticipated, it afforded us the opportunity to establish
some sort of terms. The mere fact that we return willingly when they know that we might have
fled beyond their reach should count in our favor, for, as I have always insisted, these are
highly intelligent people, with civilized ideas. If I had not been sure of that I should have
continued the flight and depended upon some other means of recovering the car--or constructing
a new one."

We had become so much accustomed to accept Edmund's decisions as final that none of us thought
of objecting to what he had done; unless it might have been Henry, but he kept his thoughts
to himself.

CHAPTER XI

BEFORE THE THRONE OF VENUS

While we were dropping down toward the city, with a great fleet of air ships attending, Edmund
opened his mind upon another curious difficulty besetting us.

"You, of course, noted," he said, "how close we approached at one time to the cloud dome. The
existence of that sky screen is a circumstance which may possibly be decisive in the determination
of our fate."

"Favorable or unfavorable?" I asked.

"Unfavorable, for this reason. If these people could be made to understand that we are visitors
from another world, and not inhabitants of the other side of their own planet, they might treat
us with greater consideration, and even with a certain superstitious deference. The imagination
is doubtless as active with them as with terrestrial beings, and if you can once touch the
imagination, even of the most intelligent and instructed persons, you can do almost anything
you choose with them. But how am I to convey to them any idea of this kind? Seeing neither
sun, nor moon, nor stars, they can have no conception of such a thing as another world than
their own."

"Couldn't you persuade them," said Jack, "that we come from the upper side of the cloud dome? If you do not save much,
save a few.

- How many what? Resale asked, too curious to leave it for later.

- Lumps, man, lumps, "said Don Candido Brevent. Would not you know that it is Fast?

- Yes? A faith that does not know.

- As has become, rather, they have brought to the port. The fixed number is not known board yet.
The hatches are nailed, and says Captain Carricarte that while embarked on 500, with the long
journey and the brutal hunting have given the British, have died some and had to throw into the
water ... many, we, fortunately chaff. Are you? Now, take the changes of clothes, form three
or four bundles, as, leads you to a cart to the dock Cavalry, against White House and delivers
them to the flower pattern Guadaño Rule.

You know him. Well, gives you everything he has already warned and know where it should be
that. Accompanying you, as you know the counter. Eh! So the accoutrement. He will keep you lunch
if you do not turn around in time. Anyway, the clothing must be on board before eleven. Did
you hear?

The Mayodomo gone, Rosa went straight to the desktop.

Her husband walked up and shaken down, but stopped seeing her for
a moment waiting for the question, which, in effect, did not take
her guide: - What happens, Gamboa?

Resale There goes broke his neck and you here restless. Say, for charity, what happens?

- The usual, daughter, that if we continue as we, still have the English
rogues to cause the ruin of this beautiful jewel of SMC the king,
whom God preserve.

- Do not tell me.

- That's right, because if
the British do not let us import the arms that make us so very missing,
I do not know why or how we will develop the sugar.

Yes, this takes Barabbas, not I get tired of saying it.

- This is
my theme, Candide, but to the point.

- To the Point.

This morning at seven Morro said English ship of war to leeward. We Several were in the dock:
Gómez, Azopardo, Sama, in short, almost all of the board last night. A bit of Morro said dam
and half an hour later she appeared at the mouth of the harbor the English corvette Pearl,
its commander or Pegete Pegea Lord, we were told after the Punta heard that from the defense
that gave the pilot to watch for signs. [35] What I figure it was the prey?

- Does the brig Speedy?

- The same, Rosa, with nearly all the cargo
on board.

- After the cargo was saved.



"Keep your pipe concealed," whispered Edmund. "Take a few strong whiffs, and hide it in your
pocket before they observe whence the smoke really comes. This may do us some good; it will,
at least, serve to awake their imagination, and that is what we need."

Jack did as requested, first filling his mouth with smoke, and then slowly letting it out in
puffs that more and more astonished the onlookers, who kept at a respectful distance, and excitedly
discussed the phenomenon. Suddenly, Jack, with characteristic mobility of thought, turned to
Edmund and demanded:

"Edmund, why didn't those fellows shoot us when we were running away? There were enough of
them to bring us down with the wildest sort of shooting."

"They didn't shoot," was the reply, "because they had nothing to shoot with. I have made up
my mind that they are an unwarlike people. I don't believe that they have the slightest idea
what a gun is. Yet they are no cowards, and they'll fight if there is need of fighting, and
no doubt they have weapons of some kind; only they are not natural slaughterers like ourselves,
and I shouldn't be surprised if war is unknown on Venus.

"All the same," said Jack, "I wish I had my pistol back. I tried to hide it, but those fellows
had their eyes on it, and it's confiscated. I'm glad you think they don't know how to use it."

"And I'm glad," returned Edmund, "that you haven't got your pistol. You've been altogether
too handy with it. Now," he continued, "let us consider our situation. You see at a glance
that we have gained a great deal as a result of the parley; the way we have just been treated
here shows plainly enough that we shall, at least, have a fair trial, and we couldn't have
counted on that before. You can never make people listen to reason against their inclination
unless you hold certain advantages, and our advantage was that we clearly had it in our power
to continue our flight. My only anxiety now is in regard to the means of holding them to the
agreement--for agreement it certainly was--and of impressing them not only with a conviction
of our innocence but with a sense of our reserve power, and the more mysterious I can make
that power seem to them, the better. That is why I welcomed even the incident of Jack's smoking.
We shall surely be arraigned before a court of some kind, and I imagine that we shall not have
long to wait. What I wish particularly is that all of you shall desist from every thought of
resistance, and follow strictly such instructions as I may have occasion to give you."

He had hardly ceased speaking when a number of official-looking persons entered the room where
we were.

"Here come the cops," said Jack. "Now for the police court."

He was not very far wrong. We were gravely conducted to one of the little craft which served
for elevators, and after a rapid descent, were led through a maze of passages terminating in
a vast and splendid apartment, apparently perfectly square in plan, and at least three hundred
feet on a side. It was half filled with a brilliant throng, in which our entry caused a sensation.
Light entered through lofty windows on all four sides. The floor seemed to be of a rose-colored
marble, with inlaid diapering of lapis lazuli, and the walls and ceiling were equally rich.
But that which absolutely fascinated the eye in this great apartment was a huge circle high
on the wall opposite the entrance door, like a great clock face, or the rose window of a cathedral,
from which poured trembling streams of colored light.

"Chromatic music, once more," said Edmund, in a subdued voice. "Do you know, that has a strange
effect upon my spirits, situated as we are. It is a prelude that may announce our fate; it
might reveal to us the complexion of our judges, if I could but read its meaning."

"It is too beautiful to spell tragedy," I said.

"Ah, who knows? What is so fascinating as tragedy for those who are only lookers-on?"

"But, Edmund," I protested, "why do you, who are always the most hopeful, now fall into despondency?"

"I am not desponding," he replied, straightening up. "But this soundless music thrills me with
its mysterious power, and sometimes it throws me into dejection, though I cannot tell why.
To me, when what I firmly believe was the great anthem of this wonderful race, was played in
the sky with spectral harmonies, there was, underlying all its mystic beauty, an infinite sadness,
an impending sense of something tragic and terrible."

I was deeply surprised and touched by Edmund's manner, and would have questioned him further,
but we were interrupted by the officials, who now led us across the vast apartment and to the
foot of a kind of throne which stood directly under the great clock face. Then, for the first
time, we recognized Ala, seated on the throne. Beside her was a person of majestic stature,
with features like those of a statue of Zeus, and long curling hair of snowy whiteness. The
severity of his aspect struck cold to my heart, but Ala's countenance was smiling and full
of encouragement. As we were led to our places a hush fell upon the throng of attendants, and
the colors ceased to play from the circle.

"Orchestra stopped," whispered the irrepressible Jack. "Curtain rises."

The pause that followed brought a fearful strain upon my nerves, but in a moment it was broken
by Ala, who fixed her eyes upon Edmund's face as he stood a little in advance of the rest of
us. He returned her regard unflinchingly. Every trace of the feeling which he had expressed
to me was gone. He stood erect, confident, masterful, and as I looked, I felt a thrill of pride
in him, pride in his genius which had brought us hither, pride in our mother earth--for were
we not her far-wandering children?

I summoned all my powers in the effort to understand the tongueless speech which I knew was
issuing from Ala's eyes. And I did understand it! Although there was not a sound, I would almost
have sworn that my ears heard the words:

"Who and what are you, and whence do you come?"

Breathlessly I awaited Edmund's answer. He slowly lifted his hand and pointed upward. He was,
then, going at once to proclaim our origin from another world; to throw over us the aegis of
the earth!

The critical experiment had begun, and I shivered at the thought that here they knew no earth;
here no flag could protect us. I saw perplexity and surprise in Ala's eyes and in those of
the stern Zeus beside her. Suddenly a derisive smile appeared on the latter's lips, while Ala's
confusion continued. God! Were we to fail at the very beginning?

Edmund calmly repeated his gesture, but it met with no response; no indication appeared to
show that it awakened any feeling other than uncomprehending astonishment in one of his judges
and derision in the other. And then, with a start, I caught sight of Ingra, standing close
beside the throne, his face made more ugly by the grin which overspread it.

I was almost wild; I opened my mouth to cry I know not what, when there was a movement behind,
and Juba stepped to Edmund's side, dropped on his knees, rose again, and fixed his great eyes
upon the judges!

My heart bounded at the thoughts which now raced through my brain. Juba belonged to their world,
however remote the ancestral connection might be; he possessed at least the elements of their
unspoken language; and it might be a tradition among his people, who we knew worshipped the
earth-star, that it was a brighter world than theirs. Had Edmund's gesture suddenly suggested
to his mind the truth concerning us--a truth which the others had not his means of comprehending--and
could he now bear effective testimony in our favor? Who was at fault she fell and broke his comb? You, nobody but you,
because if you did not have such acts of arrogance, none of this had happened. Yes, you must confess,
they must do penance and repent of you your sins and amendments. You are in mortal sin, and
if you keep going to stop at wrong. We must remedy this in time.

- That really is better! Cecilia continued despite the eyes that threw her grandmother. Never
I had heard it was a sin not to love who no one likes.

- Who says you want, spirit? Chepilla cried vehemently. Will you fall in love maybe? Sin is
not to acknowledge the favors that make us and bite the hand that
caresses.

- Let's see, what are the favors that speaks your grace?

Does the counter with us? Do gifts Corpus me to San Juan? God and he only knows the reason that
guides you. Is not strange, very strange to be so generous with us, poor women of color, a man
white and rich that it is nothing of your worship, nor mine either?

- And Back, Cecilia? Do not proceed or more threads are nonsense. The enemy could only mean inspire
some ideas as contrary to Christian humility and charity. How can good daughter, good wife, good
mother or good friend, the woman who is not thankful for favors or pay benefits? However small
(which are not) favors the gentleman makes us said, our duty is to thank them, because we can
not otherwise. It is great sin pay good with bad. Your gossip and your ingratitude will cost
us dearly.

- I do not know how his mercy he understood my conduct.

Just you know. Neither you nor give away; I do not want is to send me and get into my stuff.

-
It seems you do not get it to him. If you would not do this or that, is it for your sake or for
your own good? Whether to approve or disapprove something that you say or do, what better
test may be of his affection for you, and your good heart? Imagine, Nemesia, which the individual
to speak (well is that you know it) is a lady in her treatment, and
generosity for us as big as disinterested, and it must hurt a lot
...

- Disinterested?

Cecilia repeated. That is what I can not ...

- Do not interrupt me, girl, I'm talking to Nemesia. It gives us everything we need and many
things to covet. Barely indicated a desire for this girl, when is
quick to oblige.

Di no. Should not have consciousness is that if you refuse.

- And do not deny it.

All this is very true, but why do it?

- Best of all, continued Chepilla,
is that I do not demand anything, and you do not expect other thing
you love, gratitude, y. .. respect.

- Hete here is killing me, Cecilia
jumped again vehemently.

It was the body of one of their compatriots, and a glance at it sufficed to show the manner
in which death had been inflicted. It had been crushed in a way which could probably mean nothing
else than a fearful fall. The truth flashed upon me like a gleaming sword. The victim must
have been precipitated from the air ship which we had struck at the beginning of our flight!

And there stood our enemy, Ingra, with exultation written on his features. He had made a master
stroke, like a skillful prosecutor.

"Hang him!" I heard Jack mutter between his teeth. "Oh, if I only had my pistol!"

"Then you would make matters a hundred times worse," I whispered. "Keep your head, and remember
Edmund's injunction."

The behavior of the latter again awoke my utmost admiration. Contemptuously turning his back
upon Ingra, he faced Ala and old Zeus, and as their regards mingled, I knew well what he was
trying to express. This time, since his meaning involved no conception lying utterly beyond
their experience, he was more successful. He told them that the death of this person was a
fact hitherto unknown to us, and that, like the injury to Ala, it had been inflicted without
our volition. I believed that this plea, too, was accepted as valid by Ala; but not so with
the other. He understood it perfectly, and he rejected it on the instant. My reason told me
that nothing else could have been expected of him, for, truly, this was drawing it rather strong--to
claim twice in succession immunity for evils which had undeniably originated from us.

Our case looked blacker and blacker, as it became evident that the opposition between our two
judges had broken out again, and was now more decided than before. The features of the old
man grew fearfully stern, and he rejected all the apparent overtures of Ala. He had been willing
to pardon the injury and insult to her person, since she herself insisted upon pardon, but
now the affair was entirely different. Whether purposely or not, we had caused the death of
a subject of the realm, and he was not to be swerved aside from what he regarded as his duty.
My nerves shook at the thought that we knew absolutely nothing about the social laws of this
people, and that, among them, the rule of an eye for an eye, and blood for blood, might be
more inviolable than it had ever been on the earth.

As the discussion proceeded, with an intensity which spoken words could not have imparted to
it, Ala's cheeks began to glow, and her eyes to glitter with strange light. One could see the
resistance in them rising to passion, and, at last, as the aged judge again shook his head,
with greater emphasis than ever, she rose, as if suddenly transformed. Dona Mencia could
be loosely mother of that cute boy.

Hence, Nuno malicious assumption always discarded the idea that it is sometimes presented Dona Mencia
had that love. What we had was almost maternal affection, and some satisfaction of pride and
a lot of gratitude to be considered dear. Of this I had no doubt Nuño. The enthusiastic and passionate
admiration of the young man in love were fed little sneaky and were
evident to all eyes.

CHAPTER XII

MORE MARVELS

It was not until long afterwards that we fully comprehended all that Ala had done in that simple
act; but I will tell you now what it meant. By the unwritten law of this realm of Venus, she,
as queen, had the right to interpose between justice and its victim, and such interposition
was always expressed in the way which we had witnessed. It was a right rarely exercised, and
probably few then present had ever before seen it put into action. The sensation which it caused
was, in consequence, exceedingly great, and a murmur of astonishment arose from the throng
in the great apartment, and hundreds pressed around the throne, staring at us and at the queen.
The majestic look which had accompanied her act gradually faded, and her features resumed their
customary expression of kindness. The old judge had risen as she stepped from her place beside
him, and he seemed as much astonished as any onlooker. His hands trembled, he shook his head,
and a single word came from his mouth, pronounced with a curious emphasis. 

And the reader will guess or suspect that my friend, but a naturalized citizen Grand Republic
was and called Don Isidoro Cabra Castle.

Soon I was up to the apex and even the most hidden sets of his life. Had Poldy struggled for a few
months, in appalling indecision between the love that inspired him Isidoro and duties more or
less artificial, which bound to their homeland, their families and
high class to which they belonged.
There was a gentleness in her manner--almost a deference--which grated upon my feelings, while
Jack's disgust could find no words sufficient to express itself:

"Beauty and the beast!" he growled. "By Jo, if he's got any influence over her, I'm sorry for her."

"Well, well, don't worry about him," I said. "He's played his hand and lost, and if you were
in his place, you wouldn't feel any better about it."

"No, I'd go and hang myself, and that's what he ought to do. But isn't she a queen, though!"

Ala now resumed her place upon the throne, and issued orders which resulted in our being conducted
to apartments that were set aside for us in the palace. There were four connecting rooms, and
Juba had one of them. But we immediately assembled in the chief apartment, which had been assigned
to Edmund. There was much more deference in the manner of our attendants than we had observed
before, and as soon as they left us we fell to discussing the recent events. Jack's first characteristic
act was joyously to slap Juba on the back:

