"No, Mother Roberts, I didn't," he replied; "I brought it, and I'll tell you why. I read in
the paper that when you quit Beth-Adriel you only had sixty dollars of your own. I calculated
that couldn't last very long. I knew you wouldn't take money, and I wanted to express my gratitude
in some way; so I decided groceries would not come amiss to one who was doing light housekeeping.
I didn't knock on your door, because I thought you were in and what a surprise it would be
when you opened it in the morning. I hope you aren't offended at what I did"

"Brother Louis, don't you realize that God used you to answer my prayer?" I rejoined. "He knew
my needs, and laid it on your heart to supply them."

I do not know where he now is, but I earnestly pray that God may bless and prosper this kind-hearted
man and finally receive him into glory.

Still farther down the street, near Second, I suddenly thought I heard some one calling my
name. Again it was called, and I turned to find a Mr. Parkhurst, an old gentleman, endeavoring
to overtake me. He wished to let me know that his wife, one of my valued friends, was very
ill, and to inquire if I knew of any one who could come to their home and care for her a few
days, at least until she was somewhat recovered. Instantly I felt that God was providing a
temporary shelter for me; therefore I unhesitatingly replied:

"I myself will go, Mr. Parkhurst."

"What you! But are you not too busy?" he asked.

"Not just at present," I answered. "Besides, I gave up my studio this very day and therefore
am quite free to go."

Their appreciation was such that a few days later I was invited to make this lovely home mine,
or at least headquarters, which very kind offer was, in the name of our wonderful Provider,
gratefully accepted.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

A TRIP EAST--I ESCAPE FROM A CONFIDENCE WOMAN.

After I had enjoyed the freedom of the Parkhurst home for a few months I learned through friends
that a young lady whom I had befriended at the time of the earthquake and who had become temporarily
deranged was about to be sent to the East. The supervisors inquired whether it would suit my
convenience to take the trip, and said if so they would defray expenses from and to California
in order to have her safely chaperoned. I gladly consented; for, praise God! this would give
me opportunity to pay a brief visit to my son and his bride, now making their home in Allegheny,
Pa.

Following her safe arrival, I was on the way to Cincinnati in less than twenty-four hours.
Thence I was to take train early the next morning. Having several hours to dispose of after
securing a room in a hotel close to the station, I decided to see as many points of interest
as possible in this fine city. Accordingly I was thus delightfully occupied until about four
o'clock, when I heard some one speak of the Zoo. Upon inquiry I learned of the wonderful gardens
so called. Soon, following directions, I boarded a car at Fountain Square, which conveyed me
up a very steep incline. Returning in the neighborhood of six o'clock, I followed the example
of several persons, who on the incline stepped out of the car on to the platform in order to
enjoy the magnificent view.

A white-haired, elderly lady who had sat opposite to me on the return trip, now pleasantly
remarked:

"Cincinnati is well worth a visit, is it not?"

Upon my replying in the affirmative, she rejoined:

"Doubtless you are a stranger. May I inquire from whence you come?"

"From California," I answered.

She clasped her hands together and exclaimed ecstatically:

"Dear, dear California! How happy I am to meet some one from there! Some of my most delightful,
very happiest days were spent there."

We were now once more in the car and at the foot of the incline.

Presently she continued, "Are you going to remain for some time here? If so, I shall be delighted
to contribute to your pleasure."

I then informed her of my prospective visit to my son and his wife.

Her next question was, "Pardon me, but have you any dinner engagement? If not, dine with me
at ----'s restaurant, unless you have choice in the matter, in which case I gladly defer in
your favor."

She had handed me her card, and of course common courtesy required that I reciprocate.

At the table I quietly (though not by request) returned thanks, and then followed this up with
the message that the Master had, in answer to silent prayer, laid on my heart.

Her patronizing smile was rather disconcerting as she responded:

'My dear, I am much older and have had much more real experience than you. I've come in touch
with every phase of humanity, and have at last reached the place where I have decided to get
all I can out of life--all the fun, all the pleasure possible. I once thought and felt as you
do. You'll get over it when you have had a few hard knocks to contend with. Take my advice.
Enjoy yourself every day and hour, and as much as you can."

"I do," was my reply. "I would not exchange the experience of the past decade for all the former
years of worldly dissipation and pleasure put together. They have all been unsatisfactory.
This is quite the opposite, and, better still, it is the enjoyment of indescribable peace and
delight. You are not going to be much longer in this world. Mrs. R----, I beg of you to seek
the Lord whilst he may still be found. It is not too late, but soon, yes, very soon it may
be. Then where will you spend eternity?"

Her lips curled with a sinister, contemptuous sneer. Nevertheless she managed to smile as she
resorted to repartee.

"You must come with me this evening," she said. "I intend to take possession of you for an
hour or two, and give you a good time."

"You will please excuse me from anything of the kind," was my quick reply. "I have long ceased
to enjoy worldly amusements."

Just then the waitress came with the cheque.

"One or two?" she inquired.

"Two," promptly replied Mrs. R----

I politely wished her good evening as we stood at the desk, and was quickly walking away when
she called after me.

"Wait a minute," she said, and took a firm hold of my arm and sleeve, so that it was impossible
to free myself without attracting attention. We were now on the street. As she walked beside
me, she said:

"You may not think so, but I intend to do you a favor. People in your line of work are never
blest with overmuch of this world's goods, especially money. I'm going to take you with me
across the bridge [into Kentucky] to the house of one of my friends and win a stake for you.
You needn't touch a card unless you want to. Now don't be afraid to trust me, because----"

Before she had hardly finished speaking, I suddenly tore away from her grasp, ran down the
block to the corner, and boarded a passing car, not caring where it took me, so anxious was
I to get away from this female gambler, this confidence woman.

Why did I not have her arrested? First, because I had already purchased my ticket for my journey
to Pittsburg, and secondly, because her private conversation with me would not have warranted
me in so doing. Moreover, I knew that the all-seeing eye of God was taking cognizance of her
actions as well as of mine. He protected me, and you may rest assured that she and her kind
will not go unpunished.

Why have I told you this? In order to show that it is not only the young girls and youth who
are in danger, but also the more mature, even the rescue missionary. It therefore behooves
us to be constantly in an attitude of watchfulness and prayer, for Satan goes about in all
manner of garbs seeking whom he may devour. Nothing could better please him than to overpower
or side-track one of the children of God, more particularly a missionary.

I took a long round-trip ride on that car, my heart overflowing with gratitude to the heavenly
Father for having made the way of escape (1 Cor. 10:13). It was after nine o'clock before I
reached my hotel. I wondered, as I retired, who would be the next to be victimized by that
runner for a private gambling-house. I fell asleep with earnest prayer for the deliverance
of whosoever it might chance to be, and for God to deal speedily with all such agents of the
evil one.

After a delightful five days' visit with my son and his bride I was soon back in California,
both ready and eager to transact business for the Master's kingdom.

Anybody who has traveled on a tourist car can readily understand that, even though one may
not be prying or curious, one is apt to learn more or less of its other occupants, particularly
those in the adjoining sections; and be the porter ever so watchful, he can not cope with every
suspicious situation.

Being a rescue missionary, I particularly yet secretly kept a watchful eye over a girl just
graduated with honors from a school in the old country and now about to join some relatives
at a point near San Francisco; for she was fast succumbing to the influence of a woman with
whom some of the opposite sex seemed very familiar, considering the fact that the latter was
as much a stranger to them (when first we started out) as she was to me. Besides, the pretty
young graduate evidently was a very guileless, convent-raised girl. Matters assumed such a
condition at the close of the third day of our journey that I felt it incumbent upon me to
invite the latter into my section for the sake of some friendly advice. She appeared to take
it all in good part and promised to act upon it. Had she done so, I should not now be relating
that before the end of the next twenty-four hours I was subjected to most unkind, uncalled-for
criticism from nearly all the occupants of that car, mostly young people. The schoolgirl was
foolish enough to betray every word of our conversation to the older woman, whose actions that
same night were such that the porter had to interfere. Notwithstanding the unkind treatment
accorded me, I still continued privately to chaperon the girl until she reached her destination
where she was, thank God, welcomed at the depot by her relatives.

That porter told me that he had constantly to be on the lookout for questionable characters
of both sexes, who made it their business to travel back and forth continuously in search of
victims to rob or aid them in plying their nefarious trades, but that some acted so sanctimoniously,
as in this case, that they were rather hard to detect. I have no doubt that this adventuress
obtained the young girl's address, so that the acquaintance could, a little later on, be renewed
in order that some of this woman's accomplices, if not herself, could secure this another victim
for the white slave traffic.

Moral: Parents and guardians, secure reliable chaperons for your young people to travel with,
or else keep them at home pending such times as they can be accompanied by you or trusted friends.

A letter from a wealthy pioneer with whom I had had several interviews respecting land for
a training school and home now sent me word that he had decided to donate six acres for that
purpose, provided I should secure pledges to the amount of thirty thousand dollars for building
purposes. The undertaking looked stupendous; nevertheless, what was to hinder if this were
the plan of God?

At his invitation, I shortly went to inspect the land, then in grain. The tract was hardly
as much as was requisite for horticultural purposes and a large home, but the situation was
charming; so, without consulting any one as to the nature of the soil, I promised to do my
utmost to earn a quit title to the land. I worked indefatigably for several months before being
able to secure a promissory deed, but finally, after much effort and persuasion, I succeeded
in obtaining the latter. Then I worked harder than ever. Two years were spent in this wise.
Everything pointed to ultimate success. A board of representative business men was secured
in order to meet legal requirements. By faith I now saw the beautiful, practical home for delinquent
and dependent children looming up in the very near future.

One day whilst on my way southward I was telling an acquaintance of my hopes and also showing
her the plans. Presently a gentleman sitting immediately back of us thus addressed me:

"Pardon me, madam, but I can not refrain from hearing part of your conversation, also seeing
your plans." (With that he handed me his card.) "For over twenty-two years I was a resident
of the place where you propose to build that home," he continued, "and I know every foot of
its soil. Would it be asking too much of you to inquire just where those six acres are located?"

Upon his receiving the desired information, he said:

"I am very sorry to hear it. I regret to have to inform you that it is absolutely useless for
horticultural purposes. It is worked out, having been in grain for at least forty years; besides,
it is gravelly soil with clay bottom. I do not ask you to take my word for this. Inquire of
---- ----- or any of the reputable business men. It is too bad that you should have had so
much work for nothing."

Reader, endeavor if you can, to put yourself in my place at this moment. Through undescribable
toil I had procured nearly ten thousand dollars in pledges, though, thank God, I had collected
no money. So this distressing information almost stunned me. Thanking the gentleman, I promised,
at his earnest solicitation, to satisfy myself beyond a doubt.

What he said was all too true. For a few days the effects of the confirmation of this stranger's
statements almost prostrated me. I humbly thank God, however, that this experience was the
means of His getting me into a place where He could have a chance to talk to me. He told me
that zeal for His house had well-nigh eaten me up and that what was lacking was a need of more
watchfulness and prayer on my part. Also, he assured me that notwithstanding another crushing
disappointment, the home would be built, but not in the manner anticipated; that the silver
and gold, "the cattle on a thousand hills," everything, everywhere was His. The wound eventually
began to heal.

During this trying time, whilst I was one day conferring with Lieutenant-Governor Porter, a
lady came into his office, to whom he immediately introduced me. Acknowledging the introduction
with a very warm handshake and a sweet smile, Mrs. Tallman Chittenden, of Chittenden, Santa
Cruz County, said: "Mrs. Roberts, for a long time I have heard or read of you. I so much desire
to know you. Can you not return to my home with me today? My husband will be as pleased as
I to have you for our guest." (They owned one of the most beautiful, picturesque estates in
Santa Cruz County. The Southern Pacific passes through their magnificently cultivated grounds)
Expressing my regrets, owing to having an urgent call from the probation officer of the juvenile
court of Santa Cruz City, I promised to visit them on the return trip--a promise that I carried
out on the following evening. Soon I was made to realize that God was adding two more to the
list of true and tried friends; for after learning the nature of my recent disappointment and
that I did not now have any settled abiding-place, Mr. and Mrs. Parkhurst having removed to
Washington, they cordially invited me to consider their lovely home mine also indefinitely.

This kindness overwhelmed me with gratitude. Rest at last, real rest for the body as well as
for the soul; but it was not for long. The calls accumulated thick and fast, and again I had
to be up and doing. But even to this day (unless the place, which is for sale, has passed into
other hands) I am at liberty any hour of the day or night to avail myself of the freedom and
the home comforts of lovely Chittenden, where a most cordial greeting has ever been mine from
the generous hostess and her friendly husband. Thus God is ever providing his chosen ones with
what he has promised; for has not he said in Psa. He always knows best. He never closes one
door but that he opens a better one. It pays to stand still, to be true to him.

CHAPTER XLI.

CALL ON THE GOVERNOR AND THEN GO SOUTH.

Acting upon the suggestion of several sympathetic, interested friends, who realized, with me,
the great necessity for "the ounce of prevention home and school" for many of the rising generation,
I took a special trip to Sacramento in order to submit specifications and plans to Governor
Gillett, then in office.

This was not our first meeting; therefore I was by no means a stranger to the Governor, who
very kindly and cordially received me. Almost his first words were, "Time being at a premium
with me, tell me what I can do for you." In as few words as possible the story of effort and
apparent though not total failure was being poured into his attentive ears. Presently, to my
great joy, he replied:

"Mrs. Roberts, this has been a pet project of mine for many, many years. All I have lacked
was the time, means, and assistants to carry it into execution. Let me tell you something for
your encouragement: right now I am considering certain offers of land for just such a purpose.
No paltry six acres for it either, but three hundred or more. I hope soon to see this vitally
important and absolutely necessary plan receive the approbation of our next legislative session,
and an appropriation made for the purchase of a large tract of land, together with necessary
and suitable buildings. I know you have been working very hard. Do not nurse disappointment
any longer; instead join me feeling assured of the future welfare and maintenance of the delinquent
and dependent children of our State."

Much more did he encourage me, but the above was the sum and substance. Lighter hearted than
I had felt for many days, I now took more interest than ever in the rescue work. In response
to a call I hurried to southern California, where, with others, I engaged in the Master's service
in seeking and warning the lost, working from San Diego on up the coast.

Perhaps it would be advisable at this time to quote from the report made in the San Diego Sun
of July 14, 1908.

LOW DANCE-HALLS, CURSE OF THE CITY.

Mrs. Florence Roberts, known throughout the State as "Mother Roberts," who has been in this
city for two weeks in the interests of fallen humanity has visited the red light district of
this city. One conclusion that she draws is this: "The dance-hall is an abomination that must
go. It is more degrading than any other form of dissipation. The future of the State is being
ruined. The young--men are being degraded past redemption; the young women, especially working
girls, are in danger."

Discussing her observations with a "Sun" reporter, Mrs. Roberts said: "I visited at least a
dozen of the saloon dance-halls. The private houses would not admit me, not knowing who I was;
but the saloons are of course public.

"As far as I can see, the traffic is not organized as it is in most places. Each saloon seems
an individual institution.

"We went into place after place, dirty and squalid, most of them, and all very unattractive.
The 'glittering place of vice' was not to be found; merely the girls, the low dance-music,
and the catering to every bestial passion.

MEN ASHAMED.

"Many of the men were young. Almost all were well dressed and respectable looking, and, thank
God, many of them were ashamed when we came in, and pulled their hats down over their eyes.
We saw, not only the common sailors, but the officers, the men who command the great ships,
who plan and direct the battles of the world, parading their gold braid in these dens of vice,
in the company of the lowest.

"The indecent postures, the short-skirted, low-necked dresses, the sensual dancing, and the
frequent trips to the places behind the saloons, were nauseating and repulsive. But the heart-sorrow,
the sometimes unconscious longing for something higher and better, showing through the paint
and powder, the hard, sinister lines, the brazen, defiant eyes, touched my heart with the awful
sorrow of it all, and I would give all I possess to be able to touch them and to help them.

"I said to one poor girl, 'Do you enjoy this life?'

"'Not on your life, lady,' she replied. 'We drift into it, and we can't see the way out.'

"Many are totally resigned to the life. One girl said to me indifferently, 'I don't expect
ever to live any other life. I'm used to it, and it's good enough now.'

FORCED TO LEAVE.

"In one place the barkeeper allowed me to sing to the girls, but just in the middle of my song,
the proprietor came in and said something in a gruff voice to the barkeeper. The latter came
over to me and apologetically said, 'Say, lady, the boss is giving me h---- for allowing this.
I guess you'll have to quit.'

"Two of the girls were deeply touched by what I said to them. I spoke of the wrong influence
of some kind of home life.

"'You're right, lady. That's so. It was that way with me. I was started wrong, and everybody
helped to grease the hill I was sliding down, and I soon reached the bottom.'

"The girls are decoyed by some man friend, who has so compromised the girl that she feels she
is being shunned, to the house of a 'kind woman who will protect her.' She is ruined. She begins
smoking and drinking and soon unless she takes great care of herself, she is sent from a first-class
house to a second class, then a third class, then lower and lower, until she ends in some vile
dance-hall, compared to which the orthodox hell is a paradise. Five years altogether Is the
average life in this business.

NO-SCREEN LAW.

"One thing I found here that I have found nowhere else, and that is the rigid enforcement of
the no-screen law. Everything was open. I shall speak of it in other places. And then the law
forbidding the sale of spirituous liquors means so much to the girls, the poor, poor girls,
who are so bitter against the whole world, and who are suspicious of every woman.

"A barkeeper asked me, lady, what are you doing in a place like this?'

"'I am here to do some good if I can. I am a mother.'

"'Well,' he replied, 'this is no place for decent people.'

"Just then a rough-looking customer spoke up, 'Don't you leave because he wants you to. Do
all the good you can'

"I am afraid some of the girls thought I was there out of mere vulgar curiosity. No, indeed.
I have seen the worst places in the State, I have visited the girls, talked with them, eaten
with them, and praise God, have helped some of them to do better."

CHRISTIANITY

Mrs. Roberts has no use for so-called Christianity that forgets the virtue named charity. She
tells a story of a young girl who was won from the tenderloin by a Salvation Army lassie....
[Here follows the story of Dollie, found between these pages.]

WORST RESORTS

"As I said before," continued Mrs. Roberts, "we visited all the houses, but were not admitted
to all. They are very superstitious, and to admit visitors on Monday would 'hoodoo' the business
for the rest of the week. None of the houses were attractive. We learned the name of only one,
which, the girls tell me, is the worst in the whole district.

"There is one place, though, that I must mention. It is most attractive with lights, mirrors,
and music. But I assure you it is the first step of its kind downward. [A first-class saloon.]

"This place has a most appropriate electric sign, a winding, twisting snake. 'There is one
thing more I must tell you,' I said to a young, attractive-looking boy, 'What attracts you here?'

"'For the life of me I can't tell you, except that there's no other place where we fellows
can enjoy ourselves.'

"What an opportunity for an immense, well-equipped reading-room, where the boys can have games,
books, and all sorts of harmless amusements."

Mrs. Roberts will be here for some little time, and she expects to speak several times before
she leaves. She spoke at the Central Christian church yesterday to a large audience.

Among other things at this meeting I mentioned this incident:

In one of the Northern towns, the chief of police, knowing I was in the town, sent for me to
confer with him on a case of "strictest privacy." Wondering what was the matter, I hastened,
and soon was hearing this:

"In one of the houses on ---- Street, I have just learned from one of my men, who was told
by a near-by saloon-keeper, of a young girl inmate who has been constantly in tears for the
past two weeks, a new-comer aged about sixteen. I want some one to get her away from there.
My political situation is such at the present time that it will never do for me to figure in
this matter; at the same time I am aware if you are conspicuous in it, those doors will be
closed upon you, and that will be unwise, seeing these landladies are more or less kindly disposed
toward you.

"I understand this girl is from San Francisco, where she has a mother, who ought to be notified
and the daughter at once sent home to her; but I'm in a quandary how to proceed so as not to
incur ill-feeling with the politicians of that neighborhood. [He was a candidate for reelection.]
What would you suggest?"

Quickly I replied: "If that landlady does not know your voice, 'phone, asking if she has any
new girls at present? Then ask her to send the new one to the 'phone. If she does so, have
a talk with the girl of a nature calculated to lead the landlady to infer you are friendly,
and as soon as it is safe to do so, tell her, the new girl, that she is to come out presently
as though to go to a restaurant for breakfast, that friends are going to rescue her from her
awful predicament, but that she must be very cautious for fear of creating suspicion. Tell
her to look on the corner of Fourth and L---- Streets for a lady wearing a small black bonnet
trimmed with white and to follow her into the building where she sees her disappear. Tell her
to act as though she were making arrangements for an evening engagement."

In less than half an hour that poor child was closeted with the chief and me in his private
office. Soon, after reassuring her, he left us alone in order that I could freely interrogate,
and this, after many tears, was the sum and substance of what she told:

"I've a very comfortable home, a dear mama and two little brothers. Perhaps I have a stepfather
now, for mama was intending to marry again. He's a chef in ---- Hotel."

"Is your papa long dead, dear?" I inquired.

"Papa isn't dead. Mama got a divorce from him a little while ago. He wouldn't support us ----
and ----."

"Has your mama known this chef very long?" I asked.

"Oh, yes, quite a while. I never saw much of him though, 'cause Mama would rather I wasn't
around when he called; so she often used to let me go to the nickelodeon or the dance with
some of the girls I know, when she expected him to spend the evening."

"How did it happen you came here, my child?" was the next question.

