ELDER DANIELS [following him] Then why don't you put us on to the man that done you out of it?

BLANCO. Because he'd be too clever for you, just as he was too clever for me.

FEEMY [reddening, and disengaging her arm from Strapper's] I'm clean enough to hang you, anyway.
[Going over to him threateningly]. Youre no true American man, to insult a woman like that.

BLANCO. A woman! Oh Lord! You saw me on a horse, did you?

FEEMY. Yes I did.

BLANCO. Got up early on purpose to do it, didn't you?

FEEMY. No I didn't: I stayed up late on a spree.

BLANCO. I was on a horse, was I?

FEEMY. Yes you were; and if you deny it youre a liar.

BLANCO [to Strapper] She saw a man on a horse when she was too drunk to tell which was the
man and which was the horse--

FEEMY [breaking in] You lie. I wasn't drunk--at least not as drunk as that.

BLANCO [ignoring the interruption]--and you found a man without a horse. Is a man on a horse
the same as a man on foot? Yah! Take your witness away. Who's going to believe her? Shove her
into the dustbin. Youve got to find that horse before you get a rope round my neck. [He turns
away from her contemptuously, and sits at the table with his back to the jury box].

FEEMY [following him] I'll hang you, you dirty horse-thief; or not a man in this camp will
ever get a word or a look from me again. Youre just trash: thats what you are. White trash.

BLANCO. And what are you, darling? What are you? Youre a worse danger to a town like this than
ten horse-thieves.

FEEMY. Mr Kemp: will you stand by and hear me insulted in that low way? [To Blanco, spitefully]
I'll see you swung up and I'll see you cut down: I'll see you high and I'll see you low, as
dangerous as I am. [He laughs]. Oh you neednt try to brazen it out. Youll look white enough
before the boys are done with you.

BLANCO. You do me good. Feemy. Stay by me to the end, wont you? Hold my hand to the last; and
I'll die game. [He puts out his hand: she strikes savagely at it; but he withdraws it in time
and laughs at her discomfiture].

FEEMY. You--

ELDER DANIELS. Never mind him, Feemy: he's not right in his head to-day. [She receives the
assurance with contemptuous credulity, and sits down on the step of the Sheriff's dais].

Sheriff Kemp comes in: a stout man, with large flat ears, and a neck thicker than his head.

ELDER DANIELS. Morning, Sheriff.

THE SHERIFF. Morning, Elder. [Passing on.] Morning, Strapper. [Passing on]. Morning, Miss Evans.
[Stopping between Strapper and Blanco]. Is this the prisoner?

BLANCO [rising] Thats so. Morning, Sheriff.

THE SHERIFF. Morning. You know, I suppose, that if you've stole a horse and the jury find against
you, you wont have any time to settle your affairs. Consequently, if you feel guilty, youd
better settle em now.

BLANCO. Affairs be damned! Ive got none.

THE SHERIFF. Well, are you in a proper state of mind? Has the Elder talked to you?

BLANCO. He has. And I say it's against the law. It's torture: thats what it is.

ELDER DANIELS. He's not accountable. He's out of his mind, Sheriff. He's not fit to go into
the presence of his Maker.

THE SHERIFF. You are a merciful man, Elder; but you wont take the boys with you there. [To
Blanco]. If it comes to hanging you, youd better for your own sake be hanged in a proper state
of mind than in an improper one. But it wont make any difference to us: make no mistake about that.

BLANCO. Lord keep me wicked till I die! Now Ive said my little prayer. I'm ready. Not that
I'm guilty, mind you; but this is a rotten town, dead certain to do the wrong thing.

THE SHERIFF. You wont be asked to live long in it, I guess. [To Strapper] Got the witness all
right, Strapper?

STRAPPER. Yes, got everything.

BLANCO. Except the horse.

THE SHERIFF. Whats that? Aint you got the horse?

STRAPPER. No. He traded it before we overtook him, I guess. But Feemy saw him on it.

FEEMY. She did.

STRAPPER. Shall I call in the boys?

BLANCO. Just a moment, Sheriff. A good appearance is everything in a low-class place like this.
[He takes out a pocket comb and mirror, and retires towards the dais to arrange his hair].

ELDER DANIELS. Oh, think of your immortal soul, man, not of your foolish face.

BLANCO. I cant change my soul, Elder: it changes me--sometimes. Feemy: I'm too pale. Let me
rub my cheek against yours, darling.

FEEMY. You lie: my color's my own, such as it is. And a pretty color youll be when youre hung
white and shot red.

BLANCO. Aint she spiteful, Sheriff?

THE SHERIFF. Time's wasted on you. [To Strapper] Go and see if the boys are ready. Some of
them were short of cartridges, and went down to the store to buy them. They may as well have
their fun; and itll be shorter for him.

STRAPPER. Young Jack has brought a boxful up. Theyre all ready.

THE SHERIFF [going to the dais and addressing Blanco] Your place is at the bar there. Take
it. [Blanco bows ironically and goes to the bar]. Miss Evans: youd best sit at the table. [She
does so, at the corner nearest the bar. The Elder takes the opposite corner. The Sheriff takes
his chair]. All ready, Strapper.

STRAPPER [at the door] All in to begin.

(The crowd comes in and fills the court. Babsy, Jessie, and Emma come to the Sheriff's right;
Hannah and Lottie to his left.)

THE SHERIFF. Silence there. The jury will take their places as usual. [They do so].

BLANCO. I challenge this jury, Sheriff.

THE FOREMAN. Do you, by Gosh?

THE SHERIFF. On what ground?

BLANCO. On the general ground that it's a rotten jury. [Laughter].

THE SHERIFF. Thats not a lawful ground of challenge.

THE FOREMAN. It's a lawful ground for me to shoot yonder skunk at sight, first time I meet
him, if he survives this trial.

BLANCO. I challenge the Foreman because he's prejudiced.

THE FOREMAN. I say you lie. We mean to hang you, Blanco Posnet; but you will be hanged fair.

THE JURY. Hear, hear!

STRAPPER [to the Sheriff] George: this is rot. How can you get an unprejudiced jury if the
prisoner starts by telling them theyre all rotten? If theres any prejudice against him he has
himself to thank for it.

THE BOYS. Thats so. Of course he has. Insulting the court! Challenge be jiggered! Gag him.

NESTOR [a juryman with a long white beard, drunk, the oldest man present] Besides, Sheriff,
I go so far as to say that the man that is not prejudiced against a horse-thief is not fit
to sit on a jury in this town.

THE BOYS. Right. Bully for you, Nestor! Thats the straight truth. Of course he aint. Hear, hear!

THE SHERIFF. That is no doubt true, old man. Still, you must get as unprejudiced as you can.
The critter has a right to his chance, such as he is. So now go right ahead. If the prisoner
don't like this jury, he should have stole a horse in another town; for this is all the jury
he'll get here.

THE FOREMAN. Thats so, Blanco Posnet.

THE SHERIFF [to Blanco] Dont you be uneasy. You will get justice here. It may be rough justice;
but it is justice.

BLANCO. What is justice?

THE SHERIFF. Hanging horse-thieves is justice; so now you know. Now then: weve wasted enough
time. Hustle with your witness there, will you?

BLANCO [indignantly bringing down his fist on the bar] Swear the jury. A rotten Sheriff you
are not to know that the jury's got to be sworn.

THE FOREMAN [galled] Be swore for you! Not likely. What do you say, old son?

NESTOR [deliberately and solemnly] I say: GUILTY!!!

THE BOYS [tumultuously rushing at Blanco] Thats it. Guilty, guilty. Take him out and hang him.
He's found guilty. Fetch a rope. Up with him. [They are about to drag him from the bar].

THE SHERIFF [rising, pistol in hand] Hands off that man. Hands off him, I say, Squinty, or
I drop you, and would if you were my own son. [Dead silence], I'm Sheriff here; and it's for
me to say when he may lawfully be hanged. [They release him].

BLANCO. As the actor says in the play, "a Daniel come to judgment." Rotten actor he was, too.

THE SHERIFF. Elder Daniel is come to judgment all right, my lad. Elder: the floor is yours.
[The Elder rises]. Give your evidence. The truth and the whole truth and nothing but the truth,
so help you God.

ELDER DANIELS. Sheriff: let me off this. I didn't ought to swear away this man's life. He and
I are, in a manner of speaking, brothers.

THE SHERIFF. It does you credit, Elder: every man here will acknowledge it. But religion is
one thing: law is another. In religion we're all brothers. In law we cut our brother off when
he steals horses.

THE FOREMAN. Besides, you neednt hang him, you know. Theres plenty of willing hands to take
that job off your conscience. So rip ahead, old son.

STRAPPER. Youre accountable to me for the horse until you clear yourself, Elder: remember that.

BLANCO. Out with it, you fool.

ELDER DANIELS. You might own up, Blanco, as far as my evidence goes. Everybody knows I borrowed
one of the Sheriff's horses from Strapper because my own's gone lame. Everybody knows you arrived
in the town yesterday and put up in my house. Everybody knows that in the morning the horse
was gone and you were gone.

BLANCO [in a forensic manner] Sheriff: the Elder, though known to you and to all here as no
brother of mine and the rottenest liar in this town, is speaking the truth for the first time
in his life as far as what he says about me is concerned. As to the horse, I say nothing; except
that it was the rottenest horse you ever tried to sell.

THE SHERIFF. How do you know it was a rotten horse if you didn't steal it?

BLANCO. I don't know of my own knowledge. I only argue that if the horse had been worth its
keep, you wouldn't have lent it to Strapper, and Strapper wouldn't have lent it to this eloquent
and venerable ram. [Suppressed laughter]. And now I ask him this. [To the Elder] Did we or
did we not have a quarrel last evening about a certain article that was left by my mother,
and that I considered I had a right to more than you? And did you say one word to me about
the horse not belonging to you?

ELDER DANIELS. Why should I? We never said a word about the horse at all. How was I to know
what it was in your mind to do?

BLANCO. Bear witness all that I had a right to take a horse from him without stealing to make
up for what he denied me. I am no thief. But you havnt proved yet that I took the horse. Strapper
Kemp: had I the horse when you took me, or had I not?

STRAPPER. No, nor you hadnt a railway train neither. But Feemy Evans saw you pass on the horse
at four o'clock twenty-five miles from the spot where I took you at seven on the road to Pony
Harbor. Did you walk twenty-five miles in three hours? That so, Feemy, eh?

FEEMY. Thats so. At four I saw him. [To Blanco] Thats done for you.

THE SHERIFF. You say you saw him on my horse?

FEEMY. I did.

BLANCO. And I ate it, I suppose, before Strapper fetched up with me. [Suddenly and dramatically]
Sheriff: I accuse Feemy of immoral relations with Strapper.

FEEMY. Oh you liar!

BLANCO. I accuse the fair Euphemia of immoral relations with every man in this town, including
yourself, Sheriff. I say this is a conspiracy to kill me between Feemy and Strapper because
I wouldn't touch Feemy with a pair of tongs. I say you darent hang any white man on the word
of a woman of bad character. I stand on the honor and virtue of my American manhood. I say
that she's not had the oath, and that you darent for the honor of the town give her the oath
because her lips would blaspheme the holy Bible if they touched it. I say thats the law; and
if you are a proper United States Sheriff and not a low-down lyncher, youll hold up the law
and not let it be dragged in the mud by your brother's kept woman.

