In the first place, I think myself oblidg'd to vindicat myself from the imputation of inconstancy
for acting in this voyage against the English Intrest, and in the yeare 1683 against the French
Intrest, for which, if I could not give a very good account, I might justly lye under the sentenc
of capritiousness & inconstancy. But severall Persons of probity and good repute, being sensible
what my brother-in-Law, Mr Chouard Des Groisiliers, and myself performed in severall voyadges
for the Gentlemen conserned in the Hudson's Bay Trade, relating to the Comers of Bever skins,
and the just cause of dissattisfaction which both of us had, to make us retire into France.
I have no cause to believe that I in the least deserve to bee taxed with lightness or inconstancy
for the Imployments wherein I since ingaged, although they were against the Interests of the
said Company, for it is suffitiently known that my Brother nor myself omitted nothing that
lay in our power, having both of us severall times adventur'd our lives, and did all that was
possible for Persons of courage and Honour to perform for the advantage and profit of the said
Company, ever since the yeare 1665 unto the yeare 1674. But finding that all our advise was
slighted and rejected, and the Councill of other persons imbrac'd and made use of, which manifestly
tended to the ruin of the setlement of the Beaver Trade, & that on all occasions wee were look'd
upon as useless persons, that deserved neither reward nor incouragement, this unkinde usage
made us at last take a resolution, though with very great reluctancy, to return back into France;
for in the maine it is well knowne that I have a greater inclination for the Interest of England
than for that of ffrance, being marry'd at London unto an Honorable familly, [Footnote: He
married, between 1666 and 1673, for his second wife, the daughter of Sir John Kirke. He was
one of the original founders of the Hudson's Bay Company, having subscribed L. 300 to the common
stock in 1670. He was one of the seven members on the Committee of management for the Company,
and was no doubt instrumental in securing to Radisson a permanent pension of 1,200 livres a
year, after he left the service of France. In all probability, Radisson emigrated to Canada
with his family in 1694, for in that year his son's name thus appears as holding a land patent:
"1695. Another patent of confirmation to 'Sieur Etienne Volant Radisson' of the concession
made to him the 19th of October, 1694, of the isles, islets, and 'baitures' not granted, that
are to be found across Lake St Peter, above the islands granted to the 'Sieur Sorel,' from
the edge of the north channel, as far as the great middle channel, called the channel of Platte
Island," etc., etc. As Peter Radisson's will can nowhere be found at Somerset House, London,
he probably died in Canada.] whos alliance had also the deeper ingadged me in the Intrest of
the Nation. Morover, all my friends know the tender love I had for my wife, and that I declared
unto them how much I was troubled in being reduced to the necessity of leaving her. I hope
thes considerations will vindicate my proceedings touching the severall Interests which I espous'd,
and what I shall relate in this ensuing Narrative touching my proceedings in regard of the
English in this voyadge in the River, and also in Nelson's harbour in the year 1683, and will
justify me against what has ben reported to my prejudice to render me Odious unto the nation.
For it will appeare that having had the good fortune to defend my setlment against those which
at that time I look'd upon as my Ennemy's, & defeated them by frustrating their designes, I
improv'd the advantage I had over them the best I could; yet would they do me right, they must
own that they had more just cause to give me thanks than to complaine of me, having ever used
them kindly as long as they pleas'd to live with me. I freely confess I used all the skill
I could to compass my designes, & knowing very well what these Gentlemen intended against me,
I thought it better to surprise them than that they should me; knowing that if they had ben
afore hand with me, I should have passed my time wors with them than they did with me. I come
now to discours of my voyadge, not thinking it materiall heere to mention the campaign I made
in the french fleet, since I left England, in the Expeditions for Guinea, Tobaga, [Footnote:
This expedition was commanded by Jean, Count d'Estrees. He reduced the Island of Tobaga. He
was made a Marshal of France, and sent out, 1 August, 1687, as Viceroy over America.] and other
occasions wherein I was concern'd before I ingadged in this voyadge.

At the time my Brother-in-Law and I were dissattisfy'd with the Hudson's Bay Company, wee were
severall times invited by the late Monsieur Colbert to return back for france, with large promises
that wee should bee very kindly entertain'd. Wee refused a great while all the offers that
were made us; but seeing our businesse went wors and wors with the company, without any likelyhood
of finding any better usage, at last wee accepted the offer that was made unto us, of paying
us 400 Lewi-Dors redy money, of discharging all our Debts, and to give us good Employments.
These conditions being agreed upon, wee passed over into france in Xber, 1674.

As soon as wee got to Paris wee waited upon monsieur Colbert. Hee reproached us for preferring
the English Interest before that of ffrance; but having heard our defence, and observ'd by
what wee said unto him of our discoverys in the Northern parts of America, and of the acquaintance
wee had with the Natives, how fit wee might bee for his purpos, hee soon assur'd us of his
favor & protection, & also of the King's pardon for what was past, with an intire restoration
unto the same state wee were in before wee left france, upon condition that wee should employ
our care & industry for the advancement & increas of the comers of the Beaver Trade in the
french Collonies in Canada. Hee also confirmed the promis had ben made us at London, of the
gratuity of 400 french Pistolls, that all our Debts should bee discharg'd, & that wee should
bee put into Employments. Our Letters Pattents of pardon & restoration were forthwith dispatch't,
& monsieur Colbert would have it expressly mention'd in them, for what caus the King granted
them, viz., to employ the greatest of our skill & industry with the Natives, for the utillity
& advancement of the Beaver Trade in the french Collonies. The 400 peeces of Gould was pay'd
us, & all things else promised was perform'd, excepting only the Employment, for the which
wee were made to attend a great while, and all to no purpos.

But at last I perceaved the cause of this delay, & that my marrying in England made me bee
suspected, because my wife remained there. Monsr. Colbert having delayed us a long time with
sundry Excuses, one day hee explained himself, saying I should bring my wife over into france
if I expected that a full confidence should bee put in mee. I represented unto him that it
was nott a thing fully in my power to doe, my wife's father refusing to give me the Liberty
of bringing her over into france; but I promiss'd him to use my best endeavors to that effect.
In the meantime Monsr. Colbert intimated that hee would have my Brother-in-Law & myself make
a voyadge unto Canada, to advise with the Governour what was best ther to bee done, assuring
us that hee would write unto him in our behalf.

Wee undertook the voyadge, but being arriv'd at Quebeck, wee found that jelosy & interest which
some Persons had over those that had the absolute command, at that time, of the Trade in Canada,
& whos Creatures were Imploy'd for new Discoverys, ordered things so that the Count De Frontinac,
the Governor, took no care to perform what wee had ben promis'd hee should have don for us;
so that finding myself slighted, I left my Brother-in-Law with his familly in Canada, & returned
back again for France, intending to serve at sea in the fleet. Accordingly I there passed the
Campaigns above mention'd untill wee suffer'd shippwreck at the Isle D'ane, from which being
escaped, I returned with the rest of the Army unto Brest, in the moneth of July, having lost
all my Equipage in this disaster. The Vice Admirall & the Intendant wrote to Court in my favour,
& upon the good character they were pleas'd to give of me, I receav'd a gratuity of 100 Louis
D'ors upon the King's account, to renew my Equipage; & these Gentlemen also were pleased to
tell me I should ere long have the command of a Man of Warr; but thinking that could not so
easily bee, I desired leave to make a turn over into England under pretext of visitting my
wife & to make a farther Tryall of bringing her over into france, whereupon I had my pass granted,
with a farther gratuity of 100 Louis D'ors towards the charges of my voyage. I was comanded
to make what dispatch possible might bee, & espetially to mind the business of bringing my
wife along with me, & then I shold not doubt of having good Imployments.

I set forwards, & arrived in London the 4th of July, & amongst other discours told my father-in-Law,
Sir John Kirk, of what great importance it was unto me of making my fortune in france to take
my wife along with me thither; notwithstanding, hee would by no means give his consent thereunto,
but desired me to write to my friends in France concerning some pretention hee had against
the Inhabitants of Canada, [Footnote: John Kirke and his elder brothers, Sir David, Sir Lewis,
and others, held a large claim against Canada, or rather France, dating back to 1633, which
amounted in 1654, including principal and interest, to over--L. 34.000.] which I did. I endeavor'd
also, during my stay at London, both by myself & by Friends, to try if the Gentlemen of the
Company might conceave any better thoughts of me, & whether I might not by some means or other
be restor'd unto their good liking; but all my endevors proved in vaine. I found no likelyhood
of effecting what I so much desir'd, therefore I return'd into France & arrived at Brest the
12th of 8ber, 1679.... Having inform'd the Vice Admirall & the Intendant of the litle Successe
I had in my voyadge, & that it was not through any neglect of myne, they order'd me to goe
give an Account of it unto the Marquis De Signelay, which I did; & telling him I could not
prevaile to bring my wife over along with me, hee revil'd me, & told me hee knew very well
what an Inclination I had still for the English Intrest, saying with all that I must not expect
any confidence should bee put in me, nor that I shold not have the least Imployment, whilst
my wife stay'd in England.

Neverthelesse, hee promis'd to speak to his Father, Monsieur Colbert, touching my affaires,
which hee also performed; & afterwards waiting upon him, hee spake unto me much after the same
rate his sonn, the Marquis De Signelay had don before, as to what concerned my wife, & order'd
me to goe unto monsieur Bellinzany, his chief agent for the businesse of Trade, who would farther
inform me of his intentions. Meeting with Monsieur Belinzany, hee told me that monsieur Colbert
thought it necessary that I should conferr with monsieur De La Chesnay, [Footnote: M. Du Chesneau
was appointed 30 May, 1675, Intendant of Justice, Police, and Finance of Canada, Acadia, and
Isles of Newfoundland.] a Canada Merchant who mannadg'd all the Trade of thos parts, & who
was then at Paris, that with him some mesures should bee taken to make the best advantage of
our Discoveries & intreagues in the Northern parts of Canada, to advance the Beaver Trade,
& as much as possible might bee to hinder all strangers from driving that trade to the prejudice
of the French Collonies. The said monsr. Belinzany also told me I could not more oblige monsr.
Colbert, nor take any better cours to obtaine his friendship by any servis whatsoever, than
by using all my skill & industry in drawing all the natives of thos Northern parts of America
to traffick with & to favor the French, & to hinder & disswade them from trading with strangers,
assuring me of a great reward for the servis I should render the state upon this account, &
that Mr. De La Chesiiay would furnish me in Cannada with all things necessary for executing
what dessignes wee should conclude upon together to this intent.

According to these Instructions I went unto Mr. De La Chesnay. Wee discours'd a long time together,
& after severall inquiry's of the state of the countrys that I had most frequented, having
communicated unto him my observations, hee propos'd unto me to undertake to establish a treaty
for the Beaver trade in the Great Bay where I had ben some years before upon the account of
the English. Wee spent two Dayes in adjusting the means of selling this business; at last it
was agreed that I should make a voyadge into England to endevor to perswade my wife to come
away, & also at the same time to inform myself what shipps the Hudson Bay Company intended
to fit out for those parts. I performed this second voyage for England with some remainder
of hopes to find the Gentlemen of the Company something better inclin'd towards me than they
had ben formerly; but whether they then looked upon me as wholy unneccessary for their purpos,
or as one that was altogether unable to doe them any harm, I was sufferr'd to come away without
receaving the least token of kindnesse. All the satisfaction I had in the voyadge was that
Prince Rupert was pleas'd to tell me that hee was very sorry my offers of servis was so much
slighted.

I resolv'd with myself not to bee dejected at this coldnesse, & returned into france, thinking
there to have found Monsieur De La Chesnay; but being come to Paris, I heard hee was gon, &
I presently resolved to follow him to Canada, to execute what wee had concluded upon at Paris.
I went to take my leave of monsieur Colbert, acquainting him of my dessigne, whereof hee approved
very well. Hee wished me a good voyadge, advising me to be carefull. I went to visit the Society
of the Jesuits at Paris, as being also concern'd with La Chesnay in the Beaver Trade. They
gave mee some money for my voyadge. I went & took shipp at Rochell, & arrived at Quebeck the
25th of 7ber, 1682. As soon as I went ashore I spake with monsieur La Chesnay, who seem'd to
bee very glad to see me, and after some discours of what wee had concluded upon at Paris, hee
said the businesse must bee presently set about; & being privy unto the Court Intrigues, &
fully acquainted with the mesures wee were to use in this enterprize, hee took me along with
him unto the Governor's house, & ingadg'd me to demand his assistance & such orders as wee
should stand in need of from him for the carrying on our Dessigne. But the Governor spake unto
us in a way as if hee approved not of the businesse; whereupon La Chesnay demanded a Pass for
me to return back unto Europ by the way of New England, in a vessel belonging to the Governor
of Accadia, which was at that instant at Quebeck, & redy to saile in som short time.

