I retired to my own room for a while that I might think over all the circumstances.  There
certainly had been seven boxes, and one had had a hole in the canvas.  All the seven had certainly
been on board the steamer.  To so much I felt that I might safely swear.  I had not counted
the seven into the small boat, but on leaving the larger vessel I had looked about the deck
to see that none of the Greene trappings were forgotten.  If left on the steamer, it had been
so left through an intent on the part of some one there employed.  It was quite possible that
the contents of the box had been ascertained through the imprudence of Mrs. Greene, and that
it had been conveyed away so that it might be rifled at Como.  As to Mrs. Greene's assertion
that all the boxes had been put into the small boat, I thought nothing of it.  The people at
Bellaggio could not have known which box to steal, nor had there been time to concoct the plan
in carrying the boxes up to the hotel.  I came at last to this conclusion, that the missing
trunk had either been purloined and carried on to Como,--in which case it would be necessary
to lose no time in going after it; or that it had been put out of sight in some uncommonly
clever way, by the Greenes themselves, as an excuse for borrowing as much money as they could
raise and living without payment of their bills.  With reference to the latter hypothesis,
I declared to myself that Greene did not look like a swindler; but as to Mrs. Greene--!  I
confess that I did not feel so confident in regard to her.

Charity begins at home, so I proceeded to make myself comfortable in my room, feeling almost
certain that I should not be able to leave Bellaggio on the following morning.  I had opened
my portmanteau when I first arrived, leaving it open on the floor as is my wont.  Some people
are always being robbed, and are always locking up everything; while others wander safe over
the world and never lock up anything. For myself, I never turn a key anywhere, and no one ever
purloins from me even a handkerchief.  Cantabit vacuus--, and I am always sufficiently vacuus.
Perhaps it is that I have not a handkerchief worth the stealing.  It is your heavy-laden, suspicious,
mal-adroit Greenes that the thieves attack.  I now found out that the accommodating Boots,
who already knew my ways, had taken my travelling gear into a dark recess which was intended
to do for a dressing-room, and had there spread my portmanteau open upon some table or stool
in the corner.  It was a convenient arrangement, and there I left it during the whole period
of my sojourn.

Mrs. Greene had given the landlord an hour to find the box, and during that time the landlord,
the landlady, their three daughters, and all the servants in the house certainly did exert
themselves to the utmost.  Half a dozen times they came to my door, but I was luxuriating in
a washing-tub, making up for that four-o'clock start from Chiavenna.  I assured them, however,
that the box was not there, and so the search passed by.  At the end of the hour I went back
to the Greenes according to promise, having resolved that some one must be sent on to Como
to look after the missing article.

There was no necessity to knock at their sitting-room door, for it was wide open.  I walked
in, and found Mrs. Greene still engaged in attacking the landlord, while all the porters who
had carried the luggage up to the house were standing round.  Her voice was loud above the
others, but, luckily for them all, she was speaking English.  The landlord, I saw, was becoming
sulky.  He spoke in Italian, and we none of us understood him, but I gathered that he was declining
to do anything further.  The box, he was certain, had never come out of the steamer. They may 'moo'
like the cow, or 'mew' like the cat! I should be in danger of losing
half that was said.

And that is what these varlets here in the station know right well. It must seem but a mere
bit of bombast on my part.

It could never be seriously countenanced--unless I had an interpreter. Stop me! but if you were
a grandson instead of a granddaughter, I would not mind taking you
with me to interpret for me, though, Gadzooks, I'd be like a heathen
red Injun with a linguister!"

  "Papa had to pay the bill for every
stitch she had when he married her."  These last words were so spoken as to be audible only
by me, but her first exclamation was loud enough.  Were they people for whom it would be worth
my while to delay my journey, and put myself to serious inconvenience with reference to money?

A few minutes afterwards I found myself with Greene on the terrace before the house.  "What
ought I to do?" said he.

"Go to Como," said I, "and look after your box.  I will remain here and go on board the return
steamer.  It may perhaps be there."

"But I can't speak a word of Italian," said he.

"Take the Boots," said I.

"But I can't speak a word of French."  And then it ended in my undertaking to go to Como. 
I swear that the thought struck me that I might as well take my portmanteau with me, and cut
and run when I got there.  The Greenes were nothing to me.

I did not, however, do this.  I made the poor man a promise, and I kept it.  I took merely
a dressing-bag, for I knew that I must sleep at Como; and, thus resolving to disarrange all
my plans, I started.  I was in the midst of beautiful scenery, but I found it quite impossible
to draw any enjoyment from it;--from that or from anything around me. My whole mind was given
up to anathemas against this odious box, as to which I had undoubtedly heavy cause of complaint.
What was the box to me?  I went to Como by the afternoon steamer, and spent a long dreary evening
down on the steamboat quays searching everywhere, and searching in vain.  The boat by which
we had left Colico had gone back to Colico, but the people swore that nothing had been left
on board it. A couple of fierce brass lions held it tight round his little throat; but a couple of
the mildest Hares might have done that, I am sure.

"Sarah," he said, "I go. Expect me on Monday evening, the Sixth, when perhaps you will give
me a cup of tea;--may I ask for no Green?  I went round to every hotel and travelling office, but could
hear nothing of it. Parties had gone to Venice, and Florence, and Bologna, and any of them
might have taken the box.  No one, however, remembered it; and I returned back to Como, and
thence to Bellaggio, reaching the latter place at nine in the evening, disappointed, weary,
and cross.

"Has Monsieur found the accursed trunk?" said the Bellaggio Boots, meeting me on the quay.

"In the name of the--, no.  Has it not turned up here?"

"Monsieur," said the Boots, "we shall all be mad soon.  The poor master, he is mad already."
And then I went up to the house.

"My jewels!" shouted Mrs. Greene, rushing to me with her arms stretched out as soon as she
heard my step in the corridor.  I am sure that she would have embraced me had I found the box.
I had not, however, earned any such reward.  "I can hear nothing of the box either at Como
or Milan," I said.

"Then what on earth am I to do for my money?" said Mr. Greene.

I had had neither dinner nor supper, but the elder Greenes did not care for that.  Mr. Greene
sat silent in despair, and Mrs. Greene stormed about the room in her anger.  "I am afraid you
are very tired," said Sophonisba.

"I am tired, and hungry, and thirsty," said I.  I was beginning to get angry, and to think
myself ill used.  And that idea as to a family of swindlers became strong again.  Greene had
borrowed ten napoleons from me before I started for Como, and I had spent above four in my
fruitless journey to that place and Milan.  I was beginning to fear that my whole purpose as
to Venice and the Tyrol would be destroyed; and I had promised to meet friends at Innspruck,
who,--who were very much preferable to the Greenes.  As events turned out, I did meet them.
Had I failed in this, the present Mrs. Robinson would not have been sitting opposite to me.

I went to my room and dressed myself, and then Sophonisba presided over the tea-table for me.
"What are we to do?" she asked me in a confidential whisper.

"Wait for money from England."

"But they will think we are all sharpers," she said; "and upon my word I do not wonder at it
from the way in which that woman goes on."  She then leaned forward, resting her elbow on the
table and her face on her hand, and told me a long history of all their family discomforts.
Her papa was a very good sort of man, only he had been made a fool of by that intriguing woman,
who had been left without a sixpence with which to bless herself.  And now they had nothing
but quarrels and misery.  Papa did not always got the worst of it;--papa could rouse himself
sometimes; only now he was beaten down and cowed by the loss of his money.  This whispering
confidence was very nice in its way, seeing that Sophonisba was a pretty girl; but the whole
matter seemed to be full of suspicion.

"If they did not want to take you in in one way, they did in another," said the present Mrs.
Robinson, when I told the story to her at Innspruck.  I beg that it may be understood that
at the time of my meeting the Greenes I was not engaged to the present Mrs. Robinson, and was
open to make any matrimonial engagement that might have been pleasing to me.

On the next morning, after breakfast, we held a council of war.  I had been informed that Mr.
Greene had made a fortune, and was justified in presuming him to be a rich man.  It seemed
to me, therefore, that his course was easy.  Let him wait at Bellaggio for more money, and
when he returned home, let him buy Mrs. Greene more jewels.  A poor man always presumes that
a rich man is indifferent about his money.  But in truth a rich man never is indifferent about
his money, and poor Greene looked very blank at my proposition.

"Do you mean to say that it's gone for ever?" he asked.

"I'll not leave the country without knowing more about it," said Mrs. Greene.

"It certainly is very odd," said Sophonisba.  Even Sophonisba seemed to think that I was too
off-hand.

"It will be a month before I can get money, and my bill here will be something tremendous,"
said Greene.

"I wouldn't pay them a farthing till I got my box," said Mrs. Greene.

"That's nonsense," said Sophonisba.  And so it was.  "Hold your tongue, Miss!" said the step-mother.

"Indeed, I shall not hold my tongue," said the step-daughter.  Poor Greene!  He had lost more
than his box within the last twelve months; for, as I had learned in that whispered conversation
over the tea- table with Sophonisba; this was in reality her papa's marriage trip.

Another day was now gone, and we all went to bed. His pride grudged his very eyes the sight of
this humiliation, for despite the oft-repeated assertion of the improvidence of the Indian
character, these public granaries, whence by the primitive Cherokee government food was dispensed
gratis to all the needy, were always full, and their destruction meant national annihilation
or subjugation. After one furtive glance at the purple obscurities of the benighted world
he would bow his head, and with a smothered groan ask of the ada-wehi, "Where is it now, Attusah?"


"Let us go and look at the Serbelloni Gardens," said I, as soon as the silent meal was over;
"or take a boat over to the Sommariva Villa."

"I should like it so much," said Sophonisba.

"We will do nothing of the kind till I have found my property," said Mrs. Greene.  "Mr. Robinson,
what arrangement did you make yesterday with the police at Como?"

"The police at Como?" I said.  "I did not go to the police."

