Such reflections, though sufficiently obvious, might be too far from practical application
to have much immediate effect. But the question of the moral bearing of theology was of more
interest; and, here, the coincidence of the Utilitarianism with the accepted theology of the
day is especially important. The Deity regarded as the artificer appears to be far from purely
benevolent. In respect to morality, is he not simply indifferent? Does he not make men fragile
and place them amidst pitfalls? Does he not constantly slay the virtuous and save the wicked?
How, indeed, from the purely empirical or scientific base, do you deduce any moral attributes
whatever? 'Natural theology,' as it was called, might reveal a contriver, but could it reveal
a judge or a moral guide? Here the difficulty of a purely matter-of-fact theology made itself
felt on many sides. The remarkable influence of Butler upon many minds was partly due to a
perception of this omission. Butler avowedly appeals to the conscience, and therefore at least
recognises God as directly revealed in a moral character. That seemed to supply a gap in the
ordinary theology. But in the purely empirical view Butler's argument was untenable. It appealed
to one of the 'intuitions' which were incompatible with its fundamental assumptions. The compunctions
of conscience were facts to be explained by 'association,' not to be regarded as intimations
of wrath. Butler's view might be inverted. The 'conscience' does, in truth, suggest the divine
wrath; but that only means that it suggests the quack remedies upon which 'wonder-working'
priests establish their power. Instead of proving the truth of the religion, it explains the
origin of superstition. To James Mill, as we have seen, Butler's argument would logically prove
not a righteous governor but a cruel creator. Theologians, again, of the Paley school, were
bound in consistency to the empirical or Utilitarian view of morality. Paley accepted the consequences
unreservedly; and if such philosophers as Brown and Mackintosh persisted in regarding the coincidence
between morality and happiness as indicative of a pre-established harmony, not of an identification
of morality with the pursuit of general happiness, they still admitted that 'utility' was the
'criterion' of morality. The moral law, that is, coincides in its substance with the law, 'maximise
happiness,' and happiness means, as 'Philip Beauchamp' calls it, 'temporal' happiness--the
happiness of actual men living in this world and knowing nothing of any external world. How,
then, is the moral law related to theology? To know what is moral, we must appeal to experience
and 'utility.' We must discover what makes for happiness, just as in medicine we must discover
what makes for health or pleasure, by the ordinary methods of observation. What place is left
for any supernatural intervention? The ostensible answer was that though the moral code could
be deduced from its utility, the motives by which it was to be enforced required some supernatural
agency. The natural man might see what was right, but need not therefore do what was right.
Here 'Philip Beauchamp' comes to a direct issue with the theologians. He denies that the supernatural
motive will be on the side of morality. When J. S. Mill remarked that there had been few discussions
of the 'utility' as distinguished from the truth of religion, he scarcely recognises one conspicuous
fact. The great argument of divines had always been the absolute necessity of religion to morality;
and if morality be understood to mean utility, this is simply an argument from utility. The
point, indeed, was often taken for granted; but it certainly represents one of the strongest
persuasives, if not one of the strongest reasons. The divines, in fact, asserted that religion
was of the highest utility as supplying the motive for moral conduct. What motives, then, can
be derived from such knowledge of the Deity as is attainable from the 'Natural theology' argument?
How can we prove from it that he who puts the world together is more favourable to the virtues
than to the vices which are its results; or, if more favourable, that he shows any other favour
than can be inferred from experience? He has, it is agreed, put men, as Bentham had said, under
the command of two sovereign masters, Pleasure and Pain; and has enabled them to calculate
consequences, and therefore to seek future pleasure and avoid future pain. That only proves
that we can increase our happiness by prudence; but it suggests no additional reasons either
for seeking happiness or for altering our estimate of happiness. As 'Philip Beauchamp' argues,
we cannot from the purely empirical ground get any motive for taking into account anything
beyond our 'temporal' or secular interests. This, again, was in fact admitted by Paley. His
mode of escape from the dilemma is familiar. The existence of a supreme artificer is inferred
from the interventions in the general order of nature. The existence of a moral ruler, or the
fact that the ruler approves morality, is inferred from his interference by the particular
manifestations of power which we call miraculous. We know that actions will have other consequences
than those which can be inferred from our own experience, because some two thousand years ago
a Being appeared who could raise the dead and heal the sick. If sufficient evidence of the
fact be forthcoming, we are entitled to say upon his authority that the wicked will be damned
and the virtuous go to heaven. Obedience to the law enforced by these sanctions is obviously
prudent, and constitutes the true differentia of moral conduct. Virtue, according to the famous
definition, is doing good 'for the sake of everlasting happiness.' The downright bluntness
with which Paley announced these conclusions startled contemporaries, and yet it must be admitted
that they were a natural outcome of his position.

In short, the theological position of the Paley school and the Utilitarian position of 'Philip
Beauchamp' start from the common ground of experience. Religion means the knowledge of certain
facts, which are to be inferred from appropriate evidence. It does not modify the whole system
of thought, but simply adds certain corollaries; and the whole question is whether the corollaries
are or are not proved by legitimate reasoning. Can we discover heaven and hell as we discovered
America? Can observation of nature reveal to us a supernatural world?' The first difficulty
is that the argument for natural theology has to rest upon interference, not upon order, and
therefore comes into conflict with the first principles of scientific procedure. The Deity
is revealed not by the rational but by the arbitrary; and the more the world is explained,
the less the proof that he exists, because the narrower the sphere of his action. Then, as
such a Deity, even if proved, is not proved to be benevolent or moral, we have to rely for
the moral element upon the evidence of 'miracles,' that is, again, of certain interruptions
of order. The scientific tendency more or less embodied in Protestantism, so far as it appealed
to reason or to 'private judgment,' had, moreover, made it necessary to relegate miracles to
a remote period, while denying them at the present. To prove at once that there are no miracles
now, and that there were a few miracles two thousand years ago, was really hopeless. In fact,
the argument had come to be stated in an artificial form which had no real relation to the
facts. If the apostles had been a jury convinced by a careful legal examination of the evidence;
if they had pronounced their verdict, in spite of the knowledge that they would be put to death
for finding it, there would have been some force in Paley's argument. But then they had not.
To assume such an origin for any religion implied a total misconception of the facts. Paley
assumed that the apostles resembled twelve respectable deans of Carlisle solemnly declaring,
in spite of the most appalling threats, that John Wesley had been proved to have risen from
the dead. Paley might plausibly urge that such an event would require a miracle. But, meanwhile,
his argument appeared to rest the whole case for morality and religion upon this narrow and
perilous base. We can only know that it is our interest to be moral if we know of heaven and
hell; and we only know of heaven and hell if we accept the evidence of miracles, and infer
that the worker of miracles had supernatural sources of information. The moral difficulty which
emerges is obvious. The Paley conception of the Deity is, in fact, coincident with Bentham's
conception of the sovereign. He is simply an invisible sovereign, operating by tremendous sanctions.
The sanctions are 'external,' that is to say, pains and pleasures, annexed to conduct by the
volition of the sovereign, not intrinsic consequences of the conduct itself. Such a conception,
thoroughly carried through, makes the relation between religion and morality essentially arbitrary.
Moreover, if with 'Philip Beauchamp' we regard the miracle argument as obviously insufficient,
and consider what are the attributes really attributed to the sovereign, we must admit that
they suggest such a system as he describes rather than the revelation of an all-wise and benevolent
ruler. It is true, as 'Philip Beauchamp' argues, that the system has all the faults of the
worst human legislation; that the punishment is made atrociously--indeed infinitely--severe
to compensate for its uncertainty and remoteness; and that (as he would clearly add), to prevent
it from shocking and stunning the intellect, it is regarded as remissible in consideration
of vicarious suffering. If, then, the religion is really what its dogmas declare, it is easier
to assume that it represents the cunning of a priesthood operating upon the blind fears and
wild imaginations of an inaccessible world; and the ostensible proofs of a divine origin resting
upon miraculous proofs are not worth consideration. It professes to be a sanction to all morality,
but is forced to construct a mythology which outrages all moral considerations. Taken as a
serious statement of fact, the anthropomorphism of the vulgar belief was open to the objections
which Socrates brought against the Pagan mythology. The supreme ruler was virtually represented
as arbitrary, cruel, and despotic.

If we ask the question, whether in point of fact the religion attacked by 'Philip Beauchamp'
fairly represented the religion of the day, we should have, of course, to admit that it was
in one sense a gross caricature. If, that is, we asked what were the real roots of the religious
zeal of Wilberforce and the Evangelicals, or of the philanthropists with whom even James Mill
managed to associate on friendly terms, it would be the height of injustice to assume that
they tried to do good simply from fear of hell and hope of heaven, or that their belief in
Christianity was due to a study of Paley's Evidences. Their real motives were far nobler: genuine
hatred of injustice and sympathy for suffering, joined to the conviction that the sects to
which they belonged were working on the side of justice and happiness; while the creeds which
they accepted were somehow congenial to their best feelings, and enabled them to give utterance
to their deepest emotions. But when they had to give a ground for that belief they could make
no adequate defence. They were better than their ostensible creed, because the connection of
their creed with their morality was really arbitrary and traditional. We must always distinguish
between the causes of strong convictions and the reasons officially assigned for them. The
religious creed, as distinguished from the religious sentiment, was really traditional, and
rested upon the simple fact that it was congenial to the general frame of mind. Its philosophy
meanwhile had become hopelessly incoherent. It wished to be sensible, and admitted in principle
the right of 'private judgment' or rationalism so far as consistent with Protestantism. The
effect had been that in substance it had become Utilitarian and empirical; while it had yet
insisted upon holding on to the essentially irrational element.

The religious tradition was becoming untenable in this sense at the same time as the political
tradition. If radicalism in both were to be effectually resisted, some better foundation must
be found for conservatism. I should be tempted to say that a critical period was approaching,
did I not admit that every period can always be described as critical. In fact, however, thoughtful
people, perceiving on the one hand that the foundations of their creed were shaking, and yet
holding it to be essential to their happiness, began to take a new position. The 'Oxford movement,'
started soon afterwards, implied a conviction that the old Protestant position was as untenable
as the radical asserted. Its adherents attempted to find a living and visible body whose supernatural
authority might maintain the old dogmatic system. Liberal thinkers endeavoured to spiritualise
the creed and prove its essential truths by philosophy, independently of the particular historical
evidence. The popular tendency was to admit in substance that the dogmas most assailed were
in fact immoral: but to put them into the background, or, if necessary, to explain them away.
The stress was to be laid not upon miracles, but upon the moral elevation of Christianity or
the beauty of character of its founder. The 'unsectarian' religion, represented in the most
characteristic writings of the next generation, in Tennyson and Browning, Thackeray and Dickens,
reflects this view. Such men detested the coarse and brutalising dogmas which might be expounded
as the true 'scheme of salvation' by ignorant preachers seeking to rouse sluggish natures to
excitement; but they held to religious conceptions which, as they thought, really underlay
these disturbing images, and which, indeed, could hardly be expressed in any more definite
form than that of a hope or a general attitude of the whole character. The problem seemed to
be whether we shall support a dogmatic system by recognising a living spiritual authority,
or frankly accept reason as the sole authority, and, while explaining away the repulsive dogmas,
try to retain the real essence of religious belief.

II. CONTEMPORARY THOUGHT

If I were writing a general history of opinion, it would be necessary to discuss the views
of Mill's English contemporaries; to note their attitude in regard to the Utilitarian position,
and point out how they prepared the way for the later developments of thought. The Utilitarians
were opposed to a vague sentiment rather than to any definite system. They were a small and
a very unpopular sect. They excited antipathy on all sides. As advocating republicanism, they
were hardly more disliked by the Tories, who directly opposed them, than by the Whigs, who
might be suspected of complicity. As enthusiastic political economists, they were equally detested
by sentimental Radicals, Socialists, and by all who desired a strong government, whether for
the suppression of social evils or the maintenance of social abuses. And now, as suspected
of atheism, they were hated by theologians. But though the Utilitarians were on all sides condemned
and denounced, they were met by no definite and coherent scheme of philosophy. The philosophy
of Stewart and Brown had at least a strong drift in their direction. Though 'political economy'
was denounced in general terms, all who spoke with authority accepted Adam Smith. Their political
opponents generally did not so much oppose their theories as object to theory in general. The
Utilitarian system might be both imperfect and dogmatic; but it had scarcely to contend with
any clear and assignable rival. The dislike of Englishmen to any systematic philosophy, whether
founded upon the national character or chiefly due to special conditions, was still conspicuous
outside of the small Utilitarian camp.

To discover, therefore, the true position of contemporary opinion, we should have to look elsewhere.
Instead of seeking for the philosophers who did not exist, we should have to examine the men
of letters who expressed the general tendencies. In Germany, philosophical theories may be
held to represent the true drift of the national mind, and a historian of German thought would
inquire into the various systems elaborated by professors of philosophy. He would at least
be in no want of materials for definite logical statements. In England, there was no such intellectual
movement. There we should have to consider poetry and literature; to read Wordsworth and Coleridge,
Scott and Byron and Shelley, if we would know what men were really thinking and feeling. The
difficulty is, of course, that none of these men, unless Coleridge be an exception, had any
conscious or systematic philosophy. We can only ask, therefore, what they would have said if
they had been requested to justify their views by abstract reasoning; and that is a rather
conjectural and indefinite enterprise. It lies, fortunately, outside of my field; and it will
be enough if I try to suggest one or two sufficiently vague hints. In the first place, the
contrast between the Utilitarians and their opponents may almost be identified with the contrast
between the prosaic and the poetical aspects of the world in general. Bentham frankly objected
to poetry in general. It proved nothing. The true Utilitarian was the man who held on to fact,
and to nothing but the barest, most naked and unadorned fact. Poetry in general came within
the sweep of his denunciations of 'sentimentalism' and 'vague generalities.' It was the 'production
of a rude age'; the silly jingling which might be suitable to savages, but was needless for
the grown-up man, and was destined to disappear along with the whole rubbish of mythology and
superstition in whose service it had been enlisted. There is indeed a natural sympathy between
any serious view of life and a distrust of the æsthetic tendencies. Theologians of many different
types have condemned men for dallying with the merely pleasurable, when they ought to be preoccupied
with the great ethical problems or the safety of their souls. James Mill had enough of the
old Puritan in him to sympathise with Carlyle's aspiration, 'May the devil fly away with the
fine arts!' To such men it was difficult to distinguish between fiction and lying; and if some
concession might be made to human weakness, poets and novelists might supply the relaxations
and serve to fill up the intervals of life, but must be sternly excluded if they tried to intrude
into serious studies. Somehow love of the beautiful only interfered with the scientific investigation
of hard facts.

Poets, indeed, may take the side of reform, or may perhaps be naturally expected to take that
side. The idealist and the dreamer should be attracted most powerfully by the visions of a
better world and the restoration of the golden age. Shelley was among the most enthusiastic
prophets of the coming era. His words, he hoped, were to be 'the trumpet of a prophecy' to
'unawakened earth.' Shelley had sat at the feet of Godwin, and represented that vague metaphysical
dreaming to which the Utilitarians were radically hostile. To the literary critic, Shelley's
power is the more remarkable because from a flimsy philosophy he span an imaginative tissue
of such magical and marvellous beauty. But Shelley dwelt in an ethereal region, where ordinary
beings found breathing difficult. There facts seemed to dissolve into thin air instead of supplying
a solid and substantial base. His idealism meant unreality. His 'trumpet' did not in fact stimulate
the mass of mankind, and his fame at this period was confined to a few young gentlemen of literary
refinement. The man who had really stirred the world was Byron; and if the decline of Byron's
fame has resulted partly from real defects, it is partly due also to the fact that his poetry
was so admirably adapted to his contemporaries. Byron at least could see facts as clearly as
any Utilitarian, though fact coloured by intense passion. He, like the Utilitarians, hated
solemn platitudes and hypocritical conventions. I have noticed the point at which he came into
contact with Bentham's disciples. His pathetic death shortly afterwards excited a singularly
strong movement of sympathy. Byron was the Mirabeau of English literature, in so far as he
was at once a thorough aristocrat and a strong revolutionist. He had the qualification of a
true satirist. His fate was at discord with his character. He was proud of his order, and yet
despised its actual leaders. He was ready alternately to boast of his vices and to be conscious
that they were degrading. He shocked the respectable world by mocking 'Satanically,' as they
held, at moral conventions, and yet rather denounced the hypocrisy and the heartlessness of
precisians than insulted the real affections. He covered sympathy with human suffering under
a mask of misanthropy, and attacked war and oppression in the character of a reckless outlaw.
Full of the affectation of a 'dandy,' he was yet rousing all Europe by a cry of pure sentimentalism.
It would be absurd to attribute any definite doctrine to Byron. His scepticism in religious
matters was merely part of a general revolt against respectability. What he illustrates is
the vague but profound revolutionary sentiment which indicated a belief that the world seemed
to be out of joint, and a vehement protest against the selfish and stolid conservatism which
fancied that the old order could be preserved in all its fossil institutions and corresponding
dogmas.

