At the west side they were to invite Mrs. Callan to join their shopping trip, but in any case
they were to borrow a horse and buckboard. Neither Mrs. Callan nor the buckboard was available,
but they were welcome to the horse. So Annette was made comfortable on a bundle of blankets,
and chattered incessantly while Rolf walked alongside with the grave interest and superiority
of a much older brother. So they crossed the five-mile portage and came to Warren's store.
Nervous and excited, with sparkling eyes, Annette laid down her marten skin, received five
dollars, and set about the tremendous task of selecting her first dress of really, truly calico
print; and Rolf realized that the joy he had found in his new rifle was a very small affair,
compared with the epoch-making, soul-filling, life-absorbing, unspeakable, and cataclysmal
bliss that a small girl can have in her first chance of unfettered action in choice of a cotton
print.

"Beautiful?" How can mere words do justice to masses of yellow corn, mixed recklessly with
green and scarlet poppies on a bright blue ground. No, you should have seen Annette's dress,
or you cannot expect to get the adequate thrill. And when they found that there was enough
cash left over to add a red cotton parasol to the glorious spoils, every one there beamed in
a sort of friendly joy, and the trader, carried away by the emotions of the hour, contributed
a set of buttons of shining brass.

Warren kept a "meal house," which phrase was a ruse that saved him from a burdensome hospitality.
Determined to do it all in the best style, Rolf took Annette to the meal-house table. She was
deeply awed by the grandeur of a tablecloth and white plates, but every one was kind.

Warren, talking to a stranger opposite, and evidently resuming a subject they had discussed, said:

"Yes, I'd like to send the hull lot down to Albany this week, if I could get another man for
the canoe."

Rolf was interested at once and said: "What wages are you offering?"

"Twenty-five dollars and board."

"How will I do?"

"Well," said Warren, as though thinking it over: "I dunno but ye would. Could ye go to-morrow?"

"Yes, indeed, for one month."

"All right, it's a bargain."

And so Rolf took the plunge that influenced his whole life.

But Annette whispered gleefully and excitedly, "May I have some of that, and that?" pointing
to every strange food she could see, and got them all.

After noon they set out on their return journey, Annette clutching her prizes, and prattling
incessantly, while Rolf walked alongside, thinking deeply, replying to her chatter, but depressed
by the thought of good-bye tomorrow. He was aroused at length by a scraping sound overhead
and a sharp reprimand, "Rolf, you'll tear my new parasol, if you don't lead the horse better."

By two o'clock they were at Callan's. Another hour and they had crossed the lake, and Annette,
shrill with joy, was displaying her treasures to the wonder and envy of her kin.

Making a dress was a simple matter in those and Marta promised: "Yah, soom day ven I one have,
shall I it sew." Meanwhile, Annette was quaffing deep, soul-satisfying draughts in the mere
contempt of the yellow, red, green, and blue glories in which was soon to appear in public.
And when the bed came, she fell asleep holding the dress-goods stuff in arms, and with the
red parasol spread above her head, tired out, but inexpressibly happy.

Chapter 53. Travelling to the Great City

     He's a bad failure that ain't king in some little corner.
     --Sayings of Sylvanne Sylvanne

The children were not astir when Rolf was off in the morning. He caught a glimpse of Annette,
still asleep under the red parasol, but the dress goods and the brass buttons had fallen to
the floor. He stepped into the canoe. The dead calm of early morning was on the water, and
the little craft went skimming and wimpling across. In half an hour it was beached at Callan's.
In a little more than an hour's jog and stride he was at Warren's, ready for work. As he marched
in, strong and brisk, his colour up, his blue eyes kindled with the thought of seeing Albany,
the trader could not help being struck by him, especially when he remembered each of their
meetings--meetings in which he discerned a keen, young mind of good judgment, one that could
decide quickly.

Gazing at the lithe, red-checked lad, he said: "Say, Rolf, air ye an Injun??"

"No, sir."

"Air ye a half-breed?"

"No, I'm a Yank; my name is Kittering; born and bred in Redding, Connecticut."

"Well, I swan, ye look it. At fust I took ye fur an Injun; ye did look dark (and Rolf laughed
inside, as he thought of that butternut dye), but I'm bound to say we're glad yer white."

"Here, Bill, this is Rolf, Rolf Kittering, he'll go with ye to Albany." Bill, a loose-jointed,
middle-aged, flat-footed, large-handed, semi-loafer, with keen gray eyes, looked up from a
bundle he was roping.

Then Warren took Rolf aside and explained: "I'm sending down all my fur this trip. There's
ten bales of sixty pounds each, pretty near my hull fortune. I want it took straight to Vandam's,
and, night or day, don't leave it till ye git it there. He's close to the dock. I'm telling
ye this for two reasons: The river's swarming with pirates and sneaks. They'd like nothing
better than to get away with a five-hundred-dollar bundle of fur; and, next, while Bill is
A1 on the river and true as steel, he's awful weak on the liquor; goes crazy, once it's in
him. And I notice you've always refused it here. So don't stop at Troy, an' when ye get to
Albany go straight past there to Vandam's. You'll have a letter that'll explain, and he'll
supply the goods yer to bring back. He's a sort of a partner, and orders from him is same as
from me.

"I suppose I ought to go myself, but this is the time all the fur is coming in here, an' I
must be on hand to do the dickering, and there's too much much to risk it any longer in the
storehouse."

"Suppose," said Rolf, "Bill wants to stop at Troy?"

"He won't. He's all right, given he's sober. I've give him the letter."

"Couldn't you give me the letter, in case?"

"Law, Bill'd get mad and quit."

"He'll never know."

"That's so; I will." So when they paddled away, Bill had an important letter of instructions
ostentatiously tucked in his outer pocket. Rolf, unknown to any one else but Warren, had a
duplicate, wrapped in waterproof, hidden in an inside pocket.

Bill was A1 on the river; a kind and gentle old woodman, much stronger than he looked. He knew
the value of fur and the danger of wetting it, so he took no chances in doubtful rapids. This
meant many portages and much hard labour.

I wonder if the world realizes the hard labour of the portage or carry? Let any man who seeks
for light, take a fifty-pound sack of flour on his shoulders and walk a quarter of a mile on
level ground in cool weather. Unless he is in training, he will find it a heavy burden long
before he is half-way. Suppose, instead of a flour sack, the burden has sharp angles; the bearer
is soon in torture. Suppose the weight carried be double; then the strain is far more than
doubled. Suppose, finally, the road be not a quarter mile but a mile, and not on level but
through swamps, over rocks, logs, and roots, and the weather not cool, but suffocating summer
weather in the woods, with mosquitoes boring into every exposed part, while both hands are
occupied, steadying the burden or holding on to branches for help up steep places--and then
he will have some idea of the horror of the portage; and there were many of these, each one
calling for six loaded and five light trips for each canoe-man. What wonder that men will often
take chances in some fierce rapid, rather than to make a long carry through the fly-infested woods.

It was weighty evidence of Bill's fidelity that again and again they made a portage around
rapids he had often run, because in the present case he was in sacred trust of that much prized
commodity--fur.

Eighty miles they called it from Warren's to Albany, but there were many halts and carries
which meant long delay, and a whole week was covered before Bill and Rolf had passed the settlements
of Glens Falls, Fort Edward, and Schuylerville, and guided their heavily laden canoe on the
tranquil river, past the little town of Troy. Loafers hailed them from the bank, but Bill turned
a deaf ear to all temptation; and they pushed on happy in the thought that now their troubles
were over; the last rapid was past; the broad, smooth waters extended to their port.

Chapter 54. Albany

Only a man who in his youth has come at last in sight of some great city he had dreamed of
all his life and longed to see, can enter into Rolf's feelings as they swept around the big
bend, and Albany--Albany, hove in view. Albany, the first chartered city of the United States;
Albany, the capital of all the Empire State; Albany, the thriving metropolis with nearly six
thousand living human souls; Albany with its State House, beautiful and dignified, looking
down the mighty Hudson highway that led to the open sea.

Rolf knew his Bible, and now he somewhat realized the feelings of St. Paul on that historic
day when his life-long dream came true, when first he neared the Eternal City--when at last
he glimpsed the towers of imperial, splendid Rome.

The long-strung docks were massed and webbed with ship rigging; the water was livened with
boats and canoes; the wooden warehouses back of the docks were overtopped by wooden houses
in tiers, until high above them all the Capitol itself was the fitting climax.

Rolf knew something of shipping, and amid all the massed boats his eyes fell on a strange,
square-looking craft with a huge water-wheel on each side. Then, swinging into better view,
he read her name, the Clermont, and knew that this was the famous Fulton steamer, the first
of the steamboat age.

But Bill was swamped by no such emotion. Albany, Hudson, Clermont, and all, were familiar stories
to him and he stolidly headed the canoe for the dock he knew of old.

Loafers roosting on the snubbing posts hailed him, at first with raillery; but, coming nearer,
he was recognized. "Hello, Bill; back again? Glad to see you," and there was superabundant
help to land the canoe.

"Wall, wall, wall, so it's really you," said the touter of a fur house, in extremely friendly
voice; "come in now and we'll hev a drink."

"No, sir-ree," said Bill decisively, "I don't drink till business is done."

"Wall, now, Bill, here's Van Roost's not ten steps away an' he hez tapped the finest bar'l
in years."

"No, I tell ye, I'm not drinking--now."

"Wall, all right, ye know yer own business. I thought maybe ye'd be glad to see us."

"Well, ain't I?"

"Hello, Bill," and Bill's fat brother-in-law came up. "Thus does me good, an' yer sister is
spilin' to see ye. We'll hev one on this."

"No, Sam, I ain't drinkin'; I've got biz to tend."

"Wall, hev just one to clear yer head. Then settle yer business and come back to us."

So Bill went to have one to clear his head. "I'll be back in two minutes, Rolf," but Rolf saw
him no more for many days.

"You better come along, cub," called out a red-nosed member of the group. But Rolf shook his head.

"Here, I'll help you git them ashore," volunteered an effusive stranger, with one eye.

"I don't want help."

"How are ye gain' to handle 'em alone?"

"Well, there's one thing I'd be glad to have ye do; that is, go up there and bring Peter Vandam."

"I'll watch yer stuff while you go."

"No, I can't leave." "Then go to blazes; d'yte take me for yer errand boy?" And Rolf was left
alone.

He was green at the business, but already he was realizing the power of that word fur and the
importance of the peltry trade. Fur was the one valued product of the wilderness that only
the hunter could bring. The merchants of the world were as greedy for fur as for gold, and
far more so than for precious stones.

It was a commodity so light that, even in those days, a hundred weight of fur might range in
value from one hundred to five thousand dollars, so that a man with a pack of fine furs was
a capitalist. The profits of the business were good for trapper, very large for the trader,
who doubled his first gain by paying in trade; but they were huge for the Albany middleman,
and colossal for the New Yorker who shipped to London.

With such allurements, it was small wonder that more country was explored and opened for fur
than for settlement or even for gold; and there were more serious crimes and high-handed robberies
over the right to trade a few furs than over any other legitimate business. These things were
new to Rolf within the year, but he was learning the lesson, and Warren's remarks about fur
stuck in his memory with growing value. Every incident since the trip began had given them
new points.

The morning passed without sign of Bill; so, when in the afternoon, some bare-legged boys came
along, Rolf said to them: "Do any of ye know where Peter Vandam's house is?"

"Yeh, that's it right there," and they pointed to a large log house less than a hundred yards away.

"Do ye know him?"

"Yeh, he's my paw," said a sun-bleached freckle-face.

"If you bring him here right away, I'll give you a dime. Tell him I'm from Warren's with a cargo."

The dusty stampede that followed was like that of a mustang herd, for a dime was a dime in
those days. And very soon, a tall, ruddy man appeared at the dock. He was a Dutchman in name
only. At first sight he was much like the other loafers, but was bigger, and had a more business-like
air when observed near at hand.

"Are you from Warren's?"

"Yes, sir."

"Alone?"

"No, sir. I came with Bill Bymus. But he went off early this morning; I haven't seen him since.
I'm afraid he's in trouble."

"Where'd he go?"

"In there with some friends."

"Ha, just like him; he's in trouble all right. He'll be no good for a week. Last time he came
near losing all our stuff. Now let's see what ye've got."

"Are you Mr. Peter Vandam?"

"Of course I am."

Still Rolf looked doubtful. There was a small group around, and Rolf heard several voices,
"Yes, this is Peter; ye needn't a-worry." But Rolf knew none of the speakers. His look of puzzlement
at first annoyed then tickled the Dutchman, who exploded into a hearty guffaw.

"Wall, wall, you sure think ill of us. Here, now look at that," and he drew out a bundle of
letters addressed to Master Peter Vandam. Then he displayed a gold watch inscribed on the back
"Peter Vandam"; next he showed a fob seal with a scroll and an inscription, "Petrus Vandamus";
then he turned to a youngster and said, "Run, there is the Reverend Dr. Powellus, he may help
us"; so the black-garbed, knee-breached, shovel-hatted clergyman came and pompously said: "Yes,
my young friend, without doubt you may rest assured that this is our very estimable parishioner,
Master Peter Vandam; a man well accounted in the world of trade."

"And now," said Peter, "with the help of my birth-register and marriage-certificate, which
will be placed at your service with all possible haste, I hope I may win your recognition."
The situation, at first tense, had become more and more funny, and the bystanders laughed aloud.
Rolf rose to it, and smiling said slowly, "I am inclined to think that you must be Master Peter
Vandam, of Albany. If that's so, this letter is for you, also this cargo." And so the delivery
was made.

