Ab's father and mother rather approved of Oak. They even went so far as to consent that Ab
might pay a return visit upon the succeeding day, though it was stipulated that the father--and
this was a demand the mother made--should accompany the boy upon most of the journey. One-Ear
knew Oak's father very well. Oak's father, Stripe-Face, was a man of standing in the widely-scattered
community. Stripe-Face was so called because in a casual, and, on his part, altogether uninvited
encounter with a cave bear when he was a young man, a sweep of the claws of his adversary had
plowed furrows down one cheek, leaving scars thereafter which were livid streaks. One-Ear and
Stripe-Face were good friends. Sometimes they hunted together; they had fought together, and
it was nothing out of the way, and but natural, that Ab and Oak should become companions. So
it came that One-Ear went across the forest with his boy the next day and visited the cave
of Stripe-Face, and that the two young cubs went out together buoyant and in conquering mood,
while the grown men planned something for their own advantage. Certainly the boys matched well.
A finer pair of youngsters of eight or nine years of age could hardly be imagined than these
two who sallied forth that afternoon. They send very fine boys nowadays to our great high schools
in the United States, and to Rugby and Eaton and Harrow in England, but never went forth a
finer pair to learn things. No smattering of letters or lore of any printed sort had these
rugged youths, but their eyes were piercing as those of the eagle, the grip of their hands
was strong, their pace was swift when they ran upon the ground and their course almost as rapid
when they swung along the treetops. They were self-possessed and ready and alert and prepared
to pass an examination for admission to any university of the time; that is, to any of Nature's
universities, where matriculation depended upon prompt conception of existing dangers and the
ways of avoiding them, and of all adroitness in attainments which gave food and shelter and
safety. Eh! but they were a gallant pair, these two young gentlemen who burst forth, owning
the world entirely and feeling a serene confidence in their ability, united, to maintain their
rights. And their ambitions soon took a definite turn. They decided that they must kill a horse!

The wild horse of the time, already referred to as esteemed for his edible qualities, was,
in the opinion of the cave people, but of moderate value otherwise. He was abundant, ranging
in herds of hundreds along the pampas of the great Thames valley, and furnished forth abundant
food for man as well as the wild beasts, when they could capture him. His skin, though, was
not counted of much worth. Its short hair afforded little warmth in cloak or breech-clout,
and the tanned pelt became hard and uncomfortable when it dried after a wetting. Still, there
were various uses for this horse's hide. It made fine strings and thongs, and the beast's flesh,
as has been said, was a staple of the larder. The first great resolve of Ab and Oak, these
two gallant soldiers of fortune, was that, alone and unaided, they would circumvent and slay
one of these wild horses, thereby astonishing their respective families, at the same time gaining
the means for filling the stomachs of those families to repletion, and altogether covering
themselves with glory. 

The ultimate aim of all love-affairs, whether they be of a tragic or comic nature, is really
more important than all other aims in human life, and therefore is perfectly deserving of
that profound seriousness with which it is pursued.
 Not so easy a task as it might
seem was that which Ab and Oak had resolved upon. There must be some elaborate device to attain
their end, but they were confident. They had noted often what older hunters did, and they felt
themselves as good as anybody. They plotted long and earnestly and even made a mental distribution
of their quarry, deciding what should be done with its skin and with its meat, far in advance
of any determination upon a plan for its capture and destruction. They were boys.

There was no objection from the parents. They knew that the boys must learn to become hunters,
and if the two were not now capable of taking care of themselves in the wood, then they were
but disappointing offspring. Consent secured, the boys acted entirely upon their own responsibility,
and, to make their subsequent plans clearer, it may be well to explain a little more of the
geography of the region. The cave of Ab was on the north side of the stream, where the rocky
banks came close together with a little beach at either side, and the cave of Oak was perhaps
a mile to the westward, on the same side of the stream and with very similar surroundings.
On the south side of the river, opposite the high banks between the two caves, the land was
a prairie valley reaching far away. On the north side as well there was at one place a little
valley, but it reached back only a few hundred yards from the river and was surrounded by the
forest-crowned hills. The close standing oaks and beeches afforded, in emergency, a highway
among their ranches, and along this pathway the boys were comparatively safe. Either could
climb a tree at any time, and of the animals that were dangerous in the treetops there were
but few; in fact, there was only one of note, a tawny, cat-like creature, not numerous, and
resembling the lynx of the present day. Almost in the midst of the little plain or valley,
on the north side of the river, rose a clump of trees, and in this the two boys saw means afforded
them for a realization of their hopes. The wild horses fed daily in the valley to the north,
as in the greater one to the south of the river. But there also, in the high grass, as upon
the south, sometimes lurked the great beasts of prey, and to be far away from a tree upon the
plain was an unsafe thing for a cave man. From the forest edge to the clump of trees was not
more than two minutes' rush for a vigorous boy and it was this fact which suggested to the
youths their plan of capture of the horse.

The homes of the cave men were located, when possible, where the refuge of safety overhung
closely the river's bank, and where the non-climbing animals must pass along beneath them,
but, even at that period of few men and abundant animal life, there had developed an acuteness
among the weaker beasts, and they had learned to avoid certain paths that had proved fatal
to their brethren. They were numerous in the plains and comparatively careless there, relying
upon their speed to escape more dangerous wild beasts, but they passed rarely beneath the ledges,
where a weighty rock dropped suddenly meant certain death. It was not a task entirely easy
for the cave men to have meat with regularity, flush as was the life about them. New devices
must be resorted to, and Ab and Oak were about to employ one not infrequently successful.

The clam of the period, particularly the clam along this reach of the upper Thames, was a marvel
in his make-up. He was as large as he was luscious, as abundant as he was both and was a great
feature in the food supply of the time. Not merely was he a feature in the food supply, but
in a mechanical way, and the first object sought by the boys, after their plan had been agreed
upon, was the shell of the great clam. They had no difficulty in securing what they wanted,
for strewn all about each cave were the big shells in abundance. Sharp-edged, firm-backed,
one of these shells made an admirable little shovel, something with which to cut the turf and
throw up the soil, a most useful implement in the hands of the river haunting people. The idea
of the youngsters was simply this: Their rendezvous should be at that point in the forest nearest
the clump of trees standing solitary in the valley below. They would select the safest hours
and then from the high ground make a sudden dash to the tree clump. They would be watchful,
of course, and seek to avoid the class of animals for whom boys made admirable luncheon. Once
at the clump of trees and safely ensconced among the branches, they could determine wisely
upon the next step in their adventure. They were very knowing, these young men, for they had
observed their elders. What they wanted to do, what was the end and aim of all this recklessness,
was to dig a pit in this rich valley land close to the clump of trees, a pit say some ten feet
in length by six feet in breadth and seven or eight feet in depth. That meant a gigantic labor.
Gillian, of "The Toilers of the Sea," assigned to himself hardly a greater task. These were
boys of the cave kind and must, perforce, conduct themselves originally. As to the details
of the plan, well, they were only vague, as yet, but rapidly assuming a form more definite.

The first thing essential for the boys was to reach the clump of trees. It was just before
noon one day when they swung together on a tree branch sweeping nearly to the ground, and at
a point upon the hill directly opposite the clump. This was the time selected for their first
dash. They studied every square yard of the long grass of the little valley with anxious eyes.
In the distance was feeding a small drove of wild horses and, farther away, close by the river
side, upreared occasionally what might be the antlers of the great elk of the period. Between
the boys and the clump of trees there was no movement of the grass, nor any sign of life. They
could discern no trace of any lurking beast.

"Are you afraid?" asked Ab.

"Not if we run together."

"All right," said Ab; "let's go it with a rush."

The slim brown bodies dropped lightly to the ground together, each of the boys clasping one
of the clamshells. Side by side they darted down the slope and across through the deep grass
until the clump of trees was reached, when, like two young apes, they scrambled into the safety
of the branches.

The tree up which they had clambered was the largest of the group and of dense foliage. It
was one of the huge conifers of the age, but its branches extended to within perhaps thirty
feet of the ground, and from the greatest of these side branches reached out, growing so close
together as to make almost a platform. It was but the work of a half hour for these boys, with
their arboreal gifts, to twine additional limbs together and to construct for themselves a
solid nest and lookout where they might rest at ease, at a distance above the greatest leap
of any beast existing. In this nest they curled themselves down and, after much clucking debate,
formulated their plan of operation. Only one boy should dig at a time, the other must remain
in the nest as a lookout.

Swift to act in those days were men, because necessity had made it a habit to them, and swifter
still, as a matter of course, were impulsive boys. Their tree nest fairly made, work, they
decided, must begin at once. The only point to be determined upon was regarding the location
of the pit. There was a tempting spread of green herbage some hundred feet to the north and
east of the tree, a place where the grass was high but not so high as it was elsewhere. It
had been grazed already by the wandering horses and it was likely that they would visit the
tempting area again. There, it was finally settled, should the pit be dug. It was quite a distance
from the tree, but the increased chances of securing a wild horse by making the pit in that
particular place more than offset, in the estimation of the boys, the added danger of a longer
run for safety in an emergency. The only question remaining was as to who should do the first
digging and who be the first lookout? There was a violent debate upon this subject.

"I will go and dig and you shall keep watch," said Oak.

"No, I'll dig and you shall watch," was Ab's response. "I can run faster than you."

Oak hesitated and was reluctant. He was sturdy, this young gentleman, but Ab possessed, somehow,
the mastering spirit. It was settled finally that Ab should dig and Oak should watch. And so
Ab slid down the tree, clamshell in hand, and began laboring vigorously at the spot agreed upon.

It was not a difficult task for a strong boy to cut through tough grass roots with the keen
edge of the clamshell. He outlined roughly and rapidly the boundaries of the pit to be dug
and then began chopping out sods just as the workman preparing to garnish some park or lawn
begins his work to-day. Meanwhile, Oak, all eyes, was peering in every direction. His place
was one of great responsibility, and he recognized the fact. It was a tremendous moment for
the youngsters.

CHAPTER VI.

A DANGEROUS VISITOR.

It was not alone necessary for the plans of Ab and Oak that there should be made a deep hole
in the ground. It was quite as essential for their purposes that the earth removed should not
be visible upon the adjacent surface. The location of the pit, as has been explained, was some
yards to the northeast of the tree in which the lookout had been made. A few yards southwest
of the tree was a slight declivity and damp hollow, for from that point the land sloped, in
a reed-grown marsh toward the river. It was decided to throw into this marsh all the excavated
soil, and so, when Ab had outlined the pit and cut up its surface into sods, he carried them
one by one to the bank and cast them down among the reeds where the water still made little
puddles. In time of flood the river spread out into a lake, reaching even as far as here. The
sod removed, there was exposed a rectangle of black soil, for the earth was of alluvial deposit
and easy of digging. Shellful after shellful of the dirt did Ab carry from where the pit was
to be, trotting patiently back and forth, but the work was wearisome and there was a great
waste of energy. It was Oak who gave an inspiration.

"We must carry more at a time," he called out. And then he tossed down to Ab a wolfskin which
had been given him by his father as a protection on cold nights and which he had brought along,
tied about his waist, quite incidentally, for, ordinarily, these boys wore no clothing in warm
weather. Clothing, in the cave time, appertained only to manhood and womanhood, save in winter.
But Oak had brought the skin along because he had noticed a vast acorn crop upon his way to
and from the rendezvous and had in mind to carry back to his own home cave some of the nuts.
The pelt was now to serve an immediately useful purpose.

Spreading the skin upon the grass beside him, Ab heaped it with the dirt until there had accumulated
as much as he could carry, when, gathering the corners together, he struggled with the enclosed
load manfully to the bank and spilled it down into the morass. The digging went on rapidly
until Ab, out of breath and tired, threw down the skin and climbed into the treetop and became
the watchman, while Oak assumed his labor. So they worked alternately in treetop and upon the
ground until the sun's rays shot red and slanting from the west. Wiser than to linger until
dusk had too far deepened were these youngsters of the period. The clamshells were left in
the pit. The lookout above declared nothing in sight, then slid to the ground and joined his
friend, and another dash was made to the hill and the safety of its treetops. It was in great
spirits that the boys separated to seek their respective homes. They felt that they were personages
of consequence. They had no doubt of the success of the enterprise in which they had embarked,
and the next day found them together again at an early hour, when the digging was enthusiastically
resumed.

Many a load of dirt was carried on the second day from the pit to the marsh's edge, and only
once did the lookout have occasion to suggest to his working companion that he had better climb
the tree. A movement in the high grass some hundred yards away had aroused suspicion; some
wild animal had passed, but, whatever it was, it did not approach the clump of trees and work
was resumed at once. When dusk came the moist black soil found in the pit had all been carried
away and the boys had reached, to their intense disgust, a stratum of hard packed gravel. That
meant infinitely more difficult work for them and the use of some new utensil.

There was nothing daunting in the new problem. When it came to the mere matter of securing
a tool for digging the hard gravel, both Ab and Oak were easily at home. The cave dwellers,
haunting the river side for centuries, had learned how to deal with gravel, and when Ab returned
to the scene the next day he brought with him a sturdy oaken stave some six feet in length,
sharpened to a point and hardened in the fire until it was almost iron-like in its quality.
Plunged into the gravel as far as the force of a blow could drive it, and pulled backward with
the leverage obtained, the gravel was loosened and pried upward either in masses which could
be lifted out entire, or so crumbled that it could be easily dished out with the clamshell.
The work went on more slowly, but not less steadily nor hopefully than on the days preceding,
and, for some time, was uninterrupted by any striking incident. The boys were becoming buoyant.
They decided that the grassy valley was almost uninfested by things dangerous. They became
reckless sometimes, and would work in the pit together. As a rule, though, they were cautious--this
was an inherent and necessary quality of a cave being--and it was well for them that it was
so, for when an emergency came only one of them was in the pit, while the other was aloft in
the lookout and alert.

It was about three o'clock one afternoon when Ab, whose turn it chanced to be, was working
valiantly in the pit, while Oak, all eyes, was perched aloft. Suddenly there came from the
treetop a yell which was no boyish expression of exuberance of spirits. It was something which
made Ab leap from the excavation as he heard it and reach the side of Oak as the latter came
literally tumbling down the bole of the tree of watching.

"Run!" Oak said, and the two darted across the valley and reached the forest and clambered
into safe hiding among the clustering branches. Then, in the intervals between his gasping
breath, Oak managed to again articulate a word:

"Look!" he said.

Ab looked and, in an instant, realized how wise had been Oak's alarming cry and how well it
was for them that they were so distant from the clump of trees so near the river. What he saw
was that which would have made the boys' fathers flee as swiftly had they been in their children's
place. Yet what Ab looked upon was only a waving, in sinuous regularity, of the rushes between
the tree clump and the river and the lifting of a head some ten or fifteen feet above the reed-tops.
What had so alarmed the boys was what would have disturbed a whole tribe of their kinsmen,
even though they had chanced to be assembled, armed to the teeth with such weapons as they
then possessed. What they saw was not of the common. Very rarely indeed, along the Thames,
had occurred such an invasion. The father of Oak had never seen the thing at all, and the father
of Ab had seen it but once, and that many years before. It was the great serpent of the seas!

Safely concealed in the branches of a tree overlooking the little valley, the boys soon recovered
their normal breathing capacity and were able to converse again. Not more than a couple of
minutes, at the utmost, had passed between their departure from their place of labor and their
establishment in this same tree. The creature which had so alarmed them was still gliding swiftly
across the morass between the lowland and the river. It came forward through the marsh undeviatingly
toward the tree clump, the tall reeds quivering as it passed, but its approach indicated by
no sound or other token of disturbance. The slight bank reached, there was uplifted a great
serpent head, and then, without hesitation, the monster swept forward to the trees and soon
hung dangling from the branches of the largest one, its great coils twined loosely about trunk
and limb, its head swinging gently back and forth just below the lower branch. It was a serpent
at least sixty feet in length, and two feet or more in breadth at its huge middle. It was queerly
but not brilliantly spotted, and its head was very nearly that of the anaconda of to-day. Already
the sea-serpent had become amphibious. It had already acquired the knowledge it has transmitted
to the anaconda, that it might leave the stream, and, from some vantage point upon the shore,
find more surely a victim than in the waters of the sea or river. This monster serpent was
but waiting for the advent of any land animal, save perhaps those so great as the mammoth or
the great elk, or, possibly, even the cave bear or the cave tiger. The mammoth was, of course,
an impossibility, even to the sea-serpent. The elk, with its size and vast antlers, was, to
put it at the mildest, a perplexing thing to swallow. The rhinoceros was dangerous, and as
for the cave bear and the cave tiger, they were uncomfortable customers for anything alive.
But there were the cattle, the aurochs and the urus, and the little horses and deer, and wild
hog and a score of other creatures which, in the estimation of the sea-serpent, were extremely
edible. A tidbit to the serpent was a man, but he did not get one in half a century.

Not long did the boys remain even in a harborage so distant. Each fled homeward with his story.

CHAPTER VII.

THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS.

It was with scant breath, when they reached their respective caves, that the boys told the
story of the dread which had invaded the marsh-land. What they reported was no light event
and, the next morning, their fathers were with them in the treetop at the safe distance which
the wooded crest afforded and watching with apprehensive eyes the movements of the monster
settled in the rugged valley tree. There was slight movement to note. Coiled easily around
the bole, just above where the branches began, and resting a portion of its body upon a thick,
extending limb, its head and perhaps ten or fifteen feet of its length swinging downward, the
great serpent still hung awaiting its prey, ready to launch itself upon any hapless victim
which might come within its reach. That its appetite would soon be gratified admitted of little
doubt. Profiting by the absence of the boys, who while at work made no effort to conceal themselves,
groups of wild horses were already feeding in the lowlands, and the elk and wild ox were visible
here and there. The group in the treetop on the crest realized that it had business on hand.
The sea-serpent was a terror to the cave people, and when one appeared to haunt the river the
word was swiftly spread, and they gathered to accomplish its end if possible. With warnings
to the boys they left behind them, the fathers sped away in different directions, one up, the
other down, the river's bank, Stripe-Face to seek the help of some of the cave people and One-Ear
to arouse the Shell people, as they were called, whose home was beside a creek some miles below.
Into the home of the little colony One-Ear went swinging a little later, demanding to see the
head man of the fishing village, and there ensued an earnest conversation of short sentences,
but one which caused immediate commotion. To the hill dwellers the rare advent of a sea-serpent
was comparatively a small matter, but it was a serious thing to the Shell folk. The sea-serpent
might come up the creek and be among them at any moment, ravaging their community. The Shell
people were grateful for the warning, but there were few of them at home, and less than a dozen
could be mustered to go with One-Ear to the rendezvous.

They were too late, the hardy people who came up to assail the serpent, because the serpent
had not waited for them. The two boys roosting in the treetop on the height had beheld what
was not pleasant to look upon, for they had seen a yearling of the aurochs enveloped by the
thing, which whipped down suddenly from the branches, and the crushed quadruped had been swallowed
in the serpent's way. But the dinner which might suffice it for weeks had not, in all entirety,
the effect upon it which would follow the swallowing of a wild deer by its degenerate descendants
of the Amazonian or Indian forests.

The serpent did not lie a listless mass, helplessly digesting the product of the tragedy upon
the spot of its occurrence, but crawled away slowly through the reeds, and instinctively to
the water, into which it slid with scarce a splash, and then went drifting lazily away upon
the current toward the sea. It had been years since one of these big water serpents had invaded
the river at such a distance from its mouth and never came another up so far. There were causes
promoting rapidly the extinction of their dreadful kind.

Three or four days were required before Ab and Oak realized, after what had taken place, that
there were in the community any more important personages than they, and that they had work
before them, if they were to continue in their glorious career. When everyday matters finally
asserted themselves, there was their pit not yet completed. Because of their absence, a greater
aggregation of beasts was feeding in the little valley. Not only the aurochs, the ancient bison,
the urus, the progenitor of the horned cattle of to-day, wild horse and great elk and reindeer
were seen within short distances from each other, but the big, hairy rhinoceros of the time
was crossing the valley again and rioting in its herbage or wallowing in the pools where the
valley dipped downward to the marsh. The mammoth with its young had swung clumsily across the
area of rich feed, and, lurking in its train, eyeing hungrily and bloodthirstily the mammoth's
calf, had crept the great cave tiger. The monster cave bear had shambled through the high grass,
seeking some small food in default of that which might follow the conquest of a beast of size.
The uncomely hyenas had gone slinking here and there and had found something worthy their foul
appetite. All this change had come because the two boys, being boys and full of importance,
had neglected their undertaking for about a week and had talked each in his own home with an
air intended to be imposing, and had met each other with much dignity of bearing, at their
favorite perching-place in the treetop on the hillside. When there came to them finally a consciousness
that, to remain people of magnitude in the world, they must continue to do something, they
went to work bravely. The change which had come upon the valley in their brief absence tended
to increase their confidence, for, as thus exhibited, early as was the age, the advent of the
human being, young or old, somehow affected all animate nature and terrified it, and the boys
saw this. Not that the great beasts did not prey upon man, but then, as now, the man to the
great beast was something of a terror, and man, weak as he was, knew himself and recognized
himself as the head of all creation. The mammoth, the huge, thick-coated rhinoceros, sabre-tooth,
the monstrous tiger, or the bear, or the hyena, or the loping wolf, or short-bodied and vicious
wolverine were to him, even then, but lower creatures. Man felt himself the master of the world,
and his children inherited the perception.

Work in the pit progressed now rapidly and not a great number of days passed before it had
attained the depth required. The boy at work was compelled, when emerging, to climb a dried
branch which rested against the pit's edge, and the lookout in the tree exercised an extra
caution, since his comrade below could no longer attain safety in a moment. But the work was
done at last, that is, the work of digging, and there remained but the completion of the pitfall,
a delicate though not a difficult matter. Across the pit, and very close together, were laid
criss-crosses of slender branches, brought in armfuls from the forest; over these dry grass
was spread, thinly but evenly, and over this again dust and dirt and more grass and twigs,
all precautions being observed to give the place a natural appearance. In this the boys succeeded
very well. Shrewd must have been the animal of any sort which could detect the trap. Their
chief work done, the boys must now wait wisely. The place was deserted again and no nearer
approach was made to the pitfall than the treetops of the hillside. There the boys were to
be found every day, eager and anxious and hopeful as boys are generally. There was not occasion
for getting closer to the trap, for, from their distant perch, its surface was distinctly visible
and they could distinguish if it had been broken in. Those were days of suppressed excitement
for the two; they could see the buffalo and wild horses moving here and there, but fortune
was still perverse and the trap was not approached. Before its occupation by them, the place
where they had dug had appeared the favorite feeding-place; now, with all perversity, the wild
horses and other animals grazed elsewhere, and the boys began to fear that they had left some
traces of their work which revealed it to the wily beasts. On one day, for an hour or two,
their hearts were in their mouths. There issued from the forest to the westward the stately
Irish elk. It moved forward across the valley to the waters on the other side, and, after drinking
its fill, began feeding directly toward the tree clump. It reached the immediate vicinity of
the pitfall and stood beneath the trees, fairly outlined against the opening beyond, and affording
to the almost breathless couple a splendid spectacle. A magnificent creature was the great
elk of the time of the cave men, the Irish elk, as those who study the past have named it,
because its bones have been found so frequently in what are now the preserving peat bogs of
Ireland. But the elk passed beyond the sight of the watchers, and so their bright hopes fell.

The crispness of full autumn had come, one morning, when Ab and Oak met as usual and looked
out across the valley to learn if anything had happened in the vicinity of the pitfall. The
hoar frost, lying heavily on the herbage, made the valley resemble a sea of silver, checkered
and spotted all over darkly. These dark spots and lines were the traces of such animals as
had been in the valley during the night or toward early morning. Leading everywhere were heavy
trails and light ones, telling the story of the night. But very little heed to these things
was paid by the ardent boys. They were too full of their own affairs. As they swung into place
together upon their favorite limb and looked across the valley, they uttered a simultaneous
and joyous shout. Something had taken place at the pitfall!

All about the trap the surface of the ground was dark and the area of darkness extended even
to the little bank of the swamp on the riverside. Careless of danger, the boys dropped to the
ground and, spears in hand, ran like deer toward the scene of their weeks of labor. Side by
side they bounded to the edge of the excavation, which now yawned open to the sky. They had
triumphed at last! As they saw what the pitfall held, they yelled in unison, and danced wildly
around the opening, in the very height of boyish triumph. The exultation was fully justified,
for the pitfall held a young rhinoceros, a creature only a few months old, but so huge already
that it nearly filled the excavation. It was utterly helpless in the position it occupied.
It was wedged in, incapable of moving more than slightly in any direction. Its long snout,
with its sprouting pair of horns, was almost level with the surface of the ground and its small
bright eyes leered wickedly at its noisy enemies. It struggled clumsily upon their approach,
but nothing could relieve the hopelessness of its plight.

All about the pitfall the earth was plowed in furrows and beaten down by the feet of some monstrous
animal. Evidently the calf was in the company of its mother when it fell a victim to the art
of the pitfall diggers. It was plain that the mother had spent most of the night about her
young in a vain effort to release it. Well did the cave boys understand the signs, and, after
their first wild outburst of joy over the capture, a sense of the delicacy, not to say danger,
of their situation came upon them. It was not well to interfere with the family affairs of
the rhinoceros. Where had the mother gone? They looked about, but could see nothing to justify
their fears. Only for a moment, though, did their sense of safety last; hardly had the echo
of their shouting come back from the hillside than there was a splashing and rasping of bushes
in the swamp and the rush of some huge animal toward the little ascent leading to the valley
proper. There needed no word from either boy; the frightened couple bounded to the tree of
refuge and had barely begun clambering up its trunk than there rose to view, mad with rage
and charging viciously, the mother of the calf rhinoceros.

CHAPTER VIII.

SABRE-TOOTH AND RHINOCEROS.

The rhinoceros of the Stone Age was a monstrous creature, an animal varying in many respects
from either species of the animal of the present day, though perhaps somewhat closely allied
to the huge double-horned and now nearly extinct white rhinoceros of southern Africa. But the
brute of the prehistoric age was a beast of greater size, and its skin, instead of being bare,
was densely covered with a dingy colored, crinkly hair, almost a wool. It was something to
be dreaded by most creatures even in this time of great, fierce animals. It turned aside for
nothing; it was the personification of courage and senseless ferocity when aroused. Rarely
seeking a conflict, it avoided none. The huge mammoth, a more peaceful pachyderm, would ordinarily
hesitate before barring its path, while even the cave tiger, fiercest and most dreaded of the
carnivora of the time, though it might prey upon the young rhinoceros when opportunity occurred,
never voluntarily attacked the full-grown animal. From that almost impervious shield of leather
hide, an inch or more in thickness, protected further by the woolly covering, even the terrible
strokes of the tiger's claws glanced off with but a trifling rending, while one single lucky
upward heave of the twin horns upon the great snout would pierce and rend, as if it were a
trifling obstacle, the body of any animal existing. The lifting power of that prodigious neck
was something almost beyond conception. It was an awful engine of death when its opportunity
chanced to come. On the other hand, the rhinoceros of this ancient world had but a limited
range of vision, and was as dull-witted and dangerously impulsive as its African prototype
of today.

But short-sighted as it was, the boys clambering up the tree were near enough for the perception
of the great beast which burst over the hummock, and it charged directly at them, the tree
quivering when the shoulder of the monster struck it as it passed, though the boys, already
in the branches, were in safety. Checking herself a little distance beyond, the rhinoceros
mother returned, snorting fiercely, and began walking round and round the calf imprisoned in
the pitfall. The boys comprehended perfectly the story of the night. The calf once ensnared,
the mother had sought in vain to rescue it, and, finally, wearied with her exertion, had retired
just over the little descent, there to wallow and rest while still keeping guard over her imprisoned
young. The spectacle now, as she walked around the trap, was something which would have been
pitiful to a later race of man. The beast would get down upon her knees and plow the dirt about
the calf with her long horns. She would seek to get her snout beneath its body sidewise, and
so lift it, though each effort was necessarily futile. There was no room for any leverage,
the calf fitted the cavity. The boys clung to their perches in safety, but in perplexity. Hours
passed, but the mother rhinoceros showed no inclination to depart. It was three o'clock in
the afternoon when she went away to the wallow, returning once or twice to her young before
descending the bank, and, even when she had reached the marsh, snorting querulously for some
time before settling down to rest.

The boys waited until all was quiet in the marsh, and, as a matter of prudence, for some time
longer. They wanted to feel assured that the monster was asleep, then, quietly, they slid down
the tree trunk and, with noiseless step, stole by the pitfall and toward the hillside. A few
yards further on their pace changed to a run, which did not cease until they reached the forest
and its refuge, nor, even there, did they linger for any length of time. Each started for his
home; for their adventure had again assumed a quality which demanded the consideration of older
heads and the assistance of older hands. It was agreed that they should again bring their fathers
with them--by a fortunate coincidence each knew where to find his parent on this particular
day--and that they should meet as soon as possible. It was more than an hour later when the
two fathers and two sons, the men armed with the best weapons they possessed, appeared upon
the scene. So far as the watchers from the hillside could determine, all was quiet about the
clump of trees and the vicinity of the pitfall. It was late in the afternoon now and the men
decided that the best course to pursue would be to steal down across the valley, kill the imprisoned
calf and then escape as soon as possible, leaving the mother to find her offspring dead; reasoning
that she would then abandon it. Afterward the calf could be taken out and there would be a
feast of cave men upon the tender food and much benefit derived in utilization of the tough
yet not, at its age, too thick hide of the uncommon quarry. There was but one difficulty in
the way of carrying out this enterprise: the wind was from the north and blew from the hunters
toward the river, and the rhinoceros, though lacking much range of vision, was as acute of
scent as the gray wolves which sometimes strayed like shadows through the forest or the hyenas
which scented from afar the living or the dead. Still, the venture was determined upon.

The four descended the hill, the two boys in the rear, treading with the lightness of the tiger
cat, and went cautiously across the valley and toward the tree trunk. Certainly no sound they
made could have reached the ear of the monster wallowing below the bank, but the wind carried
to its nostrils the message of their coming. They were not half way across the valley when
the rhinoceros floundered up to the level and charged wildly along the course of the wafted
scent. There was a flight for the hillside, made none too soon, but yet in time for safety.
Walking around in circles, snorting viciously, the great beast lingered in the vicinity for
a time, then went back to its imprisoned calf, where it repeated the performance of earlier
in the day and finally retired again to its hidden resting-place near by. It was dusk now and
the shadows were deepening about the valley.

The men, well up in the tree with the boys, were undetermined what to do. They might steal
along to the eastward and approach the calf from another direction without disturbing the great
brute by their scent. But it was becoming darker every moment and the region was a dangerous
one. In the valley and away from the trees they were at a disadvantage and at night there were
fearful things abroad. Still, they decided to take the risk, and the four, following the crest
of the slight hill, moved along its circle southeastward toward the river bank, each on the
alert and each with watchful eyes scanning the forest depths to the left or the valley to the
right. Suddenly One-Ear leaped back into the shadow, waved his hand to check the advance of
those behind him, then pointed silently across the valley and toward the clump of trees.

Not a hundred yards from the pitfall the high grass was swaying gently; some creature was passing
along toward the pitfall and a thing of no slight size. Every eye of the quartet was strained
now to learn what might be the interloper upon the scene. It was nearly dark, but the eyes
of the cave men, almost nocturnal in their adaptation as they were, distinguished a long, dark
body emerging from the reeds and circling curiously and cautiously around the pitfall; nearer
and nearer it approached the helpless prisoner until perhaps twenty feet distant from it. Here
the thing seemed to crouch and remain quiescent, but only for a little time. Then resounded
across the valley a screaming roar, so fierce and raucous and death-telling and terrifying
that even the hardened hunters leaped with affright. At the same moment a dark object shot
through the air and landed on the back of the creature in the shallow pit. The tiger was abroad!
There was a wild bleat of terror and agony, a growl fiercer and shorter than the first hoarse
cry of the tiger, and, then, for a moment silence, but only for a moment. Snorts, almost as
terrible in their significance as the tiger's roar, came from the marsh's edge. A vast form
loomed above the slight embankment and there came the thunder of ponderous feet. The rhinoceros
mother was charging the great tiger!

There was a repetition of the fierce snorts, with the wild rush of the rhinoceros, another
roar, the sound of which reechoed through the valley, and then could be dimly seen a black
something flying through the air and alighting, apparently, upon the back of the charging monster.
There was a confusion of forms and a confusion of terrifying sounds, the snarling roar of the
great tiger and half whistling bellow of the great pachyderm, but nothing could be seen distinctly.
That a gigantic duel was in progress the cave men knew, and knew, as well, that its scene was
one upon which they could not venture. The clamor had not ended when the darkness became complete
and then each father, with his son, fled swiftly homeward.

Early the next morning, the four were together again at the same point of safety and advantage,
and again the frost-covered valley was a sea of silver, this time unmarred by the criss-crosses
of feeding or hunting animals. There was no sign of life; no creature of the forest or the
plain was so daring as to venture soon upon the battlefield of the rhinoceros and the cave
tiger. Cautiously the cave men and their sons made their way across the valley and approached
the pitfall. What was revealed to them told in a moment the whole story. The half-devoured
body of the rhinoceros calf was in the pit. It had been killed, no doubt, by the tiger's first
fierce assault, its back broken by the first blow of the great forearm, or its vertebrae torn
apart by the first grasp of the great jaws. There were signs of the conflict all about, but
that it had not come to a deadly issue was apparent. Only by some accident could the rhinoceros
have caught upon its horns the agile monster cat, and only by an accident even more remote
could the tiger have reached a vital part of its huge enemy. There had been a long and weary
battle--a mother creature fighting for her young and the great flesh-eater fighting for his
prey. But the combatants had assuredly separated without the death of either, and the bereaved
rhinoceros, knowing her young one to be dead, had finally left the valley, while the tiger
had returned to its prey and fed its fill. But there was much meat left. There were, in the
estimation of the cave people, few more acceptable feasts than that obtainable from the flesh
of a young rhinoceros. The first instinct of the two men was to work fiercely with their flint
knives and cut out great lumps of meat from the body in the pit. Hardly had they begun their
work, when, as by common impulse, each clambered out from the depression suddenly, and there
was a brief and earnest discussion. The cave tiger, monarch of the time, was not a creature
to abandon what he had slain until he had devoured it utterly. Gorged though he might be, he
was undoubtedly in hiding within a comparatively short distance. He would return again inevitably.
He might be lying sleeping in the nearest clump of bushes! It was possible that his appetite
might come upon him soon again and that he might appear at any moment. What chance then for
the human beings who had ventured into his dining-room? There was but one sensible course to
follow, and that was instant retreat. The four fled again to the hillside and the forest, carrying
with them, however, the masses of flesh already severed from the body of the calf. There was
food for a day or two for each family.

And so ended the first woodland venture of these daring boys. For days the vicinity of the
little valley was not sought by either man or youth, since the tiger might still be lurking
near. When, later, the youths dared to visit the scene of their bold exploit, there were only
bones in the pitfall they had made. The tiger had eaten its prey and had gone to other fields.
In later autumn came a great flood down the valley, rising so high that the father of Oak and
all his family were driven temporarily from their cave by the water's influx and compelled
to seek another habitation many miles away. Some time passed before the comrades met again.

As for Ab, this exploit might be counted almost as the beginning of his manhood. His father--and
fathers had even then a certain paternal pride--had come to recognize in a degree the vigor
and daring of his son. The mother, of course, was even more appreciative, though to her firstborn
she could give scant attention, as Ab had the small brother in the cave now and the little
sister who was still smaller, but from this time the youth became a person of some importance.
He grew rapidly, and the sinewy stripling developed, not increasing strength and stature and
rounding brawn alone, for he had both ingenuity and persistency of purpose, qualities which
made him rather an exception among the cave boys of his age.

CHAPTER IX.

DOMESTIC MATTERS.

Attention has already been called to the fact that the family of Ab were of the aristocracy
of the region, and it should be added that the interior of One-Ear's mansion corresponded with
his standing in the community. It was a fine cave, there was no doubt about that, and Red-Spot
was a notable housekeeper. As a rule, the bones remaining about the fire after a meal were
soon thrown outside--at least they were never allowed to accumulate for more than a month or
two. The beds were excellent, for, in addition to the mass of leaves heaped upon the earth
which formed a resting-place for the family, there were spread the skins of various animals.
The water privileges of the establishment were extensive, for there was the river in front,
much utilized for drinking purposes. There were ledges and shelves of rock projecting here
and there from the sides of the cave, and upon these were laid the weapons and implements of
the household, so that, excepting an occasional bone upon the earthen floor, or, perhaps, a
spattering of red, where some animal had been cut up for roasting, the place was very neat
indeed. The fact that the smoke from the fire could, when the wind was right, ascend easily
through the roof made the residence one of the finest within a large district of the country.
As to light, it cannot be said that the house was well provided. The fire at night illuminated
a small area and, in the daytime, light entered through the doorway, and, to an extent, through
the hole in the cave's top, as did also the rains, but the light was by no means perfect. The
doorway, for obvious reasons, was narrow and there was a huge rock, long ago rolled inside
with much travail, which could on occasion be utilized in blocking the narrow passage. Barely
room to squeeze by this obstruction existed at the doorway. The sneaking but dangerous hyena
had a keen scent and was full of curiosity. The monster bear of the time was ever hungry and
the great cave tiger, though rarer, was, as has been shown, a haunting dread. Great attention
was paid to doorways in those days, not from an artistic point of view exactly, but from reasons
cogent enough in the estimation of the cave men. But the cave was warm and safe and the sharp
eyes of its inhabitants, accustomed to the semi-darkness, found slight difficulty in discerning
objects in the gloom. Very content with their habitation were all the family and Red-Spot particularly,
as a chatelaine should, felt much pride in her surroundings.

It may be added that the family of One-Ear was a happy one. His life with Red-Spot was the
sequence of what might be termed a fortunate marriage. It is true that standards vary with
times, and that the demeanor of the couple toward each other was occasionally not what would
be counted the index of domestic felicity in this more artificial and deceptive age. It was
never fully determined whether One-Ear or Red-Spot could throw a stone ax with the greater
accuracy, although certainly he could hurl one with greater force than could his wife. But
the deftness of each in eluding such dangerous missiles was about the same, and no great harm
had at any time resulted from the effects of momentary ebullitions of anger, followed by action
on the part of either. There had not been at any time a scandal in the family. The pair were
faithful to each other. Society was somewhat scattered in those days, and the cave twain, anywhere,
were generally as steadfast as the lion and the lioness. It was centuries later, too, before
the cave men's posterity became degenerate enough or prosperous enough, or safe enough, to
be polygamous, and, so far as the area of the Thames valley or even the entire "Paris basin,"
as it is called, was concerned, monogamy held its own very fairly, from the shell-beds of the
earliest kitchen-middens to the time of the bronze ax and the dawn of what we now call civilization.

There were now five members in this family of the period, One-Ear, Red-Spot, Ab, Bark and Beech-Leaf,
the two last named being Ab's younger brother and little more than baby sister. The names given
them had come in the same accidental way as had the name of Ab. The brother, when very small,
had imitated in babyish way the barking of some wolfish creature outside which had haunted
the cave's vicinity at night time, and so the name of Bark, bestowed accidentally by Ab himself,
had become the youngster's title for life. As to Beech-Leaf, she had gained her name in another
way. She was a fat and joyous little specimen of a cave baby and not much addicted to lying
as dormant as babies sometimes do. The bearskin upon which her mother laid her had not infrequently
proven too limited an area for her exploits and she would roll from it into the great bed of
beech leaves upon which it was placed, and become fairly lost in the brown mass. So often had
this hilarious young lady to be disinterred from the beech leaf bed, that the name given her
came naturally, through association of ideas. Between the birth of Ab and that of his younger
brother an interval of five years had taken place, the birth of the sister occurring three
or four years later. So it came that Ab, in the absence of his father and mother, was distinctly
the head of the family, admonitory to his brother, with ideas as to the physical discipline
requisite on occasion, and, in a rude way, fond of and protective toward the baby sister.

There was a certain regularity in the daily program of the household, although, with reference
to what was liable to occur outside, it can hardly be said to have partaken of the element
of monotony. The work of the day consisted merely in getting something to eat, and in this
work father and mother alike took an active part, their individual duties being somewhat varied.
In a general way One-Ear relied upon himself for the provision of flesh, but there were roots
and nuts and fruits, in their season, and in the gathering of these Red-Spot was an admitted
expert. Not that all her efforts were confined to the fruits of the soil and forest, for she
could, if need be, assist her husband in the pursuit or capture of any animal. She was not
less clever than he in that animal's subsequent dissection, and was far more expert in its
cooking. In the tanning of skins she was an adept. So it chanced that at this time the father
and mother frequently left the cave together in the morning, their elder son remaining as protector
of the younger inmates. When occasionally he went with his parents, or was allowed to venture
forth alone, extra precautions were taken as to the cave's approaches. Just outside the entrance
was a stone similar to the one on the inside, and when the two young children were left unguarded
this outside barricade was rolled against what remained of the entrance, so that the small
people, though prisoners, were at least secure from dangerous animals. Of course there were
variations in the program. There was that degree of fellowship among the cave men, even at
this early age, to allow of an occasional banding together for hunting purposes, a battle of
some sort or the surrounding and destruction of some of the greater animals. At such times
One-Ear would be absent from the cave for days and Ab and his mother would remain sole guardians.
The boy enjoyed these occasions immensely; they gave him a fine sense of responsibility and
importance, and did much toward the development of the manhood that was in him, increasing
his self-reliance and perfecting him in the art of winning his daily bread, or what was daily
bread's equivalent at the time in which he lived. It was not in outdoor and physical life alone
that he grew. There was something more to him, a combination of traits somewhere which made
him a little beyond and above the mere seeker after food. He was never entirely dormant, a
sleeper on the skins and beech leaves, even when in the shelter of the cave, after the day's
adventures. He reasoned according to such gifts as circumstances had afforded him and he had
the instinct of devising. An instinct toward devising was a great thing to its possessor in
the time of the cave people.

We know very well to-day, or think we know, that the influence of the mother, in most cases,
dominates that of the father in making the future of the man-child. It may be that this comes
because in early life the boy, throughout the time when all he sees or learns will be most
clear in his memory until he dies, is more with the woman parent than with the man, who is
afield; or, it may be, there is some criss-cross law of nature which makes the man ordinarily
transmit his qualities to the daughter and the woman transmit hers to the son. About that we
do not know yet. But it is certain that Ab was more like his mother than his father, and that
in these young days of his he was more immediately under her influence. And Red-Spot was superior
in many ways to the ordinary woman of the cave time.

It was good for the boy that he was so under the maternal dominion, and that, as he lingered
about the cave, he aided in the making of threads of sinew or intestine, or looked on interestedly
as his mother, using the bone needle, which he often sharpened for her with his flint scraper,
sewed together the skins which made the garments of the family. The needle was one without
an eye, a mere awl, which made holes through which the thread was pushed. As the growing boy
lounged or labored near his mother, alternately helpful or annoying, as the case might be,
he learned many things which were of value to him in the future, and resolved upon brave actions
which should be greatly to his credit. He was but a cub, a young being almost as unreasoning
in some ways as the beasts of the wood, but he had his hopes and vanities, as has even the
working beaver or the dancing crane, and from the long mother-talks came a degree of definiteness
of outline to his ambitions. He would be the greatest hunter and warrior in all the region!

The cave mother easily understood her child's increasing daringness and vigor, and though swift
to anger and strong of hand, she could not but feel a pride in and tell her tales to the boy
beside her. After a time, when the family of Oak returned to the cave above and the boys were
much together again, the mother began to see less of her son. The influence of the days spent
by her side remained with the boy, however, and much that he learned there was of value in
his later active life.

CHAPTER X.

OLD MOK, THE MENTOR.

It was at about this time, the time when Ab had begun to develop from boyhood into strong and
aspiring youth, that his family was increased from five to six by the addition of a singular
character, Old Mok. This personage was bent and seemingly old, but he was younger than he looked,
though he was not extremely fair to look upon. He had a shock of grizzled hair, a short, stiff,
unpleasant beard, and the condition of one of his legs made him a cripple of an exaggerated
type. He could hobble about and on great occasions make a journey of some length, but he was
practically debarred from hunting. The extraordinary curvature of his twisted leg was, as usual
in his time, the result of an encounter with some wild beast. The limb curved like a corkscrew
and was so much shorter than the other leg that the man was really safe only when the walls
of a cave enclosed him. But if his legs were weak his brain and arms were not. In that grizzled
head was much intelligence and the arms were those of a great climber. His toes were clasping
things and he was at home in a treetop. But he did not travel much. There was no need. Old
Mok had special gifts, and they were such as made him a desirable friend among the cave men.
He had, in his youth, been a mighty hunter and had so learned that he could tell wonderfully
the ways of beasts and swimming things and the ways of slaying or eluding them. Best of all,
he was such a fashioner of weapons as the valley had rarely known, and, because of this, was
in great request as a cared-for inmate of almost any cave which hit his fancy. After his crippling
he had drifted from one haven to another, never quite satisfied with what he found, and now
he had come to live, as he supposed, with his old friend, One-Ear, until life should end. Despite
his harshness of appearance--and neither of the two could ever afterward explain it--there
was something about the grim old man which commended him to Ab from the very first. Because the
kernel of passionate love turns on the anticipation of the child to be born and its nature,
it is quite possible for friendship, without any admixture of sexual love, to exist between
two young, good-looking people of different sex, if there is perfect
fitness of temperament and intellectual capacity.

In fact, a certain aversion for each other may exist also. The reason of this is that a child
begotten by them would physically or mentally have discordant qualities. In short, the child's
existence and nature would not be in harmony with the purposes of the will to live as it presents
itself in the species.

In an opposite case, where there is no fitness of disposition, character, and mental capacity,
whereby aversion, nay, even enmity for each other exists, it is possible for love to spring
up. Love of this kind makes them blind to everything; and if it leads to marriage it is a very unhappy
one.

And now let us more thoroughly investigate the matter.

Egoism is a quality so deeply rooted in every personality that it is on egotistical ends only
that one may safely rely in order to rouse the individual to activity.

To be sure, the species has a prior, nearer, and greater claim on the individual than the transient
individuality itself; and yet even when the individual makes some sort of conscious sacrifice
for the perpetuation and future of the species, the importance of
the matter will not be made sufficiently comprehensible to his intellect,
which is mainly constituted to regard individual ends.

Therefore Nature attains her ends by implanting in the individual a certain illusion by which something
which is in reality advantageous to the species alone seems to be advantageous to himself; consequently
he serves the latter while he imagines he is serving himself. In this process he is carried away
by a mere chimera, which floats before him and vanishes again immediately, and as a motive
takes the place of reality. This illusion is instinct. In most instances instinct may be regarded
as the sense of the species which presents to the will whatever is of service to the species. But
because the will has here become individual it must be deceived in such a manner for it to
discern by the sense of the individual what the sense of the species has presented to it; in
other words, imagine it is pursuing ends concerning the individual, when in reality it is pursuing
merely general ends (using the word general in its strictest sense).

Outward manifestation of instinct can be best observed in animals, where the part it plays is most
significant; but it is in ourselves alone that we can get to know its internal process, as
of everything internal. It is true, it is thought that man has scarcely any instinct at all,
or at any rate has only sufficient instinct when he is born to seek
and take his mother's breast.

But as a matter of fact man has a very decided, clear, and yet complicated instinct--namely,
for the selection, both earnest and capricious, of another individual, to satisfy his instinct
of sex. The beauty or ugliness of the other individual has nothing whatever to do with this
satisfaction in itself, that is in so far as it is a matter of pleasure based upon a pressing
desire of the individual. The regard, however, for this satisfaction, which is so zealously
pursued, as well as the careful selection it entails, has obviously nothing to do with the
chooser himself, although he fancies that it has. Its real aim is the child to be born, in
whom the type of the species is to be preserved in as pure and perfect a form as possible.
For instance, different phases of degeneration of the human form are the consequences of a thousand
physical accidents and moral delinquencies; and yet the genuine type of the human form is, in
all its parts, always restored; further, this is accomplished under the guidance of the sense
of beauty, which universally directs the instinct of sex, and without which the satisfaction
of the latter would deteriorate to a repulsive necessity.

Accordingly,
every one in the first place will infinitely prefer and ardently desire
those who are most beautiful--in other words, those in whom the character
of the species is most purely defined; and in the second, every one
will desire in the other individual those perfections which he himself
lacks, and he will consider imperfections, which are the reverse of
his own, beautiful. This is why little men prefer big women, and fair
people like dark, and so on. They had known almost no life except that of the cave, they
had got their meat there and, at night, the twain were at the doorway whining for food. To
them were tossed some half-gnawed bones and they received them with joyous yelps and snarls.
Thenceforth they hung about the cave and retained, practically, their place in the family,
oddly enough showing particular animosity to those of their own kind who ventured near the
place. One day, the female was found in the cave's rear with four little whelps lying beside
her, and that settled it! The family petted the young animals and they grew up tamer and more
obedient than had been their father and mother. Protected by man, they were unlikely to revert
to wildness. Members of the pack which grew from them were, in time, bestowed as valued gifts
among the cave men of the region and much came of it. The two boys did a greater day's work
than they could comprehend when they raided the dens by the river's side.

But there was much beside the capture of wolf cubs to occupy the attention of the boys. They
counted themselves the finest bird hunters in the community and, to a certain extent, justified
the proud claim made. No youths could set a snare more deftly or hurl a stone more surely,
and there was much bird life for them to seek. The bustard fed in the vast nut forests, the
capercailzie was proud upon the moors, where the heath-cock was as jaunty, and the willow grouse
and partridge were wise in covert to avoid the hungry snowy owl. Upon the river and lagoons
and creeks the swan and wild goose and countless duck made constant clamor, and there were
water-rail and snipe along the shallows. There were eggs to be found, and an egg baked in the
ashes was a thing most excellent. It was with the waterfowl that the boys were most successful.
The ducks would in their feeding approach close to the shores of the river banks or the little
islands and would gather in bunches so near to where the boys were hidden that the young hunters,
leaping suddenly to their feet and hurling their stones together, rarely failed to secure at
least a single victim. There were muskrats along the banks and there was a great beaver, which
was not abundant, and which was a mighty creature of his kind. Of muskrats the boys speared
many--and roasted muskrat is so good that it is eaten by the Indians and some of the white
hunters in Canada to-day--but the big beaver they did not succeed in capturing at this stage
of their career. Once they saw a seal, which had come up the river from the sea, and pursued
it, running along the banks for miles, but it proved as elusive as the great beaver.

But, as a matter of course, it was upon land that the greatest sport was had. There were the
wild hogs, but the hogs were wary and the big boars dangerous, and it was only when a litter
of the young could be pounced upon somewhere that flint-headed spears were fully up to the
emergency. On such occasions there was fine pigsticking, and then the atmosphere in the caves
would be made fascinating with the odor of roasting suckling. There is a story by a great and
gentle writer telling how a Chinaman first discovered the beauties of roast pig. It is an admirable
tale and it is well that it was written, but the cave man, many tens of thousands of years
before there was a China, yielded to the allurements of young pig, and sought him accordingly.

The musk-ox, which still mingled with the animals of the river basin, was almost as difficult
of approach as in arctic wilds to-day, as was a small animal, half goat, half antelope, which
fed upon the rocky hillsides or wherever the high reaches were. There were squirrels in the
trees, but they were seldom caught, and the tailless hare which fed in the river meadows was
not easily approached and was swift as the sea wind in its flight, swifter than a sort of fox
which sought it constantly. But the burrowing things were surer game. There were martens and
zerboas, and marmots and hedgehogs and badgers, all good to eat and attainable to those who
could dig as could these brawny youths. The game once driven to its hole, the clamshell and
the sharpened fire-hardened spade-stick were brought into use and the fate of the animal sought
was rarely long in doubt. It is true that the scene lacked one element very noticeable when
boys dig out any animal to-day. There was not the inevitable and important dog, but the youths
were swift of sight and quick of hand, and the hidden creature, once unearthed, seldom escaped.
One of the prizes of those feats of excavation was the badger, for not only was it edible,
but its snow-white teeth, perforated and strung on sinew, made necklaces which were highly valued.

The youths did not think of attacking many of the dangerous brutes. They might have risked
the issue with a small leopard which existed then, or faced the wildcat, but what they sought
most was the wolverine, because it had fur so long and oddly marked, and because it was braver
than other animals of its size and came more boldly to some bait of meat, affording opportunity
for fine spear-throwing. And, apropos of the wolverine, the glutton, as it is called in Europe,
it is something still admired. It is a vicious, bloodthirsty, unchanging and, to the widely-informed
and scientifically sentimental, lovable animal. It is vicious and bloodthirsty because that
is its nature. It is lovable because, through all the generations, it has come down just the
same. The cave man knew it just as it is now; the early Teuton knew it when "hides" of land
were the rewards of warriors. The Roman knew it when he made forays to the far north for a
few centuries and learned how sharp were the blades of the Rhine-folk and the Briton. The Druid
and the Angle and Jute and Saxon knew it, and it is known to-day in all northern Europe and
Asia and America, in fact, in nearly all the northern temperate zone. The wolverine is something
wonderful; it laughs at the ages; its bones, found side by side with those of the cave hyena,
are the same as those found in its body as it exists to-day. It is an anomaly, an animal which
does not advance nor retrograde.

The two big boys grew daily in the science of gaining food and grew more and more of importance
in their respective households. Sometimes either one of them might hunt alone, but this was
not the rule. It was safer for two than one, when the forest was invaded deeply. But not all
their time was spent in evading or seeking the life of such living things as they might discover.
They had a home life sometimes as entertaining as the life found anywhere outside.

CHAPTER XI.

DOINGS AT HOME.

Those were happy times in the cave, where Ab, developing now into an exceedingly stalwart youth,
found the long evenings about the fire far from monotonous. There was Mok, the mentor, who
had grown so fond of him, and there was most interesting work to do in making from the dark
flint nodules or obsidian fragments--always eagerly seized upon when discovered by the cave
people in their wanderings--the spearheads and rude knives and skin scrapers so essential to
their needs. The flint nodule was but a small mass of the stone, often somewhat pear-shaped.
Though apparently a solid mass, composed of the hardest substance then known, it lay in what
might be called a series of flakes about a center, and, in wise hands, these flakes could be
chipped or pried away unbroken. The flake, once won, was often slightly concave on the outside
and convex on the other, but the core of the stone was something more equally balanced in formation
and, when properly finished, made a mighty spearhead. For the heavy axes and mallets, other
stones, such as we now call granite, redstone or quartose grit, were often used, but in the
making of all the weapons was required the exercise of infinite skill and patience. To make
the flakes symmetrical demanded the nicest perception and judgment of power of stroke, for,
with each flake gained, there resulted a new form to the surface of the stone. The object was
always to secure a flake with a point, a strong middle ridge and sides as nearly edged as possible.
And in the striking off of these flakes and their finishing others of the cave men were to
old Mok as the child is to the man.

Ab hung about the old man at his work and was finally allowed to help him. If, at first, the
boy could do nothing else, he could, with his flint scraper, work industriously at the smoothing
of the long spear shafts, and when he had learned to do well at this he was at last allowed
to venture upon the stone chipping, especially when into old Mok's possession had come a piece
of flint the quality of which he did not quite approve and for the ruining of which in the
splitting he cared but little.

There were disasters innumerable when the boy began and much bad stone was spoiled, but he
had a will and a good eye and hand, and it came, in time, that he could strike off a flake
with only a little less of deftness than his teacher and that, even in the more delicate work
of the finer chipping to complete the weapon, he was a workman not to be despised. He had an
ambition in it all and old Mok was satisfied with what he did.

The boy was always experimenting, ever trying a new flint chipper or using a third stone to
tap delicately the one held in the hand to make the fracture, or wondering aloud why it would
not be well to make this flint knife a little thinner, or that spearhead a trifle heavier.
He was questioning as he worked and something of a nuisance with it all, but old Mok endured
with what was, for him, an astonishing degree of patience, and would sometimes comment grumblingly
to the effect that the boy could at least chip stone far better than some men. And then the
veteran would look at One-Ear, who was, notoriously, a bad flint worker,--though, a weapon
once in his grasp, there were few could use it with surer eye or heavier hand--and would chuckle
as he made the comment. As for One-Ear, he listened placidly enough. He was glad a son of his
could make good weapons. So much the better for the family!

As times went, Ab was a tolerably good boy to his mother. Nearly all young cave males were
good boys until the time came when their thews and sinews outmatched the strength of those
who had borne them, and this, be it said, was at no early age, for the woman, hunting and working
with the man, was no maternal weakling whose buffet was unworthy of notice. A blow from the
cave mother's hand was something to be respected and avoided. The use of strength was the general
law, and the cave woman, though she would die for her young, yet demanded that her young should
obey her until the time came when the maternal instinct of first direction blended with and
was finally lost in pride over the force of the being to whom she had given birth. So Ab had
vigorous duties about the household.

As has been told already, Red-Spot was a notable housekeeper and there was such product of
the cave cooking as would make happy any gourmand of to-day who could appreciate the quality
of what had a most natural flavor. Regarding her kitchen appliances Red-Spot had a matron's
justifiable pride. Not only was there the wood fire, into which, held on long, pointed sticks,
could be thrust all sorts of meat for the somewhat smoky broiling, and the hot coals and ashes
in which could be roasted the clams and the clay-covered fish, but there was the place for
boiling, which only the more fortunate of the cave people owned. Her growing son had aided
much in the attainment of this good housewife's fond desire.

With much travail, involving all the force the cave family could muster and including the assistance
of Oak's father and of Oak himself, who rejoiced with Ab in the proceedings, there had been
rolled into the cave a huge sandstone rock with a top which was nearly flat. Here was to be
the great pot, sometimes used as a roasting place, as well, which only the more pretentious
of the caves could boast. On the middle of the big stone's uppermost surface old Mok chipped
with an ax the outline of a rude circle some two feet in diameter. This defined roughly the
size of the kettle to be made. Inside the circle, the sandstone must be dug out to a big kettle's
proper depth, and upon the boy, Ab, must devolve most of this healthful but not over-attractive
labor.

The boy went at the task gallantly, in the beginning, and pecked away with a stone chisel and
gained a most respectable hollow within a day or two, but his enthusiasm subsided with the
continuity of much effort with small result. He wanted more weight to his chisel of flint set
firmly in reindeer's horn, and a greater impact to the blows into which could not be put the
force resulting from a swing of arm. He thought much. Then he secured a long stick and bound
his chisel strongly to it at one end, the top of the chisel resting against a projecting stub
of limb, so that it could not be driven upward. To the other end of the stick he bound a stone
of some pounds in weight and then, holding the shaft with both hands, lifted it and let the
whole drop into the depression he had already made. The flint chisel bit deeply under the heavy
impact and the days were few before Ab had dug in the sandstone rock a cavity which would hold
much meat and water. There was an unconscious celebration when the big kettle was completed.
It was nearly filled with water, and into the water were flung great chunks of the meat of
a reindeer killed that day. Meanwhile, the cave fire had been replenished with dry wood and
there had been formed a wide bed of coals, upon which were cast numerous stones of moderate
size, which soon attained a shining heat. A sort of tongs made of green withes served to remove
the stones, one after another, from the mass of coal, and drop them in with the meat and water.
Within a little time the water was fairly boiling and soon there was a monster stew giving
forth rich odors and ready to be eaten. And it was not allowed to get over-cool after that
summoning fragrance had once extended throughout the cave. There was a rush for the clam shells
which served for soup dishes or cups, there was spearing with sharpened sticks for pieces of
the boiled meat, and all were satisfied, though there was shrill complaint from Bark, whose
turn at the kettle came late, and much clamor from chubby Beech-Leaf, who was not yet tall
enough to help herself, but who was cared for by the mother. It may be that, to some people
of to-day, the stew would be counted lacking in quality of seasoning, but an opinion upon seasoning
depends largely upon the stomach and the time, and, besides, it may be that the dirt clinging
to the stones cast into the water gave a certain flavor as fine in its way as could be imparted
by salt and pepper.

Old Mok, observing silently, had decidedly approved of Ab's device for easier digging into
sandstone than was the old manner of pecking away with a chisel held in the hand. He was almost
disposed now to admit the big lad to something like a plane of equality in the work they did
together. He became more affable in their converse, and the youth was, in the same degree,
delighted and ambitious. They experimented with the stick and weight and chisel in accomplishing
the difficult work of splitting from boulders the larger fragments of stone from which weapons
were to be made, and learned that by heavy, steady pressure of the breast, thus augmented by
heavy weight, they could fracture more evenly than by blow of stone, ax or hammer. They learned
that two could work together in stone chipping and do better work than one. Old Mok would hold
the forming weapon-head in one hand and the horn-hafted chisel in another, pressing the blade
close against the stone and at just such angle as would secure the result he sought, while
Ab, advised as to the force of each succeeding stroke, tapped lightly upon the chisel's head.
Woe was it for the boy if once he missed his stroke and caught the old man's fingers! Very
delicate became the chipping done by these two artists, and excellent beyond any before made
were the axes and spearheads produced by what, in modern times, would have been known under
the title of "Old Mok & Co."

At this time, too, Ab took lessons in making all the varied articles of elk or reindeer horn
and the drinking cups from the horns of urus and aurochs. Old Mok even went so far as to attempt
teaching the youth something of carving figures upon tusks and shoulder blades, but in this
art Ab never greatly excelled. He was too much a creature of action. The bone needles used
by Red-Spot in making skin garments he could form readily enough and he made whistles for Bark
and Beech-Leaf, but his inclinations were all toward larger things. To become a fighter and
a hunter remained his chief ambition.

Rather keen, with light snows but nipping airs, were the winters of this country of the cave
men, and there were articles of food essential to variety which were, necessarily, stored before
the cold season came. There were roots which were edible and which could be dried, and there
were nuts in abundance, beyond all need. Beechnuts and acorns were gathered in the autumn,
the children at this time earning fully the right of home and food, and the stores were heaped
in granaries dug into the cave's sides. Should the snow at any time fall too deeply for hunting--though
such an occurrence was very rare--or should any other cause, such, for instance, as the appearance
of the great cave tiger in the region, make the game scarce and hunting perilous, there was
the recourse of nuts and roots and no danger of starvation. There was no fear of suffering
from thirst. Man early learned to carry water in a pouch of skin and there were sometimes made
rock cavities, after the manner of the cave kettle, where water could be stored for an emergency.
Besieging wild beasts could embarrass but could not greatly alarm the family, for, with store
of wood and food and water, the besieged could wait, and it was not well for the flesh-seeking
quadruped to approach within a long spear-thrust's length of the cavern's narrow entrance.

The winter following the establishment of Ab's real companionship with Old Mok, as it chanced,
was not a hard one. There fell snow enough for tracking, but not so deeply as to incommode
the hunter. There had been a wonderful nut-fall in the autumn and the cave was stored with
such quantity of this food that there was no chance of real privation. The ice was clean upon
the river and through the holes hacked with stone axes fish were dragged forth in abundance
upon the rude bone and stone hooks, which served their purpose far better than when, in summer
time, the line was longer and the fish escaped so often from the barbless implements. It was
a great season in all that made a cave family's life something easy and complacent and vastly
promotive of the social amenities and the advancement of art and literature--that is, they
were not compelled to make any sudden raid on others to assure the means of subsistence, and
there was time for the carving of bones and the telling of strange stories of the past. The
elders declared it one of the finest winters they had ever known.

And so Old Mok and Ab worked well that winter and the youth acquired such wisdom that his casual
advice to Oak when the two were out together was something worth listening to because of its
confidence and ponderosity. Concerning flint scraper, drill, spearhead, ax or bone or wooden
haft, there was, his talk would indicate, practically nothing for the boy to learn. That was
his own opinion, though, as he grew older, he learned to modify it greatly. With his adviser
he had made good weapons and some improvements; yet all this was nothing. It was destined that
an accidental discovery should be his, the effect of which would be to change the cave man's
rank among living things. But the youth, just now, was greatly content with himself. He was
older and more modest when he made his great discovery.

It was when the fire blazed out at night, when all had fed, when the tired people lay about
resting, but not ready yet for sleep, and the story of the day's events was given, that Old
Mok's ordinarily still tongue would sometimes loosen and he would tell of what happened when
he was a boy, or of the strange tales which had been told him of the time long past, the times
when the Shell and Cave people were one, times when there were monstrous things abroad and
life was hard to keep. To all these legends the hearers listened wonderingly, and upon them
afterward Ab and Oak would sometimes speculate together and question as to their truth.

CHAPTER XII.

OLD MOK'S TALES.

It was worth while listening to Old Mok when he forgot himself and talked and became earnestly
reminiscent in telling of what he had seen or had heard when he was young. One day there had
been trouble in the cave, for Bark, left in charge, had neglected the fire and it had "gone
out," and upon the return of his parents there had been blows and harsh language, and then
much pivotal grinding together of dry sticks before a new flame was gained, and it was only
after the odor of cooked flesh filled the place and strong jaws were busy that the anger of
One-Ear had abated and the group became a comfortable one. Ab had come in hungry and the value
of fire, after what had happened, was brought to his mind forcibly. He laid himself down upon
the cave's floor near Old Mok, who was fashioning a shaft of some sort, and, as he lay, poked
his toes at Beechleaf, who chuckled and gurgled as she rolled about, never for a moment relinquishing
a portion of the slender shin bone of a deer, upon the flesh of which the family had fed. It
was a short piece but full of marrow, and the child sucked and mumbled away at it in utmost
bliss. Ab thought, somehow, of how poor would have been the eating with the meat uncooked,
and looked at his hands, still reddened--for it was he who had twisted the stick which made
the fire again. "Fire is good!" he said to Mok.

The old man kept his flint scraper going for a moment or two before he answered; then he grunted:

"Yes, it's good if you don't get burned. I've been burned," and he thrust out an arm upon which
appeared a cicatrice.

Ab was interested. "Where did you get that?" he queried.

"Far from here, far beyond the black swamp and the red hills that are farther still. It was
when I was strong."

"Tell me about it," said the youth.

"There is a fire country," answered Old Mok, "away beyond the swamp and woods and the place
of the big rocks. It is a wonderful place. The fire comes out of the ground in long sheets
and it is always the same. The rain and the snow do not stop it. Do I not know? Have I not
seen it? Did I not get this scar going too near the flame and stumbling and falling against
a hot rock almost within it? There is too much fire sometimes!"

The old man continued: "There are many places of fire. They are to the east and south. Some
of the Shell People who have gone far down the river have seen them. But the one where I was
burned is not so far away as they; it is up the river to the northwest."

And Ab was interested and questioned Old Mok further about the strange region where flames
came from the ground as bushes grow, and where snow or water did not make them disappear. He
was destined, at a later day, to be very glad that he had learned the little that was told
him. But to-night he was intent only on getting all the tales he could from the veteran while
he was in the mood. "Tell about the Shell People," he cried, "and who they are and where they
came from. They are different from us."

"Yes, they are different from us," said Old Mok, "but there was a time, I have heard it told,
when we were like them. The very old men say that their grandfathers told them that once there
were only Shell People anywhere in this country, the people who lived along the shores and
who never hunted nor went far away from the little islands, because they were afraid of the
beasts in the forests. Sometimes they would venture into the wood to gather nuts and roots,
but they lived mostly on the fish and clams. But there came a time when brave men were born
among them who said they would have more of the forest things, and that they would no longer
stay fearfully upon the little islands. So they came into the forest and the Cave Men began.
And I think this story true."

"I think it is true," Old Mok continued, "because the Shell People, you can see, must have
lived very long where they are now. Up and down the creek where they live and along other creeks
there lie banks of earth which are very long and reach far back. And this is not really earth,
but is all made up of shells and bones and stone spearheads and the things which lie about
a Shell Man's place. I know, for I have dug into these long banks myself and have seen that
of which I tell. Long, very long, must the Shell People have lived along the creeks and shores
to have made the banks of bones and shells so high."

And Old Mok was right. They talk of us as the descendants of an Aryan race. Never from Aryan
alone came the drifting, changing Western being of to-day. But a part of him was born where
bald plains were or where were olive trees and roses. All modern science, and modern thoughtfulness,
and all later broadened intelligence are yielding to an admission of the fact that he, though
of course commingling with his visitors of the ages, was born and changed where he now exists.
The kitchen-midden--the name given by scientists to refuse from his dwelling places--the kitchen-middens
of Denmark, as Denmark is to-day, alone, regardless of other fields, suffice to tell a wondrous
story. Imagine a kitchen-midden, that is to say the detritus of ordinary living in different
ages, accumulated along the side of some ancient water course, having for its dimensions miles
in length, extending hundreds of yards back from the margin of this creek, of tens and tens
of thousands of years ago, and having a depth of often many feet along this water course. Imagine
this vast deposit telling the history of a thousand centuries or more, beginning first with
the deposit of clams and mussel shells and of the shells of such other creatures as might inhabit
this river seeking its way to the North Sea. Imagine this deposit increasing year after year
and century by century, but changing its character and quality as it rose, and the base is
laid for reasoning.

At first these creatures who ranged up and down the ancient Danish creek and devoured the clams
and periwinkles must have been, as one might say, but little more than surely anthropoid. Could
such as these have migrated from the Asiatic plateaus?

The kitchen-middens tell the early story with greater accuracy than could any writer who ever
lifted pen. Here the creek-loving, ape-like creatures ranged up and down and quelled their
appetites. They died after they had begotten sons and daughters; and to these sons and daughters
came an added intelligence, brought from experience and shifting surroundings. The kitchen-middens
give graphic details. The bottom layer, as has been said, is but of shells. Above it, in another
layer, counting thousands of years in growth, appear the cracked bones of then existing animals
and appear also traces of charred wood, showing that primitive man had learned what fire was.
And later come the rudely carved bones of the mammoth and woolly rhinoceros and the Irish elk;
then come rude flint instruments, and later the age of smoothed stone, with all its accompanying
fossils, bones and indications; and so on upward, with a steady sweep, until close to the surface
of this kitchen-midden appear the bronze spear, the axhead and the rude dagger of the being
who became the Druid and who is an ancestor whom we recognize. From the kitchen-midden to the
pinnacle of all that is great to-day extends a chain not a link of which is weak.

"They tell strange stories, too, the Shell People," Old Mok continued, "for they are greater
story-tellers than the Cave Men are, more of them being together in one place, and the old
men always tell the tales to the children so that they are never forgotten by any of the people.
They say that once huge things came out of the great waters and up the creeks, such as even
the big cave tiger dare not face. And the old men say that their grandfathers once saw with
their own eyes a monster serpent many times as large as the one you two saw, which came swimming
up the creek and seized upon the river horses there and devoured them as easily as the cave
bear would a little deer. And the serpent seized upon some of the Cave People who were upon
the water and devoured them as well, though such as they were but a mouthful to him. And this
tale, too, I believe, for the old Shell Men who told me what their grandfathers had seen were
not of the foolish sort."

"But of another sort of story they have told me," Mok continued, "I think little. The old men
tell of a time when those who went down the river to the greater river and followed it down
to the sea, which seems to have no end, saw what no man can see to-day. But they do not say
that their grandfathers saw these things. They only say that their grandfathers told of what
had been told them by their grandfathers farther back, of a story which had come down to them,
so old that it was older than the great trees were, of monstrous things which swam along the
shores and which were not serpents, though they had long necks and serpent heads, because they
had great bodies which were driven by flippers through the water as the beaver goes with his
broad feet. And at the same time, the old story goes, were great birds, far taller than a man,
who fed where now the bustards and the capercailzie are. And these tales I do not believe,
though I have seen bones washed from the riversides and hillsides by the rains which must have
come from creatures different from those we meet now in the forests or the waters. They are
wonderful story-tellers, the old men of the Shell People."

"And they tell other strange stories," continued the old man. "They say that very long ago
the cold and ice came down, and all the people and animals fled before it, and that the summer
was cold as now the winter is, and that the men and beasts fled together to the south, and
were there for a long time, but came back again as the cold and ice went back. They say, too,
that in still later times, the fireplaces where the flames came out of great cracks in the
earth were in tens of places where they are in one now, and that, even in the ice time, the
flames came up, and that the ice was melted and then ran in rivers to the sea. And these things
I do not believe, for how can men tell of what there was so long ago? They are but the gabblings
of the old, who talk so much."

Many other stories the veteran told, but what most affected Ab was his account of the vale
of fire. He hoped to see it sometime.

CHAPTER XIII.

AB'S GREAT DISCOVERY.

It may be that never in what was destined to be a life of many changes was Ab happier than
in this period of his lusty boyhood and early manhood, when there was so much that was new,
when he was full of hope and confidence and of ambition regarding what a mighty hunter and
great man he would become in time. As the years passed he was not less indefatigable in his
experiments, and the day came when a marvelous success followed one of them, although, like
most inventions, it was suggested in the most trivial and accidental manner.

It chanced one afternoon that Ab, a young man of twenty now, had returned early from the wood
and was lying lazily upon the sward near the cave's entrance, while, not far away, Bark and
the still chubby Beechleaf were rolling about. The boy was teasing the girl at times and then
doing something to amuse or awe her. He had found a stiff length of twig and was engaged in
idly bending the ends together and then letting them fly apart with a snap, meanwhile advancing
toward and threatening with the impact the half-alarmed but wholly delighted Beechleaf. Tired
of this, at last, Bark, with no particular intent, drew forth from the pouch in his skin cloak
a string of sinew, and drawing the ends of the strong twig somewhat nearly together, attached
the cord to each, thus producing accidentally a petty bow of most rotund proportions. He found
that the string twanged joyously, and, to the delight of Beechleaf, kept twanging it for such
time as his boyish temperament would allow a single occupation. Then he picked from the ground
a long, slender pencil of white wood, a sliver, perhaps, from the making of a spear shaft,
and began strumming with it upon the taut sinew string. This made a twang of a new sort, and
again the boy and girl were interested temporarily. But, at last, even this variation of amusement
with the new toy became monotonous, and Bark ceased strumming and began a series of boyish
experiments with his plaything. He put one end of the stick against the string and pushed it
back until the other end would press against the inside of the twig, and the result would be
a taut, new figure in wood and string which would keep its form even when laid upon the ground.
Bark made and unmade the thing a time or two, and then came great disaster. He had drawn the
little stick, so held in the way we now call arrowwise, back nearly to the point where its
head would come inside the bent twig and there fix itself, when the slight thing escaped his
hands and flew away.

The quiet of the afternoon was broken by a piercing childish yell which lacked no element of
earnestness. Ab leaped to his feet and was by the youngsters in a moment. He saw the terrified
Beechleaf standing, screaming still, with a fat arm outheld, from which dangled a little shaft
of wood which had pierced the flesh just deeply enough to give it hold. Bark stood looking
at her, astonished and alarmed. Understanding nothing of the circumstances, and supposing the
girl's hurt came from Bark's careless flinging of sticks toward her, Ab started toward his
brother to administer one of those buffets which were so easy to give or get among cave children.
But Bark darted behind a convenient tree and there shrieked out his innocence of dire intent,
just as the boy of to-day so fluently defends himself in any strait where castigation looms
in sight. He told of the queer plaything he had made, and offered to show how all had happened.

Ab was doubtful but laughing now, for the little shaft, which had scarcely pierced the skin
of Beechleaf's arm had fallen to the ground and that young person's fright had given way to
vengeful indignation and she was demanding that Bark be hit with something. He allowed the
sinner to give his proof. Bark, taking his toy, essayed to show how Beechleaf had been injured.
He was the most unfortunate of youths. He succeeded but too well. The mimic arrow flew again
and the sound that rang out now was not the cry of a child. It was the yell of a great youth,
who felt a sudden and poignant hurt, and who was not maintaining any dignity. Had Bark been
as sure of hand and certain of aim as any archer who lived in later centuries he could not
have sent an arrow more fairly to its mark than he sent that admirable sliver into the chest
of his big brother. For a second the culprit stood with staring eyes, then dropped his toy
and flew into the forest with a howl which betokened his fear of something little less than
sudden death.

Ab's first impulse was to pursue his sinful younger brother, but, after the first leap, he
checked himself and paused to pluck away the thing which, so light the force that had impelled
it, had not gone deeply in. He knew now that Bark was really blameless, and, picking up the
abandoned plaything, began its examination thoughtfully and curiously.

The young man's instinct toward experiment exhibited itself as usual and he put the splinter
against the string and drew it back and let it fly as he had seen Bark do--that promising sprig,
by the way, being now engaged in peering from the wood and trying to form an estimate as to
whether or not his return was yet advisable. Ab learned that the force of the bent twig would
throw the sliver farther than he could toss it with his hand, and he wondered what would follow
were something like this plaything, the device of which Bark had so stumbled upon, to be made
and tried on a greater scale. "I'll make one like it, only larger," he said to himself.

The venturesome but more or less diplomatic Bark had, by this time, emerged from the wood and
was apprehensively edging up toward the place where Ab was standing. The older brother saw
him and called to him to come and try the thing again and the youngster knew that he was safe.
Then the two toyed with the plaything for an hour or two and Ab became more and more interested
in its qualities. He had no definite idea as to its possibilities. He thought only of it as
a curious thing which should be larger.

The next day Ab hacked from a low-limbed tree a branch as thick as his finger and about a yard
in length, and, first trimming it, bent it as Bark had bent the twig and tied a strong sinew
cord across. It was a not discreditable bow, considering the fact that it was the first ever
made, though one end was smaller than the other and it was rough of outline. Then Ab cut a
straight willow twig, as long nearly as the bow, and began repeating the experiments of the
day before. Never was man more astonished than this youth after he had drawn the twig back
nearly to its head and let it go!

So drawn by a strong arm, the shaft when released flew faster and farther than the maker of
what he thought of chiefly as a thing of sport had imagined could be possible. He had long
to search for the headless arrow and when he found it he went away to where were bare open
stretches, that he might see always where it fell. Once as he sent it from the string it struck
fairly against an oak and, pointless as it was, forced itself deeply into the hard brown bark
and hung there quivering. Then came to the youth a flash of thought which had its effect upon
the ages: "What if there had been a point to the flying thing and it had struck a reindeer
or any of the hunted animals?"

He pulled the shaft from the tree and stood there pondering for a moment or two, then suddenly
started running toward the cave. He must see Old Mok!

The old man was at work and alone and the young man told him, somewhat excitedly, why he had
thus come running to him. The elder listened with some patience but with a commiserating grin
upon his face. He had heard young men tell of great ideas before, of a new and better way of
digging pits, or of fishing, or making deadfalls for wild beasts. But he listened and yielded
finally to Ab's earnest demand that he should hobble out into the open and see with his own
eyes how the strung bow would send the shaft. They went together to an open space, and again
and again Ab showed to his old friend what the new thing would do. With the second shot there
came a new light into the eyes of the veteran hunter and he bade Ab run to the cave and bring
back with him his favorite spear. The young man was back as soon as strong legs could bring
him, and when he burst into the open he found Mok standing a long spear's cast from the greatest
of the trees which stood about the opening.

"Throw your spear at the tree," said Mok. "Throw strongly as you can."

Ab hurled the spear as the Zulu of later times might hurl his assagai, as strongly and as well,
but the distance was overmuch for spear throwing with good effect, and the flint point pierced
the wood so lightly that the weight of the long shaft was too great for the holding force and
it sank slowly to the ground and pulled away the head. A wild beast struck by the spear at
such distance would have been sorely pricked, but not hurt seriously.

"Now take the plaything," said Old Mok, "and throw the little shaft at the tree with that."

Ab did as he was told, and, poor marksman with his new device, of course missed the big tree
repeatedly, broad as the mark was, but when, at last, the bolt struck the hard trunk fairly
there was a sound which told of the sharpness of the blow and the headless shaft rebounded
back for yards. Old Mok looked upon it all delightedly.

"It may be there is something to your plaything," he said to the young man. "We will make a
better one. But your shaft is good for nothing. We will make a straighter and stronger one
and upon the end of it will put a little spearhead, and then we can tell how deeply it will
go into the wood. We will work."

For days the two labored earnestly together, and when they came again into the open they bore
a stronger bow, one tapered at the end opposite the natural tapering of the branch, so that
it was far more flexible and symmetrical than the one they had tried before. They had abundance
of ash and yew and these remained the good bow wood of all the time of archery. And the shaft
was straight and bore a miniature spearhead at its end. The thought of notching the shaft to
fit the string came naturally and inevitably. The bow had its first arrow.

An old man is not so easily affected as a young one, nor so hopeful, but when the second test
was done the veteran Mok was the wilder and more delighted of the two who shot at the tree
in the forest glade. He saw it all! No longer could the spear be counted as the thing with
which to do most grievous hurt at a safe distance from whatever might be dangerous. With the
better bow and straighter shaft the marksmanship improved; even for these two callow archers
it was not difficult to hit at a distance of a double spear's cast the bole of the huge tree,
two yards in width at least. And the arrow whistled as if it were a living thing, a hawk seeking
its prey, and the flint head was buried so deeply in the wood that both Mok and Ab knew that
they had found something better than any weapon the cave men had ever known!

There followed many days more of the eager working of the old man and the young one in the
cave, and there was much testing of the new device, and finally, one morning, Ab issued forth
armed with his ax and knife, but without his spear. He bore, instead, a bow which was the best
and strongest the two had yet learned to fashion, and a sheaf of arrows slung behind his back
in a quiver made of a hollow section of a mammoth's leg bone which had long been kicked about
the cave. The two workers had drilled holes in the bone and passed thongs through and made
a wooden bottom to the thing and now it had found its purpose. The bow was rude, as were the
arrows, and the archer was not yet a certain marksman, though he had practiced diligently,
but the bow was stiff, at least, and the arrows had keen heads of flint and the arms of the
hunter were strong as was the bow.

There was a weary and fruitless search for game, but late in the afternoon the youth came upon
a slight, sheer descent, along the foot of which ran a shallow but broad creek, beyond which
was a little grass-grown valley, where were feeding a fine herd of the little deer. They were
feeding in the direction of the creek and the wind blew from them to the hunter, so that no
rumor of their danger was carried to them on the breeze. Ab concealed himself among the bushes
on the little height and awaited what might happen. The herd fed slowly toward him.

As the deer neared the creek they grouped themselves together about where were the greenest
and richest feeding-places, and when they reached the very border of the stream they were gathered
in a bunch of half a hundred, close together. They were just beyond a spear's cast from the
watcher, but this was a test, not of the spear, but of the bow, and the most inexperienced
of archers, shooting from where Ab was hidden, must strike some one of the beasts in that broad
herd. Ab sprang to his feet and drew his arrow to the head. The deer gathered for a second
in affright, crowding each other before the wild bursting away together, and then the bow-string
twanged, and the arrow sang hungrily, and there was the swift thud of hundreds of light feet,
and the little glade was almost silent. It was not quite silent, for, floundering in its death
struggles, was a single deer, through which had passed an arrow so fiercely driven that its
flint head projected from the side opposite that which it had entered.

Half wild with triumph was the youth who bore home the arrow-stricken quarry, and not much
more elated was he than the old man, who heard the story of the hunt, and who recognized, at
once far more clearly than the younger one, the quality of the new weapon which had been discovered;
the thing destined to become the greatest implement both of chase and warfare for thousands
of years to come, and which was to be gradually improved, even by these two, until it became
more to them than they could yet understand.

But the lips of each of the two makers of the bow were sealed for the time. Ab and Old Mok
cherished together their mighty secret.

CHAPTER XIV.

A LESSON IN SWIMMING.

Ab and Oak, ranging far in their hunting expeditions, had, long since, formed the acquaintance
of the Shell People, and had even partaken of their hospitality, though there was not much
to attract a guest in the abodes of the creek-haunters. Their homes were but small caves, not
much more than deep burrows, dug here and there in the banks, above high water mark, and protected
from wild beasts by the usual heaped rocks, leaving only a narrow passage. This insured warmth
and comparative safety, but the homes lacked the spaciousness of the caves and caverns of the
hills, and the food of fish and clams and periwinkles, with flesh and fruit but seldom gained,
had little attraction for the occasional cave visitor. Ab and Oak would sometimes traffic with
the Shell People, exchanging some creature of the land for a product of the water, but they
made brief stay in a locality where the food and odors were not quite to their accustomed taste.
Yet the settlement had a slight degree of interest to them. They had noted the buxom quality
of some of the Shell maidens, and the two had now attained an age when a bright-eyed young
person of the other sex was agreeable to look upon. But there had been no love passages. Neither
of the youths was yet so badly stricken.

There came an autumn morning when Ab and Oak, who had met at daybreak, determined to visit
the Shell People and go with them upon a fishing expedition. The Shell People often fished
from boats, and the boats were excellent. Each consisted of four or five short logs of the
most buoyant wood, bound firmly together with tough withes, but the contrivance was more than
a simple raft, because, at the bow, it had been hewed to a point, and the logs had been so
chosen that each curved upward there. It had been learned that the waves sometimes encountered
could so more easily be cleft or overridden. None of these boats could sink, and the man of
the time was quite at home in the water. It was fun for the young men whose tale is told here
to go with the Shell People and assist in spearing fish or drawing them from the river's depths
upon rude hooks, and the Shell People did not object, but were rather proud of the attendance
of representatives of the hillside aristocracy.

The morning was one to make men far older than these two most confident and full of life. The
season was late, though the river's waters were not yet cold. The mast had already begun to
fall and the nuts lay thickly among the leaves. Every morning, and more regularly than it comes
now, there was a spread of glistening hoar frost upon the lowlands and the little open lands
in the forest and upon every spot not tree-protected. At such times there appeared to the eyes
of the cave people the splendor of nature such as we now can hardly comprehend. It came most
strikingly in spring and autumn, and was something wonderful. The cave men, probably, did not
appreciate it. They were accustomed to it, for it was part of the record of every year. Doubtless
there came a greater vigor to them in the keen air of the hoar frost time, doubtless the step
of each was made more springy and each man's valor more defined in this choice atmosphere.
Temperate, with a wonderful keenness to it, was the climate of the cave region in the valley
of the present Thames. Even in the days of the cave men, the Gulf Stream, swinging from the
equator in the great warm current already formed, laved the then peninsula as it now laves
the British Isles. The climate, as has been told, was almost as equable then as now, but with
a certain crispness which was a heritage from the glacial epoch. It was a time to live in,
and the two were merry on their journey in the glittering morning.

The young men idled on their way and wasted an hour or two in vain attempts to approach a feeding
deer nearly enough for effective spear-throwing. They were late when, after swimming the creek,
they reached the Shell village and there learned that the party had already gone. They decided
that they might, perhaps, overtake the fishermen, and so, with the hunter's easy lope, started
briskly down the river bank. They were not destined to fish that day.

Three or four miles had been passed and a straight stretch of the river had been attained,
at the end of which, a mile away, could be seen the boats of the Shell People, to be lost to
sight a moment later as they swept around a bend. But there was something else in sight. Perched
comfortably upon a rock, the sides of which were so precipitous that they afforded a foothold
only for human beings, was a young woman of the Shell People who had before attracted Ab's
attention and something of his admiration. She was fishing diligently. She had been left by
the fishing party, to be taken up on their return, because, in the rush of waters about the
base of the rock, was a haunt of a small fish esteemed particularly, and because the girl was
one of the little tribe's adepts with hook and line She raised her eyes as she heard the patter
of footsteps upon the shore, but did not exhibit any alarm when she saw the two young men.
The ordinary young woman of the Shell People did not worry when away from land. She could swim
like an otter and dive like a loon, and of wild beasts she had no fear when she was thus safely
bestowed away from the death-harboring forest. The maiden on the rock was most serene.

The young men called to her, but she made no answer. She but fished away demurely, from time
to time hauling up a flashing finny thing, which she calmly bumped on the rock and then tossed
upon the silvery heap, which had already assumed fair dimensions, close behind her. As Ab looked
upon the young fisherwoman his interest in her grew rapidly and he was silent, though Oak called
out taunting words and asked her if she could not talk. It was not this young woman, but another,
who had most pleased Oak among the girls of the Shell People.

It was not love yet with Ab, but the maiden interested him. He held no defined wish to carry
her away to a new home with him, but there arose a feeling that he wanted to know her better.
There might,--he didn't know--be as good wives among the Shell maidens as among the well-running
girls of the hills.

"I'll swim to the rock!" he said to his companion, and Oak laughed loudly.

Short time elapsed between decision and action in those days, and hardly had Ab spoken when
he flung his fur covering into the hands of Oak, and, clad only in the clout about his hips,
dropped, with a splash, into the water. All this time the girl had been eyeing every motion
closely. As the little waves rose laughingly about the man, she descended lightly from her
perch and slid into the stream as easily and silently as a beaver might have done. And then
began a chase. The girl, finding mid-current swiftly, was a full hundred yards ahead as Ab
came fairly in her wake.

A splendid swimmer was the stalwart young man of the hills. He had been in and out of water
almost daily since early childhood, and, though there had never been a test, was confident
that, among all the Shell People, there was none he could not overtake, despite what he had
heard and knew of their wonderful cleverness in the water. Were not his arms and legs longer
and stronger than theirs and his chest deeper? He felt that he could outswim easily any bold
fisherman among them, and as for this girl, he would overtake her very quickly and draw her
to the bank, and then there would be an interview of much enjoyment, at least to him. His strong
arm swept the water back, and his strong legs, working with them, drove his body forward swiftly
toward the brown object not very far ahead. Along the bank ran the laughing and shouting Oak.

Yard by yard, Ab's mighty strokes brought him nearer the object of his pursuit. She was swimming
breast forward, as was he--for that was his only way--she with a dog-like paddling stroke,
and often she turned her head to look backward at the man. She did not, even yet, appear affrighted,
and this Ab wondered at, for it was seldom that a girl of the time, thus hunted, was not, and
with reason, terrified. She, possibly, understood that the chase did not involve a real abduction,
for she and her pursuer had often met, but there was, at least, reason enough for avoiding
too close contact on this day. She swam on steadily, and, as steadily, Ab gained upon her.

Down the long stretch of tumbling river, sweeping eastward between hill and slope and plain
and woodland, went the chase, while the panting and cheering Oak, strong-legged and enduring
as he was, barely kept pace with the two heads he could see bobbing, not far apart now, in
the tossing waters. Ab had long since forgotten Oak. He had forgotten how it was that he came
to be thus swimming in the river. His thought was only what now made up an overmastering aim.
He must reach and seize upon the girl before him!

Closer and closer, though she as much as he was aided by the swift current, the young man approached
the girl. The hundred yards had lessened into tens and he could plainly see now the wake about
her and the occasional up-flip of her brown heels as she went high in her stroke. He now felt
easily assured of her and laughed to himself as he swept his arms backward in a fiercer stroke
and came so close that he could discern her outline through the water. It was but a matter
of endurance, he chuckled to himself. How could a woman outswim a man like him?

It was just at the time when this thought came that Ab saw the Shell girl lift her head and
turn it toward him and laugh--laugh recklessly, almost in his very face, so close together
were they now. And then she taught him something! There was a dip such as the otter makes when
he seeks the depths and there was no longer a girl in sight! But this was only a demonstration,
made in sheer audacity and blithesome insolence, for the brown head soon appeared again some
yards ahead and there was another twist of it and another merry laugh. Then the neat body turned
upon its side, and with quick outdriving legstrokes and the overhand and underhand pulling-forward
which modern swimmers partly know, the girl shot ahead through the tiny white-capped waves
and away from the swimmer so close behind her, as to-day the cutter leaves the scow. From the
river bank came a wild yelp, the significance of which, if analyzed, might have included astonishment
and great delight and brotherly derision. Oak was having a great day of it! He was the sole
witness of a swimming-match the like of which was rare, and he was getting even with his friend
for various assumptions of superiority in various doings.

Unexhausted and sturdy and stubborn, Ab was not the one to abandon his long chase because of
this new phase of things. He inhaled a great breath and made the water foam with his swift
strokes, but as well might a wild goose chase a swallow on the wing as he seek to overtake
that brown streak on the water. It was wonderful, the manner in which that Shell girl swam!
She was like the birds which swim and dive and dip, and know of nothing which they fear if
only they are in the water far enough away from where there is the need of stalking over soil
and stone. Nego ac pernego! I am rather of the opinion that the clergy should be challenged
to state their authority for stamping--from the pulpit or in their writings--as a crime an act
which has been committed by many people honoured and loved by us,
and refusing an honourable burial to those who have of their own free
will left the world.

They cannot produce any kind of Biblical authority, nay, they have no philosophical arguments that
are at all valid; and it is reasons that we want; mere empty phrases or words of abuse we cannot
accept. If the criminal law forbids suicide, that is not a reason that holds good in the church;
moreover, it is extremely ridiculous, for what punishment can frighten those who seek death? When
a man is punished for trying to commit suicide, it is his clumsy failure that is punished.

The ancients were also very far from looking at the matter in this light. Pliny says: "Vitam quidem
non adeo expetendam censemus, ut quoque modo trahenda sit. Quisquis es talis, aeque moriere,
etiam cum obscoenus vixeris, aut nefandus.

Quapropter hoc primum quisque in remediis animi sui habeat: ex omnibus bonis, quae homini tribuit
natura, nullum melius esse tempestiva morte: idque in ea optimum, quod illam sibi quisque praestare
poterit." And how many heroes and wise men of ancient times have not ended their lives by a voluntary
death! To be sure, Aristotle says "Suicide is a wrong against the State, although not against
the person;" But they were not rivals yet and there was much
to talk of good-naturedly, after some slight outflamings of passion on the part of Ab, and
the two men were good friends again.

The sum of all the day was that there had been much exercise and fun, for Oak at least. Ab
had not caught the Shell girl, manfully as he had striven. Had he caught her and talked with
her upon the river bank it might have changed the current of his life. With a man so young
and sturdy and so full of life the laughing fancy of a moment might have changed into a stronger
feeling and the swimming girl might have become a woman of the cave people, one not quite so
equal by heritage to the task of breeding good climbing and running and fighting and progressive
beings as some girl of the hills.

It matters little what might have happened had the outcome of the day's effort been the reverse
of what it was. This is but the account of the race and what the sequel was when Ab swam so
far and furiously and well. It was his first flirtation. It was yet to come to him that he
should be really in love in the cave man's way.

CHAPTER XV.

THE MAMMOTH AT BAY.

It was late autumn, and a light snow covered the ground, when one day a cave man, panting for
breath, came running down the river bank and paused at the cave of One-Ear. He had news, great
news! He told his story hurriedly, and then was taken into the cave and given meat, while Ab,
seizing his weapons, fled downward further still toward the great kitchen-midden of the Shell
People. Just as ages and ages later, not far from the same region, some Scottish runner carried
the fiery cross, Ab ran exultingly with the news it was his to bring. There must be an immediate
gathering, not only of the cave men, but of the Shell People as well, and great mutual effort
for great gain. The mammoths were near the point of the upland!

The runner to the cave of One-Ear was a hunter living some miles to the north, upon a ledge
of a broad forest-covered plateau terminating on the west in a slope which ended in a precipice
with more than a hundred feet of sheer descent to the valley below. On rare occasions a herd
of mammoths invaded the forest and worked itself toward the apex of the plateau, and then word
went all over the region, for it was an event in the history of the cave men. If but a sufficient
force could be suddenly assembled, food in abundance for all was almost certainly assured.
The prize was something stupendous, but prompt action was required, and there might be tragedies.
As bees hum and gather when their hive is disturbed, so did the Shell People when Ab burst
in upon them and delivered his message. There was rushing about and a gathering of weapons
and a sorting out of men who should go upon the expedition. But little time was wasted. Within
half an hour Ab was straining back again up the river toward his own abode, while behind him
trailed half a hundred of the Shell People, armed in a way effective enough, but which, in
the estimation of the cave men, was preposterous. The spears of the Shell People had shafts
of different wood and heads of different material from those of the cave men, and they used
their weapons in a different manner. Accustomed to the spearing of fish or of an occasional
water beast, like a small hippopotamus, which still existed in the rivers of the peninsula,
they always threw their spears--though the cave people were experts with this as well--and,
as a last resource in close conflict, they used no stone ax or mace, but simply ran away, to
throw again from a distance, or to fly again, as conditions made advisable. But they were brave
in a way--it was necessary that all who would live must have a certain animal bravery in those
days--and their numbers made them essential in the rare hunting of the mammoth.

When the company reached the home of Ab they found already assembled there a score of the hill
men, and, as the word had gone out in every direction, it was found, when the rendezvous was
reached, which was the cave of Hilltop, the man living near the crest of the plateau, and the
one who had made the first run down the river, that there were more than a hundred, counting
all together, to advance against the herd and, if possible, drive the great beasts toward the
precipice. Among this hundred there was none more delighted than Ab and Oak, for, of course,
these two had found each other in the group, and were almost like a brace of dogs whining for
the danger and the hunt.

Not lightly was an expedition against a herd of mammoths to be begun, even by a hundred well-armed
people of the time of the cave men. The mammoth was a monster beast, with perhaps somewhat
less of sagaciousness than the modern elephant, but with a temper which was demoniacal when
aroused, and with a strength which nothing could resist. He could be slain only by strategy.
Hence the everlasting watch over the triangular plateau and the gathering of the cave and river
people to catch him at a disadvantage. But, even with a drove feeding near the slope which
led to the precipice, the cave men would have been helpless without the introduction of other
elements than their weapons and their clamor. The mammoth paid no more attention to the cave
man with a spear than to one of the little wild horses which fed near him at times. The pygmy
did not alarm him, but did the pygmy ever venture upon an attack, then it was likely to be
seized by the huge trunk and flung against rock or tree, to fall crushed and mangled, or else
it was trodden viciously under foot. From one thing, though, the mammoth, huge as he was, would
flee in terror. He could not face the element of fire, and this the cave men had learned to
their advantage. They could drive the mammoth when they dare not venture to attack him, and
herein lay their advantage.

Under direction of the veteran hunter, Hilltop, who had discovered the whereabouts of the drove,
preparations were made for the dangerous advance, and the first thing done was the breaking
off of dry roots of the overturned pitch pines, and gathering of knots of the same trees, with
limbs attached, to serve as handles. These roots and knots, once lighted, would blaze for hours
and made the most perfect of natural torches. Lengths of bark of certain other trees when bound
together and lighted at one end burned almost as long and brightly as the roots and knots.
Each man carried an unlighted torch of one kind or another, in addition to his weapons, and
when this provision was made the band was stretched out in a long line and a silent advance
began through the forest. The herd of mammoths was composed of nineteen, led by a monster even
of his kind, and men who had been watching them all night and during the forenoon said that
the herd was feeding very near the edge of the wood, where it ended on the slope leading to
the precipice. There was ice upon the slope and there were chances of a great day's hunting.
To cut off the mammoths, that is, to extend a line across the uprising peninsula where they
were feeding, would require a line of not more than about five hundred yards in length, and
as there were more than a hundred of the hunters, the line which could be formed would be most
effective. Lighted punk, which preserved fire and gave forth no odor to speak of, was carried
by a number of the men, and the advance began.

It had been an exhilarating scene when the cave men and Shell People first assembled and when
the work of gathering material for the torches was in progress. So far was the gathering from
the present haunt of the game that caution had been unnecessary, and there was talk and laughter
and all the open enjoyment of an anticipated conquest. The light snow, barely covering the
ground, flashed in the sun, and the hunters, practically impervious to the slight cold, were
almost prankish in their demeanor. Ab and Oak especially were buoyant. This was the first hunt
upon the rocky peninsula of either of them, and they were delighted with the new surroundings
and eager for the fray to come. All about was talk and laughter, which became general with
any slight physical disaster which came to one among the hunters in the climbing of some tree
for a promising dead branch or finding a treacherous hollow when assailing the roots of some
upturned pine. It was a brisk scene and a lively one, that which occurred that crisp morning
in late autumn when the wild men gathered to hunt the mammoth. All was brightness and jollity
and noise.

Very different, in a moment, was the condition when the hunters entered the forest and, extended
in line, began their advance toward the huge objects of their search. The cave man, almost
a wild beast himself in some of his ways, had, on occasion, a footfall as light as that of
any animal of the time. The twig scarcely crackled and the leaf scarcely rustled beneath his
tread, and when the long line entered the wood the silence of death fell there, for the hunters
made no sound, and what slight sound the woodland had before--the clatter of the woodpeckers
and jays--was hushed by their advance. So through the forest, which was tolerably close, the
dark line swept quietly forward until there came from somewhere a sudden signal, and with a
still more cautious advance and contraction of the line as the peninsula narrowed the quarry
was brought in sight of all.

Close to the edge of the slope, and separated by a slight open space from the forest proper,
was an evergreen grove, in which the herd of monster beasts was feeding. A great bull, with
long up-curling tusks, loomed above them all, and was farthest away in the grove. The hunters,
hidden in the forest, lay voiceless and motionless until the elders decided upon a plan of
attack, and then the word was passed along that each man must fire his torch.

All along the edge of the wood arose the flashing of little flames. These grew in magnitude
until a line of fire ran clear across the wood, and the mammoths nearest raised their trunks
and showed signs of uneasiness. Then came a signal, a wild shout, and at once, with a yell,
the long line burst into the open, each man waving his flaming torch and rushing toward the grove.

There was a chance--a slight one--that the whole herd might be stampeded, but this had rarely
happened within the memory of the oldest hunter. The mammoth, though subject to panic, did
not lack intelligence and when in a group was conscious of its strength. As that yell ascended,
the startled beasts first rushed deeper into the grove and then, as the slope beyond was revealed
to them, turned and charged blindly, all save one, the great tusker, who was feeding at the
grove's outer verge. They came on, great mountains of flesh, but swerved as they met the advancing
line of fire and weaved aimlessly up and down for a moment or two. Then a huge bull, stung
by a spear hurled by one of the hunters and frantic with fear, plunged forward across the line
and the others followed blindly. Three men were crushed to death in their passage and all the
mammoths were gone save the big bull, who had started to rejoin his herd but had not reached
it in time. He was now raging up and down in the grove, bewildered and trumpeting angrily.
Immediately the hunters gathered closer together and made their line of fire continuous.

The mammoth rushed out clear of the trees and stood looming up, a magnificent creature of unrivaled
size and majesty. His huge tusks shone out whitely against the mountain of dark shaggy hair.
His small eyes blazed viciously as he raised his trunk and trumpeted out what seemed either
a hoarse call to his herd or a roar of agony over his strait. He seemed for a moment as if
about to rush upon the dense line of his tormentors, but the flaming faggots dashed almost
in his face by the reckless and excited hunters daunted him, and, as a spear lodged in his
trunk, he turned with almost a shriek of pain and dashed into the grove again. Close at his
heels bounded the hundred men, yelling like demons and forgetting all danger in the madness
of the chase. Right through the grove the great beast crashed and then half turned as he came
to the open slope beyond. But the fire behind and about the desperate mammoth seemed all one
flame now, countless spears thrown with all the force of strong arms were piercing his tough
hide, and out upon the slope toward the precipice the great beast plunged. Upon his very flanks
was the fire and about him all the stinging danger from the half-crazed hunters. He lunged
forward, slipped upon the smooth glacial floor beneath him, tried to turn again to meet his
thronging foes and face the ring of flame, and then, wavering, floundering, moving wonderfully
for a creature of his vast size, but uncertain as to foothold, he was driven to the very crest
of the ledge, and, scrambling vainly, carrying away an avalanche of ice, snow and shrubs, went
crashing to his death, a hundred feet below!

CHAPTER XVI.

THE FEAST OF THE MAMMOTH.

To the right and left of the precipice the fall to the plain below was more gradual, and with
exultant yells, the cave and Shell men rushed in either direction, those venturing nearest
the sheer descent going down like monkeys, clinging as they went to shrubs and vines, while
those who ran to where the drop was a degree more passable fairly tumbled downward to the plain.
In an incredibly short space of time absolute silence prevailed in and about the grove where
the scene had lately been so fiercely stirring. In the valley below there was wildest clamor.

It was a great occasion for the human beings of the region. There was no question as to the
value of the prize the hunters had secured. Never before in any joint hunting expedition, within
the memory of the oldest present, had followed more satisfactory result. The spoil was well
worth the great effort that had been made; in the estimation of the time, perhaps worth the
death of the hunters who had been killed. The huge beast lay dead, close to the base of the
cliff. One great, yellow-white, curved tusk had been snapped off and showed itself distinct
upon the grass some feet away from the mountain of flesh so lately animated. The sight was
one worth looking upon in any age, for, in point of grandeur of appearance, the mammoth, while
not as huge as some of the monsters of reptilian times, had a looming impressiveness never
surpassed by any beast on the earth's surface. Though prone and dead he was impressive.

But the cave and Shell men were not so much impressed as they were delighted. They had come
into possession of food in abundance and there would be a feast of all the people of the region,
and, after that, abundant meat in many a hut and cave for many a day. The hunters were noisy
and excited. A group pounced upon the broken tusk--for a mammoth tusk, or a piece of one, was
a prize in a cave dwelling--and there was prospect of a struggle, but grim voices checked the
wrangle of those who had seized upon this portion of the spoil and it was laid aside, to be
apportioned later. The feast was the thing to be considered now.

Again swift-footed messengers ran along forest paths and swam streams and thridded wood and
thicket, this time to assemble, not the hunters alone, but with them all members of households
who could conveniently and safely come to the gathering of the morrow, when the feast of the
mammoth would be on. The messengers dispatched, the great carcass was assailed, and keen flint
knives, wielded by strong and skillful hands, were soon separating from the body the thick
skin, which was divided as seemed best to the leaders of the gathering, Hilltop, the old hunter,
for his special services, getting the chief award in the division. Then long slices of the
meat were cut away, fires were built, the hunters ate to repletion and afterward, with a few
remaining awake as guards, slept the sleep of the healthy and fully fed. Not in these modern
days would such preliminary consumption of food be counted wisest preparation for a feast on
the morrow, but the cave and Shell men were alike independent of affections of the stomach
or the liver, and could, for days in sequence, gorge themselves most buoyantly.

The morning came crisp and clear, and, with the morning, came from all directions swiftly moving
men and women, elated and hungry and expectant. The first families and all other families of
the region were gathering for the greatest social function of the time. The men of various
households had already exerted themselves and a score or two of fires were burning, while the
odor of broiling meat was fragrant all about. Hunter husbands met their broods, and there was
banqueting, which increased as, hour after hour, new groups came in. The families of both Ab
and Oak were among those early in the valley, Beechleaf and Bark, wide-eyed and curious, coming
upon the scene as a sort of advance guard and proudly greeting Ab. All about was heard clucking
talk and laughter, an occasional shout, and ever the cracking of stone upon the more fragile
thing, as the monster's roasted bones were broken to secure the marrow in them.

There was hilarity and universal enjoyment, though the assemblage, almost by instinct, divided
itself into two groups. The cave men and the Shell men, while at this time friendly, were,
as has been indicated, unlike in many tastes and customs and to an extent unlike in appearance.
The cave man, accustomed to run like the deer along the forest ways, or to avoid sudden danger
by swift upward clambering and swinging along among treetops, was leaner and more muscular
than the Shell man, and had in his countenance a more daring and confident expression. The
Shell man was shorter and, though brawny of build, less active of movement. He had spent more
hours of each day of his life in his rude raft-boat, or in walking slowly with poised spear
along creek banks, or, with bent back, digging for the great luscious shell-fish which made
a portion of his food, than he had spent afoot and on land, with the smell of growing things
in his nostrils. "Shall you have many Pictures in this year?" i.e., He'll jump for joy if he
gets one in.

"Is your big Picture going to Burlington House or the Grosvenor?" i.e., They wouldn't have it at an
East-End Free Art Show.

"By Jove, dear boy, Burne-Jones will have to look to his laurels?" i.e., Green mist and gawky girls,
as usual!

"What I love about your pictures, dear Mr. Stodge, is
their Subtle Ideal treatment, so different, &c., &c.?" i.e., 'Tisn't
like anything on earth.

"Best thing you've done for years, my boy;
and, mark my words, it'll create a sensation!" i.e., Everybody says
it'll be a great go, and I may as well be in it.

"Entre nous, I don't
think Millais' landscape is to be compared with it?" i.e., I should
hope not--for MILLAIS' sake.

But there came a time in the afternoon when even such feasters as were assembled on this occasion
became, in a measure, content, when this one and that one began to look about, and when what
might be called the social amenities of the period began. Veterans flocked together, reminiscent
of former days when another mammoth had been driven over this same cliff; the young grouped
about different firesides, and there was talk of feats of strength and daring and an occasional
friendly grapple. Slender, sinewy girls, who had girls' ways then as now, ate together and
looked about coquettishly and safely, for none had come without their natural guardians. Rarely
in the history of the cave men had there been a gathering more generally and thoroughly festive,
one where good eating had made more good fellowship. Possibly--for all things are relative--there
has never occurred an affair of more social importance within the centuries since. Human beings,
dangerous ones, were merry and trusting together, and the young looked at each other.

Of course Ab and Oak had been eating in company. They had risked themselves dangerously in
the battle on the cliff, had escaped injury and were here now, young men of importance, each
endowed with an appetite corresponding with the physical exertion of which he was capable and
which he never hesitated to make. The amount either of those young men had eaten was sufficient
to make a gourmand, though of grossest Roman times, fairly sick with envy, and they were still
eating, though, it must be confessed, with modified enthusiasm. Each held in his hand a smoking
lump of flesh from some favored portion of the mammoth and each rent away an occasional mouthful
with much content. Suddenly Ab ceased mastication and stood silent, gazing intently at a not
unpleasing object a few yards distant.

Two girls stood together near a fire about which were grouped perhaps a dozen people. The two
were eating, not voraciously, but with an apparent degree of interest in what they were doing,
for they had not been among the early arrivals. It was upon these two that Ab's wandering glance
had fallen and had been held, and it was not surprising that he had become so interested. Either
of the couple was fitted to attract attention, though a pair more utterly unlike it would be
difficult to imagine. One was slight and the other the very reverse, but each had striking
characteristics.

They stood there, the two, just as two girls so often stand to-day, the hand of one laid half-caressingly
upon the hip of the other. The beaming, broad one was chattering volubly and the slender one
listening carelessly. The talking of the heavier girl was interrupted evenly by her mumbling
at a juicy strip of meat. Her hunger, it was clear, had not yet been satisfied, and it was
as clear, too, that her companion had yet an appetite. The slender one was, seemingly, not
much interested in the conversation, but the other chattered on. It was plain that she was
a most contented being. She was symmetrical only from the point of view of admirers of the
heavily built. She had very broad hips and muscular arms and was somewhat squat of structure.
It is hesitatingly to be admitted of this young lady that, sturdy and prepossessing, from a
practical point of view, as she might be to the average food-winning cave man, she lacked a
certain something which would, to the observant, place her at once in good society. She was
an exceedingly hairy young woman. She wore the usual covering of skins, but she would have
been well-draped, in moderately temperate weather, had the covering been absent. Either for
fashion's sake or comfort, not much weight of foreign texture in addition to her own hirsute
and, to a certain extent, graceful, natural garb, was needed. She was a female Esau of the
time, just a great, good-hearted, strong and honest cave girl, of the subordinate and obedient
class which began thousands of years before did history, one who recognized in the girl who
stood beside her a stronger and dominating spirit, and who had been received as a trusted friend
and willing assistant. It is so to-day, even among the creatures which are said to have no
souls, the dogs especially. But the girl had strength and a certain quick, animal intelligence.
She was the daughter of a cave man living not far from the home of old Hilltop, and her name
was Moonface. Her countenance was so broad and beaming that the appellation had suggested itself
in her jolly childhood.

Very different from Moonface was the slender being who, having eaten a strip of meat, was now
seeking diligently with a splinter for the marrow in the fragment of bone her father had tossed
toward her. Her father was Hilltop, the veteran of the immediate region and the hero of the
day, and she was called Lightfoot, a name she had gained early, for not in all the country
round about was another who could pass over the surface of the earth with greater swiftness
than could she. And it was upon Lightfoot that Ab was looking.

The young woman would have been fair to look upon, or at least fascinating, to the most world-wearied
and listless man of the present day. She stood there, easily and gracefully, her arms and part
of her breast, above, and her legs from about the knees, below, showing clearly from beneath
her covering of skins. Her deep brown hair, knotted back with a string of the tough inner bark
of some tree, hung upon the middle of her flat, in-setting back. She was not quite like any
of the other girls about her. Her eyes were larger and softer and there was more reflection
and variety of expression in them. Her limbs were quite as long as those of any of her companions
and the fingers and toes, though slenderer, were quite as suggestive of quick and strong grasping
capabilities, but there was, with all the proof of springiness and litheness, a certain rounding
out. The strip of hair upon her legs below the knees was slight and silken, as was also that
upon her arms. Yet, undoubted leader in society as her appearance indicated, quite aside from
her father's standing, there was in her face, with all its loftiness of air, a certain blithesomeness
which was almost at variance with conditions. She was a most lovable young woman--there could
be no question about that--and Ab had, as he looked upon her for the first time, felt the fact
from head to heel. He thought of her as like the leopard tree-cat, most graceful creature of
the wood, so trim was she and full of elasticity, and thought of her, too, as he looked in
her intelligent face, as higher in another way. He was somewhat awed, but he was courageous.
He had, so far in life, but sought to get what he wanted whenever it was in sight. Now he was
nonplussed.

Presently Lightfoot raised her eyes and they met those of Ab. The young people looked at each
other steadily for a moment and then the glance of the girl was turned away. But, meanwhile,
the man had recovered himself. He had been eating, absent-mindedly, a well-cooked portion of
a great steak of the mammoth's choicest part. He now tore it in twain and watched the girl
intently. She raised her eyes again and he tossed her a half of the smoking flesh. She saw
the movement, caught the food deftly in one hand as it reached her, and looked at Ab and laughed.
There was no mock modesty. She began eating the choice morsel contentedly; the two were, in
a manner, now made formally acquainted.

The young man did not, on the instant, pursue his seeming advantage, the result of an impulsive
bravery requiring a greater effort on his part than the courage he had shown in conflict with
many a beast of the forest. He did not talk to the young woman. But he thought to himself,
while his blood bubbled in his veins, that he would find her again; that he would find her
in the wood! She did not look at him more, for her people were clustering about her and this
was a great occasion.

Ab was recalled to himself by a hoarse exclamation. Oak was looking at him fiercely. There
was no other sound, but the young man stood gazing fixedly at the place where the girl had
just been lost amid the group about her. And Ab knew instinctively, as men have learned to
know so well in all the years, from the feeling which comes to them at such a time, that he
had a rival, that Oak also had seen and loved this slender creature of the hillside.

There was a division of the mammoth flesh and hide and tusks. Ab struggled manfully for a portion
of one of the tusks, which he wanted for Old Mok's carving, and won it at last, the elders
deciding that he and Oak had fought well enough upon the cliff to entitle them to a part of
the honor of the spoil, and Oak opposing nothing done by Ab, though his looks were glowering.
Then, as the sun passed toward the west, all the people separated to take the dangerous paths
toward their homes. Ab and Oak journeyed away together. Ab was jubilant, though doubtful, while
the face of Oak was dark. The heart of neither was light within him.

CHAPTER XVII.

THE COMRADES.

Drifting away in various directions toward their homes the Cave and Shell People still kept
in groups, by instinct. Social functions terminated before dark and guests going and coming
kept together for mutual protection in those days of the cave bear and other beasts. But on
the day of the Feast of the Mammoth there was somewhat less than the usual precaution shown.
There were vigorous and well-armed hunters at hand by scores, and under such escort women and
children might travel after dusk with a degree of safety, unless, indeed, the great cave tiger,
Sabre-Tooth, chanced to be abroad, but he was more rarely to be met than others of the wild
beasts of the time. When he came it was as a thunderbolt and there were death and mourning
in his trail. The march through the forest as the shadows deepened was most watchful. There
was a keen lookout on the part of the men, and the women kept their children well in hand.
From time to time, one family after another detached itself from the main body and melted into
the forest on the path to its own cave near at hand. Thus Hilltop and his family left the group
in which were Ab and Oak, and glances of fire followed them as they went. The two girls, Lightfoot
and Moonface, had walked together, chattering like crows. They had strung red berries upon
grasses and had hung them in their hair and around their necks, and were fine creatures. Lightfoot,
as was her wont, laughed freakishly at whatever pleased her, and in her merry mood had an able
second in her sturdy companion. There were moments, though, when even the irrepressible Lightfoot
was thoughtful and so quiet that the girl who was with her wondered. The greater girl had been
lightly touched with that unnamable force which has changed men and women throughout all the
ages. The picture of Ab's earnest face was in her mind and would not depart. She could not,
of course, define her own mood, nor did she attempt it. She felt within herself a certain quaking,
as of fear, at the thought of him, and yet, so she told herself again and again, she was not
afraid. All the time she could see Ab's face, with its look of longing and possession, but
with something else in it, when his eyes met hers, which she could not name nor understand.
She could not speak of him, but Moonface had upon her no such stilling influence.

"They look alike," she said.

Lightfoot assented, knowing the girl meant Ab and Oak. "But Ab is taller and stronger," Moonface
continued, and Lightfoot assented as indifferently, for, somehow, of the two she had remembered
definitely one only. She became daring in her reflections: "What if he should want to carry
me to his cave?" and then she tried to run away from the thought and from anything and everybody
else, leaping forward, outracing and leaving all the company. She reached her father's cave
far ahead of the others and stood, laughing, at the entrance, as the family and Moonface, a
guest for the night, came trotting up.

And Ab, the buoyant and strong, was not himself as he journeyed with the homeward-pressing
company. His mood changed and he dropped away from Oak and lagged in the rear of the little
band as it wound its way through the forest. Slight time was needed for others to recognize
his mood, and he was strong of arm and quick of temper, as all knew well, and, so, he was soon
left to stalk behind in independent sulkiness. He felt a weight in his breast; a fiery spot
burned there. He was fierce with Oak because Oak had looked at Lightfoot with a warm light
in his eyes. He! when he should have known that Ab was looking at her! This made rage in his
heart; and sadness came, too, because he was perplexed over the girl. "How can I get her?"
he mumbled to himself, as he stalked along.

Meanwhile, at the van of the company there was noise and frolic. Assembled in force, they were
for the hour free from dread of the haunting terror of wild beasts, and, satisfied with eating,
the Cave and Shell People were in one of the merriest moods of their lives, collectively speaking.
The young men were especially jubilant and exuberant of demeanor. Their sport was rough and
dangerous. There were scuffling and wrestling and the more reckless threw their stone axes,
sometimes at each other, always, it is true, with warning cries, but with such wild, unconscious
strength put in the throwing that the finding of a living target might mean death. Ab, engrossed
in thoughts of something far apart from the rude sport about him, became nervously impatient.
Like the girl, he wanted to escape from his thoughts, and bounding ahead to mingle with the
darting and swinging group in front, he was soon the swift and stalwart leader in their foolishly
risky sport, the center of the whole commotion. One muscled man would hurl his stone hatchet
or strong flint-headed spear at a green tree and another would imitate him until a space in
advance was covered and the word given for a rush, when all would race for the target, each
striving to reach it first and detach his own weapon before others came. It was a merry but
too careless contest, with a chance of some serious happening. There followed a series of these
mad games and the oldsters smiled as they heard the sound of vigorous contest and themselves
raced as they could, to keep in close company with the stronger force.

Ab had shown his speed in all his playing. Now he ran to the front and plucked out his spear,
a winner, then doubled and ran back beside the pathway to mingle with the central body of travelers,
having in mind only to keep in the heart and forefront of as many contests as possible. There
was more shouting and another rush from the main body and, bounding aside from all, he ran
to get the chance of again hurling his spear as well. A great oak stood in the middle of the
pathway and toward it already a spear or two had been sent, all aimed, as the first thrower
had indicated, at a white fungus growth which protruded from the tree. It was a matter of accuracy
this time. Ab leaped ahead some yards in advance of all and hurled his spear. He saw the white
chips fly from the side of the fungus target, saw the quivering of the spear shaft with the
head deep sunken in the wood, and then felt a sudden shock and pain in one of his legs. He
fell sideways off the path and beneath the brushwood, as the wild band, young and old, swept
by. He was crippled and could not walk. He called aloud, but none heard him amid the shouting
of that careless race. He tried to struggle to his feet, but one leg failed him and he fell
back, lying prone, just aside from the forest path, nearly weaponless and the easy prey of
the wild beasts. What had hurt him so grievously was a spear thrown wildly from behind him.
It had, hurled with great strength, struck a smooth tree trunk and glanced aside, the point
of the spear striking the young man fairly in the calf of the leg, entering somewhat the bone
itself, and shocking, for the moment, every nerve. The flint sides had cut a vein or two and
these were bleeding, but that was nothing. The real danger lay in his helplessness. Ab was
alone, and would afford good eating for those of the forest who, before long, would be seeking
him. The scent of the wild beast was a wonderful thing. The man tried to rise, then lay back
sullenly. Far in the distance, and growing fainter and fainter, he could hear the shouts of
the laughing spear-throwers.

The strong young man, thus left alone to death almost inevitable, did not altogether despair.
He had still with him his good stone ax and his long and keen stone knife. He would, at least,
hurt something sorely before he was eaten, he thought grimly to himself. And then he pressed
leaves together on the cut upon his leg, and laid himself back upon the leaves and waited.

He did not have to wait long. He had not thought to do so. How full the woods were of blood-scenting
and man-eating things none knew better than he. His ear, keen and trained, caught the patter
of a distant approach. "Wolves," he said to himself at first, and then "Hyenas," for the step
was puzzling. He was perplexed. The step was regular, and it was not in the forest on either
side, but was coming up the path. A terror came upon him and he had crawled deeper into the
shades, when he noted that the steps first ceased, and then that they wandered searchingly
and uncertainly. Then, loud and strong, rang out a voice, calling his name, and it was the
voice of Oak! He could not answer for a moment, and then he cried out gladly.

Oak had, in the forward-rushing group, seen Ab's hurt and fall, but had thought it a trifling
matter, since no outcry came from those behind, and so had kept his course away and ahead with
the rest. But finally he had noted the absence of Ab and had questioned, and then--first telling
some of his immediate companions that they were to lag and wait for him--had started back upon
a run to reach the place where he had last seen his friend. It was easy now to arrange wet
leaves about Ab's crippling, but little more than temporary, wound. The two, one leaning upon
the other and hobbling painfully, and each with weapons in hand, contrived, at last, to reach
Oak's lingering and grumbling contingent. Ab was helped along by two instead of one then, and
the rest was easy. When the pathway leading to home was reached, Oak accompanied his friend,
and the two passed the night together.

Ab, once on his own bed, with Oak couched beside him, was surprised to find, not merely that
his physical pain was going, but that the greater one was gone. The weight and burning had
left his breast and he was no longer angry at Oak. He thought blindly but directly toward conclusions.
He had almost wanted to kill Oak, all because each saw the charm of and wanted the possession
of a slender, beautiful creature of their kind. Then something dangerous had happened to him,
and this same Oak, his friend, the man he had wished to kill, had come back and saved his life.
The sense which we call gratitude, and which is not unmingled with what we call honor, came
to this young cave man then. He thought of many things, worried and wakeful as he was, and
perhaps made more acute of perception by the slight, exciting fever of his wound.

He thought of how the two, he and Oak, had planned and risked together, of their boyish follies
and failures and successes, and of how, in later years, Oak had often helped him, of how he
had saved Oak's life once in the river swamp, where quicksands were, of how Oak had now offset
even that debt by carrying him away from certain ending amid wild beasts. No one--and of the
cave men he knew many--no one in all the careless, merry party had missed him save Oak. He
doubtless could not have told himself why it was, but he was glad that he could repay it all
and have the balance still upon his side. He was glad that he had the secret of the bow and
arrow to reveal. That should be Oak's! So it came that, late that night, when the fire in the
cave had burned low and when one could not wisely speak above a whisper, Ab told Oak the story
of the new weapon, of how it had been discovered, of how it was to be used and of all it was
for hunters and fighters. Furthermore, he brought his best bow and best arrows forth, and told
Oak they were his and that they would practice together in the morning. His astonished and
delighted companion had little to say over the revelation. He was eager for the morning, but
he straightened out his limbs upon the leafy mattress and slept well. So, somewhat later, did
the half-feverish Ab.

Morning came and the cave people were astir. There was brief though hearty feeding and then
Ab and Oak and Old Mok, to whom Ab had said much aside, went away from the cave and into the
forest. There Oak was taught the potency of the new weapon, its deadly quality and the safety
of distance it afforded its user. It was a great morning for all three, not excepting the stern
and critical old teacher, when they thus met together in the wood and the secret of what two
had found was so transmitted to another. As for Oak, he was fairly aflame with excitement.
He was far from slow of mind and he recognized in a moment the enormous advantage of the new
way of killing either the things they ate, or the things they dreaded most. He could scarcely
restrain his eagerness to experiment for himself. Before noon had come he was gone, carrying
away the bow and the good arrows. As he disappeared in the wood Ab said nothing, but to himself
he thought:

"He may have all the bows and arrows he can make, but I will have Lightfoot myself!"

Ab and Mok started for the cave again, Ab, bow in hand and with ready arrow. There was a patter
of feet upon leaves in the wood beside them and then the arrow was fitted to the string, while
Old Mok, strong-armed if weak-legged, raised aloft his spear. The two were seeking no conflict
with wild beasts today and were but defensive and alert. They were puzzled by the sound their
quick ears caught. "Patter, patter," ever beside them, but deep in the forest shade, came the
sound of menacing followers of some sort.

There was tension of nerves. Old Mok, sturdy and unconsciously fatalistic, was more self-contained
than the youth at his side, bow-armed and with flint ax and knife ready for instant use. At
last an open space was reached across which ran the well-worn path. Now the danger must reveal
itself. The two men emerged into the glade, and, a moment later, there bounded into it gamboling
and full of welcome, the wolf cubs, which had played about the cave so long, who were now detached
from their own kind and preferred the companionship of man. There was laughter then, and a
more careless demeanor with the weapon borne.

CHAPTER XVIII.

LOVE AND DEATH.

Different from his former self became this young forester, Ab. He was thinking of something
other than wild beasts and their pursuit. Instinctively, the course of his hunting expeditions
tended toward the northwest and soon the impulse changed to a design. He must look upon Lightfoot
again! Henceforth he haunted the hill region, and never keener for quarry or more alert for
the approach of some dangerous animal was the eye of this woodsman than it was for the appearance
somewhere of a slender figure of a cave girl. Neither game nor things to dread were numerous
in the vicinity of the home of Hilltop, for there one of the hardiest and wisest among hunters
had occupied his cave for many years, and wild beasts learn things. So it chanced that Lightfoot
could wander farther afield than could most girls of the time. Ab knew all this well, for the
quality of expert and venturesome old Hilltop was familiar to all the cave men throughout a
wide stretch of country. So Ab, somewhat shamefaced to his own consciousness, hunted in a region
not the best for spoil, and looked for a girl who might appear on some forest path, moderately
safe from the rush of any of the hungry man-eaters of the wood.

But not all the time of this wild lover was wasted in haunting the possible idling-places of
the girl he wanted so. With love there had come to him such sense and thoughtfulness as has
come with earnest love to millions since. What could he do with Lightfoot should he gain her?
He was but a big, young fighting man and hunter, still sleeping, almost nightly, on one of
the leaf beds in his father's cave. With a wife of his own he must have a cave of his own.
Compared with his first impulses toward the girl, this was a new train of thought, and, as
we recognize it to-day, a nobler one. He wanted to care for his own. He wanted a cave fit for
the reception of such a woman as this, to him, the sweetest and proudest of all beings, Lightfoot,
daughter of old Hilltop, of the wooded highlands.

Far up the river, far beyond the home of Oak's father and beyond the shining marshlands and
the purple heather reaches which made the foothills pleasant, extended to the river's bank
a promontory, bold and picturesque and clad heavily with the best of trees. It was a great
stretch of land, where, in some of nature's grim work, the earth had been up-heaved and there
had been raised good soil for giant forests, and at the same time been made broad caverns to
become future habitations of the creature known as man. But the trees bore nuts and fruits,
and such creatures as found food in nuts and fruits, and, later, such as loved rich herbage,
came to the forest in great numbers, and then followed such as fed upon these again, all the
flesh eaters, to whom man was, as any other living thing, to be seized upon and devoured. The
promontory, so rich in game and nuts and fruits, was, at the same time, the most dangerous
in all the region for human habitation. There were deep, dry caves within its limits, but in
none of them had a cave man yet ventured to make his home. It was toward this promontory that
the young man in love turned his eyes. Because others had feared to make a home in this lone,
high region should he also fear? There was food there in plenty and if there were chance of
fighting in plenty, so much the better! Was he not strong and fleet; had he not the best of
spears and axes? Above all, had he not the new weapon which made man far above the beasts?
Here was the place for a home which should be the best in all this region of the cave men.
Here game and food of all kinds would be most abundant. The situation would demand a brave
man and a woman scarcely less courageous, but would not he and the girl he was determined to
bring there meet all occasion? His mind was fixed.

Ab found a cave, one clean and dry and opening out upon a slight treeless area, and this he,
lover-like, improved for the woman he had resolved to bring there, arranging carefully the
interior of which must be a home. He had fancies such as lovers have exhibited from since the
time when the plesiosaurus swashed away in the strand of a warm sea a hollow nursery for the
birth and first tending of the young of his odd kind, up to the later time when men have squandered
fortunes on the sleeping rooms of women they have loved. He toiled for many days. With his
ax he chipped away the cavern's sharp protuberances at each side, and with the stone chips
from the walls and with what he brought from outside, he made the floor white and clean and
nearly level. He built a fireplace and chipped into a huge stone, which, fortunately, lay inside
the cave, a hollow for holding drinking water, or for the boiling of meat. He built up a passage-way
at the entrance, allowing something but not too much more than his own width, as the gauge
for measurement of its breadth. He brought into the cave a deep carpet of leaves and made a
wide bed in one corner and this he covered with furred skins, for many skins Ab owned in his
own right. Then, with a thick fragment of tough branch as a lever, he rolled a big stone near
the cave's entrance and left it ready to be occupied as a home. The woman was still lacking.

There came a day when Ab, impatient after his searching and waiting, but yet resolute, had
killed a capercailzie--the great grouse-like bird of the time, the descendants of which live
to-day in northern forests--and had built a fire and feasted, and then, instinctively careful,
had climbed to the first broad, low branch of an enormous tree and there adjusted himself to
sleep the sleep of one who has eaten heartily. He lay with the big branch for a bed, supported
on either side by green, upspringing twigs, and slept well for an hour or two and then awoke,
lazy and listless, but with much good to him from the repast and rest. It was not yet very
late in the afternoon and the sun still shone kindly upon him, as upon a whole world of rejoicing
things. Something like a reflection of the life of the morning was beginning to manifest itself,
as is ever the way where forests and wild things are. The wonderful noise of wood life was
renewed. As the young man awakened, he felt in every pulse the thrilling powers of existence.
Everything was fair to look upon. His ears took in the sound of the voices of birds, already
beginning vesper songs, though the afternoon was yet so early as scarcely to hint of evening,
and the scent from a thousand plants and flowers, permeating and intoxicating, reached his
senses as he lounged sprawlingly upon his safe bed aloft.

It was attractive, the scene which Ab looked upon. The forest was in all the glory of summer
and nesting and breeding things were happy. There was the fullness of the being of trees and
plants and of all birds and beasts. There was a soft commingling of sounds which told of the
life about, the effect of which was, somehow, almost drowsy in the blending of all together.
The great ferns waved gently along the hollows as the slight breeze touched them. They were
queer, those ferns. They were not quite so slender and tapering and gothic as the ferns we
see to-day. They were a trifle more lush and ragged, and their tips were sometimes almost rounded.
But Ab noted little of fern or bird. It was only the general sensuousness that was upon him.
The smell of the pines was a partial tonic to the healthy, half-awakened man, and, though he
lay back upon the rugged wooden bed and half dozed again, nature had aroused him a trifle beyond
the point of relapse into absolute, unknowing slumber. There was coming to him a sharpness
of perception which affected the quiescence of his enjoyment. He rose to a sitting posture
and looked about him. At once his eyes flashed, every nerve and muscle became tense and the
blood leaped turbulently in his veins. He had seen that for which he had come into this region,
the girl who had so reached his rude, careless heart. Lightfoot was very near him!

The girl, all unconscious, was sitting upon the trunk of a fallen tree which lay close beside
a creek. There was an abundance of small pebbles upon the little strand and the young lady
was absent-mindedly engaged in an occupation in which, to the observer, she took some interest,
while she, no doubt, was really thinking of something else. She sat there, slender, beautiful
and excelling, in her way, the belle of the period, merely amusing herself. Her toes were charming
toes. There could be no debate on that point, for, while long and strong and flexible, they
had a certain evenness and symmetry. They were being idly employed just now. At the creek's
edge, half imbedded in the ground, uprose the crest of a granite stone. Picking up pebble after
pebble in her admirable toes, Lightfoot was engaged in throwing them, one after another, at
the outstanding point of granite, utilizing in the performance only those toes and the brown
leg below the knee. She did exceedingly well and hit the red-brown target often. Ab, hot-headed
and fierce lover in the tree top, looked on admiringly. How perfect of form was she; how bright
the face! and then, forgetting himself, he cried aloud and slid from the branch as easily and
swiftly as any serpent and started running toward the girl. He must have her!

With his cry, the girl leaped to her feet, and as he reached the ground, recognized him on
the instant. She knew in the same instant that they had felt together and that it was not by
accident that he was near her. She had felt as he; so far as a woman may feel with a man; but
maidens are maidens, and sweet lightness dreads force, and a modified terror came upon her.
She paused for a moment, then turned and ran toward the upland forest.

Not a moment hesitating or faltering as affected by the girl's action was the young man who
had tumbled from the tree bed. The blood dancing within him and the great natural impulse of
gaining what was greatest to him in life controlled him now. He was hot with fierce lovingness.
He ran well, but he did not run better than the graceful thing before him.

Even for the critical being of the great cities of to-day, the one who "manages" races of all
sorts, it would have been worth while to see this race in the forest. As the doe leaps, scarcely
touching the ground, ran Lightfoot. As the wolf or hound runs, less swift for the moment, but
tireless, ran the man behind her. Yet of all the men in the cave region, this flying girl wanted
most this man to take her! It was the maidenly force-dreading instinct alone which made her run.

Ab, dogged and enduring, lost no space as the race led away toward the hill and home of the
fleet thing ahead of him. There were miles to be covered, and therein he had hope. They were
on the straight path to Hilltop's cave, though there were divergent, curving side paths almost
as available; but to avoid her pursuer, the fugitive could take none of these. There were cross-cuts
everywhere. In leaving the direct path she would but lose ground. To reach soon enough by straight,
clean running the towering wooded hill in which was her father's cave seemed the only hope
of the half-unwilling fugitive.

There were descents and ascents in the long chase and plateaus where the running was on level
ground. Straining forward, gaining little, but confident of overtaking the girl, Ab, deep-chested
and physically untroubled, pressed onward, when he noted that the girl made a sudden spurt
and bounded forward with a speed not shown before, while, at the same time, she swerved from
the right of the path.

It was not Ab who had made her swerve. Some new alarm had come to her. She was about to reach
and, as Ab supposed, pass one of the inletting paths entering almost at right angles from the
left. She did not pass it. She leaped into it in evident terror and then, breaking out from
the wood on the right, came another form and one surely in swift following. Ab knew the figure
well. Oak was the new pursuer!

The awful rage which rose in the heart of Ab as he saw what was happening is what can no more
be described than one can tell what a tiger in the jungle thinks. He saw another--the other
his friend--pursuing and intending to take what he wanted to be his and what had become to
him more than all else in the world; more than much eating and the skins of things to keep
him warm, more than a mammoth's tooth to carve, more than the glorious skin of the great cave
tiger, the possession of which made a rude nobility, more than anything and all else! He leaped
aside from the path. He knew well the other path upon which were running Oak and Lightfoot.
He knew that he could intercept them, because, though the running was not so good, the distance
to be covered was much less, for to him path running was a light matter. In the wood he ran
as easily and leaped as well and attained a point almost as quickly as the beasts. There was
a stress of effort and, as the shadows deepened, he burst in upon the cross path where he knew
were the fleeing Lightfoot and following Oak. He had thought to head them off, but Ab was not
the only man who was swift of foot in the cave country. They passed, almost as he bounded from
the forest. He saw them close together not many yards ahead of him and, with a shout of rage,
bent himself in swift and terrible pursuit again.

It was all plain to Ab now as he flew along, unnoted by the two ahead of him. He knew that
Oak had, like him, determined to own Lightfoot, and had like him, been seeking her. Only chance
had made the chase thus cross Oak's path; but that made no difference. There must be a grim
meeting soon. Ab could see that the endurance of the wonderfully fleet-footed woman was not
equal to that of the man so near her. She would soon be overtaken. Before her rose the hill,
not a mile in its slope, where were her father's cave, and safety. He knew that she had not
the strength to breast it fleetly enough for covert. And, as he looked, he saw the girl turn
a frightened face toward her close pursuer and knew that she saw him as well. Her pace slackened
for a moment as this revelation came to her, and he felt, somehow, that in him she recognized
comparative protection. Then she recovered herself and bent all the power she had toward the
ascent. But Oak had been gaining steadily, and now, with a sudden rush, he reached her and
grasped her, the woman shrieking wildly. A moment later Ab rushed in upon them with a shout.
Instinctively Oak released the girl, for in the cry he heard that which meant menace and immediate
danger. As Lightfoot felt herself free she stood for a moment or two without a movement, with
wide-open eyes, looking upon what was happening before her. Then she bounded away, not looking
backward as she ran.

The two men stood there glaring at each other, Oak perched, and yet not perched, so broad and
perfect was his foothold, on the crest of a slight shelf of the downward slope. There stood
the two men, poised, the one above, the other below, two who had been as close together from
childhood as all the attributes of mind and body might allow, and yet now as far apart as human
beings may be. They were beautiful in a way, each in his murderous, unconscious posing for
the leap. The sun hit the blue ax of Oak and made it look a gray. The raised ax of Ab, which
was of a lighter colored stone, was in the shade and its yellowness was darkened into brown.
The spectacle lasted for but a second. As Oak leaped Ab bounded aside and they stood upon a
level, a tiny plateau, and there was fierce, strong fencing. One could not note its methods;
even the keen-eyed wolverine, crouching low upon an adjacent monster limb, could never have
followed the swift movements of these stone axes. The dreadful play was brief. The clash of
stone together ceased as there came a duller sound, which told that stone had bitten bone.
Oak, slightly the higher of the two, as they stood thus in the fray, leaned forward suddenly,
his arms aloft, while from his hand dropped the blue ax. He floundered down uncouthly and grasped
the beech leaves with his hands, and then lay still. Ab stood there weaponless, a creature
wandering of mind. His yellow ax had parted from his hand, sunk deeply into the skull of Oak,
and he looked upon it curiously and vacantly. He was not sane. He stepped forward and pulled
the ax away and lifted it to a level with his eyes and went to where the sunlight shone. The
ax was not yellow any more. Meanwhile a girl was flitting toward her home and the shadows of
the waning day were deepening.

CHAPTER XIX.

A RACE WITH DREAD.

Ab looked toward the forest wherein Lightfoot had fled and then looked upon that which lay
at his feet. It was Oak--there were the form and features of his friend--but, somehow, it was
not Oak. There was too much silence and the blood upon the leaves seemed far too bright. His
rage departed, and he wanted Oak to answer and called to him, but Oak did not answer. Then
came slowly to him the idea that Oak was dead and that the wild beasts would that night devour
the dead man where he lay. The thought nerved him to desperate, sudden action. He leaped forward,
he put his arms about the body and carried it away to a hollow in the wooded slope. He worked
madly, doing some things as he had seen the cave people do at other buryings. He placed the
weapons of Oak beside him. He took from his belt his own knife, because it was better than
that of Oak, and laid it close to the dead man's hand, and then, first covering the body with
beech leaves, he worked frantically upon the overhanging soil, prying it down with a sharp-pointed
fragment of limb, and tossing in upon all as heavy stones as he could lift, until a great cairn
rose above the hunter who would hunt no more.

Panting with his efforts, Ab sat himself down upon a rock and looked upon the monument he had
raised. Again he called to Oak, but there was still no answer. The sun had set, evening shadows
thickened around him. Then there came upon the live man a feeling as dreadful as it was new,
and, with a yell, which was almost a shriek, he leaped to his feet and bounded away in fearful
flight.

He only knew this, that there was something hurt his inside of body and soul, but not the inside
of him as it had been when once he had eaten poisonous berries or when he had eaten too much
of the little deer. It was something different. It was an awful oppression, which seemed to
leave his body, in a manner, unfeeling but which had a great dread about it and which made
him think and think of the dead man, and made him want to run away and keep running. He had
always run far that day, but he was not tired now. His legs seemed to have the hard sinews
of the stag in them but up toward the top of him was something for them to carry away as fast
and far as possible from somewhere. He raced from the dense woodland down into the broad morass
to the west--beyond which was the rock country--and into which he had rarely ventured, so treacherous
its ways. What cared he now! He made great leaps and his muscles and sinews responded to the
thought of him. To cross that morass safely required a touch on tussocks and an upbounding
aside, a zig-zag exhibition of great strength and knowingness and recklessness. But it was
unreasoning; it was the instinct begotten of long training and, now, of the absence of all
nervousness. Each taut toe touched each point of bearing just as was required above the quagmire,
and, all unperceiving and uncaring, he fled over dirty death as easily as he might have run
upon some hardened woodland pathway. He did not think nor know nor care about what he was doing.
He was only running away from the something he had never known before! Why should he be running
now? He had killed things before and not cared and had forgotten. Why should he care now? But
there was the something which made him run. And where was Oak? Would Oak meet him again and
would they hunt together? No, Oak would not come, and he, this Ab, had made it so! He must
run. No one was following him--he knew that--but he must run!

The marsh was passed, night had fallen, but he ran on, pressing into the bear and tiger haunted
forest beyond. Anything, anything, to make him forget the strange feeling and the thing which
made him run! He plunged into a forest path, utterly reckless, wanting relief, a seeker for
whatever might come.

In that age and under such conditions as to locality it was inevitable that the creature, man,
running through such a forest path at night, must face some fierce creature of the carnivora
seeking his body for food. Ab, blinded of mood, cared not for and avoided not a fight, though
it might be with the monster bear or even the great tiger. There was no reason in his madness.
He was, though he knew it not, a practical suicide, yet one who would die fighting. What to
him were weight and strength to-night? What to him were such encounters as might come with
hungry four-footed things? It would but relieve him were some of the beasts to try to gain
his life and eat his body. His being seemed valueless, and as for the wild beasts--and here
came out the splendid death-facing quality of the cave man--well, it would be odd if there
were not more deaths than one! But all this was vague and only a minor part of thought.

Sometimes, as if to invite death, he yelled as he ran. He yelled whenever in his fleeting visions
he saw Oak lying dead again. So ran the man who had killed another.

There was a growl ahead of him, a sudden breaking away of the bushes, and then he was thrown
back, stunned and bleeding, because a great paw had smitten him. Whatever the beast might be,
it was hungry and had found what seemed easy prey. There was a difference, though, which the
animal,--it was doubtless a bear--unfortunately for him, did not comprehend, between the quality
of the being he proposed to eat just now and of other animals included in his ordinary menu.
But the bear did not reason; he but plunged forward to crush out the remaining life of the
runner his great paw had driven back and down and then to enjoy his meal.

The man was little hurt. His skin coat had somewhat protected him and his sinewy body had such
toughness that the hurling of it backward for a few feet was not anything involving a fatality.
Very surely and suddenly had been thrust upon him now the practical lesson of being or dying,
and it was good for the half-crazed runner, for it cleared his mind. But it made him no less
desperate or careless. With strength almost maniacal he leaped at what he would have fled from
at any other time, and, swinging his ax with the quickness of light, struck tremendously at
the great lowering head. He yelled again as he felt stone cut and crash into bone, though himself
swept aside once more as a great paw, sidestruck, hurled him into the bushes. He bounded to
his feet and saw something huge and dark and gasping floundering in the pathway. He thought
not but ran on panting. By some strange freak of forest fortune abetting might the man wandering
of mind had driven his ax nearly to the haft into the skull of his huge assailant. It may be
that never before had a cave man, thus armed, done so well. The slayer ran on wildly, and now
weaponless.

Soon to the runner the scene changed. The trees crowded each other less closely and there was
less of denned pathway. There came something of an ascent and he breasted it, though less swiftly,
for, despite the impelling force, nature had claims, and muscles were wearying of their work.
Fewer and fewer grew the trees. He knew that he was where there was now a sweep of rocky highlands
and that he was not far from the Fire Country, of which Old Mok had so often told him. He burst
into the open, and as he came out under the stars, which he could see again, he heard an ominous
whine, too near, and a distant howl behind him. A wolf pack wanted him.

He shuddered as he ran. The life instinct was fully awakened in him now, as the dread from
which he had run became more distant. Had he heard that close whine and distant howl before
he fairly reached the open he would have sought a treetop for refuge. Now it was too late.
He must run ahead blindly across the treeless space for such harborage as might come. Far ahead
of him he could see light, the light of fire, reaching out toward him through the darkness.
He was panting and wearied, but the sounds behind him were spur enough to bring the nearly
dead to life. He bowed his head and ran with such effort as he had never made before in all
his wild and daring existence.

The wolves of the time, greater, swifter and fiercer than the gaunt gray wolves of northern
latitudes and historic times, ran well, but so did contemporaneous man run well, and the chase
was hard. With his life to save, Ab swept panting over the rocky ground with a swiftness begotten
of the grand last effort of remaining strength, running straight toward the light, while the
wolf pack, now gathered, hurled itself from the wood behind and followed swiftly and relentlessly.
Ever before the man shone the light more brightly; ever behind him became more distinct the
sound made by the following pack. It was a dire strait for the running man. He was no longer
thinking of what he had lately done. He ran.

The light he had seen extended as he neared it into what looked like a great fence of flame
lying across his way. There were gaps in the fence where the flame, still continuous, was not
so high as elsewhere. He did not hesitate. He ran straight ahead. Closer and closer behind
him crowded the pursuing wolves, and straight at the flame he ran. There was one chance in
many, he thought, and he took it without hesitation. Close before him now loomed the wall of
flame. Close behind him slavering jaws were working in anticipation, and there was a strain
for the last rush. There was no alternative. Straight at the fire wall where it was lowest
rushed Ab, and with a great leap he went at and through the curling crest of the yellow flame!

The man had found safety! There was a moment of heat and then he knew himself to be sprawling
upon green turf. A little of the strength of desperation was still with him and he bounded
to his feet and looked about. There were no wolves. Beside him was a great flat rock, and he
clambered upon this, and then, over the crest of the flames could see easily enough the glaring
eyes of his late pursuers. They were running up and down, raging for their prey, but kept from
him beyond all peradventure by the fire they could not face. Ab started upright on the rock
panting and defiant, a splendid creature erect there in the firelight.

Soon there came to the man a more perfect sense of his safety. He shouted aloud to the flitting,
snarling creatures, which could not harm him now; he stooped and found jagged stones, which
he sent whirling among them. There was a savage satisfaction in it.

Suddenly the man fell to the ground, fairly groaning with exhaustion. Nature had become indignant
and the time for recuperation had been reached. The wearied runner lay breathing heavily and
was soon asleep. The flames which had afforded safety gave also a grateful warmth in the chill
night, and so it was that scarcely had his body touched the ground when he became oblivious
to all about him, only the heaving of the broad chest showing that the man lying fairly exposed
in the light was a living thing. The varying wind sometimes carried the sheet of flame to its
utmost extent toward him, so that the heat must have been intense, and again would carry it
in an opposite direction while the cold air swept down upon the sleeping man. Nothing disturbed
him. Inured alike to heat and cold, Ab slept on, slept for hours the sleep which follows vast
strain and endurance in a healthy human being. Then the form lying on the ground moved restlessly
and muttered exclamations came from the lips. The man was dreaming.

For as the sleeper lay there--he remembered it when he awoke and wondered over it many times
in after years--Oak sprang through the flames, as he himself had done, and soon lay panting
by his side. The lapping of the fire, the snapping and snarling of the wolves beyond and the
familiar sound of Oak's voice all mingled confusedly in his ears, and then he and Oak raced
together over the rough ground, and wrestled and fought and played as they had wrestled and
fought and played together for years. And the hours passed and the wind changed and the flames
almost scorched him and Ab started up, looking about him into the wild aspect of the Fire Country;
for the night had passed and the sun had risen and set again since the exhausted man had fallen
upon the ground and become unconscious.

Ab rolled instinctively a little away from the smoky sheets of flame and, sitting up, looked
for Oak. He could not see him. He ran wildly around among the rocks looking for him and despairingly
called aloud his name. The moment his voice had been hoarsely lifted, "Oak!" the memory of
all that had happened rushed upon him. He stood there in the red firelight a statue of despair.
Oak was dead; he had killed Oak, and buried him with his own hands, and yet he had seen Oak
but a minute ago! He had bounded through the flames and had wrestled and run races with Ab,
and they had talked together, and yet Oak must be lying in the ground back there in the forest
by the little hill. Oak was dead. How could he get out of the ground? Fear clutched at Ab's
heart, his limbs trembled under him. He whimpered like a lost and friendless hound and crouched
close to the hospitable fire. His brain wavered under the stress of strange new impressions.
He recalled some mutterings of Old Mok about the dead, that they had been seen after it was
known that they were deep in the ground, but he knew it was not good to speak or think of such
things. Again Ab sprang to his feet. It would not do to shut his eyes, for then he saw plainly
Oak in his shallow hole in the dark earth and the face Ab had hurried to cover first when he
was burying his friend, there under the trees. And so the night wore away, sleep coming fitfully
from time to time. Ab could not explore his retreat in the strange firelight nor run the risks
of another night journey across the wild beasts' chosen country. He began to be hungry, with
the fierce hunger of brute strength, sharpened by terrific labors, but he must wait for the
morning. The night seemed endless. There was no relief from the thoughts which tortured him,
but, at last, morning broke, and in action Ab found the escape he had longed for.

CHAPTER XX.

THE FIRE COUNTRY.

It was light now and the sun shone fairly on Ab's place of refuge. As his senses brought to
him full appreciation he wondered at the scene about him. He was in a glade so depressed as
to be a valley. About it, to the east and north and west, in a wavering, tossing wall, rose
the uplifting line of fire through which he had leaped, though there were spaces where the
height was insignificant. On the south, and extending till it circled a trifle to east, rose
a wall of rock, evidently the end of a forest-covered promontory, for trees grew thickly to
its very edge and their green branches overhung its sheer descent. Coming from some crevice
of the rocks on the east, and tumbling downward through the valley, was a riotous brook, which
disappeared through some opening at the west. Within this area, thus hemmed in by fire and
rock, appeared no living thing save the birds which sang upon the bushes beside the small stream's
banks and the butterflies which hung above the flowers and all the insect world which joined
in the soft, humming chorus of the morning. It was something that Ab looked upon with delighted
wonder, but without understanding. What he saw was not a marvel. It was but the result of one
of many upheavals at a time when the earth's cooled shell was somewhat thinner than now and
when earthquakes, though there were no cities to overthrow, at least made havoc sometimes by
changing the face of nature. There had come a great semi-circular crack in the earth, near
and extending to the line of the sheer rock range. The natural gas, the product of the vegetation
of thousands of centuries before, had found a chance to escape and had poured forth into the
outer world. Something, perhaps a lightning stroke and a flaming tree, perhaps some cave man
making fire and consumed on the instant when he succeeded, had ignited the sheet of rising
gas, and the result was the wall of flame. It was all natural and commonplace, for the time.
There were other upleaping flame sheets in the surrounding region forever burning--as there
are in northern Asia to-day--but Ab knew of these fires only from Old Mok's tales. He stood
wonderstruck at what he saw about him.

But this man in the valley was young and very strong, with tissues to be renewed, and the physical
man within him clamored and demanded. He must eat. He ran forward and around, anxiously observant,
and soon learned that at the western end of the valley, where the little creek tumbled through
a rocky cut into a lower level, there was easy exit from the fire-encompassed and protected
area. He clambered along the creek's rough, descending side. He emerged upon an easier slope
and then found it possible to climb the hillside to the plane of the great wood. There must,
he thought, be food of some sort, even for a man with only Oak's knife in his possession! There
was the forest and there were nuts. He was in the forest soon, among the gray-trunked, black-mottled
beeches and the rough brown oaks. He found something of what he sought, the nuts lying under
shed leaves, though the supply was scant. But nuts, to the cave man, made moderately good food,
supplying a part of the sustenance he required, and Ab ate of what he could find and arose
from the devouring search and looked about him.

He was weaponless, save for the knife, and a flint knife was but a thing for closest struggle.
He longed now for his ax and spear and the strong bow which could hurt so at a distance. But
there was one sort of weapon to be had. There was the club. He wandered about among the tops
of fallen trees and wrenched at their dried limbs, and finally tore one away and broke off,
later, with a prying leverage, what made a rough but available club for a cave man's purposes.
It was much better than nothing. Then began a steady trot toward what should be fair life again.
There were vague paths through the forest made by wild beasts. As he moved the man thought deeply.

He thought of the fire-wall, and could not with all his reasoning determine upon the cause
of its existence, and so abandoned the subject as a thing, the nub of which was unreachable.
That was the freshest object in his mind and the first to be mentally disposed of. But there
were other subjects which came in swift succession. As he went along with a dog's gait he was
not in much terror, practically weaponless as he was. His eye was good and he was going through
the forest in the daylight. He was strong enough, club in hand, to meet the minor beasts. As
for the others, if any of them appeared, there were the trees, and he could climb. So, as he
trotted he could afford to think.

And he thought much that day, this perplexed man, our grandfather with so many "greats" before
the word. He had nothing to divert him even in the selection of the course toward his cave.
He noted not where the sun stood, nor in what direction the tiny head-waters of the rivulets
took their course, nor how the moss grew on the trees. He traveled in the wood by instinct,
by some almost unexplainable gift which comes to the thing of the woods. The wolf has it; the
Indian has it; sometimes the white man of to-day has it.

As he went Ab engaged in deeper and more sustained thought than ever before in all his life.
He was alone; new and strange scenes had enlarged his knowledge and swift happenings had made
keener his perceptions. For days his entire being had been powerfully affected by his meeting
with Lightfoot at the Feast of the Mammoth and the events which had followed that meeting in
such swift succession. The tragedy of Oak's death had quickened his sensibilities. Besides,
what had ensued latest had been what was required to make him in a condition for the divination
of things. The wise agree that much stimulant or much deprivation enables the brain convolutions
to do their work well, though deprivation gets the cleaner end. The asceticism of Marcus Aurelius
was productive of greater results than the deep drinking of any gallant young Roman man of
letters of whom he was a patron. The literature of fasting thinkers is something fine. Ab,
after exerting his strength to the utmost for days, had not eaten of flesh, and the strong
influences to which he was subjected were exerted upon a man still, practically, fasting. For
a time, the rude and earth-born child of the cave was lifted into a region of comparative sentiment
and imagination. It was an experience which affected materially all his later life.

Ever to the trotting man came the feelings which must follow fierce love and deadly action
and vague remorse and fear of something indefinable. He saw the face and form of Lightfoot;
he saw again the struggle, death-ending, with the friend of youth and of mutual growing into
manhood. He remembered dimly the half insane flight, the leaps across the dreaded morass and,
more distinctly, the chase by the wolves. The aspect of the Fire Country and of all that followed
his awakening was, of course, yet fresh in his mind. He was burdened.

Ever uprising and oppressing above all else was the memory of the man he had killed and buried,
covering the face first, so that it might not look at him. Was Oak really dead? he asked himself
again! Had not he, Ab, as soon as he slept again, seen, alive and well, the close friend of
his? He clung to the vision. He reasoned as deeply as it was in him to reason.

As he struggled in his mind to obtain light there came to him the fancy of other things dimly
related to the death mystery which had perplexed him and all his kind. There must be some one
who made the river rise and fall or the nut-bearing forest be either fruitful or the hard reverse.
Who and what could it be? What should he do, what should all his friends do in the matter of
relation to this unknown thing?

With this day and hour did not come really the beginning of Ab's thought upon the subject of
what was, to him and those he knew, the supernatural. He had thought in the past--he could
not help it--of the shadow and the echo. He remembered how he and Oak had talked about the
echo, and how they had tried to get rid of the thing which had more than once called back to
them insolently across the valley. Every word they shouted this hidden creature would mockingly
repeat and there was no recourse for them. They had once fully armed themselves and, in a burst
of desperate bravery, had resolved to find who and what the owner of this voice was and have,
at least, a fight. They had crossed the valley and ranged about the woodland whence the voice
seemed to have come, but they never found what they sought!

The shadow which pursued them on sunny afternoons had puzzled them in another way. Very persistent
had been the flat, black, earth-clinging and distorted thing which followed them so everywhere.
What was this black, following thing, anyhow, this thing which swung its unsubstantial body
around as one moved but which ever kept its own feet at the feet of the pursued, wherever there
was no shade, and which lay there beside one so persistently?

But the echoes and the shadows were nothing as compared with the things which came to one at
night. What were those creatures which came when a man was sleeping? Why did they escape with
the dawn and appear again only when he was asleep and helpless, at least until he awoke fairly
and seized his ax?

The sun rose high and dropped slowly down toward the west, where the far ocean was, and the
shadows somewhat lengthened, but it was still light along the forest pathways and the untiring
man still hurried on. He was now close to his country and becoming careless and at ease. But
his imagination was still busy; he could not free himself of memory. There came to him still
the vision of the friend he had buried, hiding his face first of all. The frenzy of his wish
for knowing rushed again upon him. Where was Oak now? he demanded of himself and of all nature.
"Where is Oak?" he yelled to the familiar trees beside his path. But the trees, even to the
cave man, so close to them in the economy of wild life, so like them in his naturalness, could
give no answer.

So the cave man struggled in his dim, uncertain way with the eternal question: "If a man die
shall he live again?" So the human mind still struggles, after thousands of centuries have
contributed to its development. A wall more impassable than the wall of flame Ab had so lately
looked upon still rises between us and those who no longer live. We reach out for some knowledge
of those who have died, and go almost into madness because we can grasp nothing. Silence unbroken,
darkness impenetrable ever guard the mystery of death. In the long ages since the cave man
ran that day, love and hope have in faith erected, beyond the grim barriers of blackness and
despair, fair pavilions of promise and consolation, but to the stern examiners of physical
fact and reality there has come no news from beyond the walls of silence since. We clamor tearfully
for some word from those who are dead, but no answer comes. So Ab groped and strove alone in
the forest, in his youth and ignorance, and in the youth and ignorance of our race.

Upon the pathway along the river's bank Ab emerged at last. All was familiar to him now. There,
by the clump of trees in the flat below, was the place where he and Oak had dug the pit when
they were but mere boys and had learned their first important lessons in sterner woodcraft.
Soon came in sight, as he ran, the entrance to the cave of his own family. He was home again.
But he was not the one who had left that rude habitation three days before. He had gone away
a youth. He had come back one who had suffered and thought. He came back a man.

CHAPTER XXI.

THE WOOING OF LIGHTFOOT.

Lightfoot, when Ab seized Oak, had fled away from the two infuriated men, as the hare runs,
and had sped into the forest. She had the impetus of new fear now and ran swiftly as became
her name, never looking behind her, nor did she slacken her pace, though panting and exhausted,
until she found herself approaching the cave where lived her playmate, Moonface, not more than
an hour's run from her own home.

The fleeing girl was fortunate in stumbling upon her friend as soon as she came into the open
space about the cave. Moonface was enjoying herself lazily that afternoon. She was leaning
back idly in a swing of vines to which she had braided a flexible back, and was blinking somnolently
in the sunshine as the visitor leaped from the wood. Moonface recognized her friend, gave a
quavering cry of delight and came slipping and rolling recklessly to the ground to meet her.
Lightfoot uttered no word. She stood breathless, and was rather carried than led by Moonface
to an easy seat, moss-padded, upon twisted tree roots, which was that young lady's ordinary
resting-place. Upon this seat the two sank, one overcome with past fear and present fatigue,
and the other with an all-absorbing and demanding curiosity. It was beyond the ordinary scope
of the self-restraining forces in Moonface to await with calm the recovery of Lightfoot's breath
and powers of conversation. She pinched and shook her friend and demanded, half-crying but
impatiently, some explanation. It was a great hour for Moonface, the greatest in her life.
Here was her friend and dictator panting and terrified like some weak, hunted-down thing of
the wood. It was a marvel. At last Lightfoot spoke:

"They are fighting at the foot of the hill!" she said, and Moonface at once guessed the whole
story, for she was not blind, this wide-mouthed creature.

"Why did you run away?" she asked.

"I ran because I was scared. One of them must be dead before this time. I am glad I am alive
myself," Lightfoot gasped. Then the girl covered her face with her hands as she recalled Ab's
face, distorted by passion and murderous hate, and Oak's equally maddened look as, before the
onrush, he had grasped her so firmly that the marks of his fingers remained blue upon her arms
and slender waist and neck.

Then Lightfoot, slow to regain her composure, told tremblingly the story of all that had occurred,
finding comfort in the unaffrighted look upon the face, as well as in the reassuring talk,
of her easy-going, unimaginative and cheerful and faithful companion. She remained as a guest
at the cave overnight and the next forenoon, when she took her way for home, she was accompanied
by Moonface. Gradually, as the hours passed, Lightfoot regained something of her usual frame
of mind and a little of her ordinary manner of careless light-heartedness, but when home had
been reached and the girls had rested and eaten and she heard Moonface telling anew for her
the story of the flight in the wood, while her father, Hilltop, and her two strapping brothers
listened with interest, but with no degree of excitement, she felt again the wild alarm and
horror and uncertainty which had affected her when first she fled from what was to her so dreadful.
She crept away from the cave door near which the others sat enjoying the balmy midsummer afternoon,
beckoning to one of her brothers to follow her, as the big fellow did unquestioningly, for
Lightfoot had been, almost from young girlhood, the dominant force in the family, even the
strong father, though it was contrary to the spirit of the time, admiring and yielding to his
one daughter without much comment. The great, hulking youth, well armed and ready for any adventure,
joined her, nothing both, and the two disappeared, like shadows, in the depths of the forest.

Lightfoot had been the housekeeper in the cave of Hilltop, the cave of the greatest hunter
of the region, young despite the years which had encompassed him, and father of two boys who
were fine specimens of the better men of the time. They were splendid whelps, and this slim
thing, whom they had cared for as she grew, dominated them easily, though the age was not one
of vast family affection, while chivalry, of course, did not exist. Hilltop's wife had died
two years before, and Lightfoot, with unconscious force, had taken her mother's place. There
was none other with woman's ways to help the men in the rock-guarded home on the windy hill.
Hilltop had not been altogether unthinking all this time. He had often looked upon his daughter's
friend, the jolly, swart and well-fed Moonface, and had much approved of her, but, today, as
he listened to her story, he did not pay such attention as was demanded by the interest of
the theme. An occasional death, though it were the killing of one cave man by another, was
not a matter of huge importance. He was not inflamed in any way by what he heard, but as he
looked and listened to the comfortable young person who was speaking, the idea, hastened it
may be by some loving and domestic instinct, grew slowly in his brain that she might make for
him as excellent a mate as any other of the "good matches" to be found in the immediately surrounding
country. He was a most directly reasoning person, this Hilltop, best of hunters and generally
respected on the forest ridges. After the thought once dawned upon him, it grew and grew, and
an idea fairly developed in Hilltop's mind meant action. His fifty-five years of age had hardly
cooled and had certainly not nearly approached to freezing the blood in his outstanding veins.
He had a suit to make, and make at once. That he might have no interruption he bade Stone-Arm,
his remaining son, who sat on a rock near by, and who had listened, open-mouthed, to the recital
of Moonface, to seek his brother and Lightfoot in the forest path. There might be beasts abroad
and two men were better than one, said this crafty father-hunter-lover.

The boy, clever tracker as a red Indian or Australian trailer, soon found the path his brother
and Lightfoot had taken and joined them. As he listened to what they were saying he was glad
he had been sent to follow them. They were hastening toward the valley. "Do the British people," asks
Mr. BLATCHFORD, "understand the nature of the monster modern military science has created?"
We hope to hear later what name Mr. WINSTON CHURCHILL has found for Mr. BLATCHFORD.

* * *

Agitation for a Federal Divorce Law is being revived in the United States. It appears that there
are still some backward States where the expenses of a divorce suit
mount up to something like ten dollars and the parties often have
to wait as long as three weeks before the knot is untied.

* * *

"It has now been decided definitely," says The Daily Express, "that
Sir AUCKLAND GEDDES will leave England on April 10th."

This disposes finally of the rumour that he intended taking it with
him.

* * *

The natives of the Andaman Islands average about seventy pounds each in weight. They are so short
in stature that their feet only just reach the ground in time.

* * *

M. LOUCHEUR suggests that France should build houses similar to those which are not being built
in England.

* * *

"Sergeant R. Pernotte," says a student of human endeavour, "last week punched a ball for fifty
hours without a break." It is presumed that the ball must have done something to annoy him.

*
* *

Thirty thousand years ago, says a weekly journal, the seas around England were at a higher level
than at present. It is difficult to know what can be done about it, but it is just as well that
the matter should be mentioned.

* * *

According to Mr. M. T. SIMM, M.P., there are many wayside inns of a passable nature. The trouble,
of course, is that so many people have a difficulty in passing them.

* * *

We understand that Mr. Justice ----'s question, "Who is Mr. LLOYD GEORGE?" has been postponed
to a date to be fixed later.

* * *

A trade journal advertises a new calculating machine which will total up stupendous figures without
any human help at all.

A correspondent writes to say that in his house he has the identical gas meter which gave the
inventor his idea.

* * *

The contemporary which refers to the discovery of a gold ring inside a cod-fish as extraordinary
evidently cannot be aware that many profiteers who go in for fishing are nowadays using such
articles as bait.
* * *

A purse containing nearly a hundred pounds in treasury notes,
picked up by a policeman in South Wales, has not yet been claimed.
It is now thought probable that a local miner may have dropped his
week's wages whilst entering his car and that his secretary has not
yet called his attention to the deficit.

* * *

"The way some newsboys
dodge in and out of the moving traffic is most dangerous and a serious
accident is sure to result before very long," complains a writer in
an evening paper. For ourselves we cannot but admire this attempt
on the boys' part to make history while in the act of selling it.

*
* *

We learn from an evening paper that a large woollen warehouse
in London was completely destroyed by fire the other day. We cannot
understand why some people use such inflammable material for building
purposes.

* * *

An old pleasure-boat proprietor at Yarmouth has
stated in an interview that, although all his skiffs and dinghies
are ten to fifteen years old, they are much more trustworthy than
those being built at the present time. We await, fearfully, the comments
of Lord FISHER.

* * *

Dutch wasps, says a news item, are very much
like British. Only the finished expert can tell the difference on
being stung.

* * *

It is said that the Dutch are the most religious
race of to-day. Of course it is well known that the Chinese pray more
than the Dutch, but then nobody understands what they are saying.

*
* *

The Ascot Fire Brigade went on strike last week and several important
fires had to be postponed at the last moment.

* * *

The Bolsheviks,
it appears, may not, after all, be as black as they are painted. It
is reported that TROTSKY has caused one of his Chinese guards to be
executed for calling another an Irishman.

* * *

Senator BORAH recently
informed the American Press that the Presidential election campaign
was becoming a Saturnalia of public corruption. In one flagrant case
it appears that a man who was given the money to buy ten dollars'
worth of Irish Republic went and bought a box of cigars instead.

*
* *

"To keep cats off the seed beds," says Home Chat, "bury a small
bottle up to the neck and fill it with liquid ammonia." The old practice
of burying the cat up to the neck in the seed bedding and keeping
the ammonia for subsequent use is considered obsolete.

* * *

During
the past year in London 2,886 persons were knocked down by horsed
vehicles, as compared with 8,388 who were knocked down by motor vehicles.
The popularity of the latter, it seems, is still unchallenged.

*
* *

A weekly paper has an article on "Bad Manners Among Fish." He was a fine figure of a man, too.

Lightfoot was not much in the cave now. She lingered about the open space or wandered in the
near wood. A woman's instinct told her to be out-doors all the time she could. A man would
seek her, but with the thought came an awful dread. Which man? One afternoon she saw something.

Two gray forms flitted across an open space in the forest near the cave, and in a moment the
girl was in a treetop. What followed was the unexpected. Close behind the gray things came
a man, fully armed, straight, eager and alert and silent in his wood surroundings, with eyes
roving over and searching all the open space about the cave of Hilltop. The man was Ab.

The girl gave a shriek of delight, then, alarmed at the sound she had made, cowered behind
a refuge of leaves and branches. She was happy beyond all her experience before. The question
which had been in all her thoughts was answered! It was Oak, not Ab, who lay in the ground
on the hillside. And, even as she realized this fully, there was a swift upward scramble and
the young cave man was beside her on the limb. There was no running away this time. The girl's
face told its story well enough, so well that Ab, still lately doubting, though resolved, knew
that his fitting mate belonged to him. There came to them the happiness which ever comes to
lovers, be they man or bird or beast, and then came swift conclusion. He told her she must
go with him at once, told her of the new cave and of all he had done, but the girl, well aware
of the dangers of the beast-haunted region where the new home had been selected, was thoroughly
alarmed. Then Ab told her of the little flying spears which Old Mok had made for him, and about
the wonderful bow which sent them to their mark, and the girl was reassured and soon began
to feel exceedingly brave and proud of her lover and his prowess.

No need of carrying off a girl by force or craft on this occasion, for Hilltop had fully recognized
Ab's strength and quality. The two went to the cave together and there was eating and then,
later, two skin-clad human beings, a man and a woman, went away together through the forest.
Their journey was a long one and a careful lookout was necessary as they hurried along a pathway
of the strange country. But the cave was reached at last, just as the sun burned red and gave
a rosy glow to everything.

Silently the two came into the open space in front of what was to be their fortress and abode.
Solid was the rock about the entrance and narrow the blocked opening. Smoke curled in a pretty
spiral upward from where smoldered the fire Ab had made the day before. Lightfoot looked upon
it all and laughed joyously, though tremblingly, for she had now given herself to a man and
he had brought her to his place of living.

As for the man, he looked down upon the girl delightedly. His pulse beat fast. He put his arm
about her and together they entered the cave. There was a marriage but no ceremony. Just as
robins mate when they have met or as the buck and doe, so faithful man and wife became these two.

Darkness fell, the fire at the cave entrance flashed up fiercely and Ab and Lightfoot were
"at home."

CHAPTER XXII.

THE HONEYMOON.

The sun shone brilliantly, birds were singing and the balsam firs gave forth their morning
incense as Ab and Lightfoot issued from their cave. They had eaten heartily, and came out buoyant
and delighted with the world which was theirs. The chattering of the waterfowl along the river
reached their ears faintly, the leaves were moved by a gentle breeze, there was a hum of insects
in the air and the very pulse of living could be felt. Ab carried his new weapon proudly, hungering
for the love and admiration of this girl of his, and eager to show her its powers and to exhibit
his own skill. At his back hung his quiver of mammoth bone. His bow, unstrung, was in his hand.
In front of the cave was a bare area of many yards in extent, then came a few scattering trees
and, at a distance of perhaps two hundred yards, the forest began. Across the open space of
ground, with its great mass of branches crushed together not far from the cave's mouth, had
fallen one of the gigantic conifers' of the time, and was there gradually decaying, its huge
limbs and bole, disintegrating, and dry as punk, affording, close at hand, a vast fuel supply,
the exceptional value of which Ab had recognized when making his selection of a home. Near
the edge of the little clearing made by nature, Ab seated himself upon a log, and drawing Lightfoot
down to a seat beside him, began enthusiastically to make clear the marvels of the weapon he
had devised and which he and Old Mok had developed into something startling in its possibilities.

All details of the explanation made by the earnest young hunter, it is probable, Lightfoot
did not comprehend. She looked proudly at him, fingering the flint pointed arrows curiously,
yet seemed rather intent upon the man than the wood and stone. But when he pointed at a great
knot in a tree near them and bent his bow and sent an arrow fairly into the target, and when,
even with her strength, Lightfoot could not pull the arrow out, she was wild with admiration
and excitement. She begged to be taught how to use, herself, this wonderful new weapon, for
she recognized as readily as could anyone its adaptation to the use of one of inferior strength.
The delighted lover was certainly as desirous as she that she should some day become an expert.
He handed her the bow, retaining, slung over his shoulder, fortunately, as it developed, the
bone quiver full of Old Mok's best arrows. He taught her, first, how to bend and string the
bow. There were failures and successes, and there was much laughter from the merry-hearted
Lightfoot. Finally, it happened that Ab was not just content with the quality of the particular
arrow which he had selected for Lightfoot's use. He had taken a slender one with a clean flint
head, but something about the notch had not quite suited him. With a thin, hard stone scraper,
carried in a pouch of his furry garb, he began rasping and filing at this notch to make it
better fit the string of tendons, while Lightfoot, with the bow still strung, stood beside
him. At last, tired of holding the thing in her hands, she passed it over her head and one
shoulder and stood there jauntily, with both hands free, while the man scraped away with the
one little flake of flint in his possession, and, as he worked, paused from time to time note
how well he was rounding the notch in the end of the slight hardwood shaft. It was just as
he was holding up to her eyes the arrow, now made almost an ideal one, according to his fancy,
when there came to the ears of the two a sound, distinct, ominous and implying to them deadly
peril, a sound such that, though nerves spoke and muscles acted, they were very near the momentary
paralysis which sometimes come from sudden fearful shock. From close beside them came the half
grunt and half growl of the great cave bear!

With the instinct born of generations, each leaped independently toward the nearest tree, and,
with the unconscious strength and celerity which comes to even wild animals with the dread
of death at hand, each clambered to a treetop before a word was spoken. Scarcely had either
left the ground before there was a rush into the open glade of a huge brown hairy form, and
this was instantly followed by another. As Ab and Lightfoot climbed far amid the branches and
looked down, they saw upreared at the base of each tree the figure of one of the monsters whose
hungry exclamations they knew so well. They had been careless, these two lovers, especially
the man. He had known well, but for the moment had forgotten how beast-infested was the immediate
area about his new home, and now had come the consequence of his thoughtlessness. He and his
wife had been driven to the treetops within a few yards of their own hearthstone, leaving their
weapons inside their cave!

Alarmed and panting, after settling down to a firm seat far aloft, each looked about to see
what had become of the other. Each was at once reassured as to the present, and each became
much perplexed as to the future. The cave bear, like his weaker and degenerate descendant,
the grizzly of to-day, had the quality of persistence well developed, and both Ab and Lightfoot
knew that the siege of their enemies would be something more than for the moment. The trees
in which they perched were very close to the wood, but not so close that the forest could be
reached by passing from branch to branch. Their two trees were not far from each other, but
their branches did not intermingle. There was a distinct opening between them. The tree up
which Lightfoot had scrambled was a great fir towering high above the strong beech in which
Ab had found his safety. Branches of the fir hung down until between their ends and Ab's less
lofty covert there were but a few yards of space. Still, one trying to reach the beech from
the lofty fir would find an unpleasantly wide gap.

Each of the creatures in the tree was unarmed. Ab still bore the quiver full of admirable arrows,
and across the breast of Lightfoot still hung the strong bow which she had slung about her
in such blithesome mood. Soon began an exceedingly earnest conversation. Ab, eager to reach
again the fair creature who now belonged to him, was half frantic with rage, and Lightfoot
was far from her usual mood of careless gaiety. The two talked and considered, though but to
little purpose, and, finally, after weary hours, the night came on. It was a trying situation.
Man and woman were in equal danger. The bears were hungry--and the cave bear knew his quarry.
The beasts beneath were not disposed to leave the prey they had imprisoned aloft. The night
grew, but either Ab or Lightfoot, looking down, could see the glare of small, hungry eyes.
There was gentle talk between the two, for this was a great strait and, in straits, souls,
be they prehistoric, historic or of to-day, always come closer together. Very much more loving
lovers, even, than they were before, became the two perched aloft that night. It was a comfort
for the wedded pair to call to each other through the darkness. After a time, however, muscles
grew lax with the continued strain. Weariness clouded the spirits of the couple and almost
overcame them and only the thing which has always, in great stress, given the greatest strength
in this world--the love of male and female--sustained them. They stood the test pretty well.
To sleep in a tree top was an easy thing for them, with the precautions, simple and natural,
of the time. Each plaited a withe of twigs with which to be tied to the tree or limb, and resting
in the hollow nest where some great limb joined the bole, slept as sleep tired children, until
the awakening of nature awoke these who were nature's own. When Ab awoke, he had more on his
mind than Lightfoot, for he was the one who must care for the two. He blinked and wondered
where he was. Then he remembered all, suddenly. He looked across anxiously at a slender brown
thing lying asleep, coiled so close to the bole of the tree to which she was bound that she
seemed almost a part of it. Then he looked down, and, after what he saw, thought very seriously.
The bears were there! He looked up at the bright sky and all about him, and inhaled all the
fragrance of the forest, and felt strong, and that he knew what he should do. He called aloud.

The girl awoke, frightened. She would have fallen had she not been bound to the tree. Gradually,
the full meaning of the situation dawned upon her and she began to cry. She was hungry, her
limbs were stiffened by her bands, and there was death below. But there, close to her, was
the Man. His voice gradually reassured her. He was becoming angry now, almost raging. Here
he was, the lord of a cave, independent and master as much as any other man whom he knew, perched
in one tree while his bride of a day was in the top of another, yet kept apart from her by
the brutes below!

He had decided what to do, and now he talked to Lightfoot with all the frankness of the strong
male who felt that he had another to care for, and who realized his responsibility and authority
together. As the strength and decided personality of the young man came to her through his
voice, the young woman drew her scanty fur robe about her and checked her tears. She became
comparatively calm and reasonable.

The tree in which Lightfoot had found refuge had many long slender branches lowering toward
the giant beech into which the man had made his retreat. Ab argued that it was possible--barely
possible--for Lightfoot's compact, agile, slender body to be launched in just the right way
from one of the branches of the taller tree, and, swinging in its descent across the space
between the two, lodge among the branches of the beech with him. Strong arms ready to clasp
her as she came and to withstand the shock and to hold her safely he promised and, to enforce
his plea, he pointed out that, unless they thus took their fate in hand, there was starvation
awaiting them as they were, while carrying out his plan, if any accident befell, there was
only swift though dreadful death to reckon with. There was one chance for their lives and that
chance must be taken. Ab called to his young wife:

"Crawl out upon a branch above me, swing down from it, swing hard and throw yourself to me.
I will catch you and hold you. I am strong."

The woman, with all faith in the man, still demurred. It was a great test, even for the times
and the occasion. But hunger was upon her and she was cold and was, naturally, very brave.
She lowered herself and climbed down and reached an out-extending limb, and there, across the
gap, she saw Ab with his strong legs twined about the uprearing branch along which he laid,
with giant brown arms stretched out confidently and with eyes steadily regarding her, eyes
which had love and longing and a lot of fight in them. She walked out along the limb, holding
herself safely by a firm hand-hold on the limb above, until the one her bare feet rested upon
swayed and tipped uncertainly. Then came her time of trial of nerve and trust. Suddenly she
stooped, caught the lower limb with her hands and then swung beneath it, hanging by her hands
alone, and, hand over hand, passed herself along until she reached almost its end. Then she
began swaying back and forth. She was but a few yards above Ab now, dangling in mid-air, while,
below her, the two hungry bears had rushed together and were looking upward with red, anticipating
eyes, the ooze coming from their mouths. The moment was awful. Soon she must be a mangled thing
devoured by frightful beasts, or else a woman with a life renewed. She looked at Ab, and, with
courage regained, prepared for the great effort which must end all or gain a better lease of life.

She swung back and forth, each drawing up and outreach and flexible motion of her arms giving
more momentum to the sway and conserving force for the launch of herself she was about to make.
The desperation and strength of a wood-wise creature, so bravely combined, alone enabled her
to obey Ab's hoarse command.

Ab, with his arms outreaching in their strength, feeling the fierce eyes of the hungry bears
below boring into his very heart, leaned forward and upward as the swing of the woman reached
its climax. With a cry of warning, the woman launched herself and shot downward and forward,
like a bolt to its mark, a very desirable lump of femininity as appearing in mid-air, but one
somewhat forcible in its alighting.

Ab was strong, but when that girl landed fairly in his brawny arms, as she did beautifully,
it was touch and go, for a fraction of a second, whether both should fall to the ground together
or both be saved. He caught her deftly, but there was a great shock and swing and then, with
a vast effort, there came recovery and the man drew himself, shaking, back to the support of
the branch from which he had been almost wrenched away, at the same time placing beside him
the object he had just caught.

There was absolute silence for a moment or two between these unconventional lovers to whom
had come escape from a hard situation. They were drawing deep breaths and recovering an equilibrium.
There they sat together on the strong branch, each of them as secure and, for the moment, as
perfectly at home as if lying on a couch in the cave. Each of them was panting and each of
them rejoicing. It was unlikely that upon their trained, robust nerves the life-endangering
episode of a moment could have a more than passing effect. They sat so together for some minutes
with arms entwined, still drawing deep breaths, and, a little later, began to laugh chucklingly,
as breath came to be spared for such exhibition if human feeling. Gradually, the indrawing
and expelling of the glorious air shortened. The two had regained their normal condition and
Ab's face lengthened and the lines upon it became more distinct. He was all himself again,
but in no dallying mood. He gave a triumphant whoop which echoed through the forest, shook
his clenched hand savagely at the brutes below and reached toward Lightfoot for the bow which
hung about her shoulders.

CHAPTER XXIII.

MORE OF THE HONEYMOON.

The brown, downy woman knew, on the instant, what was her husband's mood and immediate intent
when he thus shouted and took into his own keeping again the stiff bow which hung about her
shoulders. She knew that her lord was not merely in a glad, but that he was also in a vengeful
frame of mind, that he wanted from her what would enable him to kill things, and that, equipped
again, he was full of the spirit of fight. She knew that, of the four animals grouped together,
two huge creatures of the ground and two slighter ones perched in a tree top, the chances were
that the condition of those below had suddenly become the less preferable.

The bow was about Ab's shoulders instantly, and then this preposterous young gentleman of the
period turned to the woman and laughed, and caught her in one of his arms a little closer,
and drew her up against him and laid his cheek against her own for a moment and drew it away
and laughed again. The kiss, it is believed, had not fully developed itself in the cave man's
time, but there were substitutes. Then, releasing her, he said gleefully and chucklingly, "follow
me;" and they clambered down the bole of the beech together until they reached the biggest
and very lowest limb of all. It was perhaps twenty feet above the ground. A little below their
dangling feet the hungry bears, hitherto more patient, now, with their expected prey so close
at hand, becoming desperately excited, ran about, frothing and foaming and red-eyed, uprearing
themselves in awful nearness, at times, in their eagerness to reach the prey which they had
so awaited and which, to their intelligence, seemed about falling into their jaws. They had
so driven into trees before, and finally consumed exhausted cave men and women. As bears went,
they were doubtless logical animals. They could not know that there had come into possession
of this particular pair of creatures of the sort they had occasionally eaten, a trifling thing
of wood and sinew string and flint point, which was destined henceforth to make a decided change
in the relative condition of the biped and quadruped hunters of the time. How could they know
that something small and sharp would fly down and sting them more deeply than they had ever
been stung before, that it would sting so deeply that their arteries might be cut, or their
hearts pierced and that then they must lie down and die? The well-thrown spear had been, in
other ages, a vast surprise to the carnivora of the period, but there was something yet to learn.

When they had reached the huge branch so near the ground both Ab and Lightfoot were for a moment
startled and lifted their feet instinctively, but it was only for a moment in the case of the
man. He knew that he was perfectly safe and that he had with him an engine of death. He selected
his best and strongest arrow, he fitted it carefully to the string and then, as his mother
had done years before above the hyena which sought her child, he reached one foot down as far
as he could, and swung it back and forth tantalizingly, just above the larger of the hungry
beasts below. The monster, fierce with hunger and the desire for prey, roared aloud and upreared
himself by the tree trunk and tore the bark with his strong claws, throwing back his great
head as he looked upward at the quarry so near him and yet just beyond his reach. This was
the man's opportunity. Ab drew back the arrow till the flint head rested close by his out-straining
hand and the tough wood of the bow creaked under the thrust of his muscled arm. Then he released
the shaft. So close together were man and bear that archer's skill of aim was not required.
The brown target could not be missed. The arrow struck with a tear and the flint head drove
through skin and tissue till its point protruded at the back of the great brute's neck. The
bear fell suddenly backward, then rose again and reached blindly at its neck with its huge
fore-paws, while from where the arrow had entered the blood came out in spurts. Suddenly the
bear ceased its appalling roars and started for the cave. There had come to it the instinct
which makes such great beasts seek to die alone. It rushed at the narrow entrance but its course
was scarcely noted by the couple in the tree. The other bear, the female, was seeking to reach
them in no less savage mood than had animated her stricken mate.

Not often, when the cave man first learned the use of the bow, came to him such fortune with
a first strong shot as that which had so come to Ab. Again he selected a good arrow, again
shot his strongest and best, but the shaft only buried itself in the shoulder and served but
to drive to absolute madness the raging creature thus sorely hurt. The forest echoed with the
roaring of the infuriated animal, and as she reared herself clambering against the tree the
tough fiber was rended away in great slivers, and the man and woman were glad that the trunk
was thick and that they owned a natural citadel. Again and again did Ab discharge his arrows
and still fail to reach a vital part of the terror below. She fairly bristled with the shafts.
It was inevitable that she must die, but when the last shot had sped she was still infuriate
and, apparently, as strong as ever. The archer looked down upon her with some measure of despondency
in his face, but by no means with despair. He and his bride must wait. That was all, and this
he told to Lightfoot. That intelligent and reliable young helpmate of a few hours, who had
looked upon what had occurred with an awed admiration, did not exhibit any depression. Her
husband, fortunate Benedict, had produced a great effect upon her by his feat. She felt herself
something like a queen. Had she known enough and had the fancies of the Ruth of some thousands
of decades later she would have told him how completely thenceforth his people were her people
and his gods her gods.

The she bear became finally somewhat quieted; she tore less angrily at the tree and made less
of the terrible clamor which had for the moment driven from the immediate region all the inmates
of the wood, for none save the cave tiger cared to be in the immediate neighborhood of the
cave bear. Her roars changed into roaring growls, and she wandered staggeringly about. At last
she started blindly and weakly toward the forest, and just as she had passed beneath its shadow,
paused, weaved back and forth for a moment, and then fell over heavily. She was dead.

Not an action of the beast had escaped the eyes of Ab. Well he knew the ways of wounded things.
As the bear toppled over he gave utterance to a whoop and, with a word to the girl beside him,
slid lightly to the ground, she following him at once. It was very good to be upon the earth
again. Ab stamped with his feet and stretched his arms, and the woman danced upon the grass
and laughed gleefully. But this was only for a moment or so. Ab started toward the cave, and
as he reached the entrance, gave a great cry of rage and dismay. Lightfoot ran to his side
and even her ready laugh failed her when she looked upon his perplexed and stormy countenance
and saw what had happened. The rump of the monster he bear was what she looked upon. The beast,
in his instinctive effort to crawl into some dark place to die, had fairly driven himself into
the cave's entrance, dislodging some of the stones Ab had placed there, had wedged himself
in firmly, and had died before he could extricate his great carcass. The two human beings were
homeless and, with all the arrows gone, weaponless, in the midst of a region so dangerously
infested that any movement afoot was but inviting death. They were hungry, too, for many hours
had passed since they had tasted food. It was not matter of surprise that even the stout-hearted
cave man stood aghast.

The occasion for Ab's alarm was fully verified. From the spot where the cave bear lay at the
forest's edge came a sharp, snapping growl. The lurking hyenas had found the food, and a long,
inquiring howl from another direction told that the wolves had scented it and were gathering.
For the instant Ab was himself almost helpless with fear. The woman was simply nerveless. Then
the man, so accustomed to physical danger, recovered himself. He sprang forward, seized a stout
fragment of limb which might serve as a sort of weapon, and, turning to the woman, said only
the one word "fire."

Lightfoot understood and life came to her again. None in all the region could make a fire more
swiftly than she. Her quick eye detected just the base she wanted in a punkish fragment of
wood and the harder and pointed bit of limb to be used in making the friction. In a time scarcely
worth the noting the point was whirling about and burning into the wooden base, twirling with
a skill and velocity not comprehensible by us to-day, for the cave people had perfected wonderfully
this greatest manual art of the time, and Lightfoot, muscular and enduring, was, as already
said, in this thing the cleverest among the clever. Ab, with ready club in hand, advanced cautiously
toward the point at the wood's edge where lay the body of the bear. He paused as he came near
enough to see what was happening. Four great hyenas were tearing eagerly at the flesh of the
dead brute, and behind them, deeper in the wood, were shining eyes, and Ab knew that the wolf
pack was gathering. The bear consumed, the man and woman, without defense, would surely be
devoured. It was a desperate strait, but, though he was weaponless, there was the cave man's
great resort, the fire, and there might be a chance for life. To seek the tree tops would be
dangerous even now, and once ensconced in such harborage, only starvation was awaiting. He
moved back noiselessly, with as little apparent motion as possible, for he did not want to
attract the attention of the gleaming eyes in the distance, until he came near Lightfoot again,
and then he abandoned caution of movement and began tearing frantically at the limbs and debris
of the great dead conifer, and to build a semicircular fence in front of the cave entrance.
He did the swift work of half a score of men in his desperation and anxiety, his great strength
serving him well in his compelling strait.

Meanwhile the stick twirled and rasped in the hands of the brown woman seated on the ground,
and at last a tiny thread of smoke arose. The continued friction had done its work. Deft himself
at fire-making, Ab knew just what was wanted at this moment and ran to his wife's side with
punk from the dead tree, rubbed to a powder in his hard hands. The powder, poured gently down
upon the point where the increasing heat had brought the gleam of fire, burst, almost at once,
into a little flame. What followed was simple and easy. Dry twigs made the slight flame a greater
one and then, at a dozen different points, the wall which Ab had built was fired. They were
safe, for the time at least. Behind them was the uprearing rock in which was the cave and before
them, almost encircling them completely, was the ring of fire which no wild beast would cross.
At one end, close to the rock, a space had been left by Ab, that he and Lightfoot might, through
it, reach the vast store of fuel which lay there ready to the hand and so close that there
was no danger in visiting it. Hardly had the flame extended itself along the slight wooden
barrier than the whole wood and clearing resounded with terrifying sounds. The wolf pack had
increased until strong enough to battle with the hyenas for the remainder of the feast in the
wood, and their fight was on.

The feeling of terror had passed away from this young bride and groom, with the assurance of
present safety, and Ab felt the need of eating. "There is meat," he said, as he pointed toward
the haunches of the bear, half-protruding from the rock, "and there is fire. The fire will
cook the meat, and, besides, we are safe. We will eat!"

The bridegroom of but a day or two said this somewhat grandiloquently, but he was not disposed
to be vain or grandiloquent a little later. He put his hand to the belt of his furry garb and
found no sharp flint knife there! It had been lost in his late tree clambering. He put his
hand into the pouch of his cloak and found only the flint skin scraper, the scraper with which
he had improved the arrow's notch, though it was not originally intended for such use. It was
all that remained to him of weapon or utensil. But it would cut or tear, though with infinite
effort, and the man, to reassure the woman, laughed, and assailed the brown haunch before him.
Even with his strength, it was difficult for Ab to penetrate the tough skin of the bear with
an implement intended for scraping, not for cutting, and it was only after he had finally cut,
or rather dug, away enough to enable him to get his fingers under the skin and tear away an
area of it by sheer main strength that the flesh was made available. That end once attained,
there followed a hard transverse digging with the scraper, a grasp about tissue of strong,
impressed fingers, and a shred of flesh came away. It was tossed at once to a young person
who, long twig in hand, stood eagerly waiting. She caught the shred as she had caught the fine
bit of mammoth when first she and Ab had met, and it was at once impaled and thrust into the
flames. It was withdrawn, it is to be feared, a trifle underdone, and then it disappeared,
as did other shreds of excellent bear's meat which came following. It was a sight for a dyspeptic
to note the eating of this belle-matron of the region on this somewhat exceptional occasion.

Strip after strip did Ab tear away and toss to his wife until the expression on her face became
a shade more peaceful and then it dawned upon him that she was eating and that he was not.
There was clamor in his stomach. He sprang away from the bear, gave Lightfoot the scraper and
commanded her to get food for him as he had done for her. The girl complied and did as well
as had done the man in digging away the meat. He ate as she had done, and, at last, partly
gorged and content, allowed her to take her place at the fire and again eat to his serving.
He had shown what, from the standard of the time, must be counted as most gallant and generous
and courteous demeanor. He had thought a little of the woman.

A tiny rill of cold water trickled down on one side of the outer door of their cave. With this
their thirst was slaked, and they ate and ate. The shadows lengthened and Ab replenished again
and again the fire. From the semicircle of forest all about came the sound of footsteps rustling
in the leaves. But the two people inside the fire fence, hungry no longer, were content. Ab
talked to his wife:

"The fire will keep the man-eating things away," he said. "I ran not long ago with things behind
me, and I would have been eaten had I not come upon a ring of fire like the one we have made.
I leaped it and the eaters could not reach me. A man, in order to have his love gratified, will
unhesitatingly risk his life; in fact, if his love is absolutely rejected, he will sacrifice his
life into the bargain.

The Werthers and Jacopo Ortis do not only exist in romances; Europe produces every year at
least half-a-dozen like them: sed ignotis perierunt mortibus illi: for their sufferings are chronicled
by the writer of official registers or by the reporters of newspapers. Indeed, readers of the police
news in English and French newspapers will confirm what I have said. Only the fire could protect the two. They had heat and
food and nothing to fear for the moment, but they must fairly eat their way into a safety which
would be permanent!

He kept the fire alight far into the darkness, and then, piling the fuel high all along the
line of defense, he aroused the sleeping woman and told her she must keep the flames bright
while he slept in his turn. She was just the wife for such an emergency as this, and rose uncomplainingly
to do her part of the guarding work. From the forest all about came snarling sounds or threatening
growls, and eyes blazed in the somber depths beneath the trees. There were hungry things out
there and they wanted to eat a man and woman, but fire they feared. The woman was not afraid.

After hours had passed the man awoke and took the woman's place and she slept in his stead.
Morning came and the sounds from the forest died away partly, but the man and woman knew of
the fierce creatures still lurking there. They knew what was before them. They must delve and
eat their way into the cave as soon as possible.

Ab scraped at the bear's huge body with his inefficient bit of flint and dug away food in abundance,
which he heaped up in a little red mound inside the fire, but the bear was a monstrous beast
and it was a long way from tail to head. The days of the honeymoon passed with a degree of
travail, for there was no moment when one of the two must not be awake feeding the guarding
fire or digging at the bear. They ate still heartily on the second day but it is simple, truthful
history to admit that on the sixth day bear's meat palled somewhat on the happy couple. To
have eaten thirty quails in thirty days or, at a pinch, thirty quails in two days would have
been nothing to either of them, but bear's meat eaten as part of what might be called a tunneling
exploit ceased, finally, to possess an attractive flavor. There was a degree of shade cast
by all these obtrusive circumstances across this honeymoon, but there came a day and hour when
the bear was largely eaten, and fairly dug away as to much of the rest of him, and then, quite
suddenly, his head and fore-quarters toppled forward into the cave, leaving the passage free,
and when Ab and Lightfoot followed, one shouting and the other laughing, one coming again to
his fortress and his weapons and his power, and the other to her hearth and duties.

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE FIRE COUNTRY AGAIN.

The sun rose brightly the next morning and when Ab, armed and watchful, rolled the big stone
away and passed the smoldering fire and issued from the cave into the open, the scene he looked
upon was fair in every way. Of what had been left of the great bear not a trace remained. Even
the bones had been dragged into the forest by the ravening creatures who had fed there during
the night. There were birds singing and there were no enemies in sight. Ab called to Lightfoot
and the two went forth together, loving and brave, but no longer careless in that too interesting
region.

And so began the home life of these two people. It was, in its way and relatively, as sweet
and delicious as the first home life of any loving and appreciating man and woman of to-day.
The two were very close, as the conditions under which they lived demanded. They were the only
human beings within a radius of miles. The family of the cave man of the time was serenely
independent, each having its own territory, and depending upon itself for its existence. And
the two troubled themselves about nothing. Who better than they could daily win the means of
animal subsistence?

Ab taught Lightfoot the art of cracking away the flakes of the flint nodules and of the finer
chipping and rasping which made perfect the spear and arrowheads, and never was pupil swifter
in the learning. He taught her, too, the use of his new weapon, and in all his life he did
no wiser thing! It was not long before she became easily his superior with the bow, so far
as her strength would allow, and her strength was far from insignificant. Her arrows flew with
greater accuracy than his, though the buzzing shaft had not as yet, and did not have for many
centuries later, the "gray goose" feather which made the doing of its mission far more certain.
Lightfoot brought to the cave the capercailzie and willow grouse and other birds which were
good things for the larder, and Ab looked on admiringly. Even in their joint hunting, when
there was a half rivalry, he was happy in her. Somehow, the arrow sang more merrily when it
flew from Lightfoot's bow.

Better than Ab, too, could the young wife do rare climbing when in a nest far out upon some
branch were eggs good for roasting and which could be reached only by a light-weight. And she
learned the woods about them well, and, though ever dreading when alone, found where were the
trees from which fell the greatest store of nuts and where, in the mud along the river's side,
her long and highly educated toes could reach the clams which were excellent to feed upon.

But never did the hunter leave the cave without a fear. Ever, even in the daytime, was there
too much rustling among the leaves of the near forest. Ever when day had gone was there the
sound of padded feet on the sward about the cave's blocked entrance. Ever, at night, looking
out through the narrow space between the heaped rocks, could the two inside the cave see fierce
and blazing eyes and there would come to them the sound of snarls and growls as the beasts
of different quality met one another. Yet the two cared little for these fearful surroundings
of the darkness. They were safe enough. In the morning there were no signs of the lurking beasts
of prey. They were somewhere near, though, and waiting, and so Ab and Lightfoot had the strain
of constant watchfulness upon them.

It may be that because of this ever present peril the two grew closer together. It could not
well be otherwise with human beings thus bound and isolated and facing and living upon the
rest of nature, part of it seeking always their own lives. They became a wonderfully loving
couple, as love went in that rude time. Despite the too wearing outlook imposed upon them,
because they were in so dangerous a locality, they were very happy. Yet, one day, came a difference
and a hurt.

Oak, apparently forgotten by others, was remembered by Ab, though never spoken of. Sometimes
the man had tossed upon his bed of leaves and had muttered in his sleep, and the one word he
had most often spoken in this troubled dreaming was the name of Oak. Early in their married
life Lightfoot, to whom the memory of the dead man, so little had she known him, was a far
less haunting thing than to her husband, had suddenly broken a silence, saying "Where is Oak?"
There was no answer, but the look of the man of whom she had asked the question was such that
she was glad to creep from his sight unharmed. Yet once again, months later, she forgot herself
and mocked Ab when he had been boastful over some exploit of strength and courage and when
he had seemed to say that he knew no fear. She, but to tease him, sprang up with a face convulsed
and agonized, and with staring eyes and hands opening and shutting, had cried out "Oak! Oak!"
as she had seen Ab do at night. Her mimic terror was changed on the moment into reality. With
a shudder and then with a glare in his eyes the man leaped toward her, snatching his great
ax from his belt and swinging it above her head. The woman shrieked and shrank to the ground.
The man whirled the weapon aloft and then, his face twitching convulsively, checked its descent.
He may, in that moment, have thought of what followed the slaying of the other who had been
close to him. There was no death done, but, thenceforth, Lightfoot never uttered aloud the
name of Oak. She became more sedate and grave of bearing.

The episode was but a passing, though not a forgotten one in the lives of the two. The months
went by and there were tranquil hours in the cave as, at night, the weapons were shaped, and
Lightfoot boasted of the arrowheads she had learned to make so well. Sometimes Old Mok would
be rowed up the river to them by the sturdy and venturesome Bark, who had grown into a particularly
fine youth and who now cared for nothing more than his big brother's admiration. Between Old
Mok and Lightfoot, to Ab's great delight, grew up the warmest friendship. The old man taught
the woman more of the details of good arrow-making and all he knew of woodcraft in all ways,
and the lord of the place soon found his wife giving opinions with an air of the utmost knowledge
and authority. Whatever came to him from her and Old Mok pleased him, and when she told him
of some of the finer points of arrow-making he stretched out his brawny arms and laughed.

But there came, in time, a shade upon the face of the man. The incident of the talk of Oak
may have brought to his mind again more freshly and keenly the memory of the Fire Country.
There he had found safety and great comfort. Why should not he and Lightfoot seize upon this
home and live there? It was a wonderful place and warm, and there were forests at hand. He
became so absorbed in his own thoughts on this great theme that the woman who was his could
not understand his mood, but, one day, he told her of what he had been thinking and of what
he had resolved upon. "I am going to the Fire Country," he said.

Armed, this time with spear and ax and bow and arrow, and with food abundant in the pouch of
his skin garb, Ab left the cave in which Lightfoot was now to stay most of the time, well barricaded,
for that she was to hunt afar alone in such a region was not even to be thought of. What thoughts
came to the man as he traversed again the forest paths where he had so pondered as he once
ran before can be but guessed at. Certainly he had learned no more of Oak.

Lightfoot, left alone in the cave, became at once a most discreet and careful personage, for
one of her buoyant and daring temperament. She had often taken risks since her marriage, but
there was always the chance of finding within the sound of her voice her big mate, Ab, should
danger overtake her. She remained close to the cave, and when early dusk came she lugged the
stone barriers into place and built a night-fire within the entrance. The fierce and hungry
beasts of the wood came, as usual, lurking and sniffing harshly about the entrance, and when
she ventured there and peered outside she saw the wicked and leering eyes. Alone and a little
alarmed, she became more vengeful than she would have been with the big, careless Ab beside
her. She would have sport with her bow. The advantage of the bow is that it requires no swing
of space for its work as is demanded of the flung spear. An arrow may be sent through a mere
loophole with no probable demerit as to what it will accomplish. So the woman brought her strongest
bow--and far beyond the rough bow of Ab's first make was the bow they now possessed--and gathered
together many of the arrows she could make so well and use so well, and, thus equipped, went
again to the cave's entrance, and through the space between the heaped rocks of the doorway
sent toward the eyes of wolf, or cave hyena, shafts to which they were unaccustomed, but which,
somehow, pierced and could find mid-body quite as well as the cave man's spear. There was a
certain comfort in the work, though it could not affect her condition in one way or another.
It was only something of a gain to drive the eyes away.

And Ab reached the Fire Valley again. He found it as comfortable and untenanted as when the
leap through the ring of flame had saved his life. He clambered up the creek and wandered along
its banks, where the grass was green because of the warmth about, and studied all the qualities
of the naturally defended valley. "I will make my home here," he said. "Lightfoot shall come
with me."

The man returned to his cave and his lonely mate again and told her of the Fire Country. He
said that in the Fire Valley they would be safer and happier, and told her how he had found
an opening underneath the cliff which they could soon enlarge into a cave to meet all wants.
Not that a cave was really needed in a fire valley, but they might have one if they cared.
And Lightfoot was glad of the departure.

The pair gathered their belongings together and there was the long journey over again which
Ab had just accomplished. But it was far different from either journey that he had made. There
with him was his wife, and he was all equipped and was to begin a new sort of life which would,
he felt, be good. Lightfoot, bearing her load gallantly, was not less jubilant. As a matter
of plain fact, though Lightfoot had been happy in the cave in the forest, she had always recognized
certain of its disadvantages, as had, in the end, her fearless husband. It is, in a general
way, vexatious to live in a locality where, as soon as you leave your hearthstone, you incur,
at least, a chance of an exciting and uncomfortable episode and then lodgment in the maw of
some imposing creature of the carnivora. Lightfoot was quite ready to seek with Ab the Fire
Valley of which he had so often told her. She was a plucky young matron, but there were extremes.

There were no adventures on the journey worth relating. The Fire Valley was reached at nightfall
and the two struggled weariedly up the rugged path beside the creek which issued from the valley's
western end. As they reached the level Ab threw down his burden, as did Lightfoot, and as the
woman's eyes roved over the bright scene, she gave a great gasp of delight. "It is our home!"
she cried.

They ate and slept in the light and warmth of surrounding flames, and when the day came they
began the work of enlarging what was to be their cave. But, though they worked earnestly, they
did not care so much for the prospective shelter as they might have done. What a cave had given
was warmth and safety. Here they had both, out of doors and under the clear sky. It was a new
and glorious life. Sometimes, though happy, the woman worked a little wearily, and, not long
after the settlement of the two in their new home, a child was born to them, a son, robust
and sturdy, who came afterward to be known as Little Mok.

CHAPTER XXV.

A GREAT STEP FORWARD.

There came to Ab and Lightfoot that comfort which comes with laboring for something desired.
In all that the two did amid their pleasant surroundings life became a greater thing because
its dangers were so lessened and its burdens lightened. But they were not long the sole human
beings in the Fire Valley. There was room for many and soon Old Mok took up his permanent abode
with them, for he was most contented when with Ab, who seemed so like a son to him. A cave
of his own was dug for Mok, where, with his carving and his making of arrows and spearheads,
he was happy in his old age. Soon followed a hegira which made, for the first time, a community.
The whole family of Ab, One-Ear, Red-Spot and Bark and Beech-leaf and the later ones, all came,
and another cave was made, and then old Hilltop was persuaded to follow the example and come
with Moonface and Branch and Stone Arm, his big sons, and the group, thus established and naturally
protected, feared nothing which might happen. The effect of daily counsel together soon made
itself distinctly felt, and, under circumstances so different, many of the old ways were departed
from. Half a mile to the south the creek, which made a bend adown its course, tumbled into
the river and upon the river were wild fowl in abundance and in its depths were fish. The forest
abounded in game and there were great nut-bearing trees and the wild fruits in their season.
Wild bees hovered over the flowers in the open places and there were hoards of wild honey to
be found in the hollows of deadened trunks or in the high rock crevices. A great honey-gatherer,
by the way, was Lightfoot, who could climb so well, and who, furthermore, had her own fancy
for sweet things. It was either Bark or Moonface who usually accompanied her on her expeditions,
and they brought back great store of this attractive spoil. The years passed and the community
grew, not merely in numbers, but intelligence. Though always an adviser with Old Mok, Ab's
chief male companion in adventure was the stanch Hilltop, who was a man worth hunting with.
Having two such men to lead and with a force so strong behind them the valley people were able
to cope with the more dangerous animals venturesomely, and soon the number of these was so
decreased that even the children might venture a little way beyond the steep barriers which
had been raised where the flame circle had its gaps. The opening to the north was closed by
a high stone wall and that along the creek defended as effectively, in a different way. They
were having good times in the valley.

At first, the home of all was in the caves dug in the soft rock of the ledge, for of those
who came to the novel refuge there was, for a season, none who could sleep in the bright light
from the never-waning flames. There came a time, though, when, in midsummer, Ab grumbled at
the heat within his cave and he and Lightfoot built for themselves an outside refuge, made
of a bark-covered "lean-to" of long branches propped against the rock. Thus was the first house
made. The habitation proved so comfortable that others in the valley imitated it and soon there
was a hive of similar huts along the foot of the overhanging precipice. When the short, sharp
winter came, all did not seek their caves again, but the huts were made warmer by the addition
to their walls of bark and skins, and cave dwelling in the valley was finally abandoned. There
was one exception. Old Mok would not leave his warm retreat, and, as long as he lived, his
rock burrow was his home.

There came also, as recruits, young men, friends of the young men of the valley, and the band
waxed and waned, for nothing could at once change the roving and independent habits of the
cave men. But there came children to the mothers, the broad Moonface being especially to the
fore in this regard, and a fine group of youngsters played and straggled up and down the creek
and fought valiantly together, as cave children should. The heads of families were friendly,
though independent. Usually they lived each without any reference to anyone else, but when
a great hunt was on, or any emergency called, the band came together and fought, for the time,
under Ab's tacitly admitted leadership. And the young men brought wives from the country round.

The area of improvement widened. Around the Fire Village the zone of safety spread. The roar
of the great cave tiger was less often heard within miles of the flaming torches of the valley
so inhabited. There grew into existence something almost like a system of traffic, for, from
distant parts, hitherto unknown, came other cave men, bringing skins, or flints, or tusks for
carving, which they were eager to exchange for the new weapon and for instruction in its uses.
Ab was the first chieftain, the first to draw about him a clan of followers. The cave men were
taking their first lesson in a slight, half unconfessed obedience, that first essential of
community life where there is yet no law, not even the unwritten law of custom.

Running in and out among the children, sometimes pummeled by them, were a score or two of gray,
four-footed, bone-awaiting creatures, who, though as yet uncounted in such relation, were destined
to furnish a factor in man's advancement. They were wolves and yet no longer wolves. They had
learned to cling to man, but were not yet intelligent enough or taught enough to aid him in
his hunting. They were the dogs of the future, the four-footed things destined to become the
closest friends of men of future ages, the descendants of the four cubs Ab and Oak had taken
from the dens so many years before.

It was humanizing for the children, this association of such a number together, though they
ran only a little less wildly than those who had heretofore been born in the isolated caves.
There came more of an average of intelligence among them, thus associated, though but little
more attention was paid them than the cave men had afforded offspring in the past. There had
come to Ab after Little Mok two strong sons, Reindeer and Sure-Aim, very much like him in his
youth, but of them, until they reached the age of help and hunting, he saw little. Lightfoot
regarded them far more closely, for, despite the many duties which had come upon her, there
never disappeared the mother's tenderness and watchfulness. And so it was with Moonface, whose
brood was so great, and who was like a noisy hen with chickens. So existed the hovering mother
instinct with all the women of the valley, though then the mothers fished and hunted and had
stirring events to distract them from domesticity and close affection almost as much as had
the men.

From this oddly formed community came a difference in certain ways of doing certain things,
which changed man's status, which made a revolution second only to that made by the bow and
for which even men of thought have not accounted as they should have done, with the illustration
before them in our own times of what has followed so swiftly the use of steam and, later, of
electricity. Men write of and wonder at the strange gap between what are called the Paleolithic
and the Neolithic ages, that is, between the ages when the spearheads and ax and arrowheads
were of stone chipped roughly into shape, and the age of stone even-edged and smoothly polished.
There was really no gap worth speaking of. The Paleolithic age changed as suddenly into the
Neolithic as the age of horse power changed into that of steam and electricity, allowance being
always made for the slower transmission of a new intelligence in the days when men lived alone
and when a hundred years in the diffusion of knowledge was as a year to-day.

One day Ab went into Old Mok's cave grumbling. "I shot an arrow into a great deer," he said,
"and I was close and shot it with all my force, but the beast ran before it fell and we had
far to carry the meat. I tore the arrow from him and the blood upon the shaft showed that it
had not gone half way in. I looked at the arrow and there was a jagged point uprising from
its side. How can a man drive deeply an arrow which is so rough? Are you getting too old to
make good spears and arrows, Mok?" And the man fumed a little. Old Mok made no reply, but he
thought long and deeply after Ab had left the cave. Certainly Ab must have good arrows! Was
there any way of bettering them? And, the next day, the crippled old man might have been seen
looking for something beside the creek where it found its exit from the valley. There were
stones ground into smoothness tossed up along the shore and the old man studied them most carefully.
Many times he had bent over a stream, watching, thinking, but this time he acted. He noted
a small sandstone block against which were rasping stones of harder texture, and he picked
this from the tumbling current and carried it to his cave. Then, pouring a little water upon
a depression in the stone's face, he selected his best big arrowhead and began rubbing it upon
the wet sandstone. It was a weary work, for flint and sandstone are different things and flint
is much the harder, but there came a slow result. Smoother and smoother became the chipped
arrowhead, and two days later--for all the waking hours of two days were required in the weary
grinding--Old Mok gave to Ab an arrow as smooth of surface and keen of edge as ever flew from
bow while stone was used. And not many years passed--as years are counted in old history--before
the smoothed stone weaponhead became the common property of cave men. The time of chipped stone
had ended and that of smoothed stone had begun. There was no space between them to be counted
now. One swiftly became the other. It was a matter of necessity, this exhibition of enterprise
and sense by the early man in the prompt general utilization of a new discovery. And not alone
in the improvements in means which came when men of the hunting type were so gathered in a
community were the bow and the smoothed implements, though these were the greatest of the discoveries
of the epoch. The fishermen who went to the river were not content with the raft-like devices
of the aquatic Shell People and learned, in time, that hollowed logs would float and that,
with the aid of fire and flint axes, a great log could be hollowed. And never a Phoenician
ship-builder, never a Fulton of the steamer, never a modern designer of great yachts, stood
higher in the estimation of his fellows than stood the expert in the making of the rude boats,
as uncouth in appearance as the river-horse which sometimes upset them, but from which men
could, at least, let down their lines or dart their spears to secure the fish in the teeming
waters. And the fishermen had better spears and hooks now, for comparison was necessarily always
made among devices, and bone barbs and hooks were whittled out from which the fish no longer
often floundered. There came, in time, the making of rude nets, plaited simply from the tough
marsh grasses, but they served the purpose and lessened somewhat the gravity of the great food
question.

CHAPTER XXVI.

FACING THE RAIDER.

One day, at noon, a man burst, panting, through the wide open entrance to the Fire Valley.
His coat of skin was rent and hung awry and, as all could see when he staggered down the pathway,
the flesh was torn from one cheek and arm, and down his leg on one side was the stain of dried
blood. He was exhausted from his hurt and his run and his talk was, at first, almost unmeaning.
He was met by some of the older and wiser among those who saw him coming and to their questions
answered only by demanding Ab, who came at once. The hard-breathing and wounded man could only
utter the words "Big tiger," when he pitched forward and became unconscious. But his words
had been enough. Well understood was it by all who listened what a raid of the cave tiger meant,
and there was a running to the gateway and soon was raised the wall of ready stone, upbuilt
so high that even the leaping monster could not hope to reach its summit. Later the story of
the wounded, but now conscious and refreshed runner, was told with more of detail and coherence.

The messenger brought out what he had to tell gaspingly. He had lost much blood and was faint,
but he told how there had taken place something awful in the village of the Shell Men. It was
but little after dusk the night before when the Shell Men were gathered together in merrymaking
after good fishing and lucky gathering of what there was to eat along the shores of the shell
fish and the egg-laying turtles and the capture of a huge river-horse. It had been, up to midnight,
one of the greatest and most joyous meetings the Shell People had joined in for many years.
They were close-gathered and prosperous and content, and though there was daily turmoil and
risk of death upon the water and sometimes as great risk upon the land, yet the village fringing
the waters had grown, and the midden--the "kitchen-midden" of future ages--had raised itself
steadily and now stretched far up and down the creek which was a river branch and far backward
from the creek toward the forest which ended with the uplands. They had learned to dread the
forest little, the water people, but from the forest now came what made for each in all the
village a dread and horror. The cave tiger had been among them!

The Shell People had gathered together upon the sward fronting their line of shallow caves
and one of them, the story-teller and singer, was chanting aloud of the river-horse and the
great spoil which was theirs, when there was a hungry roar and the yell or shriek of all, men
or women not too stricken by fear to be unable to utter sound, and then the leap into their
midst of the cave tiger! Perhaps the story-teller's chant had called the monster's attention
to him, perhaps his attitude attracted it; whatever may have been the influence, the tiger
seized the singer and leaped lightly into the open beyond the caves and, as lightly, with long
bounds, into the blackness of the forest beyond.

There was a moment of awe and horror and then the spirit of the brave Shell Men asserted itself.
There was grasping of weapons and an outpouring in pursuit of the devourer. Easy to follow
was the trail, for a monster beast carrying a man cannot drop lightly in his leaps. There was
a brief mile or two traversed, though hours were consumed in the search, and then, as morn
was breaking, the seekers came upon what was left of the singer. It was not much and it lay
across the forest pathway, for the cave tiger did not deign to hide his prey. There came a
half moaning growl from the forest. That growl meant lurking death. Then the seekers fled.
There was consultation and a resolve to ask for help. So the runner, the man stricken down
by a casual stroke in the tiger's rush, but bravest among his tribe, had come to the Fire Valley.

To the panting stranger Ab had not much to say. He saw to it that the man was refreshed and
cared for and that the deep scars along his side were dressed after the cave man's fashion.
But through the night which followed the great cave leader pondered deeply. Why should men
thus live and dread the cave tiger? Surely men were wiser than any beast! This one monster
must, anyhow, be slain!

But little it mattered to all surrounding nature that the strong man in the Fire Valley had
resolved upon the death of the cave tiger. The tiger was yet alive! There was a difference
in the pulse of all the woodland. There was a hush throughout the forest. The word, somehow,
went to every nerve of all the world of beasts, "Sabre-Tooth is here!" Even the huge cave bear
shuffled aside as there came to him the scent of the invader. The aurochs and the urus, the
towering elk, the reindeer and the lesser horned and antlered things fled wildly as the tainted
air brought to them the tale of impending murder. Only the huge rhinoceros and mammoth stood
their ground, and even these were terror-stricken with regard for their guarded young whenever
the tiger neared them. The rhinoceros stood then, fierce-fronted and dangerous, its offspring
hovering by its flanks, and the mammoths gathered in a ring encircling their calves and presenting
an outward range of tusks to meet the hovering devourer. The dread was all about. The forest
became seemingly nearly lifeless. There was less barking and yelping, less reckless playfulness
of wild creatures, less rustling of the leaves and pattering along the forest paths. There
was fear and quiet, for Sabre-Tooth had come!

The runner, refreshed and strengthened by food and sleep, appeared before Ab in the morning
and told his story more in detail and got in return the short answer: "We will go with you
and help you and your people. Tigers must be killed!"

Rarely before had man gone out voluntarily to hunt the great cave tiger. He had, sometimes
in awful strait, defended himself against the monster as best he could, but to seek the encounter
where the odds were so great against him was an ugly task. Now the man-slayer was to be the
pursued instead of the pursuer. It required courage. The vengeful wounded man looked upon Ab
with a grim, admiring regard. "You fear not?" he said.

There was bustling in the valley and soon a stalwart dozen men were armed with bow and spear
and the journey was taken up toward the Shell Men's home. The village was reached at mid-day
and as the little troop emerged from the forest the death wail fell upon their ears. "The tiger
has come again!" exclaimed the runner.

It was true. The tiger had come again! Once more with his stunning roar he had swept through
the village and had taken another victim, a woman, the wife of one of the head men. Too benumbed
by fear, this time, to act at once, the Shell Men had not pursued the great brute into the
darkness. They had but ventured out in the morning and followed the trail and found that the
tiger had carried the woman in very nearly the same direction as he had borne the man and that
what remained from his gorging of the night lay where his earlier feast had been. It was the
first tragedy almost repeated.

The little group of Fire Valley folk entered the village and were received with shouts from
the men, while from the throats of the women still rose the death wail. There were more people
about the huts than Ab had ever seen there and he recognized at once among the group many of
the cave men from the East, strong people of his own kind. As the wounded runner had gone to
the Fire Valley, so another had been sent to the East, to call upon another group for aid,
and the Eastern cave people, under the leadership of a huge, swarthy man called Boarface, had
come to learn what the strait was and to decide upon what degree of help they could afford
to give. Between these Eastern and the Western cave men there was a certain coldness. There
was no open enmity, though at some time in the past there had been family battles and memories
of feuds were still existent. But Ab and Boarface met genially and there was not a trace of
difference now. Boarface joined readily in the council which was held and decided that he would
aid in the desperate hunt, and certainly his aid was not to be despised when his followers
were looked upon. They were a stalwart lot.

The way was taken by the gathered fighting men toward where, across the forest path, lay part
of a woman. As the place was neared the band gathered close together and there were outpointing
spears, just as the mammoths' tusks outpointed when the beasts guarded their young from the
thing now hunted. But there came no attack and no sound from the forest. The tiger must be
sleeping. Beneath a huge tree bordering the pathway lay what remained of the woman's body.
Fifty feet above, and almost directly over this dreadful remnant of humanity, shot out a branch
as thick as a man's body. There was consultation among the hunters and in this Ab took the
lead, while Boarface and the Shell Men who had come to help assented readily. No need existed
for the risk of an open fight with this great beast. Craft must be used and Ab gave forth his
swift commands.

The Fire Valley leader had seen to it that his company had brought what he needed in his effort
to kill the tiger. There were two great tanned, tough urus hides. There were lengths of rhinoceros
hide, cut thickly, which would endure a strain of more than the weight of ten brawny men. There
was one spear, with a shaft of ash wood at least fifteen feet in length and as thick as a man's
wrist. Its head was a blade of hardest flint, but the spear was too heavy for a man's hurling.
It had been made for another use.

There was little hesitation in what was done, for Ab knew well the quality of the work he had
in hand. He unfolded his plan briefly and then he himself climbed to the treetop and out upon
the limb, carrying with him the knotted strip of rhinoceros hide. In the pouch of his skin
garment were pebbles. He reached a place on the big limb overhanging the path and dropped a
pebble. It struck the earth a yard or two away from what remained of the woman's body and he
shouted to those below to drag the mangled body to the spot where the pebble had hit the earth.
They were about to do so when from the forest on one side of the path came a roar, so appalling
in every way that there was no thought of anything among most of the workers save of sudden
flight. The tiger was in the wood and very near and a scent had reached him. There was a flight
which left upon the ground beneath the tree branches only old Hilltop and the rough Boarface
and some dozen sturdy followers, these about equally divided between the East and the West
men of the hills. There was swift and sharp work then.

The tiger might come at any moment, and that meant death to one at least. But those who remained
were brave men and they had come far to encompass this tiger's ending. They dragged what remained
of the tiger's prey to where the pebble had hit the earth. Ab, clinging and raging aloft, afar
out upon the limb, shouted to Hilltop to bring him the spear and the urus skins, and soon the
sturdy old man was beside him. Then, about two deep notches in the huge shaft, thongs were
soon tied strongly, and just below its middle were attached the bag-shaped urus skins. Near
its end the rhinoceros thong was knotted and then it was left hanging from the limb supported
by this strong rope, while, three-fourths of the way down its length, dangled on each side
the two empty bags of hide. Short orders were given, and, directed by Boarface, one man after
another climbed the tree, each with a weight of stones carried in his pouch, and each delivering
his load to old Hilltop, who, lying well out upon the limb, passed the stones to Ab, who placed
them in the skin pouches on either side the suspended and threatening spear. The big skin pouches
on either side were filling rapidly, when there came from the forest another roar, nearer and
more appalling than before, and some of the workers below fled panic-stricken. Ab shouted and
frothed and foamed as the men ran. Old Hilltop slid down the tree, ax in hand, followed by
the dark Boarface, and one or two of the men below were captured and made to work again. If we
linger for a moment in the road we shall probably see the scornful face of the proud usurper
at one of the windows calmly enjoying this view of mine, all unconscious that I, the rightful
owner, am standing beneath. Does it not remind you of the films?--

"Charles Carruthers, an outcast from his ancestral halls, eyes mournfully the scene of merry junketing
within.

Charles Carruthers--blick! blick!"--and you see him eyeing mournfully outside--"blick! blick!"--and
you see the junketers eating his junket within.

On looking back in a calmer mood on the lines which I have just written, I feel it possible that
I may have let my emotions run away with me and conveyed a slightly false impression. I may have
suggested that the old home has belonged to my family since Domesday Book or dear-knows-when
or some other historic date in our island story. That would not be
strictly true.

As a matter of fact I have never lived in the house, nor have any of my relations either.
It has belonged to me, to be quite accurate, since March 25th, 1920, and the interloper was interloping
on a short lease when I bought the long lease over his head. It is also true that by an awkward
and absurd convention I have to restore the old home to the ground landlord in 1941. But who
cares about what is going to happen in 1941? The Coalition may have come to an end by that time,
and the first Labour Government, under Lord NORTHCLIFFE or Mr. JACK
JONES, may be in power.

Some bricklayer, in a mood of artistic frenzy, may have designed the plan of a new brick and
had it passed by the Ministry of Housing. DEMPSEY may have met CARPENTIER.

No, the trouble is about the interloper. It appears that, having the remainder of a lease to
run, he can go on anteloping (you know what I mean) for two years
more if he likes. To do him justice he admits that the place is mine
and wants to leave it. He has no real love for the priceless old spot.
All that he asks is somewhere better to go to. So I am gladly doing
my best to help him. The creature Ab looked upon
that day so long ago was beautiful, in his way. He was beautiful as is the peacock or the banded
rattlesnake. There were color contrasts and fine blendings. The stripes upon him were wonderfully
rich, and as he came creeping toward the body, he was as splendid as he was dreadful.

With every nerve strained, but with his first impulse of something like terror gone, Ab watched
the devourer beneath him while his sharp flint knife, hard gripped, bore lightly against the
taut rhinoceros-hide rope. The tiger began his ghastly meal but was not quite beneath the suspended
spear. Then came some distant sound in the forest and he raised his head and shifted his position.

He was fairly under the spear now. The knife pressed firmly against the rawhide was drawn back
and forth noiselessly but with effectiveness. Suddenly the last tissue parted and the enormously
weighted spear fell like a lightning-stroke. The broad flint head struck the tiger fairly between
the shoulders, and, impelled by such a weight, passed through his huge body as if it had met
no obstacle. Upon the strong shaft of ash the monster was impaled. There echoed and reechoed
through the forest a roar so fearful that even the hunters whom Ab had sent far away from the
scene of the tragedy clambered to the trees for refuge. The struggles of the pierced brute
were tremendous beyond description, but no strength could avail it now; it had received its
death wound and soon the great tiger lay still, as harmless as the squirrel, frightened and
hidden in his nest. In wild triumph Ab slid to the ground and then the long cry to summon his
party went echoing through the wood. When the others found him he had withdrawn the spear and
was already engaged, flint knife in hand, in stripping from the huge body the glorious robe
it wore.

There was excitement and rejoicing. The terror had been slain! The Shell People were frantic
in their exultation. Meanwhile Ab had called upon his own people to assist him and the wonderful
skin of the tiger was soon stretched out upon the ground, a glorious possession for a cave man.

"I will have half of it," declared Boarface, and he and Ab faced each other menacingly. "It
shall not be cut," was the fierce retort. "It is mine. I killed the tiger!"

Strong hands gripped stone axes and there was chance of deadly fray then and there, but the
Shell People interfered and the Shell People excelled in number, and were a potent influence
for peace. Ab carried away the splendid trophy, but as Boarface and his men departed, there
were black faces and threatening words.

CHAPTER XXVII.

LITTLE MOK.

Among all the children of Ab--and remarkable it was for the age--the best loved was Little
Mok, the eldest son. When the child, strong and joyous, was scarcely two years old, he fell
from a ledge off the cliff where he had climbed to play, and both his legs were broken. Strange
to say he survived the accident in that time when the law of the survival of the fittest was
almost invariable in its sternest and most purely physical demonstration. The mother love of
Lightfoot warded off the last pitiless blow of nature, although the child, a hopeless cripple,
never after walked. The name Little Mok was naturally given him, and before long the child
had won the heart, as well as the name, of the limping old maker of axes, spearheads and arrows.

The closer ties of family life, as we know them now, existed but in their outlines to the cave
man. The man and woman were faithful to each other with the fidelity of the higher animals
and their children were cared for with rough tenderness in their infancy. The time of absolute
dependence was made very short, though, and children very early were required to find some
of their own food, and taught by necessity to protect themselves. But Little Mok, unable to
take up for himself the burden of an independent existence, was not slain nor left to die of
neglect as might have been another child thus crippled in the time in which he lived. He, once
spared, grew into the wild hearts of those closest to him and became the guarded and cherished
one of the rude home of Ab and Lightfoot, and to him was thus given the continuous love and
care which the strong-limbed boys and girls of the family lost and never missed.

It was a strange thing for the time. The child had qualities other than the negative ones of
helplessness and weakness with which to bind to him the hearts of those around him, but the
primary fact of his entire dependence upon them was what made him the center of the little
circle of untaught, untamed cave people who lived in the Fire Valley. He may have been the
first child ever so cherished from such impulse.

From his mother the child inherited a joyous disposition which nothing could subdue. Often
on the return home from some little expedition on which it had been practicable to take him,
sitting on Lightfoot's shoulder, or on the still stronger arm of old One-Ear, his silent, somewhat
brooding grandfather, the little brown boy made the woods ring with shrill bird calls, or the
mimicry of animals, and ever his laughter filled the spaces in between these sounds. Other
children flocked around the merry youngster, seeking to emulate his play of voice and the oldsters
smiled as they saw and heard the joyous confusion about the tiny reveler. The excursions to
the river were Little Mok's chief delight from his early childhood. He entered into the preparations
for them with a zest and keen enjoyment born of the presence of an adventurous spirit in a
maimed body, and when the fishing party left the Fire Camp it was incomplete if Little Mok
was not carried lightly at the van, the life and joy of the occasion.

No one ever forgot the day when Little Mok, then about six years old, caught his first fish.
His joy and pride infected all as he exhibited his prize and boasted of what he would catch
in the river next, and when, on the return, Old Mok saluted him as the "Great Fisherman," the
elf's elation became too great for any expression. His little chest heaved, his eyes flashed,
and then he wriggled from Lightfoot's arms into the lap of Old Mok, snuggled down into the
old man's furs and hid his face there; and the two understood each other.

It was soon after this great event of the first fish-catching that Red-Spot, Ab's mother, died.
She had never quite adapted herself to the new life in the Fire Valley, and after a time she
began to grow old very fast. At last a fever attacked her and the end of her patient, busy
life came. After her death One-Ear was much in Old Mok's cave, the two had so long been friends.
There with them the crippled boy was often to be found. He was not always gay and joyous. Sometimes
he lay for days on his bed of leaves at home, in weakness and pain, silent and unlike himself.
Then when Lightfoot's care had given him back a little strength, he would beg to be taken to
Old Mok's cave. There he could sleep, he said, away from the noise and the lights of the outside
world, and finally he claimed and was allowed a nest of his own in the warmest and darkest
nook of Old Mok's den, where he slept every night, and sometimes a good part of the day, when
one of his times of pain and weakness was upon him. Here during many a long hour of work, experiment
and argument, the wide eyes and quick ears of Little Mok saw and heard, while Ab, Mok and One-Ear
bent over their work at arrowhead or spear point, and talked of what might be done to improve
the weapons upon which so much depended. Here, when no one else remained in the weary darkness
of night and the half light of stormy days Old Mok beguiled the time with stories, and sometimes
in a hoarse voice even attempted to chant to his little hearer snatches of the wild singing
tales of the Shell People, for the Shell People had a sort of story song.

Once, when Lightfoot sat by Old Mok's fire, she told them of the time when she and Ab found
themselves outside their cave, unarmed, with a bear to be eaten through before they could get
into their door, and Little Mok surprised his mother and Old Mok by an outburst of laughter
at the tale. He had a glimmering of humor, and saw the droll side of the adventure, a view
which had not occurred to Lightfoot, nor to Ab. The little lad, of the world, yet not in it,
saw vaguely the surprises, lights and shades and contrasts of existence, and sometimes they
made him laugh. The laugh of the cave man was not a common event, and when it came was likely
to be sober and sardonic, at least it was so when not simply an evidence of rude health and
high animal spirits. Humor is one of the latest, as it is one of the most precious, grains
shaken out of Time's hour-glass, but Little Mok somehow caught a tiny bit of the rainbow gift,
long before its time in the world, and soon, with him, it was to disappear for centuries to come.

One day when Little Mok was brought back from an expedition to the river, he told Old Mok how
he had sat long on the bank, too tired to fish, and had just rested and feasted his eyes on
the wood, the stream, the small darting creatures in it, the birds, and the animals which came
to drink. Describing a herd of reindeer which had passed near him, Little Mok took up a piece
of Old Mok's red chalkstone and on the wall of the cave drew a picture of the animal. The veteran
stared in surprise. The picture was wonderfully life-like in grasp and detail. The child owned
that great gift, the memory of sight, and his hand was cunning. Encouraged by his success,
the boy drew on, delighting Old Mok with his singular fidelity and skill. Then came hours and
days of sketching and etching in the old man's cave. The master was delighted. He brought out
from their hiding places his choicest pieces of mammoth tusk or teeth of the river-horse for
Little Mok's etchings and carvings. And, as time passed, the young artist excelled the old
one, and became the pride and boast of his friend and teacher. "Nothing fresh has transpired;"
i.e., The local Reporter's invention is at last exhausted.

"The Prisoner seemed fully alive to the very serious position in which
he was placed;" i.e., He occasionally wiped his mouth on his knuckles.

While everything else in the Fire Valley was growing, developing and flourishing, Little Mok's
frail body had ever grown but slowly, and about the beginning of his twelfth year there appeared
a change in him. He became permanently weak and grew more and more helpless day by day. His
cherished excursions to the river, even his little journeys on old One-Ear's strong arm to
the cliff top, from whence he could see the whole world at once, had all to be abandoned.

When the winter snows began to whirl in the air Little Mok was lying quietly on his bed, his
great eyes looking wistfully up at Lightfoot, who in vain taxed her limited skill and resources
to tempt him to eat and become more sturdy. She hovered over him like a distressed mother bird
over its youngling fallen from the nest, but, with all her efforts, she could not bring back
even his usual slight measure of health and strength to the poor Little Mok. Ab came sometimes
and looked sadly at the two and then walked moodily away, a great weight on his breast. Old
Mok was always at work, and yet always ready to give Little Mok water or turn his weary little
frame on its rude bed, or spread the furs over the wasted body, and always Lightfoot waited
and hoped and feared.

And at last Little Mok died, and was buried under the stones, and the snow fell over the lonely
cairn under the fir trees outside the Fire Valley where his grave was made.

Lightfoot was silent and sad, and could not smile nor laugh any more. She longed for Little
Mok, and did not eat or sleep. One night Ab, trying to comfort her, said, "You will see him again."

"What do you mean?" cried Lightfoot. And Ab only answered, "You will see him; he will come
at night. Go to sleep, and you will see him."

But Lightfoot could not sleep yet and for many a night her eyes closed only when extreme fatigue
compelled sleep toward the morning.

And at last, after many days and nights, Lightfoot, when asleep, saw Little Mok. Just as in
life, she saw him, with all his familiar looks and motions. But he did not stay long. And again
and again she saw him, and it comforted her somewhat because he smiled. There had come to her
such a heartache about him, lying out there under the snow and stones, with no one to care
for him, that the smile warmed her heavy heart and she told Ab that she had seen Little Mok,
only whispering it to him--for it was not well, she knew, to talk about such things--and she
whispered to Ab, too, her anguish that Little Mok only came at night, and never when it was
day, but she did not complain. She only said: "I want to see him in the daytime."

And Ab could think of nothing to say. But that made him think more and more. He felt drawn
closer to Lightfoot, his wife, no longer a young girl, but the mother of Little Mok, who was
dead, and of all his children.

