He would have done as much for any woman in her position; the emotion that filled him was entirely
that of pity. She was vain and frivolous--employing every artifice, but she was a woman despite
that, and entitled, in the present circumstances, to what comfort and sympathy he could give her.

However, to Della, the moment of victory was at hand. She had been a trifle worried just an
instant before; and the white world outside had seemed to threaten to rush in and crush out
her life--the life she loved so well--and she had been just a little afraid.

But she had not been too frightened to note Lawler's sympathy--the quick glow in his eyes,
and the atmosphere of tenderness that suddenly seemed to envelop him. It was surrender, she
thought, the breaking down of that quiet, steady reserve in him which had filled her with resentment.

She caught his free hand and held it tightly, while she turned her head so that she could look
into his eyes.

"Lawler," she said then, in a low voice; "I lied to you."

"Lied?" He stiffened, dropped his hand from her head and looked straight at her.

She laughed, lightly. "Yes; I lied, Lawler. The day we met in Willets--you remember? Well,
I loved you from that moment, Lawler. You looked so big and fine and strong. I just couldn't
help it. I did overhear Gary Warden telling those two men to cut the fence; and I didn't want
them to set all those cattle adrift. But I didn't intend to come here. I started out to find
your ranch--the Circle L. I thought I would find you there, and I knew I wouldn't be able to
go back to the Two Diamond right away--that you would have to keep me at your house until the
storm was over. But I got lost, and when I saw the light in the window, here, I knew I had
better go toward it. But I came because I wanted to be near you, Lawler. And now--" She laughed
and tried to draw him toward her.

"Of course you are not in earnest, Miss Wharton," he said, slowly, his voice grave. "Such a
confession----"

"It's the truth," she declared, shamelessly, holding tightly to him. "It is simple, isn't it?
I love you--and I came to you. I came, because I had to--I wanted to. I had been thinking of
you--dreaming of you. You were in my mind all the time.

"And you have been acting dreadfully distant. I had begun to believe that you didn't like me--that
you wished I hadn't come----"

"That would be the truth, Miss Wharton," he interrupted. He grimly walked to the fireplace,
standing with his back to it, looking at her. He was wondering how he could tell her that she
had disgraced her sex; how he could, without being brutal, tell her how he abhorred women who
pursued men.

Despite the impulse of charity that moved him, he could not veil the grim disgust that had
seized him. It showed in the curve of his lips and in his eyes.

And Miss Wharton saw it. She had been watching him narrowly when he walked away from her; she
was looking at him now, in resentful inquiry, her lips tight-pressed. She was puzzled, incredulous.

Then, with their glances locked, she laughed, jeeringly.

"I really don't know how to classify you!" she said, scornfully. "Am I ugly?"

He smiled grimly. "Far from it," he answered, frankly. "I think," he added, his gaze still
holding hers, "that mere physical beauty doesn't intrigue my interest. There must be something
back of it."

"Character, I suppose," she mocked; "nobility, virtue?"

"I think you have said it," he smiled. "At least I haven't the slightest desire to like you."

"School teachers are more in your line, I suppose," she jibed.

There was a wanton light in her eyes. The change that had come over her was startling; and
Lawler found himself watching her, trying to associate this new side of her character with
that she had shown before she had betrayed her real character; she represented a type that
had always been repulsive to him. And, until now, she had fooled him. He had wasted his politeness,
his gentleness, his consideration, and his delicacy. He understood, now, why she had seemed
to laugh at him when he had endeavored to provide a certain measure of privacy for her; he
knew how she felt at this moment, when she must realize that she had betrayed herself.

Any further talk between them would be profitless, and so Lawler did not answer her question.
He stood, looking at the north window, which was a little to one side of her; while she sat
staring past him, her lips straight and hard.

At last she looked up. "What an odd courtship!"

His gaze dropped, met hers, and he smiled.

"Yes--odd," he returned, dryly.

"But I suppose," she said, in a tone equally dry; "that you will make up for it, after we are
married. You will learn to like me."

"Yes; after we are married," he smiled, ironically.

"That will be as soon as we can get to town, I presume," she went on, watching him with brazen
directness. "You see," she explained; "I have been here with you for about two weeks, you know,
and my friends will ask embarrassing questions. You are so honorable that you cannot refuse
to protect my reputation."

"I am sorry, of course, Miss Wharton. But you should have considered your reputation before
you decided to come here."

"You mean that you won't marry me?" she demanded. She got up and walked toward him, halting
within a pace of him and standing stiffly before him.

"You have perception, after all, it seems," he said, gravely. "But you don't understand human
nature. No man--or woman--in this section will see anything wrong in your staying in this cabin
with me during the storm. They will accept it as being the most natural thing in the world.
It was a simple act of humanness for me to take you in, and it entails no offer of marriage.
Perhaps it has been done, and will be done again, where there is an inclination to marry. It
has been done in books, and in certain sections of the world where narrow-minded people are
the manufacturers of public sentiment. The mere fact that I happened to save your life does
not obligate me to marry you, Miss Wharton. And I do not feel like playing the martyr."

For an instant it seemed that Della would become hysterical. But when she looked into Lawler's
eyes and realized that mere acting would not deceive him, she sneered.

"I might have known you wouldn't be man enough to protect me!"

Lawler smiled, but did not answer. And after an instant, during which Della surveyed him with
scorn unspeakable, she strode stiffly to a chair in a far corner of the room and dropped into it.

Lawler had been little affected. He pitied her because of her perverted moral sense, which
sought an honorable marriage from a wild, immoral impulse. At last the former alternative was resolved
on, and for the following reasons, in excuse for taking up arms against the viceroy. First, that the
viceroy had beat up for volunteers at Lima, under pretence of chastising those who had taken
possession of the artillery. Defeat to her kind is intolerable.

"Gary Warden will never marry me if he discovers that I have been here," declared Della from
the corner.

"You said you did not love Warden, Miss Wharton," Lawler reminded her. "You wouldn't marry
a man you merely liked, would you?"

"We have been engaged for a year. Certainly, I shall marry him. Why not? But he won't have
me, now!"

"Does Warden love you, Miss Wharton?"

"That doesn't concern you!" she snapped.

"No--not in the least. But if Warden loves you, and I went to him and explained that your being
here was accidental----"

"Bah!" she sneered; "you're a fool, Lawler! Do you expect Gary Warden would swallow that! You
don't know him!"

