No, there is one thing and one only which distinguishes the Hebrew sacred writings from all
others, and that is their insistent note of proletarian revolt, their furious denunciations
of exploiters, and of luxury and wantonness, the vices of the rich. Of that note the Assyrian
and Chaldean and Babylonian writing contain not a trace, and the Egyptian hardly enough to
mention. The Hindoos had a trace of it; but the true, natural-born rebels of all time were
the Hebrews. They were rebels against oppression in ancient Judea, as they are today in Petrograd
and New York; the spirit of equality and brotherhood which spoke through Ezekiel and Amos and
Isaiah, through John the Baptist and Jesus and James, spoke in the last century through Marx
and Lassalle and Jaures, and speaks today through Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Kautsky
and Israel Zangwill and Morris Hillquit and Abraham Cahan and Emma Goldman and the Joseph Fels
endowment.

The legal rate of interest throughout the Babylonian Empire was 20%; the laws of Manu permitted
24%, while the laws of the Egyptians only stepped in to prevent more than 100%. Thou shalt
not give him any money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

And so on, forbidding that Hebrews be sold as bond servants, and commanding that at the end
of fifty years All debtors shall have their debts forgiven and their lands returned to them.
And note that this is not the raving of agitators, the demand of a minority party; it is the
law of the Hebrew land.

There has been of late a great deal of new discovery concerning the early Jews. Conrad Noel
summarizes the results as follows:

The land-mark law, which sternly forbids encroachment upon peasant rights; consideration for
the foreigner; additional sanitary and food laws; tithe regulations on behalf of widows, orphans,
foreigners, etc.; that those who have no economic independence should eat and be satisfied;
that loans should be given cheerfully, not only without any interest, but even at the risk
of losing the principal. To withhold a loan because the year of release is at hand in which
the principal is no longer recoverable, is described as a grave sin. When you are compelled
to free your slaves, you must give them sufficient capital to embark upon some industry which
shall prevent their falling back into slavery. A number of holidays are insisted upon. There
must be no more crushing of the poor out of existence, for God cares for these people who have
been driven to poverty, and they shall never cease out of the land. Howbeit there shall be
no poor with you, for the Lord will bless you, if you will obey these laws.

But then prosperity came, and culture, which meant contact with the capitalist ideas of the
heathen empires. The Jews fell from the stern justice of their fathers; and so came the prophets,
wild-eyed men of the people, clad in camel's hair and living upon locusts and wild honey, breaking
in upon priests and kings and capitalists with their furious denunciations. And always they
incited to class war and social disturbance. I quote Conrad Noel again:

Nathan and Gad bad been David's political advisers, Abijah had stirred Jeroboam to revolt,
Elijah had resisted Ahab, Elisha had fanned the rebellion of Jehu, Amos thunders against the
misrule of the king of Israel, Isaiah denounces the landlords and the usurers, Micah charges
them with blood-guiltiness; Jeremiah and the latter prophets, though they strike a more intimate
note of personal repentance, strike it as the prelude to that national restoration for which
they hunger as exiles.

The first chapters of Isaiah are typical of the Old Testament point of view. Just as the prophets
of the nineteenth century thundered against the "Christian" employers of Lancashire, and told
them their houses were cemented with the blood of little children, so Isaiah cries against
his generation: "Your governing classes companion with thieves; behold you build up Sion with
blood." Their ceremonial and their Sabbath keeping are an abomination to God. "When ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you. Your hands are full of blood." The poor man
is robbed. The rich exact usury. "Woe unto you that lay house to house and field to field,
that ye may dwell alone in the midst of the land." Though your sins be blood-colored, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Mother Earth

And nowadays we have the Socialist and Anarchist agitators, following the same tradition, possessed
by the same dream as the ancient Hebrew prophets. I have mentioned Emma Goldman; it may be
that the reader is not familiar with her writings, and does not realize how very Biblical she
is, both in point of view and style. Let me quote a few sentences from a recent issue of her
paper, "Mother Earth", on the subject of our ruling classes and their social responsibility:

Yes, you idle rich, you may howl about what we mean to do to you! Your riches are rotten and
your fine clothes are falling from your backs. Your stocks and bonds are so tainted that the
ink on them should turn to acid and eat holes in your pockets and your skins. You have piled
up your dirty millions, but what wages have you paid to the poor devils of farm hands you have
robbed? And do you imagine they won't remember it when the revolution comes? You loll on soft
couches and amuse yourselves with your mistresses; you think you are "it" and the world is
yours. You send militiamen and shoot down our organizers, and we are helpless. But wait, comrades,
our time is coming.

Doubtless the reader is well satisfied that the author of this tirade is now in jail, where
she can no longer defy the laws of good taste. They always put the ancient prophets in jail;
that is the way to know a prophet when you meet him. Let me quote another prophet who is now
behind bars--Alexander Berkman, in his "Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist", discussing the same
subject of plutocratic pretension:

Tell me, you four hundred, where did you get it? Who gave it to you? Your grandfather, you
say? Your father? Can you go all the way back and show there is no flaw anywhere in your title?
I tell you that the beginning and the root of your wealth is necessarily in injustice. And
why? Because Nature did not make this man rich and that man poor from the start. Nature does
not intend for one man to have capital and another to be a wage-slave. Nature made the earth
to be cultivated by all. The idea we Anarchists have of the rich is of highwaymen, standing
in the street and robbing every one that passes.

Or take "Big Bill" Haywood, chief of the I. W. W. Hear what he has to say in a pamphlet addressed
to the harvest-hands he is seeking to organize:

How much farther do you plutes expect to go with your grabbing? Do you want to be the only
people left on earth? Why else do you drive out the workers from all share in Nature, and claim
everything for yourselves? The earth was made for all, rich and poor alike; where do you get
your title deeds to it? Nature gave everything for all men to use alike; it is only your robbery
which makes your so-called "ownership". Capital has no rights. The land belongs to Nature,
and we are all Nature's sons.

Or take Eugene V. Debs, three times candidate of the Socialist Party for President. I quote
from one of his pamphlets:

The propertied classes are like people who go into a public theatre and refuse to let anyone
else come in, treating as private property what is meant for social use. "I saw Mounet-Sully
at one of the performances of your Othello" I remarked. "I wonder what he thought of his own
personation of Orosmane when he witnessed the real tragedy?"

"Had Mounet-Sully been able to appreciate Othello" answered Rossi, "he never could have brought himself
to personate Orosmane."
Some one then asked Rossi what he thought of the Comédie Frarçaise.

"The
Comédie Française," said Rossi, "like every school of acting that
is founded on art, and not on Nature, is falling into decadence. The first is not from Emma Goldman, nor did I find it in "Mother Earth". I found it in
the Epistle of James, believed by orthodox authorities to have been James, the brother of Jesus.
It is exactly what he wrote--save that I have put it into modern phrases, and changed the swing
of the sentences, in order that those familiar with the Bible might read it without suspicion.
The second passage is not in the writings of Alexander Berkman, but in those of St. John Chrysostom,
most famous of the early fathers, who lived 374-407. The third is not from the pen of "Big
Bill" but from that of St. Ambrose, a father of the Latin Church, 340-397, and the fourth is
not by Comrade Debs, but by St. Basil of the Greek Church, 329-379. And if the reader objects
to my having fooled him for a minute or two, what will he say to the Christian Church, which
has been fooling him for sixteen hundred years?

The Soap Box

This book will be denounced from one end of Christendom to the other as the work of a blasphemous
infidel. Yet it stands in the direct line of the Christian tradition: written by a man who
was brought up in the Church, and loved it with all his heart and soul, and was driven out
by the formalists and hypocrites in high places; a man who thinks of Jesus more frequently
and with more devotion than he thinks of any other man that lives or has ever lived on earth;
and who has but one purpose in all that he says and does, to bring into reality the dream that
Jesus dreamed of peace on earth and good will toward men.

I will go farther yet and say that not merely is this book written for the cause of Jesus,
but it is written in the manner of Jesus. We read his bitter railings at the Pharisees, and
miss the point entirely, because the word Pharisee has become to us a word of reproach. But
this is due solely to Jesus; in his time the word was a holy word, it meant the most orthodox
and respectable, the ultra high-church devotees of Jerusalem. The way to get the spirit of
the tirades of Jesus is to do with him what we did with the early church fathers--translate
him into American. This time, since the reader shares the secret, it will not be necessary
to disguise the Bible style, and we may follow the text exactly. Let me try the twenty-third
chapter of Matthew, omitting seven verses which refer to subtleties of Hebrew casuistry, for
which we should have to go to Lyman Abbott or St. Alphonsus to find a parallel:

Then Jesus mounted upon a soap-box, and began a speech, saying, The doctors of divinity and
Episcopalians fill the Fifth Avenue churches; and it would be all right if you were to listen
to what they preach, and do that; but don't follow their actions, for they never practice what
they preach. They load the backs of the working-classes with crushing burdens, but they themselves
never move a finger to carry a burden, and everything they do is for show. They wear frock-coats
and silk hats on Sundays, and they sit at the speakers' table at the banquets of the Civic
Federation, and they occupy the best pews in the churches, and their doings are reported in
all the papers; they are called leading citizens and pillars of the church. But don't you be
called leading citizens, for the only useful man is the man who produces. (Applause). And whoever
exalts himself shall be abased, and whoever humbles himself shall be exalted. Woe unto you,
doctors of divinity and Methodists, hypocrites! for you send missionaries to Africa to make
one convert, and when you have made him, he is twice as much a child of hell as yourselves.
(Applause). Woe unto you, blind guides, with your subtleties of doctrine, your transubstantiation
and consubstantiation and all the rest of it; you fools and blind! Woe unto you, doctors of
divinity and Episcopalians, hypocrites! for you drop your checks into the collection-plate
and you pay no heed to the really important things in the Bible, which are justice and mercy
and faith in goodness. (Laughter). Woe unto you, doctors of divinity and Anglicans, hypocrites!
for you bathe yourselves and dress in immaculate clothing but within you are full of extortion
and excess. You blind high churchmen, clean first your hearts, so that the clothes you wear
may represent you. Woe unto you, doctors of divinity and Baptists, hypocrites! for you are
like marble tombs which appear beautiful on the outside, but inside are full of dead men's
bones and all uncleanness. Even so you appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity. (Applause). Woe unto you, doctors of divinity and Unitarians, hypocrites!
because you erect statues to dead reformers, and put wreathes upon the tombs of old-time martyrs.
You say, if we had been alive in those days, we would not have helped to kill those good men.
That ought to show you how to treat us at present. (Laughter). But you are the children of
those who killed the good men; so go ahead and kill us too! You serpents, you generation of
vipers, how can you escape the damnation of hell?

At this point, according to the report published in the Jerusalem "Times", a police sergeant
stepped up to the orator and notified him that he was under arrest; he submitted quietly, but
one of his followers attempted to use a knife, and was severely clubbed. Jesus was taken to
the station-house followed by a riotous throng, and held upon a charge of disorderly conduct.
Next morning the Rev. Dr. Caiaphas of Old Trinity appeared against him, and Magistrate Pilate
sentenced him to six months on Blackwell's Island, remarking that from this time on he proposed
to make an example of those soap-box orators who persist in using threatening and abusive language.
Just as the prisoner was being led away, a detective appeared with a requisition from the Governor,
ordering that Jesus be taken to San Francisco, where he is under indictment for murder in the
first degree, it being charged that his teachings helped to incite the Preparedness Day explosion.

The Church Machine

The Catholics of His time came to Jesus and said, "Master, we would have a sign of Thee"--meaning
that they wanted him to do some magic, to prove to their vulgar minds that his power came from
God. He answered by calling them an evil and adulterous generation--which is exactly what I
have said about the Papal machine. The Baptists and Methodists and Presbyterians and other
book-worshippers of his time accused him of violating the sacred commands so definitely set
down in their ancient texts, and to them he answered that the Sabbath was made for man and
not man for the Sabbath; he called them hypocrites, and quoted Karl Marx at them--"This people
honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me." The characters in Mrs. Aitken's sketch
are weak and thin, and the verse intolerable. She divides the most inseparable phrases to make
out her measure, and constantly ends the lines with a preposition. No torturing of the voice can
make verse of such sentences as these:

He bids Your grace deny Lord Bothwell's wish to be Made member of
the council, and if so Be you delay, he--

In the scene with Bothwell
the queen declares her love to him thus:

Wait you for love?

But the longing for justice between man and man, which is the Kingdom of Heaven on earth, is
the deepest instinct of the human heart, and the voice of the carpenter cannot be confined
within the thickest church-walls, nor drowned by all the pealing organs in Christendom. Even
in these days, when the power of Mammon is more widespread, more concentrated and more systematized
than ever before in history--even in these days of Morgan and Rockefeller, there are Christian
clergymen who dare to preach as Jesus preached. One by one they are cast out of the Church--Father
McGlynn, George D. Herron, Alexander Irvine, J. Stitt Wilson, Austin Adams, Algernon Crapsey,
Bouck White; but their voices are not silenced they are like the leaven, to which Jesus compared
the kingdom of God--a woman took it and hid it in three measures of meal till the whole was
leavened. The young theological students read, and some of them understand; I know three brothers
in one family who have just gone into the Church, and are preaching straight social revolution--and
the scribes and the pharisees have not yet dared to cast them out.

In this book I have portrayed the Christian Church as the servant and henchman of Big Business,
a part of the system of Mammon. Every church is necessarily a money machine, holding and administering
property. And it is not alone the Catholic Church which is in politics, seeking favors from
the state--the exemption of church property from taxation, exemption of ministers from military
service, free transportation for them and their families on the railroads, the control of charity
and education, laws to deprive people of amusements on Sunday--so on through a long list. As
the churches have to be built with money, you find that in them the rich possess the control
and demand the deference, while the poor are humble, and in their secret hearts jealous and
bitter; in other words, the class struggle is in the churches, as everywhere else in the world,
and the social revolution is coming in the churches, just as it is coming in industry.

It is a fact of deep significance that the majority of ministers are proletarians, eking out
their existence upon a miserable salary, and beholden in all their comings and goings to the
wealthy holders of privilege. Even in the Roman Catholic Church that is true. The ordinary
priest is a man of the working class, and knows what working people suffer and feel. So in
the Catholic Church there are proletarian rebellions; there is many a priest who does not carry
out the political orders of his superiors, but goes to the polls and votes for his class instead
of for his pope. In Ireland, as I write, the young priests are defying their bishops and joining
the Sinn Fein, a non-religious movement for an Irish Republic.

What is it that keeps the average workingman in subjection to the exploiter? Simply terror,
the terror of losing his job. And if you could get into the inmost soul of Christian ministers,
you would find that precisely the same force is keeping many of them slaves to Tradition. They
are educated men, and thousands of them must resent the dilemma which compels them to be either
fools or hypocrites. They have caught enough of the spirit of their time not to enjoy having
to pose as miracle-mongers, rain-makers and witch-doctors; they would like to say frankly that
they do not believe that Jonah ever swallowed the whale, and even that they are dubious about
Hercules and Achilles and other demigods. But they are part of a machine, and the old men and
the rich men who run the machine have laid down the law. Those who find themselves tempted
to think, remember suddenly that they have wives and children; they have only one profession,
they have been unfitted for any other by a life-time of study of dead things, as well as by
the practice of altruism.

But now the Social Revolution is coming; coming upon swift wings--it may be here before this
book sees the light. And who knows but then we may see in America that wonderful sight which
we saw in Russia, when Christian monks assembled and burned their holy books, and petitioned
the state to take them in as citizens and human beings? It is my belief that when the power
of exploitation is broken, we shall see the Dead Hand crumble into dust, as a mummy crumbles
when it is exposed to the air. All those men who stay in the Church and pretend to believe
nonsense, because it affords an easy way to earn a living, will suddenly realize that it is
possible to earn a living outside; that any man can go into a factory, clean and well-ventilated
and humanly run, and by four hours work can earn the purchasing power of ten or fifteen dollars.
Do you not think that there may be some who will choose freedom and self-respect on those terms?

And what of those thousands and tens of thousands who join the church because it is a part
of the regime of respectability, a way to make the acquaintance of the rich, to curry favor
and obtain promotion, to get customers if you are a tradesman, to extend your practice if you
are a professional man? And what about the millions who go to church because they are poor,
and because life is a desperate struggle, and this is one way to keep the favor of the boss,
to get a little better chance for the children, to get charity if you fall into need; in short,
to acquire influence with the well-to-do and powerful, who stand together, and like to see
the poor humble and reverent, contented in that state of life to which it has pleased God to
call them?

The Church Redeemed

Do I mean that I expect to see the Church--all churches--perish and pass away? I do not, for
I believe that the Church answers one of the fundamental needs of man. The Social Revolution
will abolish poverty and parasitism, it will make temptations fewer, and the soul's path through
life much easier; but it will not remove the necessity of struggle for individual virtue, it
will only clear the way for the discovery of newer and higher types of virtue. "And Hamlet," I remarked,
"is thoroughly of the North--a German even, rather than Englishman."
"To me," answered Rossi, "Hamlet represents no nationality and no
one type of character. He is the image of humanity. Hamlet is to me
not a man, but Man. As the
Reformation compelled the Catholic Church to cleanse itself and abolish the grossest of its
abuses, so the Social Revolution will compel it to repudiate its defense of parasitism and
exploitation. I will record the prophecy that by the year 1950 all Catholic authorities will
be denying that the Church ever opposed Socialism--true Socialism; just as today they deny
that the Church ever tortured Galileo, ever burned men for teaching that the earth moves around
the sun, ever sold the right to commit crime, ever gave away the New World to Spain and Portugal,
ever buried newly-born infants in the cellars of nunneries.

The Social Revolution will compel all churches, Christian, Hebrew, Buddhist, Confucian, or
what you will, to drive out their formalists and traditionalists. If there is any church that
refuses so to adapt itself, the swift progress of enlightenment and freedom will leave it without
followers. But in the great religions, which have a soul of goodness and sincerity, we may
be sure that reformers will arise, prophets and saints who, as of old, will preach the living
word of God. In many churches today we can see the beginning of that new Counter-Reformation.
Even in the Catholic Church there is a "modernist" rebellion; read the books of the "Sillon",
and Fogazzaro's trilogy of novels, "The Saint", and you will see a genuine and vital protest
against the economic corruption of the Church. In America, the "Knights of Slavery" have been
forced by public pressure to support a "War for Democracy", and even to compete with the Y.
M. C. A. in the training camps. They are doing good work, I am told.

