"To hold one's ground, at times requires more courage, more heroic patience and fortitude,
than any other effort we can make. I have been told that soldiers can charge against any odds
better than they can simply and coolly stand their ground. But I can see that you have been
making progress. You have graduated with honor. You are surely winning esteem and confidence.
You have kept your faith in God, and maintained your peculiar usefulness to a class that so
few can reach: perhaps you are doing more good than any of us, by proving that it is a fact
and not a theory that the fallen can rise."

"You are in the world, but not of it," he said; and then, as if anxious to change the subject,
asked. "Did you see my mother?"

Although Mrs. Arnot did not intend it, there was a slight constraint in her voice and manner
as she replied: "Yes, I took especial pains to see her before I returned, and went out of my
way to do so. I wished to assure her how well you were doing, and how certain you were to retrieve
the past, all of which, of course, she was very glad to hear."

"Did she send me no message?" he asked, instinctively feeling that something was wrong.

"She said that she wrote to you regularly, and so, of course, felt that there was no need of
sending any verbal messages."

"Was she not cordial to you?" asked the young man, with a dark frown.

"She was very polite, Egbert. I think she misunderstands me a little."

His lace flushed with indignation, and after a moment's thought he said bitterly, and with
something like contempt, "Poor mother! she is to be pitied."

Mrs. Arnot's face became very grave, and almost severe, and she replied, with an emphasis which
he never forgot:

"She is to be loved; she is to be cherished with the most delicate consideration and forbearance,
and honored--yes, honored--because she is your mother. You, as her son, should never say, nor
permit any one to say a word against her. Nothing can absolve you from this sacred duty. Remember
this as you hope to be a true man."

This was Mrs. Arnot's return for the small jealousy of her girlhood's friend.

He bowed his head, and after a moment replied: "Mrs. Arnot, I feel, I know, you are right.
I thank you."

"Now you are my knight again," she said, her face suddenly lighting up. "But come; let us join
the others, for they seem to have hit upon a very mirthful and animated discussion."

Laura's eye and sympathies took them in at once as they approached, and enveloped them in the
genial and magnetic influences which she seemed to have the power of exerting. Although naturally
and deeply interested in his interview with Mrs. Arnot, Haldane's eyes and thoughts had been
drawn frequently and irresistibly to the object of his old-time passion. She was, indeed, very
different from what he had expected. The diffident maiden, so slight in form and shy in manner,
had not developed into a drooping lily of a woman, suggesting that she must always have a manly
support of some kind near at hand. Still less had she become a typical belle, and the aggressive
society girl who captures and amuses herself with her male admirers with the grace and sang
froid of a sportive kitten that carefully keeps a hapless mouse within reach of her velvet
paw. The pale and saint-like image which he had so long enshrined within his heart, and which
had been created by her devotion to her mother, also faded utterly away in the presence of
the reality before him. She was a veritable flesh-and-blood woman, with the hue of health upon
her cheek, and the charm of artistic beauty in her rounded form and graceful manner. She was
a revelation to him, transcending not only all that he had seen, but all that he had imagined.

Thus far he had not attained a moral and intellectual culture which enabled him even to idealize
so beautiful and perfect a creature. She was not a saint in the mystical or imaginative sense
of the word, but, as a queen reigning by the divine right of her surpassing loveliness and
grace in even Hillaton's exclusive society, she was practically as far removed from him as
if she were an ideal saint existing only in a painter's haunted imagination.

Nature had dowered Laura Romeyn very richly in the graces of both person and mind; but many
others are equally favored. Her indescribable charm arose from the fact that she was very receptive
in her disposition. She had been wax to receive, but marble to retain. Therefore, since she
had always lived and breathed in an atmosphere of culture, refinement, and Christian faith,
her character had the exquisite beauty and fragrance which belongs to a rare flower to which
all the conditions of perfect development have been supplied. We're so convinced that even under
the rule of the pleasure principle are enough ways to the se reluctance to make full the subject
of memory and mental processing. Like with that, in finite pleasure expiring cases and situations,
an economically oriented Aesthetic concern, but for our purposes they do nothing, since they exist
and rule the pleasure principle and do not require evidence of the effectiveness of tendencies beyond
the pleasure principle that is, those in the original than this and would be independent of it.

III.

Twenty-five years of hard work have brought about that the next targets for psychoanalytic technique
are very different today than at the beginning. First, could be analyzed Doctors otherwise seek
to guess the patient as the hidden unconscious, to be assembled and at the right time delay. Psychoanalysis
was primarily an interpretation of art. Since the therapeutic task was not solved immediately
went to the next intention of the patient to confirm the construction by his own memories
from action. In this effort was the emphasis on the resistance of the patient, the art was
now, as soon as possible this To expose the patient to show him and
by human influences (here the point to move to as "transmission acting
suggestion) to give up the opposition.

But then it became increasingly clear that the objectives of ensuring the realization of the unconscious,
also in this way are not fully accessible. The patient may require the repressed in him not remember
everything, maybe just not the essence, and thus earns no conviction the accuracy of the information
communicated to him construction. Rather, he is forced to the repressed to repeat as a present
experience, rather than as the doctor saw it rather as a to remember pieces of the past [5]. This
occurs with unacceptable fidelity reproduction always has a piece of infantile sexual life,
that is, the Oedipus complex and its offshoots the content and plays regularly in the field
of transmission, that the relationship from the doctor. If one is brought into the treatment
so far, so one can say that the earlier Neurosis had now been replaced by a fresh transference
neurosis. The doctor has sought the Area of ​​this transference neurosis as limiting, as much
in the memory to push for as little as possible and allow repetition. The ratio between Memory
and reproduction is produced for every case to another. can a rule, the Doctors save the analyzed
period this is not the cure, he has to him a certain piece of his forgotten life can relive and
to ensure that a measure of superiority maintained by virtue of which the apparent reality but
always as a reflection of a forgotten past is detected. If this succeeds, is the belief of the
patient and the dependent of their therapeutic success obtained.

  
  
  [5] S. On the technique of psychoanalysis II remembering, repeating
and Working through.

Collection of small writings on the theory of neurosis, Episode IV, p. 441, 1918.

To this "repetition compulsion" which during the psychoanalytic treatment of neurotics Expresses
to find understandable, one must make, especially from the error-free, we have to do in the fight
against resistance with the resistance of the unconscious. The unconscious, ie the "repression,
ensure the efforts of the treatment is absolutely no resistance, it seeks even otherwise, it's
as against the oppressive pressure on him to consciousness or penetrate removal by the real fact.
The resistance in the treatment goes by the same higher Layers and systems of mental life from having
that time led by the repression. But as the motives of the resistors, so that even unconsciously by
experience in the treatment initially , we are admonished to improve an inappropriate expression
of our way. We miss of ambiguity, if we are not the conscious and
the unconscious, but the related And I bring the repressed in contrast
to each other. "He is a perfect gentleman," was the verdict
of the best society wherever he appeared.

Something to this effect Haldane learned from one of the young men with whom he had been spending
the evening, as they bent their steps homeward--for soon after Mr. Beaumont's arrival all took
their departure.

That gentleman seemed to bring in with him a different atmosphere from that which had prevailed
hitherto. Although his bow was distant to Haldane when introduced, his manner had been the
perfection of politeness to the others. For some reason, however, there had been a sudden restraint
and chill. Possibly they had but unconsciously obeyed the strong will of Mr. Beaumont, who
wished their departure. He was almost as resolute in having his own way as Mr. Arnot himself.
Not that he was ever rude to any one in any circumstances, but he could politely freeze objectionable
persons out of a room as effectually as if he took them by the shoulders and walked them out.
There was so much in his surroundings and antecedents to sustain his quiet assumption, that
the world was learning to say, "By your leave," on all occasions.

Haldane was not long in reaching a conclusion as he sat over a dying fire in his humble quarters
at the hermitage. If he saw much of Laura Romeyn he would love her of necessity by every law
of his being. Assuring himself of the hopelessness of his affection would make no difference
to one of his temperament. He was not one who could coolly say to his ardent and impetuous
nature, "Thus far, and no farther." There was something in her every tone, word, and movement
which touched chords within his heart that vibrated pleasurably or painfully.

This power cannot be explained. It was not passion. Were Laura far more beautiful, something
in her manner or character might speedily have broken the spell by which she unconsciously
held her captive. His emotion in no respect resembled the strong yet restful affection that
he entertained for Mrs. Arnot. Was it love? Why should he love one who would not love in return,
and who, both in the world's and his own estimation, was infinitely beyond his reach? However
much his reason might condemn his feelings, however much he might regret the fact, his heart
trembled at her presence, and, by some instinct of its own, acknowledged its mistress. He was
compelled to admit to himself that he loved her already, and that his boyhood's passion had
only changed as he had changed, and had become the strong and abiding sentiment of the man.
She only could have broken the power by becoming commonplace, by losing the peculiar charm
which she had for him from the first. But now he could not choose; he had met his fate.

One thing, however, he could do, and that he resolved upon before he closed his eyes in sleep
in the faint dawning of the following day. He would not flutter as a poor moth where he could
not be received as an accepted lover.

This resolution he kept. He did not cease calling upon Mrs. Arnot, nor did the quiet warmth
of his manner toward her change; but his visits became less frequent, he pleading the engrossing
character of his studies, and the increasing preparation required to maintain his hold on his
mission-class; but the lady's delicate intuition was not long in divining the true cause. One
of his unconscious glances at Laura revealed his heart to her woman's eye as plainly as could
any spoken words. But by no word or hint did Mrs. Arnot reveal to him her knowledge. Her tones
might have been gentler and her eyes kinder; that was all. In her heart, however, she almost
revered the man who had the strength and patience to take up this heavy and hopeless burden,
and go on in the path of duty without a word. How different was his present course from his
former passionate clamor for what was then equally beyond his reach? She was almost provoked
at her niece that she did not appreciate Haldane more. But would she wish her peerless ward
to marry this darkly shadowed man, to whom no parlor in Hillaton was open save her own? Even
Mrs. Arnot would shrink from this question.

Laura, too, had perceived that which Haldane meant to hide from all the world. When has a beautiful
woman failed to recognize her worshippers? But there was nothing in Laura's nature which permitted
her to exult over such a discovery. She could not resent as presumption a love that was so
unobtrusive, for it became more and more evident as time passed that the man who was mastered
by it would never voluntarily give to her the slightest hint of its existence. She was pleased
that he was so sensible as to recognize the impassable gulf between them, and that he did not
go moaning along the brink, thus making a spectacle of himself, and becoming an annoyance to
her. Indeed, she sincerely respected him for his reticence and self-control, but she also misjudged
him; for he was so patient and strong, and went forward with his duties so quietly and steadily,
that she was inclined to believe that his feelings toward her were not very deep, or else that
he was so constituted that affairs of the heart did not give him very much trouble.

CHAPTER XLVII

LAURA CHOOSES HER KNIGHT

Why Laura, how your cheeks burn!" exclaimed Mrs. Arnot as she entered her niece's room one
afternoon.

"Now, don't laugh at me for being so foolish, but I have become absurdly excited over this
story. Scott was well called the 'Wizard of the North.' What a spell he weaves over his pages!
When reading some of his descriptions of men and manners in those old chivalric times, I feel
that I have been born some centuries too late--in our time everything is so matter-of-fact,
and the men are so prosaic. The world moves on with a steady business jog, or, to change the
figure, with the monotonous clank of uncle's machinery. My castle in the air would be the counterpart
of those which Scott describes."

"Romantic as ever," laughed her aunt; "and that reminds me, by the way, of the saying that
romantic girls always marry matter-of-fact men, which, I suppose, will be your fate. I confess
I much prefer our own age. Your stony castles make me shiver with a sense of discomfort; and
as for the men, I imagine they are much the same now as then, for human nature does not change
much."

"O, auntie, what a prosaic speech! Uncle might have made it himself. The idea of men being
much the same now! Why, in that day there were the widest and most picturesque differences
between men of the same rank. There were horrible villains, and then to vanquish these and
undo the mischief they were ever causing, there were knights sans peur et sans reproche. But
now a gentleman is a gentleman, and all made up very much in the same style, like their dress
coats. I would like to have seen at least one genuine knight--a man good enough and brave enough
to do and to dare anything to which he could be impelled by a most chivalric sense of duty.
About the most heroic thing a man ever did for me was to pick up my fan."

Mrs. Arnot thought of one man whose heart was almost breaking for her, and yet who maintained
such a quiet, masterful self-control that the object of his passion, which had become like
a torturing flame, was not subjected to even the slightest annoyance; and she said, "You are
satirical today. In my opinion there are as true knights now as your favorite author ever described."

"Not in Hillaton," laughed Laura, "or else their disguise is perfect."

"Yes, in Hillaton," replied Mrs. Arnot, with some warmth, "and among the visitors at this house.
I know of one who bids fair to fulfil my highest ideal of knighthood, and I think you will
do me the justice to believe that my standard is not a low one."

"Auntie, you fairly takeaway my breath!" said Laura, in the same half-jesting spirit." Where
have my eyes been? Pray, who is this paragon, who must, indeed, be nearly perfect, to satisfy
your standard?"

"You must discover him for yourself; as you say, he appears to be but a gentleman, and would
be the last one in the world to think of himself as a knight, or to fill your ideal of one.
You must remember the character of our age. "Can you imagine such a thing as that?"

But, then spoke the child.

"He is a liar.

What he does is calculated and vulgar. He knows you want to learn, so he was kind to me and promised
me a dog. I do not know what he has promised you, or why he is kind to you, but he surely
wants something from you, Mama. Otherwise, he would not be so polite
and friendly.

He is a bad person. He's lying. Look at him once, and it would not matter; you will always see
an illusion.

Oh, I hate him, the pathetic liar, the villain..."

"But Edgar, how can you say such a thing?"

She was confused and did not respond further. She had a feeling that
the child was right.

"Yes,
he is a villain, but you cannot learn from listening to me. You must see it for yourself. Why
do you think he is afraid of me? Why is he hiding from me? Because he
knows I see through his facade; I know him as the villain!"

"How can you say such a thing, how can you say such a thing..."

Her brain was dry, her bloodless lips stammering the statement over
and over. She now had a terrible and sudden fear, and did not really
know whether to bring the child before the Baron. Edgar saw that his
warning made an impression, and he was tempted to make her a companion
in hatred, born from their hostility against him.

He went soft on
his mother now. They embraced, and his voice was flattering with excitement.


After Laura had quite looked through her acquaintances Haldane made one of his infrequent calls,
but as Mr. Beaumont was also present she gave to her quondam lover scarcely more than a kindly
word of greeting, and then forgot his existence. It did not occur to her, any more than it
would to Haldane himself, that he was the knight.

Mr. Arnot, partly out of a grim humor peculiarly his own, and partly to extenuate his severity
toward the youth, had sent to his niece all the city papers containing unfavorable references
to Haldane, and to her mind the associations created by those disgraceful scenes were still
inseparable from him. She honestly respected him for his resolute effort to reform, as she
would express it, and as a sincere Christian girl she wished him the very best of success,
but this seemed as far as her regard for him could ever go. She treated him kindly where most
others in her station would not recognize him at all, but such was the delicacy and refinement
of her nature that she shrank from one who had been capable of acts like his. The youth who
had annoyed her with his passion, whom she had seen fall upon the floor in gross intoxication,
who had been dragged through the streets as a criminal, and who twice had been in jail, was
still a vivid memory. She knew comparatively little about, and did not understand, the man
of to-day. Beyond the general facts that he was doing well and doing good, it was evident that,
by reason of old and disagreeable associations, she did not wish to hear much about him, and
Mrs. Arnot had the wisdom to see that time and the young man's own actions would do more to
remove prejudice from the mind of her niece, as well as from the memory of society in general,
than could any words of hers.

Of course, such a girl as Laura had many admirers, and among them Mr. Beaumont was evidently
winning the first place in her esteem. Whether he were the knight that her aunt had in mind
or no, she was not sure, but he realized her ideal more completely than any man whom she had
ever met. He did, indeed, seem the "perfect flower of his age," although she was not so sure
of the oak-like qualities. She often asked herself wherein she could find fault with him or
with all that related to him, and even her delicate discrimination could scarcely find a vulnerable
point. He was fine-looking, his heavy side-whiskers redeeming his face from effeminacy; he
was tall and elegant in his proportions; his taste in his dress was quiet and faultless; he
possessed the most refined and highly cultured mind of any man whom she had known; his family
was exceedingly proud and aristocratic, but as far as there can be reason for these characteristics,
this old and wealthy family had such reason. Laura certainly could not find fault with these
traits, for from the first Mr. Beaumont's parents had sought to pay her especial attention.
It was quite evident that they thought that the orphaned girl who was so richly dowered with
wealth and beauty might make as good a wife for their matchless son as could be found, and
such an opinion on their part was, indeed, a high compliment to Laura's birth and breeding.
No one else in Hillaton would have been thought of with any equanimity.

The son was inclined to take the same view as that entertained by his parents, but, as the
party most nearly interested, he felt it incumbent upon him to scrutinize very closely and
deliberately the woman who might become his wife, and surely this was a sensible thing to do.

There was nothing mercenary or coarse in his delicate analysis and close observation. Far from
it. Mr. Beaumont was the last man in the world to look a lady over as he would a bale of merchandise.
More than all things else, Mr. Beaumont was a connoisseur, and he sought Mrs. Arnot's parlors
with increasing frequency because he believed that he would there find the woman best fitted
to become the chief ornament of the stately family mansion.

Laura had soon become conscious of this close tentative scrutiny, and at first she had been
inclined to resent its cool deliberateness. But, remembering that a man certainly has a right
to learn well the character of the woman whom he may ask to be his wife, she felt that there
was nothing in his action of which she could complain; and it soon became a matter of pride
with her, as much as anything else, to satisfy those fastidious eyes that hitherto had critically
looked the world over, and in vain, for a pearl with a lustre sufficiently clear. She began
to study his taste, to dress for him, to sing for him, to read his favorite authors; and so
perfect was his taste that she found herself aided and enriched by it. He was her superior
in these matters, for he had made them his life-study. The first hour that she spent with him
in a picture-gallery was long remembered, for never before had those fine and artistic marks
which make a painting great been so clearly pointed out to her. She was brought to believe
that this man could lead her to the highest point of culture to which she could attain, and
satisfy every refined taste that she possessed. It seemed as if he could make life one long
gallery of beautiful objects, through which she might stroll in elegant leisure, ever conscious
that lie who stood by to minister and explain was looking away from all things else in admiration
of herself.

The prospect was too alluring. Laura was not an advanced female, with a mission; she was simply
a young and lovely woman, capable of the noblest action and feeling should the occasion demand
them, but naturally luxurious and beauty-loving in her tastes, and inclined to shun the prosaic
side of life.

She made Beaumont feel that she also was critical and exacting. She had lived too long under
Mrs. Arnot's influence to be satisfied with a man who merely lived for the pleasure he could
get out of each successive day. He saw that she demanded that he should have a purpose and
aim in life, and he skilfully met this requirement by frequently descanting on aesthetic culture
as the great lever which could move the world, and by suggesting that the great question of
his future was how he could best bring this culture to the people. As a Christian, she took
issue with him as to its being the great lever, but was enthusiastic over it as a most powerful
means of elevating the masses, and she often found herself dreaming over how much a man gifted
with Mr. Beaumont's exquisite taste and large wealth could do by placing within the reach of
the multitude objects of elevating art and beauty.

By a fine instinct she felt, rather than saw, that Mrs. Arnot did not specially like the seemingly
faultless man, and was led to believe that her aunt's ideal knight was to be found among some
of the heartier young men who were bent on doing good in the old-fashioned ways; and, with
a tendency not unnatural in one so young and romantic, she thought of her aunt as being a bit
old-fashioned and prosaic herself. For the Arts, Frederick William had no meaning. Although he painted himself, especially
in the later years when he was plagued by gout, usually they were peasants, which he portrayed once
he also painted as Gundling Pulcinello, but the pictures were only of his flatterers praised. For
the music he had little left over, once he chimes come from Holland, the spiritual from the
towers played songs. A few times a week he was on winter evenings Arias and choruses show from heroic
operas, such as from Handel's Alessandro or Siroe, and While on wind instruments of the Hoboisten
of the Guard Regiment. These concerts were the musicians with their desks and lights at one
end of the long hall, and the king sat all alone at the other. Sometimes, after a good dinner,
he slept in the heroic Music is. The most fun made him a conductor of Pepusch for six bassoons
composed concert titled: # Porco primo, secondo porco #, etc. It is held while the abdomen
laughter. Even the Crown Prince Frederick was once heard this concert, and about the composer to
mock, he invited a large party to participate. Pepusch wanted to escape, had to but add to the will
of the prince. He was not six but seven Hoboisten, put the notes on the desk and looked around
quite seriously in the hall. The Crown Prince went to him and asked: "Mr. Conductor, he looks
for something" Pepusch replied that it was the matter yet? a desk. "I thought," Frederick replied,
smiling, "there were only six pigs in his Music? "-" That's right, Royal Highness, "replied
Pepusch," but it is there still a piglet come flauto solo # #. And Friedrich, the flute player,
was cited.
 I have found my knight, though probably not yours. See!" and she held up her finger,
with a great flashing diamond upon it.

Mrs. Arnot took the girl in her arms and said, "I do bless you, my child, and I think I can
congratulate you also. On every principle of worldly prudence and worldly foresight I am sure
I can. It will be very hard ever to give you up to another; and yet I am growing old, and I
am glad that you, who are such a sacred charge to me, have chosen one who stands so high in
the estimation of all, and who is so abundantly able to gratify your tastes."

"Yes, auntie, I think I am fortunate," said Laura, with complacent emphasis. "I have found
a man not only able to gratify all my tastes--and you know that many of them are rather expensive--but
he himself satisfies my most critical taste, and even fills out the ideal of my fancy."

Mrs. Arnot gave a sudden sigh.

"Now, auntie, what, in the name of wonder, can that foreboding sigh mean?"

"You have not said that he satisfied your heart."

"O, I think he does fully," said Laura, hastily, though with a faint misgiving." These tender
feelings will come in their own good time. We have not got far enough along for them yet. Besides,
I never could have endured a passionate lover. I was cured of any such tastes long ago, you
remember," she added, with a faint laugh.

"Poor Egbert!" ejaculated Mrs. Arnot, with such sad emphasis that Laura looked up into her
face inquiringly as she asked:

"You don't think he will care much, do you?" 

"Edgar", his mother began, "what happened to you?! I was ashamed of you, how could you have been
so naughty, especially to an adult!, You will apologize to the Lord Baron immediately!"

Edgar looked out the window and considered the trees, "No" he said
so his mother began to work on his safety.

"Edgar, whats going on? You've changed? I don't know if you're coming
or going! You were also so intelligent, well behaved and well spoken, but suddenly
you act as if the devil has gotten into you! What do you have against
the Baron? You've had it very happy up until now lad!"
 You cannot return his deep,
yet unobtrusive, love, and, as the world is constituted, it is probably well for you that this
is true; but I cannot bear that it should have no better reward than your last rather contemptuous
allusion."

"Forgive me, auntie; I did not imagine that he felt as you seem to think. Indeed, in my happiness
and preoccupation, I have scarcely thought of him at all. His love has, in truth, been unobtrusive.
So scrupulously has he kept it from my notice that I had thought and hoped that it had but
little place in his mind. But if you are right, I am very, very sorry. Why is the waste of
these precious heart-treasures permitted?" and gathering tears attested her sincerity.

"That is an old, old question, which the world has never answered. The scientists tell us that
by a law of nature no force is ever lost. If this be true in the physical world, it certainly
should be in the spiritual. I also believe that an honest, unselfish love can enrich the heart
that gives it, even though it receives no other reward. But you have no occasion to blame yourself,
Laura. It is one of those things which never could have been helped. Besides, Haldane is serving
a Master who is pledged to shape seeming evils for his good. I had no thought of speaking of
him at all, only your remark seemed so like injustice that I could not be silent. In the future,
moreover, you may do something for him. Society is too unrelenting, and does not sufficiently
recognize the struggle he has made, and is yet making; and he is so morbidly sensitive that
he will not take anything that even looks like social alms. You will be in a position to help
him toward the recognition which he deserves, for I should be sorry to see him become a lonely
and isolated man. Of course, you will have to do this very carefully, but your own graceful
tact will best guide you in this matter. Thoughts slowed her pace. Another situation to face, another occasion to feel helpless and fearful.
Now guilt was added to the mix. And this strange, new child, so remarkable to behold, it made
her feel paralyzed and uncertain.

There was no recourse other than to try; to go in softly.

Best not to irritate the child with the prospect of a fight. Auntie!" she exclaimed after a moment, a sudden light breaking in upon her, "Mr. Haldane
is your knight."

"And a very plain, prosaic knight, no doubt, he seems to you."

"I confess that he does, and yet when I think of it I admit that he has fought his way up against
tremendous odds. Indeed, his present position in contrast with what he was involves so much
hard fighting that I can only think of him as one of those plain, rugged men who have risen
from the ranks."

"Look for the plain and rugged characteristics when he next calls," said Mrs. Arnot quietly.
"One would have supposed that such a rugged nature would have interposed some of his angles
in your way."

"Forgive me, auntie; I am inclined to think that I know very little about your knight; but
it is natural that I should much prefer my own. Your knight is like one of those remorseful
men of the olden time who, partly from faith and partly in penance for past misdeeds, dons
a suit of plain heavy iron armor, and goes away to parts unknown to fight the infidel. My knight
is clad in shining steel; nor is the steel less true because overlaid with a filagree of gold;
and he will make the world better not by striking rude and ponderous blows, but by teaching
it something of his own fair courtesy and his own rich culture."

"Your description of Haldane is very fanciful and a little far-fetched," said Mrs. Arnot, laughing;
"should I reply in like vein I would only add that I believe that he will henceforth keep the
'white cross' on his knightly mantle unstained. Already he seems to have won a place in that
ancient and honorable order established so many centuries ago, the members of which were entitled
to inscribe upon their shields the legend, 'He that ruleth his own spirit is better than he
that taketh a city.' But we are carrying this fanciful imagery too far, and had better drop
it altogether. I know that you will do for Haldane all that womanly delicacy permits, and that
is all I wish. "Mother," he said, "just there
was an excellent example of him not wanting anything positive. He has turned out far different than
I have. Indeed, you're the one who has been changed; not me. He is trying to take advantage of you,
by inciting you against me. I do not seek to take advantage of you at all. His promises will
not be kept, so watch him carefully. He's an evil person who should not be trusted, one who lies
to everyone, even you." Nothing can compensate for the absence of a warm, kind heart,
and the nature that is without it is like a home without a hearth-stone and a fire; the larger
and more stately it is, the colder and more cheerless it seems."

Laura understood her aunt's allusion to her own bitter disappointment, and she almost shivered
at the possibility of meeting a like experience.

CHAPTER XLVIII

MRS. ARNOT'S KNIGHT

