Claudius, at the time of his accession, was fifty years of age; and though he had hitherto
lived apparently unambitious of public honours, accompanied with great ostentation, yet he
was now seized with a desire to enjoy a triumph.  As there existed no war, in which he might
perform some military achievement, his vanity could only be gratified by invading a foreign
country, where, contrary to the advice contained in the testament of Augustus, he might attempt
to extend still further the limits of the empire.  Either Britain, therefore, or some nation
on the continent, at a great distance from the capital, became the object of such an enterprize;
and the former was chosen, not only as more convenient, from its vicinity to the maritime province
of Gaul, but on account of a remonstrance lately presented by the Britons to the court of Rome,
respecting the protection afforded to some persons of that nation, who had fled thither to
elude the laws of their country.  Considering the state of Britain at that time, divided as
it was into a number of principalities, amongst which there was no general confederacy for
mutual defence, and where the alarm excited by the invasion of Julius Caesar, upwards of eighty
years before, had long since been forgotten; a sudden attempt upon the island could not fail
to be attended with success. Consequently that the theory of a 'compact' between the States and
the United States is untenable, for at the time the United States was born, the States did
not exist.[1]

[Footnote 1: As Lincoln expressed it in his message of July 4, 1861: "The States have their status
in the Union, and they have no other legal status.... The Union is older than any of the States,
and in fact, it created them as States."]

To maintain the "Compact Theory" it is necessary to show that the "Continental Congress" had no
properly delegated national powers, and to it the character of a
national government could not fitly be applied, and that the colonies
when they separated from England remained independent of each other,
because as colonies they had been independent.  He penetrated into the country of the Silures, a warlike
tribe, who inhabited the banks of the Severn; and having defeated Caractacus in a great battle,
made him prisoner, and sent him to Rome.  The fame of the British prince had by this time spread
over the provinces of Gaul and Italy; and upon his arrival in the Roman capital, the people
flocked from all quarters to behold him.  The ceremonial of his entrance was conducted with
great solemnity.  On a plain adjoining the Roman camp, the pretorian troops were drawn up in
martial array: the emperor and his court took their station in front of the lines, and behind
them was ranged the whole body of the people.  The procession commenced with the different
trophies which had been taken from the Britons during the progress of the war. Next followed
the brothers of the vanquished prince, with his wife and daughter, in chains, expressing by
their supplicating looks and gestures the fears with which they were actuated.  But not so
Caractacus himself. With a manly gait and an undaunted countenance, he marched up to the tribunal,
where the emperor was seated, and addressed him in the following terms:

"If to my high birth and distinguished rank, I had added the virtues of moderation, Rome had
beheld me rather as a friend than a captive; and you would not have rejected an alliance with
a prince, descended from illustrious ancestors, and governing many nations.  The reverse of
my fortune to you is glorious, and to me humiliating.  I had arms, and men, and horses; I possessed
extraordinary riches; and can it be any wonder that I was unwilling to lose them?  Because
Rome aspires to universal dominion, must men therefore implicitly resign themselves to subjection?
I opposed for a long time the progress of your arms, and had I acted otherwise, would either
you have had the glory of conquest, or I of a brave resistance?  I am now in your (335) power:
if you are determined to take revenge, my fate will soon be forgotten, and you will derive
no honour from the transaction.  Preserve my life, and I shall remain to the latest ages a
monument of your clemency."

Immediately upon this speech, Claudius granted him his liberty, as he did likewise to the other
royal captives.  They all returned their thanks in a manner the most grateful to the emperor;
and as soon as their chains were taken off, walking towards Agrippina, who sat upon a bench
at a little distance, they repeated to her the same fervent declarations of gratitude and esteem.

History has preserved no account of Caractacus after this period; but it is probable, that
he returned in a short time to his own country, where his former valour, and the magnanimity,
which he had displayed at Rome, would continue to render him illustrious through life, even
amidst the irretrievable ruin of his fortunes.

The most extraordinary character in the present reign was that of Valeria Messalina, the daughter
of Valerius Messala Barbatus.  She was married to Claudius, and had by him a son and a daughter.
To cruelty in the prosecution of her purposes, she added the most abandoned incontinence. Not
confining her licentiousness within the limits of the palace, where she committed the most
shameful excesses, she prostituted her person in the common stews, and even in the public streets
of the capital.  As if her conduct was already not sufficiently scandalous, she obliged C.
Silius, a man of consular rank, to divorce his wife, that she might procure his company entirely
to herself.  Not contented with this indulgence to her criminal passion, she next persuaded
him to marry her; and during an excursion which the emperor made to Ostia, the ceremony of
marriage was actually performed between them.  The occasion was celebrated with a magnificent
supper, to which she invited a large company; and lest the whole should be regarded as a frolic,
not meant to be consummated, the adulterous parties ascended the nuptial couch in the presence
of the astonished spectators.  Great as was the facility of Claudius's temper in respect of
her former behaviour, he could not overlook so flagrant a violation both of public decency
and the laws of the country. Judicial System and Jurisdiction of the United States Courts.

#District Courts.#--The United States is divided into judicial districts. Many single States form a
judicial district, while others are divided into two and others into three districts. The number
of districts has varied. At present there are about sixty. To each of these districts is given
a court and a district judge. These form the lowest grade of Federal courts.

#Circuit Courts.#--These judicial districts are grouped into nine circuits. For example, the
Fourth circuit includes the districts of Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, and
South Carolina. For each circuit is appointed one circuit judge. One of the justices of the
Supreme Court is also allotted to each of the circuits, who, after the expiration of the Supreme
Court term, visits his circuit, and tries the more important cases which may arise in that circuit.
The Circuit Court may be held by the circuit judge, the Supreme Court
justice, or the district judge of that district in which the court
is sitting, or by any two of them, or all of them, sitting together.

    The Circuit Courts form the next series of the Federal courts higher
than the District Courts.

#Jurisdiction.#--The relation between the Supreme, Circuit and District courts is easy to explain.
Their jurisdiction is upon federal questions; that is, over those cases mentioned in the Constitution
over which judicial power has been granted to the United States, viz., questions arising under
the Constitution, federal laws, or treaties, between citizens of
different States, between citizens and foreigners, between States
themselves, etc., and all crimes punishable under the United States
laws.
As it was common for them to be taught the more useful parts of education in the families of
their masters, they were usually well qualified for the management of domestic concerns, and
might even be competent to the superior departments of the state, especially in those times
when negotiations and treaties with foreign princes seldom or never occurred; and in arbitrary
governments, where public affairs were directed more by the will of the sovereign or his ministers,
than by refined suggestions of policy.

From the character generally given of Claudius before his elevation to the throne, we should
not readily imagine that he was endowed with any taste for literary composition; yet he seems
to have exclusively enjoyed this distinction during his own reign, in which learning was at
a low ebb.  Besides history, Suetonius informs us that he wrote a Defence of Cicero against
the Charges of Asinius Gallus.  This appears to be the only tribute of esteem or approbation
paid to the character of Cicero, from the time of Livy the historian, to the extinction of
the race of the Caesars.  Asinius Gallus was the son of Asinius Pollio, the orator. Marrying
Vipsania after she had been divorced by Tiberius, he incurred the displeasure of that emperor,
and died of famine, either voluntarily, or by order of the tyrant.  He wrote a comparison between
his father and Cicero, in which, with more filial partiality than justice, he gave the preference
to the former.

FOOTNOTES:

[465]  A.U.C. 714.

[466]  Pliny describes Drusus as having in this voyage circumnavigated Germany, and reached
the Cimbrian Chersonese, and the Scythian shores, reeking with constant fogs.

[467]  Tacitus, Annal. xi. 8, 1, mentions this fosse, and says that Drusus sailed up the Meuse
and the Waal.  Cluverius places it between the village of Iselvort and the town of Doesborg.

[468]  The Spolia Opima were the spoils taken from the enemy's king, or chief, when slain in
single combat by a Roman general.  They were always hung up in the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius.
Those spoils had been obtained only thrice since the foundation of Rome; the first by Romulus,
who slew Acron, king of the Caeninenses; the next by A. Cornelius Cossus, who slew Tolumnius,
king of the Veientes, A.U. 318; and the third by M. Claudius Marcellus, who slew Viridomarus,
king of the Gauls, A.U. 330.

[469]  A.U.C. 744.

[470]  This epistle, as it was the habit of Augustus, is interspersed with Greek phrases.

[471]  The Alban Mount is the most interesting feature of the scenery of the Campagna about
Rome, Monti Cavo, the summit, rising above an amphitheatre of magnificent woods, to an elevation
of 2965 French feet. The view is very extensive: below is the lake of Albano, the finest of
the volcanic lakes in Italy, and the modern town of the same name.  Few traces remain of Alba
Longa, the ancient capital of Latium.

