MAKERS OF AMERICAN HISTORY" SERIES

  GEORGE
  WASHINGTON

  By CALISTA McCABE COURTENAY

  ILLUSTRATED BY

  A. M. TURNER

  AND

  HARRIET KAUCHER

  Copyright, 1917, by
  SAM'L GABRIEL SONS & COMPANY
  NEW YORK

CONTENTS

                                                           PAGE
  CHAPTER I                                                   5

  Washington's Early Life--Appointed as Surveyor--First
  Trip into the Wilderness--Entrusted with Message
  to the French.

  CHAPTER II                                                 20

  Washington Appointed a Member of Gen. Braddock's
  Staff--French and Indian War--Washington Made
  Commander of Virginia Forces--Causes of the American
  Revolution--Washington a Member of the First Continental
  Congress.

  CHAPTER III                                                30

  Beginning of the Revolution--Washington
  Made Commander-in-Chief
  of the Continental
  Army--British Forced
  to Leave Boston.

  CHAPTER IV                                                 40

  Declaration of Independence
  Signed--Battle
  of Long Island--Battle
  of White Plains--Washington
  Crosses the Delaware
  and Surprises the
  Hessians at Trenton.

  CHAPTER V                                                  52

  Recapture of Fort Ticonderoga
  by Gen. Burgoyne--Battle
  of Brandywine--Battle
  of Germantown--Burgoyne's
  Surrender
  at Saratoga--Washington
  at Valley Forge--Alliance with France.

  CHAPTER VI                                                 62

  Battle of Monmouth--Patriots Receive Aid from France--Recapture
  of Fort at Stony Point by Gen. Anthony
  Wayne--Washington at Morristown--Surrender of
  Charleston, S. C., to the British--Treason of Benedict
  Arnold.

  CHAPTER VII                                                73

  Gen. Gates Defeated at Camden, S. C.--Battle of King's
  Mountain--Washington Sends Aid to the South--Siege of
  Yorktown--Surrender of Lord Cornwallis--Peace Treaty
  Signed--Washington's Farewell to His Officers.

  CHAPTER VIII                                               83

  Washington Retires to Mount Vernon--Inaugurated as
  First President of the United States--His Reelection--His
  Death at Mount Vernon. All loyal Americans love and honor him, the
greatest man in the history of the Republic.

He was born in 1732, in Westmoreland County, Virginia, where the Potomac River flowed past
his father's farm. The farm-house, called "Wakefield," was burned, but the United States Government
built a monument to mark the place where it stood.

When "Wakefield" was destroyed, the family lived for a time in a home, later called Mount Vernon,
in Fairfax County. But the real boyhood home of George Washington was a farm overlooking the
Rappahannock River, where his parents went when he was about eight years old. His father, Augustine
Washington, was a prosperous Virginia planter, and owned several fine estates.

His mother's name was Mary Ball. She was a beautiful and sensible woman, and a wise, firm and
loving mother. She was his father's second wife and there were two little lads already in the
home, Lawrence and Augustine, when she came to take the place of their mother who had died.
Besides these two half-brothers, George had two sisters and three brothers. The two older sons
were sent to England to school.

When George was eight years old, Lawrence returned home, having finished his studies. A great
affection at once sprang up between them. George was a fine, manly little fellow whom any big
brother could love, and he looked up to Lawrence as a model. Before long, Lawrence went away
to the wars, serving under Admiral Vernon in the West Indies. His letters filled George with
admiration and he at once became commander-in-chief of all the boys at school; they had parades
and battles in imitation of those Lawrence wrote about.

George's father died when he was twelve years old, but, fortunately, he had a wise and careful
mother. She taught him respect and obedience to authority; justice and courtesy to others;
loyalty to God and his country. He had a high temper and a spirit of command, which she taught
him to control. A few times only in his life, when greatly provoked, did his anger get beyond
bounds. He loved and honored his mother deeply and never forgot her teachings.

George and his younger brothers were educated in the country schools of Virginia. George soon
showed that he had a practical mind, caring little for poetry and literature. He liked mathematics
and wanted to know about business and keeping accounts. He spent hours copying into a book
the exact forms of legal papers of all kinds. He was very neat and accurate in his school work
and learned the value of system and order. He never began a thing without finishing it. He
never did anything without knowing the reason why. When he grew up, these fine principles and
this skill and accuracy, fitted him to take a great part in the history of America.

All boys in those early days knew how to handle guns and manage horses. George was an expert
rider and loved the life of the woods. Being exceptionally tall and strong, he was the champion
athlete at school. It is said he could throw a stone farther than any man in Virginia. Besides,
he was so fair-minded that the boys always let him settle their disputes and quarrels, knowing
he would give every one a square deal. He was the admired and trusted leader of them all.

In addition to his mother's care, George soon had the loving advice and devoted friendship
of his brother Lawrence. The war was over and that splendid young gentleman had come home,
and had married the charming Anne Fairfax. His house, willed to him by his father, stood upon
a hill overlooking the beautiful Potomac River. To this lovely home, surrounded by lawns and
stately trees, Lawrence gave the name Mount Vernon, in honor of the Admiral under whom he had
served. George spent as much time as possible here, where he met many persons of education
and refinement.

While he was still a young boy, he wrote out for himself a long list of rules of politeness
and good behavior. He had observed that older people do not like careless children, who forget
the comforts and rights of others. As a result, he was well liked by his brother's friends.
Among them were often military and naval officers, who told him stories of war and adventure
in foreign lands. When he was fourteen, one of these officers would have appointed him midshipman
in the British navy. He was eager to go, but his mother needed his help in the management of
their property. So he continued two years more at school, studying mathematics, engineering
and surveying.

The country was then new and wild and there was much work for land surveyors, whose business
it was to measure off boundaries and describe the positions of rivers, mountains and forests
in a piece of land. George learned to do this so well that by the time he was sixteen, he was
appointed public surveyor of his county. His chief work for the next three years was on the
vast tracts of land owned by Lord Fairfax, the uncle of Lawrence Washington's wife. Though
very young, George was a great favorite with his lordship, who often took him fox hunting.
George was a bold and skillful horseman and rode well after the hounds.

The estate of Lord Fairfax, lying between the Potomac and Rappahannock rivers and extending
to the Alleghany Mountains, had been given to his grandfather by King Charles II. These lands
had never been settled nor surveyed. People known as squatters were now moving in and taking
possession of the best places without permission. It became necessary to have the land surveyed,
and these settlers either driven out or made to pay for certain definite parts. Lord Fairfax
knew no one who could do this so well as George Washington, for he was strong and fair enough
to deal wisely with the rough settlers. It was just what George wanted to do, and he gladly
accepted the offer.

In March, George set out for his first trip into the wilderness. He was just sixteen years
old, and it was his first big undertaking. George Fairfax, Anne's brother, went with him. They
crossed the mountains into the lovely valley of the Shenandoah River. George's letters home
were full of the beauty of the country and the richness of the land. After the first night,
they found it more comfortable to sleep out under the sky than in the poor, untidy lodgings
of the settlers. They lived on wild turkey and other game. They did their own cooking, roasting
the meat on sticks over the fire and eating it on broad, clean chips.

They met a party of war-painted Indians, and for the first time George saw an Indian war dance.
He studied the Indians carefully, for he wanted to understand their ways so that he might know
how to deal with them. All through his life, he was kind and just in his treatment of these people.

The work of surveying grants of land took them long distances among the mountains and through
the valleys. They traveled on horseback over the woodland trails, for there were as yet no
roads. Sometimes they found the rivers so high that they crossed in canoes, their horses swimming.

George returned in a month, well pleased with his adventures, and Lord Fairfax, delighted with
his success, paid him well.

The cordial, friendly, free life of Virginia pleased Lord Fairfax more than did the life in
England. When he heard the account of the fertility and beauty of the Shenandoah Valley, he
decided to make his home there. George laid out for him a fine farm of ten thousand acres.
The long stone farm-house, surrounded by servants' quarters, stables and kennels, was located
on a charming hillside. The place was called "Greenway Court," and visitors always found a
warm welcome, whether Indians, woodsmen, or friends from the cities. Here George stayed when
on his surveying trips and during the hunting seasons.

Until he was nineteen, George spent his time at his work, or at home with his mother or at
Mount Vernon with Lawrence. The society of his home and friends kept him from being spoiled
by the roughness of the wilderness. He was now six feet, two inches in height, with a fresh,
out-door complexion, blue eyes and brown hair. He had attractive manners, he was careful about
his dress, and presented a pleasing appearance. Through all his life, George Washington was
a true gentleman.

He was so well paid for his work that he was able to buy several pieces of fine land. His noble
character gave him a high place among the leading men of his colony. When he was nineteen,
he was appointed one of four military officers in the colonies, with the rank and pay of a
major, $750 a year--a considerable sum at that time.

Troubles had now arisen between the French and the English about the ownership of lands west
of the Alleghany Mountains. The Indians, regarding the lands as theirs, took part in the disturbance.
To protect her frontiers, Virginia was divided into four districts, each under a leader, whose
duty it was to organize and drill militia. George at once began to study military tactics and
the arts of war. This was interrupted by a trip to the West Indies with his beloved brother
Lawrence, who was ill of consumption.

They had hardly arrived there when George had a severe attack of smallpox; though he soon got
well, his face was scarred for life. He wrote home about the beauty of the island, the wonderful
trees and fruits, and his social pleasures--dinners, parties and drives. For the first time
in his life, he attended a theater. He visited the courts of justice and the fortifications;
studied the laws, the soil and the crops, learning all that could be learned about the island.
The trip resulted in no lasting good for Lawrence, however, for he died the following summer,
beloved and honored by the colonists.

George was only twenty, but Lawrence left Mount Vernon in his charge, and the care of his wife
and little daughter. The farm on the Rappahannock had been given to George by their father.
These two fine estates, with the property he had bought for himself, made George a large land
owner when still a very young man. The care of all this property and his military duties kept
him busy.

During this time, the trouble with the French had grown more serious. The English, having settled
the eastern sea-coast, claimed the lands to the west for their settlers. The French claimed
the same lands by reason of having explored them first. The rich country lying west of the
Alleghany Mountains, between the Great Lakes and the Ohio River, was the region in question.
The French were planning to hold it by a line of forts from the Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico,
and near the eastern end of Lake Erie, they had built two forts.

Governor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia decided to send a message to the French commandant, Saint
Pierre, warning him to keep off English soil. He needed someone brave and strong enough to
travel in the winter, through hundreds and hundreds of miles of forests and across mountains
and swift rivers; who knew how to take care of himself in the woods; who could get along with
the Indians, and meet the French officers with courtesy and wisdom.

Of all the men in Virginia, the Governor chose George Washington, only twenty-one years old,
for this dangerous and important journey!

So, late in the autumn of 1753, Major Washington set out for the Ohio River, accompanied by
Christopher Gist, a brave and daring frontiersman, and an Indian chief called Half King, as
guides, together with interpreters and a small company of trusted men. They traveled on horseback,
and took with them tents and supplies for the journey.

As they proceeded, cold weather overtook them and the forests became almost impassable from
snow. Traveling was so difficult that, when they reached the Monongahela River, they sent two
men down the river in a canoe with their baggage. These men waited for them at the fork where
the Allegheny River joins the Monongahela to form the Ohio. As soon as Washington saw this
fork, he marked it as a splendid location for a fort, of which we shall learn more later.

Pushing on a little farther, Washington and his men reached a little settlement on the Ohio
River, where Indian chiefs met him in council. He told them he had a letter for the French
commandant and asked for their advice and help. Indians are very dignified and slow in their
councils. They kept Washington waiting for several days. Then three of the greatest chiefs
went with him to the French forts. These were in what is now northwestern Pennsylvania. It
was a journey of many miles through snow and mud and took nearly a week.

It was almost the middle of December before Washington delivered his message to the French
commandant, Saint Pierre. He was politely received by the French officers, with whom he discussed
matters very tactfully. It took some days to prepare the reply to the Governor of Virginia.
While they waited, the French tried, with presents and liquor, to coax Washington's Indian
friends to leave him. At this time, the Indian tribes were in a difficult position. Both the
French and the English were trying to get their lands and each seeking to win their alliance
against the other. Washington reminded the chiefs that he had their word of honor and so kept
them with him.

After receiving the French reply, the party started back home, going as far as possible in
canoes. The rivers were swollen and full of ice, making the water-trip extremely dangerous.
On Christmas Day, Washington began his long journey home--nearly a thousand miles through almost
trackless forests. The horses became so tired that he and Christopher Gist decided to hurry
on foot, in advance of the others, to the fork of the Ohio, leaving their horses to be brought
later. They tramped several days, camping in the forests at night. An Indian met them and offered
to show them a short cut. But he was treacherous and guided them out of their way and tried
to shoot them. They escaped, traveling as fast as they could all night and all the next day.

At nightfall they came to the Allegheny River, expecting to find it frozen over, but it was
full of floating ice and they had no way to cross. After working a whole day, with only a small
hatchet, they made a raft. In trying to pole this across the swift current, Washington was
thrown into the water and was nearly drowned, but he managed to get on the raft again and they
reached an island, where they spent the night. It was so intensely cold that Gist's hands and
feet were frozen. The next morning, they got ashore on the chunks of ice and by suppertime
were in the warm house of a trader named Frazier. In a few days, they were rested enough to
go on to Gist's home, where the Major bade his companion good-by and went on alone on horseback,
through constant snows and bitter cold.

On the sixteenth of January (1754), Major Washington delivered the French reply to Governor
Dinwiddie. He had been absent almost three months on his perilous journey, and you can imagine
that his mother and friends were glad to see him safe at home again.

The Governor and the colonists were very proud of the way Washington had performed his errand.
His wisdom in his dealings with the Indians and the French, his firmness, his courage and daring
in the face of peril, had indeed been marked. He had not only done well what he had been sent
to do, but he had thoroughly examined the French forts and made notes of the best places for
English defenses. From that time, he was trusted with important duties.

As might have been expected, the reply from the French commandant stated that the land belonged
to French settlers and that they intended to keep it. It was Washington's opinion that the
French intended in the spring to take possession of the whole country. The Governor of Virginia
tried to interest other colonies to help fight the French. When they refused, Virginia sent
Captain Trent to raise a company of men in the western country and to build a fort at the fork
of the Ohio River, where the city of Pittsburgh now stands.

Washington, now Colonel, was ordered to raise three hundred men and build a road to this fort
for cannon and supplies. He succeeded in getting together one hundred and fifty men, who were
poorly equipped, and without training. They built the road as far as Cumberland. Here, in April,
1754, they met Captain Trent's men in retreat. A French force of three hundred men had surprised
them by suddenly paddling down the river in canoes, and planting their guns before the fort,
with a summons to surrender in an hour. One young officer and fifty men could not hold out
against so many. So they surrendered and marched back over the mountains.

Every day traders and settlers came by, hurrying eastward. They said the French had taken the
place at the fork of the Ohio and were building a strong fort. They were coaxing the Indians,
with fine presents, to fight the English. If the British were to succeed against the French,
they required a good road over which to march an army. So Colonel Washington hurried the road
building as much as possible, but at best he could make only slow progress in such mountainous
country.

He received a message from the friendly chief Half King, telling him that a French force was
on its way to attack him. With a little band of men, Washington made his way by night through
the forest, in a heavy rain, to the camp of Half King. Indian scouts tracked the Frenchmen
to a forest near a place called Great Meadows, where, in May, Washington and his men attacked
them on one side and the Indians on the other. The Colonel was in the thickest of the fight
and, for the first time, heard bullets whistling about his head. Ten Frenchmen were killed
and twenty-one taken prisoners. Half King sent the scalps of the dead men, with tomahawks and
strings of black wampum (small beads made of shells and sometimes used by the Indians as money),
to all his allies and asked them to join the English.

This was Washington's first skirmish and it opened the French and Indian War that lasted seven
years. Washington now encamped at Great Meadows where he dug rude trenches, which he called
Fort Necessity. Supplies of food and ammunition were slow in reaching him. He had been reënforced
with troops from the command of Colonel Fry, who had died on the way, and Washington was now
made commander of the joint forces of about three hundred men.

The French finished their fort, which they called Duquesne (doo-cané). Then about nine hundred
French and Indians attacked Washington. The English fought bravely, but Half King and his men
deserted Washington. Being greatly outnumbered, he was obliged to surrender.

Colonel Washington led his beaten and discouraged men home, trying to cheer them while sharing
their hardships. The campaign, fought against such odds, had not been successful, but Washington
was publicly thanked for his bravery and hard work.

He resigned his commission and went to look after his mother's affairs. He soon settled at
Mount Vernon and began work on his farm. His greatest desire was to devote himself to country
life, but he was needed too much by the colony to be allowed to live as a private man. Washington
was appointed a member of his staff.

General Braddock was a brave and experienced soldier, but he knew nothing of warfare in a new
country, amid great forests and savage foes. He knew but one way to fight, which he had learned
in the orderly camps and wide fields of Europe, and felt that nobody could defeat his well-drilled
soldiers. He thought Washington too young to give advice, and paid no attention to what he
said. He looked with contempt upon the queerly dressed, untrained Virginia troops, whom he
called "raw recruits." Instead of being friendly and generous with the Indians, Braddock treated
them coldly and they left him.

With much difficulty, the army and its supplies were brought over the mountains and approached
Fort Duquesne early in July. As they drew near it, Braddock's men put on their scarlet uniforms
and forded the river, with bands playing and colors flying. It was the first time Washington
ever saw a regular, well-disciplined army and he enjoyed the sight, although he wondered how
their orderly ranks were going to fight among the rocks and trees. Fearing an attack from the
woods, he wanted to send Indian scouts and Virginia rangers ahead. General Braddock admired
Washington, but could not help laughing at his fears. So he sent his soldiers gayly forward.

Suddenly, they were attacked in front! With hideous yells, the Indians fell upon their flanks.
All that General Braddock had learned of warfare was of little use to him now in the wilderness,
but he was courageous and determined. Four horses were shot under him and he was fatally wounded.
Before he died, he praised the Virginians, like a brave and true gentleman, and apologized
to Washington for not heeding his advice. He left to him his horse and his servant. All the
staff officers were killed but Washington. His splendid height and broad shoulders made him
a fine target, as he rode about the field trying to rally the men. His horses were killed under
him and his clothing was torn by bullets. An Indian chief said, "A Power mightier than we shielded
him. He cannot die in battle!" The contest ended in a terrible defeat for the English. The
regulars were useless and frightened. The despised Virginians were brave but too few in number
to meet the enemy alone. The survivors retreated with the wounded to Fort Cumberland (Maryland).

Washington had been twice defeated, but his courage and wisdom were so great that Virginia
had made him Commander-in-Chief of her forces. His tasks were heavy for so young a man--he
was only twenty-three at that time! He did the best he could under many difficulties and raised
and drilled a force of militia.

While facing a common danger, the colonies were not united then in any way, except under a
Governor General sent out from England by the King. Washington had no authority over troops
from any other colony, nor would officers commissioned by the King take orders from him. Naturally,
all sorts of disputes arose and finally Washington decided to go to Boston to put all these
questions before Governor General William Shirley.

Two other young Virginia officers rode with him. It was midwinter. They had hundreds of miles
of mud roads to travel. They had fine horses and were attended by mounted black servants in
livery. The story of Washington's bravery in Braddock's defeat was known throughout the country.
When these three handsome young officers reached the cities along the way, they were splendidly
entertained, for every one wanted to honor Washington. He wore fine clothes and his appearance
and manners delighted all who met him. General Shirley received him with favor and granted
his requests.

Word was brought that the French and Indians were attacking the settlers beyond the mountains.
Washington hurried back to his command at Winchester. He was anxious to have the forces and
supplies necessary to attack Fort Duquesne at once. But while the people were clamoring for
protection, Washington was unable to help them on account of the unfair treatment of Governor
Dinwiddie, and the indifference of England. His force was too small and untrained to make an
attempt against the French; but he remained patient and cheerful and for almost two years,
he stood by the people who depended upon him. Then William Pitt became prime minister of England
(1757) and at once took an interest in the defense of the colonies.

Washington was ordered to proceed against Fort Duquesne. That French garrison had been weakened
by taking men and supplies to the battle-front on the north, where they were being defeated
by the British. Before Washington reached the fort, the commandant set fire to it and fled.
Washington planted the British flag upon the still smoking ruins and on the same site built
Fort Pitt, which he named in honor of the great English statesman. This is where the city of
Pittsburgh now stands. Thus ended the French occupation of the Ohio Valley.

The many cares and hardships Washington had suffered had made him ill and he returned to Mount
Vernon, hoping that his military life was over. He was greatly loved and honored by his soldiers
and his fellow countrymen.

When Washington was twenty-seven years old, he married a charming young widow, Mrs. Martha
Custis. The wedding took place January 6, 1759.

Mrs. Custis had a little girl, Martha, four years old, and a little boy, John, who was six.
Washington dearly loved these children, whom he taught and trained with great care. He and
his wife were great favorites socially and at their home (Mount Vernon) they entertained many
guests. Here the Custis children met many of the prominent men of those days.

One of these visitors was Louis Philippe, the exiled King of France. Noticing how many letters
Washington wrote, he asked him if he were not afraid of writing something he might regret.
Washington answered that he was careful never to do or say a thing he could afterward be sorry for.

Washington kept fine horses and dogs and was very fond of hunting. Although busy with the care
of his great farms and his wife's large estate, he found time to follow the hounds. His wisdom
and honesty were so trusted that, aside from his own affairs, other people gave him charge
of theirs. He was often called upon to settle disputes, thus preventing law-suits. He was a
member of the Virginia Legislature, then called the House of Burgesses, of which he attended
every meeting and was careful to know all about the affairs of the colony. When he first took
his seat in the Legislature, he was thanked for his military service to the colony. He rose
to reply, but could only blush and stammer. The speaker said, "Sit down, Mr. Washington, your
modesty equals your valor!"

For fifteen years, Washington led a peaceful and happy life with his family. He was kept busy
looking after his vast estates. But then again, the country began to claim his attention. George
III was King of England. Under his rule, unjust laws were made for the colonies, which the
wise men of America knew would destroy their rights. The colonies were not represented in the
British Parliament (where the laws were made) and so claimed that Parliament had no right to
tax them. Needing money, England laid heavy taxes on the colonies, which they would not pay.
After much trouble, all the taxes were taken off except the one on tea. That was left to prove
England's right to tax the colonies.

In the autumn of 1773, several ships were sent over loaded with tea, which was to be sold very
cheaply. But the colonists refused to have tea at any price rather than submit to "taxation
without representation." There can be no freedom in a land whose people may be taxed without
their consent. From several ports, the ships were sent back. In Boston, a party of citizens
dressed as Indians, boarded the ships at night, December 16, and threw all the tea into the
harbor. This is called the Boston Tea Party. The same violence occurred at Annapolis, Maryland.
To punish the city of Boston, Parliament passed a law that no ship should come in or go out
of her harbor. The port was closed and business stopped.

News of this was carried to the other colonies. In Virginia, a day of fasting and prayer was
appointed. The people did not want to give up their liberties, for which many had come to America.
It seemed, on the other hand, very dreadful to go to war with the mother country. The colonies
were independent of one another, but knew they must stand together against the injustice of
England. Meetings were held in each colony to talk matters over, and it was decided to hold
a General Congress, made up of men selected by each colony.

In the Virginia Convention, Washington was one of the first to say that the colonies ought
to be allowed to govern themselves, make their own laws and decide their own taxes. He was
usually very quiet in all that he said and did, but the wrongs of Boston had so stirred him
that he made a fiery speech. He said he would raise a thousand men, pay them himself and march
at their head to the relief of Boston. He said he had hoped there would be no break with England
and he shrank from the horror of war, but now he began to feel that it could not be avoided
and if so, no sacrifice was too great to preserve the liberties of America for the millions
who would some day call it their home.

He was one of several delegates chosen to represent Virginia in the General Congress, which
was held at Carpenters' Hall in Philadelphia, September 5, 1774. My son was to
compete with your mad tailor, who makes the best caftan? No, this
is nothing.

"The sultana, however, appealed to the fact that he had her committed the condition to advance,
and the Sultan, who was a man of his word was, at last, although he swore that if the mad tailor his caftan
and 'm still so beautiful that he could for him but not his Son.

The sultan himself went to his son and asked him to send in the grilling of his mother, who would
now see even quite a caftan of his hand. The good Labakan laughed your heart with joy, if it
is missing only that, he thought to himself, as will soon experience the joy of my wife Sultana
They had set up two rooms, one for the prince, the other for the
tailors. there they should their art test, and they had each only
a reasonable piece of silk, where scissors, needle and thread.

The Sultan was very curious to what was for conveying a thing of Kaftan probably his son to light, but
also the Sultana knocked restless heart, whether their list will
probably succeed or not.

We had two days the two suspended their business, left the Sultan on the third call his wife, and
when it was published, he sent in those two rooms, pick up the two caftans and its maker to
leave. Labakan triumphantly entered and spread his caftan before the astonished eyes of the
Sultan. "See here, father," he said, "Look, dear mother, if not this is a masterpiece from a kaftan?
. As I let it come up with the most skillful Hofschneider on a bet, whether it has a statutory
right brings smiles The Sultana and turned to Omar: "And what have
released you, my son" angrily this the silk and shears raised the
Back: "You taught me to tame a horse and wield a sword and my spear
hits sixty gears its target - but the arts of the needle are foreign
to me, they would be unworthy of a pupil Elfi Bey, the ruler of Cairo.

"" Oh, true son of my lord, "said the Sultana, alas," that I embrace you,
you should call son!

Pardon, my lord and master, "she said then, by itself the Sultan
claimed that"

I have used this trick against you, do ye see now have no idea who
Prince and who is Schneider; true, the caftan is delicious, made to
your son has, and I would like to ask, in which master he had learned.

"The Sultan was sitting in deep thought, suspiciously soon his wife, now Labakan opinion, in vain his
blushing and his dismay that he so "experience but I know Allah be praised it, a means, if I
am deceived or not." betrayed stupid to fight world, was looking for.

"Again, this evidence is not sufficient," he said, he gave orders to
drive up his fastest horse ., jumped up and rode into a forest that
began not far from the town there lived to an old legend, a good fairy,
Adolzaide commands, who had often been the kings of his tribe in its
hour of need stood with their advice, there hurried to the Sultan.

In the middle of the forest was an open space surrounded by tall cedars. lived there, according
to legend, the fairy, and rarely entered a mortal this place, because a certain shyness in front
of the old days had passed from father to son . inherited as the Sultan had arrived, he dismounted,
tied his horse to a tree that stood in the middle of the square and
spoke in a loud voice: "If it is true that you granted my paternal
goodness-quality advice in the hour of Not so despise not the request
of her grandson and advise me where human mind is too short-sighted
"He had hardly spoken the last words, when one of the cedars opened
and out stepped a veiled woman in long white robes.



There were many men in Congress at that time whose names Americans can never forget. They did
many wise things, but none was more fortunate than this choice of a Commander-in-Chief for
the Continental Army. One of the members, John Adams, called him "the modest and virtuous,
the generous and brave George Washington."

Washington's early life and training fitted him in a wonderful way for this great and difficult
post. As a young surveyor, he had learned much about the country and how to make his way through
forests and mountains. Later, as a commander, he had learned how to fight in the woods, and
all the secrets of frontier warfare. With Braddock, he had learned that soldiers drilled on
the parade grounds and battle-fields of Europe did not know what to do when hemmed in by rocks
and brush and savage enemies in a new and uncleared country. He had also learned how to value
and how to handle the independent, though rough-looking, soldiers of the backwoods. With all
this knowledge and experience, with his clear mind and high courage, Washington was the most
dangerous foe the British could have.

In June (1775), Washington, as Commander-in-Chief of the army, left Philadelphia for Boston.
There was no time to visit Mount Vernon. He wrote to his wife, telling her to be brave and
that he trusted God would soon bring him safely home. General Philip Schuyler and General Charles
Lee and a light horse troop went with him. As they galloped along the way, people came out
of the farms and villages to see the great General. Washington, now forty-three years old,
was very splendid and dignified in his bearing, yet always modest and quiet--a gentleman and
a soldier.

About twenty miles from Philadelphia, they met a messenger from Boston riding a fleet horse
and bearing dispatches to Congress. They stopped and heard from him the news of the Battle
of Bunker Hill, which had just been fought (June 17, 1775). The British had been victorious,
but not until more than half their number had been killed and the patriots had fired their
last round of ammunition. When Washington was told how bravely the militia had stood their
ground, he said, "The liberties of the country are safe!" He was not troubled by the triumph
of the British, because he felt sure the Americans would win when properly armed and drilled.
This news made him more anxious to reach the scene of action and he traveled on as fast as
he could. He left General Schuyler to command the patriot forces in New York.

On July second, he reached his headquarters in Cambridge, where he was received with cheers
and the thunder of cannon. The men had so little powder that they could not give him a great
salute, but they spared all they could.

The next day, July 3, 1775, Washington took command of the Continental Army under a large elm
tree, which still stands on the Cambridge Common. The patriot army was a rather discouraging
sight. The 16,000 men had been called together without any preparation. They were farmers,
fishermen and shop-keepers. They had very little discipline or order and were in need of everything--arms,
ammunition, food, clothing, tents, shoes. As yet they were not one army, but a collection of
separate companies from the different New England colonies. Each had its own regulations, its
own officers and its own interests. There were jealousy and often misunderstanding among them.
After reviewing this army, General Washington visited the American forts strung in an irregular
semi-circle around Boston, within which the British forces were besieged.

He found the men camped in rough board shacks, or shelters made of turf and brush, and dressed
in the clothes they wore on their farms and in the villages. Here and there was a tent. No
wonder the British, in their orderly tents and fine scarlet uniforms, thought they could soon
scatter this mixed crowd! There was but one exception. General Nathanael Greene, of Rhode Island,
had raised and drilled a body of men and brought them to Boston under fine discipline, with
good tents and clothing. His camp showed what could be done. General Greene became one of Washington's
most faithful and lifelong friends, and was one of the greatest generals of the Revolution.

In contrast with the undisciplined, ragged Continental troops were the trained British soldiers,
commanded by experienced generals. They were well fortified in Boston and the harbor was defended
by their warships. They felt no fear of the irregular line of posts with which the Americans
thought to hem them in.

Washington at once began the task of organizing the army and teaching and training the men.
In this he showed skill beyond almost any other man in history. He was beset with many difficulties,
among them the jealousy and discontent of some of the officers. There was one general, however,
who was always ready to serve in any place and put the cause above himself. This was Israel
Putnam, the brave man who was plowing in his field when he heard of the Battle of Lexington.
He left his plow in the furrow, unhitched his horses and galloped sixty-eight miles that day
to Cambridge! He was nearly sixty years of age at the time. He was much loved by the army for
his bravery and generosity and all were glad when "Old Put" was appointed Major-General.

Washington formed the army into six brigades of six regiments each. He wrote to Congress to
appoint at once officers to help him. He wanted an adjutant-general to train and discipline
the troops; a quartermaster to arrange for all supplies, and an officer to look after enlistments.
The men had enlisted for only a short time and numbers returned home after this term of enlistment
expired; so it was hard to keep the army up to fighting strength. The lack of powder was also
a very serious matter and Washington sent to the southern colonies, asking for what they had
in store.

He at once began to improve the defenses and strengthen the weak places. Soon a strong line
of fortifications surrounded the city. The strictest discipline was required and Washington
visited the forts every day. The arrival of fourteen hundred riflemen from Pennsylvania, Virginia
and Maryland was a great help; among these were the stalwart sharp-shooters under Colonel Daniel
Morgan, whom Washington had known in the French war. They were six feet tall and over, and
dressed in hunting shirts and wide-brimmed hats. They had marched six hundred miles in three weeks.

The winter passed in drilling the army and trying to get powder. Washington was besieging Boston
without any powder, though the British little thought that was the reason he did not attack
them! All he could do was to cut them off from nearby supplies of food, but they sent out warships
with men who plundered the coasts of New England. The people drove their cattle inland and
fought the invaders boldly.

Knowing that he could not return home, General Washington sent for his wife to come to Cambridge.
Mrs. Washington set out on the long journey in her carriage, drawn by four horses, and accompanied
by her son and his wife. (Her daughter had died in the meantime.) Colored servants in scarlet
and white liveries rode beside the carriage. Escorts of horsemen brought them from city to
city, until they arrived in camp, just before Christmas. It had been more than half a year
since the General had seen his family and his work was made easier by having with him those
he loved. The Craigie house in Cambridge (later the home of the poet Longfellow), was Washington's
headquarters. Here Mrs. Washington helped him entertain officers and members of Congress. The
General was so busy that he was often obliged to leave his guests at the table, while his own
meal remained unfinished.

The plundering attacks by the British upon the New England coast became so violent that, without
waiting for Congress to act, Washington had several armed vessels fitted out. They were commanded
by such brave sea captains as John Manly and John Paul Jones and were ordered by the General
to defend the coast and capture British ships bringing supplies from England.

As the weeks passed, it grew more difficult to keep up the numbers of the army. The men grew
tired of the long and uncomfortable encampment without any fighting. Had there been any powder,
their General would gladly have given them fighting enough! All through the war, Washington
was troubled and handicapped by these short enlistments, as he had to be constantly training
new recruits.

In December, some Connecticut troops decided to go home without even remaining for their full
time. Some took their guns and ammunition. This desertion was a bad thing for the discipline
of the army, and sorely distressed Washington. On their way home, these men were made to feel
what the people thought of their conduct, for no one would give them food, and their friends
would not receive them kindly when they arrived. The day after they walked off, something happened
that put new life into the camp. A long train of wagons came lumbering and jolting into Cambridge,
with flags flying and an escort of soldiers and horsemen. What was in the wagons?--Cannon!
and thousands of guns and shot and thirty-two tons of musket balls! Captain John Manly, of
the ship Essex, had captured a large British brigantine and taken her cargo of munitions.

In spite of Washington's efforts to appeal to their patriotism, the soldiers still wanted to
go home. They were sick of the discomforts of camp. By January (1776), only ten thousand men
were left, and there was danger of the poorly defended lines being taken. But for some reason,
the British made no attack. During this disheartening time, General Greene was a great help,
with his courage and patriotism and cheerfulness.

In February, Colonel Henry Knox returned from the forts on Lake Champlain with a long train
of forty-two ox-sleds, carrying artillery and ammunition. He had gone in midwinter after the
supplies of cannon and lead captured from the British the year before and had performed his
errand with daring and faithfulness. Then ten regiments of militia arrived and at last, Washington
and his generals thought they had men and ammunition enough to attack the British.

General Putnam had fortified a hill north of the city of Boston. Troops were sent, on the night
of March 4, to fortify Dorchester Heights, to the south from which Boston and the harbor could
be swept by guns. That the British might not hear the noise of the wagons and pickaxes, the
patriots bombarded the city all night. The ground was deeply frozen and the work hard. But
Washington was with the men, everywhere helping and encouraging them.

When morning came, the British looked upon four forts raised as if by the magic of an Aladdin's
lamp! General Sir William Howe determined to attack these new works. A storm of great fury
arose and he waited. The storm continued all night and all day. The patriots used this time
to strengthen their forts, and the British saw they could not hold the city against them; so
they prepared to leave, taking everything with them that could be of use to the "rebels." They
were allowed to embark upon their ships without being fired on, to prevent their burning the
city. They sailed away to Halifax. After being besieged ten months, Boston fell into Washington's
hands without a battle! Washington was thanked by Congress and given a gold medal in honor
of the capture of Boston. Before Washington had been made Commander-in-Chief, Ethan Allen,
with the "Green Mountain Boys" (so-called because they came from Vermont, the "Green Mountain
State"), had surprised and taken, without a fight, Fort Ticonderoga in eastern New York. Shortly
after, Crown Point on Lake Champlain was captured by Colonel Benedict Arnold. The capture of
these two British forts opened the way to Canada.

While Washington was building up the army and besieging Boston, an expedition against Montreal
and Quebec was planned. General Richard Montgomery, who commanded a force on Lake Champlain,
marched up to Montreal, which surrendered (November, 1775) without a struggle. Benedict Arnold
was sent, with about twelve hundred men from Boston, to join Montgomery's forces in the attack
on Quebec. They were to make their way up the Kennebec River and through the dense Maine woods.
Arnold was a brave soldier and led his men through hardships and perils, through snow and ice
and over frozen mountains, until they reached Quebec. On the last day of December, with the
ground frozen and covered with snow, the two American armies made a combined attack on the
city; but Quebec did not surrender, though the patriots fought with desperate courage and daring.
The gallant Montgomery led his men up the heights, dashing forward with the cry, "Push on,
my brave boys! Quebec is ours!" A volley from a cannon killed him and scattered his men. The
Americans suffered terrible losses. In the death of General Montgomery, America lost one of
her bravest soldiers and truest gentlemen. He was deeply mourned in England as well as in America.

Benedict Arnold also was beaten back; his leg was shattered by a musket ball, but he bravely
fortified his position and with five hundred men besieged Quebec. He wrote, "I am in the way
of my duty and I know no fear."

As the weeks passed, the men grew weary and homesick. They suffered untold hardships from want
of food, clothing and shelter, and from the bitter cold of the Canadian winter. Though Arnold
and his men fought bravely, Quebec did not fall into the hands of the Americans. Their attacks
were repulsed by the British forces in command of the city.

Shortly after the capture of Boston, Washington brought his army to New York, as he feared
the British might take that city. He sent General Putnam to fortify New York and the Hudson
River, and he followed, gathering troops on the way. When he arrived, he fortified Brooklyn
Heights, Long Island, and put General Greene in command. He had only about eight thousand men
to garrison the forts about New York.

The same troubles from short enlistments, lack of discipline and supplies had to be met. Washington
was freely giving himself to the just and righteous cause of American freedom, and he would
not be discouraged even by want of spirit and obedience in his troops. There was another difficulty.
All over the country and especially in New York, many persons, called Tories, were still loyal
to King George III, and Washington feared treachery from them.

The British fleet, however, had not gone to New York, but up to Halifax. General Howe and his
army waited in Halifax for ships and men from England. With their help, he expected to drive
the Americans out of New York and away from the Hudson River. England intended to crush the
colonies and hired German troops, called Hessians, in addition to her own forces. It was now
a year since the Battle of Lexington was fought and Washington feared that the war would be
a long one.

He went to Philadelphia to consult with Congress. To succeed against the British, the colonies,
he knew, must work together in earnest for their common liberty. The army must have regular
pay and supplies, and the men must promise to serve as long as needed. Congress established
a war office and ordered that the term of enlistment be for three years.

Washington returned to New York and soon afterwards a conspiracy (plot) among the Tories was
discovered. Many arrests were made. A member of Washington's body-guard was found to be in
the plot and he was hanged. While this was going on, the British fleet arrived in the harbor.
There were one hundred and thirty ships. The troops--30,000--were landed on Staten Island.
Washington was very uneasy with this large force before him and he knew not how many treacherous
Tories about him.

For a year, the Americans had been fighting on account of unjust laws and taxes. But England
had grown still more severe and unfair, until many began to believe that the only hope for
peace and prosperity in the colonies was in their union with one another and their separation
from England. Washington had hoped that the trouble with the mother country might be peaceably
settled. But the time had now come when he urged Congress to declare the independence of the
colonies and throw off the British yoke. While he, in New York, was facing foes within and
without, Congress in Philadelphia was discussing this great question behind locked doors. Anxious
throngs crowded the streets waiting for the decision.

At last, on the 4th of July, 1776, the Liberty Bell in the State House tower rang out the glad
tidings that Congress had adopted the Declaration of Independence! Washington was overjoyed
when a messenger brought him the word. On the evening of July 9, he had his army drawn up to
hear the Declaration read before each brigade. He said he hoped that it would inspire each
man to live and act with courage, "as became a Christian soldier defending the dearest rights
and liberties of his country." The people of New York tore down a statue of King George and
melted it into bullets for the army.

There was not much time for rejoicing, however, considering that the British ships were in
New York harbor. Among them was the flagship of Lord Richard Howe, Admiral of the British Navy
and brother of General Howe. He came with a proposal of peace from England and tried to deliver
it in the form of a message addressed to "George Washington." Washington, resenting this insult,
refused to receive the message and did not accept it until it was returned properly addressed
to "General George Washington." Congress thanked him for making the British respect the dignity
of his office.

America had decided to be free at any cost, and while her cause did not look very promising,
it was too late to talk about peace. Washington knew his forces were not strong enough to defend
New York. The enemy had its great fleet, and thousands of men already on land with thousands
more coming.

Washington had brought the army up to fifteen thousand men, but hesitated to rely on this force.
He was still troubled by jealousies among the officers and among the troops from the different
colonies, although he tried to show them that honor and success depended on self-forgetfulness
and working together for the cause. The militia could not be counted on and could be called
out only for special occasions. Whole companies would leave at the end of their enlistment,
even though they were greatly needed. We cannot always be proud of this fighting force, though
it showed splendid courage when really in action. The men had not learned that a brave soldier
does not quit, but patiently endures hardships. At best, Washington's army was too small to
strongly fortify any one place about New York. He had no idea where the British would attack
first, and so had spread the army out until it was a long, weak line.

On August 26 and 27 (1776), the enemy surrounded the fortifications at Brooklyn on Long Island.
The Americans fought with great bravery, but were outnumbered and defeated. About two thousand
were killed, wounded or captured. Regiments had hurried to their help from points nearby and
most of the army was finally on Long Island. Fearing his whole force would be destroyed, Washington
decided to withdraw to New York, which he did in the night, under cover of heavy rain, wind
and fog. He had not slept for two days and nights and had hardly been out of the saddle, but
he watched the men embark with all their belongings, and he himself went in the last boat.
When the British soldiers awoke in the morning, they were amazed to find that the whole American
army had disappeared!

It was important for Washington to know what the next move of the British would be. Captain
Nathan Hale, a fine young officer, volunteered to act as spy. He succeeded in passing through
the enemy's lines and making notes and drawings, but on his way back, he was captured by the
British. On Sept. 22, 1776, this noble patriot was hanged. His last words, while standing on
the scaffold, were, "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country."

The army in New York was in great danger of being surrounded and captured by the British, whose
gunboats bombarded all the forts. More than half of the population of the city were Tories
and several thousand of the militia had deserted. Washington was kind of heart and did not
blame them too much, but he knew that his force was too small to hold the city of New York;
so he began to withdraw to the northern end of Manhattan Island. The British moved upon the
city and found it easy to land, because the soldiers, left to defend the first fort they attacked,
ran off in confusion. Washington, hearing the shots, galloped into their midst and tried to
rally them, but they scattered like frightened rabbits. Washington lost his temper, and throwing
his hat on the ground, he exclaimed, "Are these the men with whom I am to defend America?"
He would have been killed or captured by the oncoming British, if one of his officers had not
seized the bridle of his horse and dragged him away.

The main body of the American army soon assembled in a strong camp on the rocky heights near
King's Bridge, defended by Fort Washington. Here they were attacked by the British (September,
1776), when the regular Continental troops fought valiantly and proved victorious, wiping out
the disgrace of the retreat which put General Howe in possession of New York. This success
greatly strengthened the army.

The Americans had repulsed the British at King's Bridge, but Lord Howe sent gunboats up the
Hudson River to cut off Washington from his supplies, which were stored in Connecticut. Washington
thought he might be forced to surrender if he remained, so he decided to leave a garrison at
Fort Washington and take the army into camp at White Plains (New York). A great many of his
men were sick or wounded, and the hospital arrangements were poor and insufficient. The disabled
men were lying in crowded sheds, stables and any other places of shelter that could be found.
Washington did all he could to relieve their sufferings, and in a letter to Congress, he begged
for better pay for the men and better supplies. He also urged that a call be made for men who
would enlist for the entire term of war, however long it might be. A British officer wrote
to a friend in London: "The rebel army is so wretched! I believe no nation ever saw such a
set of tatterdemalions (ragged fellows). There are few coats among them but are out at the
elbows and in a whole regiment, there is hardly a sound pair of breeches. How they must be
pinched by the winter! We, who are warmly clothed, feel it severely."

The camp at White Plains was attacked by the British, with heavy loss on both sides, and Washington
again withdrew his men in the night and entrenched himself at North Castle on the east side
of the Hudson. The British did not follow him, and this left Washington in doubt as to what
their next move would be. He left a part of the troops in camp, stationed a strong force in
the Highlands to defend the Hudson River, and with the rest of his army, crossed into New Jersey,
opposite Fort Washington. From this point, he saw General Howe capture Fort Washington and,
without power to prevent it, beheld his brave men bayoneted by the cruel German soldiers. The
supplies and the survivors of the garrison--about twenty-eight hundred men--fell into the hands
of the enemy (November 16, 1776). Following this, Lord Charles Cornwallis led six thousand
British across the river and attacked Washington's forces, obliging him to retreat across New
Jersey, over the Delaware River and into Pennsylvania.

Washington had with him but three thousand soldiers, ragged and half starved, but they loved
their Commander and were ready to make any sacrifice for him and their country. He had sent
orders to General Charles Lee to bring reinforcements from the north, but Lee was in no hurry
to obey. Lord Howe, who was anxious for peace, issued an order for all Americans to lay down
their arms and go home; for Congress to break up, and he promised pardon for every one if the
order was obeyed. A great many were faint-hearted enough to give up, even though America had
sacrificed so much for freedom. But Washington was undaunted and remained true to his purpose
to free the colonies. He cheered his suffering soldiers and, after securing reënforcements
from the militia of New Jersey and Pennsylvania, he took his stand at a point across the Delaware
River opposite Trenton. He seized all the boats on the river and when Lord Cornwallis marched
into Trenton, there were no boats for his troops and they could not cross the river to attack
the Americans. Leaving Hessian troops to guard Trenton, Cornwallis withdrew to wait until ice
should bridge the river for him. These German--or Hessian--soldiers were hated by the Americans
on account of their cruelty and because they were fighting for pay.

It was evident that the British intended to attack Philadelphia and General Putnam was sent
to defend it. Congress took fright and moved to Baltimore. The British held New York and Washington
knew the people would lose heart if Philadelphia should also be taken.

General Lee's forces at last arrived, though the General himself, because of his carelessness
and laziness, had been captured on the way. With this reënforcement and with forces commanded
by Generals Gates and Sullivan, which had joined him, Washington intended to surprise the garrison
in Trenton. He divided his army into three detachments and planned to cross the Delaware on
Christmas night, because he knew the German soldiers would be drinking and frolicking on that
holiday. Washington himself led about twenty-four hundred men, with artillery, to a crossing
at a point nine miles up the river. The night was dark and stormy. It was hailing and snowing
and bitter cold. The river was filled with drifting cakes of ice, which imperiled the boats.
The crossing was extremely dangerous and it took more than ten hours to get the troops and
their guns on the other side. When he arrived, Washington found the other two detachments had
not started, so his forces alone surprised the Hessians completely, captured Trenton and took
a thousand prisoners!

Messengers were dispatched to call the army from the Hudson and to gather the New Jersey militia.
When these forces were assembled, Washington again crossed the icy river into Pennsylvania,
but returned and occupied Trenton a few days later. Lord Cornwallis, who had come down in a
hurry from Princeton, planned to "bag the fox in the morning." But he found the "fox" had been
too sly for him, for Washington, leaving his camp fires burning, had quietly led his army off
at dead of night, by a rough and roundabout way, to Princeton. At sunrise (Jan. 3, 1777), he
surprised and put to flight the regiment of British which had started out from Princeton to
help Cornwallis at Trenton.

Meanwhile, Cornwallis awoke to find his "fox" gone and he set out for Princeton, arriving just
as the patriots had completed the destruction of the bridge leading to the town. Washington
pushed on, destroying the bridges as he went. His men were nearly exhausted when at last they
reached camp at Morristown, where Washington established headquarters, so he could guard the
road between New York and Philadelphia, and keep Cornwallis shut up in New Brunswick and Amboy
(New Jersey).

Congress thanked Washington, and great soldiers all over the world praised him for the wonderful
way in which he had led his soldiers out of the enemy's pitfalls and turned defeat to victory.
Many colonists, who had seen no hope of success, now believed that Washington's generalship
would triumph. Congress gave him full military authority and he issued a proclamation, ordering
all who were loyal to the King to go to the British camp and all others to take the oath of
allegiance to the United States. Among them was Thaddeus Kosciusko, a military engineer from
Warsaw (Poland). Washington asked him, "Why do you come?" "To fight for American Independence,"
he said. "What can you do?" asked General Washington. "Try me!" was the brief reply. Washington
"tried him," and he proved a valuable help throughout the Revolution. Another who volunteered
his services was Washington's devoted friend, the young French nobleman, the Marquis de Lafayette.
Though scarcely twenty years of age, Lafayette loved human liberty more than home and friends
and the easy life of the French court, and at his own expense, he fitted out a ship, loaded
with military stores, and sought to aid the Americans in their struggle. Washington loved him
for his fine spirit, charming manner and soldierly bearing. He became a member of the Commander's
family and his name is honored by every American.

The year 1777 was a very hard and trying one. Washington's forces were too weak to fight regular
battles with the British. He used every device to make General Howe think he had a strong army,
and at the same time, tried to convince Congress that he could not act for want of men and
supplies. The British kept him guessing about what they would do next. Would they attack Philadelphia
or the fort on Lake Champlain? He did not dare to withdraw troops from either place to strengthen
the other.

General John Burgoyne, one of Howe's lieutenant-generals, arrived from England in the summer
of 1777. He landed at Quebec and marched with eight thousand men, British, Germans and Indians,
to Fort Ticonderoga. The garrison of thirty-five hundred men surrendered. Valuable stores were
taken and the presence of this new army discouraged the Americans. But Washington only said,
"We should never despair. If new difficulties arise, we must only put forth new exertions."
He could not leave his own position, but he showed the greatest wisdom in arranging and locating
the forces in the North. He sent his valued Virginia riflemen, under Colonel Daniel Morgan,
to help fight Burgoyne's Indians.

For months, Washington had watched the British fleet in New York harbor and now it put to sea
with eighteen thousand men on board. Would it go to Boston or to Philadelphia? Washington led
his army toward Philadelphia, believing this would be the British point of attack, and soon
after, the fleet appeared while Washington was camped at Germantown, near Philadelphia. The
fleet sailed away, however, without making an attack and the summer passed in marching troops
here and there--calling them out and sending them home again. Washington had a busy time watching
Burgoyne on the Hudson and the lakes, watching Howe, who was occupying New York and New Jersey,
and guarding the coast.

The fleet finally disappeared and, after a council of war, the American officers decided to
leave Philadelphia and all march north together to attack the British forces in New York. This
was such an important move that a letter was sent to Congress asking permission. The messenger
who carried the letter was Alexander Hamilton, a mere youth, though he was captain of artillery.
He was very small but so brave that they called him "the little lion" and Washington addressed
him affectionately as "my boy." Congress approved of the plan to attack New York and the army
was about to march, when it was reported that the British fleet was sailing up the Chesapeake
Bay. Washington's army halted near Philadelphia. The Commander-in-Chief knew that there were
people in Philadelphia who did not favor the cause of American freedom, thinking it foolish
for the poorly equipped Continental troops to fight the British. To encourage the people of
Philadelphia, Washington decided to parade the army through the city. He rode at the head with
his staff. The men were poorly clad and had no uniforms, but their guns were bright and they
carried them well. They made a brave showing and after the parade, marched into camp on the
Brandywine Creek.

The British landed at Elkton, Maryland--about fifty miles from Philadelphia. Washington sent
troops of light horse to ride about the country and annoy them in every way possible. One young
commander, Henry Lee, of Virginia, was so daring that they called him "Light Horse Harry."
He was another of the brave young officers whom Washington loved to have about him and who
helped him overcome the difficulties that beset him at every turn. Washington spent most of
his time in the saddle, watching the march of the British. His troops were unequal to the enemy
in every way, and though the war had lasted more than two years, he had never dared to risk
a real battle. The time had come when he must make a stand in the open or acknowledge to the
world the weakness of his army. He had about eleven thousand men, while the British numbered
about eighteen thousand. He appealed to his soldiers to do their best and make a firm stand
in defense of their national capital (Philadelphia). The battle of the Brandywine was fought
on September 11, 1777, and the Americans were badly defeated. Following this, Congress moved
to Lancaster (Pa.) and the British, under Cornwallis, took possession of Philadelphia, which
they entered dressed in their bright scarlet uniforms, the bands playing "God Save the King."
What a contrast to the ragged Continentals who had marched there a few weeks before!

Washington did not despair. His courage and determination grew stronger in the face of defeat
and he firmly believed his fortunes would take a turn. After resting his troops, he made a
surprise attack on General Howe at Germantown. He was in a fair way to success, when a heavy
fog came on. The Americans could not tell their own soldiers apart from the enemy and a panic
took place. But Washington, who was in the hottest of the fight, was not discouraged even at
this disaster. He had proved to the world that his troops were not afraid of the British army,
and his men, in spite of their losses, were encouraged by this encounter with trained European
soldiers. The English had looked down on the American patriots, but they were now beginning
to find them worthy foes.

During this time, the army in the North had been busy. General Burgoyne had sent a force to
Bennington, Vermont, to seize cattle and supplies, but General John Stark, at the head of the
New England militia, completely routed them. He captured a quantity of guns and ammunition
and hundreds of prisoners. At the same time, west of the Hudson, another body of British was
defeated and their tents and stores taken by the Americans.

This was joyful news to Washington, and these victories served to keep up the spirits of the
patriots and also to disgust the Indians with their British commanders. The militia, too, gained
confidence, overcoming their fears and finding they were a match for the British and the Germans.
Recruits flocked to the American camp in the North and Burgoyne was soon surrounded. In the
great battle near Saratoga (N. Y.), he was completely defeated and surrendered to General Horatio
Gates on October 17, 1777.

This splendid victory gave the Americans large quantities of military stores, but most of all,
it gave them confidence, for they had at last beaten the British forces. The experience of
actual warfare and the example of the trained soldiers had taught them how to fight. One of
Burgoyne's officers said that when the Continental troops were drawn up to receive the surrender,
they stood like soldiers, though dressed as if they had come from the farm or the shop. He
was surprised to see how straight and strong and fine they were! General Gates ordered his
men not to cheer or show any desire to humiliate their beaten foes, and this courtesy tendered
him by General Gates was reported to Parliament by General Burgoyne when he returned to England.
He was especially touched by it because he had needlessly burned some of the beautiful homes
of the very officers who were so gracious to him. This courtesy was very fine in Gates, but
he failed in his duty to his Commander-in-Chief, and in many ways was unreliable. He did not
report the victory to Washington, as was his duty, and paid no attention to his commands. He
did not send the troops to Philadelphia, as he was ordered, and he did not even return the
company of Virginia riflemen until it was too late.

General Gates and his friends were doing all in their power to destroy the good name and the
authority of Washington. They kept back troops Washington needed and then criticized him for
not fighting a decisive battle. But Washington endured their fault-finding in silence, for
he knew that an open battle with such a powerful foe meant certain defeat, and patriotism so
filled his heart that it left no room for selfish ambition. He was not seeking personal glory,
but independence for America. If General Howe had attacked him, he would have fought bravely,
but he and his fellow officers knew it was unwise to attack the British. In many skirmishes,
however, his troops showed courage and steadfastness, and proved they were making progress
in the arts of warfare.

A few months before this, Congress had made some changes in the quartermaster (the officer
who attends to supplies) and in the commissary (food) departments, although Washington had
opposed the changes. The result was a bad mix-up in getting supplies to the army, and food
and clothing spoiled and went to waste for want of wagons to carry them to the camp.

Winter set in, and the troops were poorly clad and worn out from hardships. There were not
enough blankets to go around, and many of the men were obliged to sit by the camp fires all
night and thus got very little rest. Washington decided to go into winter quarters in the village
of Valley Forge, about twenty miles from Philadelphia. From here, he could watch General Howe's
movements and be ready, if necessary, to defend Congress, which now met at York. On the march
to Valley Forge, many of the soldiers were barefooted and they left a trail of blood on the
frozen ground. To add to their suffering, someone blundered, and they were several days without
food. Washington was blamed for going into winter quarters and not driving the enemy out of
Philadelphia. He wrote to Congress, giving a full account of how he had been annoyed and hindered
by those who should have helped him. He told them that nearly three thousand of his men were
unfit for duty because they were almost naked, and two thousand more were sick for want of
food and shelter.

During this cruel winter of 1777-1778, many men froze and starved to death in camp and hundreds
of horses were lost. Washington, who was always careful about other people's property, was
sometimes obliged to let his men seize food from the farmers. Congress did not stand by him.
Some of the members were jealous of his power and his influence. General Gates was the popular
hero after the victory of Saratoga, and a plot hatched by officers and members of Congress
almost succeeded in putting him in Washington's place. Though Washington's plan had made the
defeat of General Burgoyne possible, Gates claimed all the credit. Washington bore all this
fault-finding and unfairness with patient courage. He kept his temper and devoted himself to
his suffering men, whose endurance touched his heart. Fortunately for America, the conspiracy
against Washington failed and the only result was to make his name and fame brighter and more
widespread.

While the Americans in camp at Valley Forge were so miserable, the British, twenty miles away,
were spending a gay winter in the homes of the people of Philadelphia. Why they did not attack
and destroy the wretched patriot army was a mystery. After awhile, provisions and other necessities
were secured and the camp became more cheerful. Mrs. Washington and the wives of some of the
other officers came to join their husbands.

Baron Frederick von Steuben, a German officer, who had served in several wars and received
great honors, was sent to America by friends in Paris. He offered to fight for the colonists
without rank or pay. Congress sent him to Washington, who realized that his experience would
be valuable, and who asked him to drill and discipline the troops. Steuben was a wonderful
soldier and after a few weeks under his direction, the army learned something of real military
tactics, and how to work together like a great machine. He not only drilled them, but looked
after their comforts and won their love by his kindness.

Not all the work for freedom was done on the battle-fields and in the camps. While Washington
and his soldiers were skirmishing with the British and while they were encamped at Valley Forge,
Benjamin Franklin, one of the foremost thinkers and statesmen of the time, was in Europe making
friends for the American cause and asking help for the struggling colonists. The King of France
made a treaty of alliance with him, which Congress signed May 4th, 1778. Three days later,
it was celebrated in camp with thanksgiving and parades, and the news that France was to help
the American cause thrilled every patriot's heart with joy. He was now ordered home and Sir
Henry Clinton took his place and was told to leave the city. While Washington was in doubt
as to what move Clinton would make, messengers came from England with offers of peace for the
colonies. They offered a large bribe to General Joseph Reed, a member of Congress. His scornful
answer was, "I am not worth purchasing, but such as I am, the King of Great Britain is not
rich enough to do it!" This was the spirit that won freedom for America.

In June (1778), General Clinton withdrew his army from Philadelphia and Washington marched
his troops out of Valley Forge and followed him. Near Monmouth, New Jersey, Washington decided
to make an attack. He sent General Charles Lee (who, by this time, had been released by the
British) with six thousand men to start the battle, while he brought up the main division.
General Lee, who never would take orders from Washington, commanded his men to retreat. Immediately
Washington heard of this disobedience, he galloped forward, sternly ordered Lee to the rear,
and with hot words rallied the men, stopped the retreat and saved the day. His presence and
the courage he displayed ended the disorder and put new life into the men. An officer, who
saw him at the time, said his anger was splendid and he "swore like an angel from heaven."

Washington spent the night upon the field, his head pillowed on the roots of a tree. At daybreak
he arose to renew the attack, but the enemy had learned one of his own tricks and, as Washington
himself put it, "had stolen off in the night as silent as the grave." It was at this battle
of Monmouth that Molly Pitcher became a heroine. She had been carrying water to the men in
action. At one gun, six men had been killed, the last one her husband. As he fell, she seized
the ramrod from his hand and took his place. Washington was proud of her courage and gave her
the rank and pay of her husband.

The love and respect in which the army held Washington were increased by his magnificent daring
and splendid generalship in this battle. Congress thanked him "for his great good conduct."
General Charles Lee, who had always been disrespectful to Washington and who had tried his
best to harm him, was court-martialed for insubordination (disobedience) and deprived of his
command. (Charles Lee was not connected with the Lees of Virginia.) General Lee was really
a brilliant soldier, but he was ruined by his own jealous disposition. Washington treated him
and all other enemies with the kindness of a great mind and a true heart.

After the Battle of Monmouth, Clinton took up his quarters in New York and Washington remained
in New Jersey. Soon he received word that the French King had sent a fleet of eighteen ships
and four thousand soldiers to help the colonists. The Americans were very glad of this, thinking
that the British fleet would now be destroyed; but the attack of the French (August, 1778)
was unsuccessful and they sailed away without having done much good.

We have spoken several times of the Tories who sided with the British. When the war broke out,
the patriot settlers in the Wyoming Valley, Pennsylvania, decided they would join in the defense
of the country and they drove all the Tories out of the Valley. Just after the Battle of Monmouth
(June 28, 1778), while all the fighting men were away, these Tories got together seven hundred
Indians and attacked the women and children. Before Washington could send aid, the whole Valley
was laid waste. All the homes were burned. Hundreds were killed by the Indians and many more
died trying to reach places of safety. This was followed by night attacks in different places,
when sentinels were surprised and murdered by Indians and Tories. Indeed, all through the war,
the most cruel enemies the patriots had were their Tory neighbors.

To guard against such attacks, and to be ready to meet the British at any point, Washington
distributed his troops in a long line of camps and got ready to defend the country from Boston
to Philadelphia. The Hudson River was guarded by a fortress at West Point. In order to call
the militia out, he arranged a system of signals. On a high hill overlooking the British camp,
sentries kept constant watch. If the enemy moved, warning was to be given by firing a big gun.
When the gun boomed, fires were to be lighted on the hills within hearing. As soon as these
were seen from more distant hills, other fires were to be lighted, until every hilltop blazed
and all the countryside was roused and men warned to hurry to their rallying places.

Though General Clinton had a great army, he did not offer battle. He carried on an annoying
form of warfare by sending out small bodies of men to distant places, to attack and destroy.
In this way he plundered and burned villages on the shores of the Chesapeake and in New England
and captured valuable stores.

While these things were happening, Washington planned to recapture the fort at Stony Point
on the Hudson, which had been taken by Sir Henry Clinton, May 31, 1779. His plan was entrusted
to General Wayne, called "Mad Anthony" Wayne because of his dashing bravery. Wayne took a small
body of light-armed, fearless men, marched through the mountains and at midnight on July 16,
stormed the fort and captured it. This feat was so well done that it is considered one of the
great events of the war. Congress thanked Washington for the victory and gave Wayne a medal
for his courage and success.

The swift and daring young scout, "Light Horse Harry" Lee, was with this expedition. After
it was over, he asked permission to lead an attack on the garrison of Paulus Hook (now Jersey
City), right under the guns of New York. Washington, who always admired courageous deeds, allowed
him to make the attempt. Lee surprised the fort at night, captured a number of prisoners and
made a successful retreat while the guns from the battleships were sounding the alarm. These
two daring attacks increased the confidence and spirit of the Americans and gave the British
more respect for them. Still, it was tiresome for the troops to remain month after month in
camp, wondering what the enemy would do next.

Washington had more serious troubles. Congress was slow and often unwise in its acts. The people
grew tired of the war, because business was suffering and the farms were neglected, and nothing
seemed to be gained by it. Officers resigned from the army and men deserted. Washington was
laughed at by the Tories and criticized by his friends. But he was patient and said, "We must
not despair! The game is yet in our hands; to play it well is all we have to do."

Washington's greatness is shown not only by his skill in action, but by the patience with which
he could wait. He simply would not be discouraged. Under such trials, he became "the best among
the great."

The winter came and Washington took part of his army into a camp of log huts at Morristown,
New Jersey. The sad story of Valley Forge was repeated here and the winter (1779-1780) was
the coldest ever known in the colonies.

When the war broke out, there was, of course, no American money. Congress had put out some
paper money called "Continental Currency," but it was worth so little that it took a great
deal of it to buy anything. Washington was obliged to ask the states to give the army grain
and cattle. New Jersey, where a part of the army was stationed, was very generous and the women
knitted socks and made clothes for the soldiers.

The British went on surprising and killing small garrisons and plundering the country. In December,
1779, General Clinton sailed, with General Cornwallis and a strong army, to attack Charleston,
South Carolina. They landed at Savannah, Georgia, and marched overland. Washington dared not
go to the help of the Southern troops and leave the Hudson unguarded against the British army
from Canada, which might descend upon it. General Benjamin Lincoln and Commander Whipple were,
therefore, left alone to defend Charleston, which they did bravely, though it was bombarded
on all sides by the British. They held out until their guns were destroyed and their provisions
gone. The people were frightened into submission and on May 12, 1780, the city of Charleston
surrendered, and Lincoln and his army became prisoners of war. Considering South Carolina conquered,
General Clinton went back to New York, leaving Lord Cornwallis in command, with orders to subdue
North Carolina and Virginia.

After their success in the South, the British made an attempt to capture Washington's headquarters
at Morristown. The patriots of New Jersey rallied to the help of the army and drove off the
British, who withdrew, burning houses and killing people as they went. Soon after this, the
Americans were encouraged by the arrival (July 10, 1780) of a large French force under Count
de Rochambeau (ro-sham-bo), who came to help them.

Early in the year (January, 1780), Washington had had the unpleasant duty laid upon him by
Congress of rebuking General Benedict Arnold, who, though he was very brave and fought gallantly,
had been guilty of several unwise acts. Washington greatly admired General Arnold and made
his reproof so gentle that it was almost a compliment. But being called to account at all was
more than Arnold could bear. He felt hurt, too, that Congress had promoted others and had only
blame for him. This so enraged him that he proved false to the trust Washington had placed
in him and false to his country.

After his rebuke, feeling that he had been treated unfairly, Arnold began writing letters to
Major John André, a popular young British officer, in which he offered to betray the fortress
of the Hudson. At Arnold's own request, Washington gave him command of West Point and an important
part in a plan to attack the British with the help of the French. Washington had gone to consult
with the French commander in Newport (R. I.), when Major André and General Arnold met. At dead
of night, September 21, 1780, they went to a house in the forest to make arrangements for the
betrayal of West Point. With letters and plans of the fort hidden in his boots, Major André
rode back alone to New York. He was caught and searched by three young farmers, who were guarding
their cattle against the outlaws who overran the neighborhood. They found the letters and knew
he was a spy. André begged them to release him and made them all kinds of offers if they would,
but they marched him off ten miles to the nearest fort.

General Washington came back from Newport two days earlier than he was expected. Lafayette,
Count Rochambeau and Hamilton rode with him and they planned to go at once to West Point. Arnold
was living with his family in a house several miles from the fort and Washington sent word
they would have breakfast with him. This was the very day for the fort to be given up and the
sudden return of Washington frightened Arnold. Just before his guests arrived, a messenger
brought word of André's capture. Hastily bidding his wife good-by, he flung himself on his
horse and galloped away. After breakfast, Washington went on with Rochambeau to the fort. No
salute welcomed them. General Arnold was not there and apparently they were not expected. While
wondering at his absence, Washington had no thought of treachery. Then Hamilton brought him
the dreadful news. "Whom can we trust now?" was all he said. Hamilton rode hard after Arnold,
but he escaped to the British ship which was lying in the river.

Major André endeared himself to everybody by his charming manners, intelligence and bravery.
The young officers loved him and the British made every effort to save him, but honorably refused
to give up General Arnold in exchange for him. Washington treated André with the greatest kindness,
but justice to America required that this fine young officer should die and he suffered the
shameful death of a spy (October 2, 1780). His body was later sent to England and he was buried
in Westminster Abbey. General Arnold was made an officer in the British army, but nobody trusted
him, and the men hated his command. Twenty years afterward (1801), he died, poor and broken-hearted,
in a foreign land. It is said that, on his death-bed, he called for his old American uniform
and asked to be allowed to die in it. "God forgive me," he cried, "for ever putting on another!"

Count Rochambeau had told a pretty story about his journey from Newport with General Washington.
One evening, as they passed through a large town, the people came out to greet their General.
Throngs of children carrying torches crowded about him, touching his hands and calling him
"Father." He was very kind and gentle to all these people, but the patriotism of the children
pleased him most. He said Great Britain could never conquer a country whose children were taught
to be loyal.

Another French officer said of Washington's horses, "They are as good as they are beautiful,
and all perfectly trained. He trains them all himself. He leaps the highest barriers and rides
very fast." At one time, early in the war, when the Virginia riflemen first came north, some
Marblehead (Mass.) fishermen laughed at their fringed hunting shirts and a fight followed.
Washington heard of it, jumped on his horse and galloped into camp. His colored servant was
going to let down some bars for him, but he leaped over them and dashed into the midst of the
fight. He seized the two biggest riflemen and shook them, commanding peace.

Washington, as usual, was prevented, through lack of men and supplies, from giving the British
a blow. Months passed without much being done, except dashing skirmishes now and then. The
two camps watched each other, wondering what the other would do. Lord Cornwallis angered the
people of South Carolina by hanging a number of prisoners at Charleston and by the cruel raids
of General Tarleton and his dragoons, who rode about the country, slaying innocent people.
General Thomas Sumter, who was nicknamed the "Game Cock," gathered together a few men. Those
who had no guns sharpened their saws into swords and fastened hunting knives on long poles
and thus armed, these soldiers gave the British a great deal of trouble.

Meanwhile, General Lincoln was still held a prisoner of war and the people were very glad when
they heard that General Gates, the hero of Saratoga, had been sent to take command of the Southern
forces of the American army. Gates was very headstrong, however, and thought he knew more than
any one could tell him and would take no advice from officers on the ground. He did the worst
thing he could do--he rushed at once into an open battle with Lord Cornwallis (August 16, 1780)
and met with a terrible defeat at Camden, South Carolina.

Cornwallis now marched into North Carolina to subdue that State. Her Scotch-Irish people, always
brave, had declared themselves independent of Great Britain a whole year before Congress had
dared to do so. Cornwallis found himself in a "hornets' nest." Sharp-shooters and bold riders
cut off his messengers and foraging parties. In the western part, the mountain people gathered,
who were used to Indian fighting. They were joined by rugged men from all parts of the South.
Each man was dressed in homespun, with a deer's tail or bit of green stuck in his hat. Each
carried a long rifle, hunting knife, knapsack and blanket. At King's Mountain (on the border
line between North and South Carolina), this little army overtook and destroyed a British and
Tory force under General Ferguson. Soon after, Lord Cornwallis retreated to South Carolina again.

The victory at King's Mountain aroused all the patriotism of the mountain folk. Francis Marion,
one of the bravest soldiers of the South, took the field with a brigade of friends and neighbors.
Armed with knives and rude swords, he, like Sumter, would surprise and capture British posts
and then gallop back to the woods, while the enemy would be at a loss to know where he came
from. The British called him the "Swamp Fox."

About this time, Colonel William Washington, a kinsman of the General, with a few horsemen,
surprised a body of Tories who had made their headquarters in a log barn. He put the trunk
of a tree on two wagon wheels, painted it to look like a cannon, and pointed it at the barn.
Then he sent a messenger with a white flag of truce to tell them to surrender or be blown to
pieces. Their leader and one hundred and twelve men surrendered! They felt very foolish when
they saw the cannon and were laughed at all over the State.

General Gates, broken-hearted over his defeat at Camden, was trying to gather up his scattered
army. To add to his sorrow, he received word that his only son was dead, and soon after, he
was notified that Congress had given his command to General Greene and ordered an investigation
of his defeat. These troubles were almost more than he could bear, but his feelings were soothed
by a letter from General Washington, full of tender sympathy and expressions of confidence.
The letter so comforted him that he was found in his room kissing the words. General Greene
was also very considerate, and the proud heart of Gates, who had wronged both these men, was
melted, by their kindness, into lasting love for them.

General Greene found the army small and discouraged, but he soon inspired the men with renewed
hope. He had with him the famous Virginia Rifles under General Daniel Morgan, who had served
bravely at Quebec and Saratoga. This division was attacked at Cowpens (S. C.) January 17, 1781,
by Tarleton and his large force, but Morgan was so daring and skillful that he routed the British,
who lost 800 of their 1100 men.

Cornwallis tried to attack General Greene, who knew his army was too small to risk a battle;
so he led Cornwallis a long chase through forests and mountains, while his light horse troops
under Harry Lee annoyed the British like wasps that sting and fly away to return and sting
again! Greene was at last overtaken and defeated, but the effect of the battle so crippled
the British that there was nothing for them to do but retreat to the nearest sea-coast town,
where they might get aid from their fleet. General Greene marched hard after them, turning
his defeat into a victory, and so hampering Cornwallis that he lost hope.

Cornwallis now turned northward into Virginia and Greene gave up the chase and marched into
South Carolina. He, with Lee, Marion, Sumter, Wade Hampton and other daring officers, fought
battle after battle until they had regained from the British most of Georgia and the Carolinas
(September, 1781).

In Virginia, Lafayette and "Mad Anthony" Wayne kept annoying Cornwallis as he marched to Portsmouth
on the James River.

Meanwhile Washington, while giving advice and directing the campaigns in the South, where he
had sent some of his most brilliant generals, was watching General Clinton. Ever since the
Battle of Monmouth (N. J.), he had remained in the neighborhood of New York. Though he was
needed with his army in the South, he dared not leave the Hudson unguarded. At last, however,
he planned to help the South by causing the British to recall some of their troops. He had
the French forces come and encamp near his army, and appear to be making arrangements for laying
siege to New York. Even the soldiers thought they were going to try to take the city. General
Clinton fell into the trap and wrote to Cornwallis for all the regiments he could spare. Troops
were hurried aboard ship and set sail for New York.

Clinton found out, too late, how completely he had been deceived, for Washington and Rochambeau
slipped out of their camps and marched their armies across New Jersey! He took his revenge
by sending Benedict Arnold, who was now a British officer, to his native State, Connecticut,
to plunder and lay waste the country and murder the garrisons. This brutality was Arnold's
last act in America, and shortly after, he went to England.

When the French and Continental armies reached Philadelphia, they were received with rejoicing.
Washington was entertained in the home of Robert Morris, a patriot banker, without whose help,
in raising money, Washington could not have saved the country and who more than once had come
to the aid of the army. At this time, he loaned the government $20,000 in gold, and at about
the same time, France sent the colonists more than a million dollars in coin.

The Continental army paraded through Philadelphia (August 30, 1781), dusty and ragged, but
keeping step to the fife and drum. The next day, the French troops marched through, jaunty
in white and green uniforms, with bands playing. Lafayette, who was in Virginia, sent word
to Washington that the British troops had landed at Yorktown (instead of going to New York),
and that Cornwallis was strongly fortified there. The British battleships lay in the river
before the town. Cornwallis thought his only enemy was Lafayette, of whom he had little fear.
Lafayette carefully arranged his troops to cut off any retreat from Yorktown, and waited for
Washington. A powerful French fleet arrived from France and bottled up Cornwallis in the York
River. The American and French armies marched on from Philadelphia, Washington taking time
on the way to visit Mount Vernon, which he had not seen for six years.

Cornwallis felt very safe and snug in Yorktown (Va.) till he saw the French ships, and then
he decided to retreat. But every way was blocked. The allied armies (American and French) entrenched
themselves close about the town. Washington spent the first night among his men sleeping under
a mulberry tree. On the night of October 6th (1781), the siege of Yorktown began, Washington
himself putting the match to the first gun. A week later, two strong British redoubts (forts)
were stormed and taken, one by an American company under Colonel Hamilton and the other by
the French. The British kept up a constant bombardment of the American lines, and Washington
was often in the greatest peril. On one occasion, an officer spoke of his danger and Washington
said, "If you think so, you are at liberty to step back." He was never afraid and what the
Indian had said of him years ago seemed indeed true.--"A mighty Power protected him and he
could not die in battle!"

The Americans pounded the British fortifications to pieces. Cornwallis looked in vain for help
from New York. He was surrounded on all sides and all hope of escape was gone. On the 19th
of October, 1781, in order not to sacrifice the lives of any more of his brave men, Lord Cornwallis
surrendered to General Washington. The whole country went wild with joy over this great victory,
and the Americans did not forget that the French, with their men, money and ships, made it
possible for them to win. The troops held services of thanksgiving in camp, and Congress named
a day when all the people should thank God. When Cornwallis surrendered, Washington treated
the British with great kindness and courtesy.

The English were now having so much trouble in Europe that it was difficult for them to carry
on the war in America; but they were not willing to make peace on terms that America would
accept. Washington thought that the only way to secure a glorious and lasting peace was to
be prepared to carry on the war. If the British should see the colonists weak and unprepared,
they would either conquer them or offer them an inglorious peace. He, therefore, fortified
his forces at Newburgh on the Hudson, where they were joined by the French.

The entire year 1782 was spent in camp. The men soon became discontented. Congress and the
States were slow, as usual, in furnishing supplies. But Washington's patience and fair dealing
kept the men loyal to him and the country.

The first articles of peace were signed in France, November 30, 1782, but it was not until
September 3, 1783, that the final treaty of peace with England was signed at Paris.

On April 19th (1783), just eight years after the Battle of Lexington, Washington proclaimed
to his troops that the war was over; but the British did not leave New York until November,
and then Washington and the Governor marched in.

On December 4, at Fraunce's Tavern, New York City, he said good-by to the officers and men
who had served and suffered so long with him; there were tears in his eyes and theirs, as he
shook their hands and bade them farewell. A ship carried him to Annapolis, Maryland, where
he surrendered his commission to Congress. He sheathed his sword after years of faithful and
honorable service. Through good and evil fortunes, he had always held firmly to ideals of truth,
courage and patriotism, and he retired from public life admired and loved by his countrymen.
He arrived at Mount Vernon on Christmas eve (1783).

The United States now had a place among the nations of the world. She had a flag of her own,
the beautiful Stars and Stripes, created in the dark days of the war. For a hundred and fifty
years, the colonies had used the flag of Great Britain. When the Revolution broke out, each
State and regiment had its own flag; but in 1777, Congress appointed Washington, Robert Morris
and Colonel Ross a committee to devise a flag. They were in Philadelphia at the time, and it
was in the house of Betsy Ross (which still stands) that the first American flag was made,
consisting of thirteen red and white stripes, with a circle of thirteen white stars on a blue
field, "representing a new constellation." (A group of fixed stars.) This flag was accepted
by Congress on June 14, the day that is now celebrated in the United States as Flag Day. Its
objects were to gain liberty, equality and a fair chance for everybody. It was won by the patience
and courage of patriots, ill-fed, ill-clad and ill-paid. Its armies were too weak for the glory
of many great battles. Years afterward, Lafayette said to Napoleon, "It was the grandest of
causes, won by the skirmishes of sentinels and outposts."

Washington laid aside his sword and spent five happy years at Mount Vernon. He was a brave
soldier, but he loved best the quiet life of the farm. He once said, "How pitiful is the ambition
which desolates the world with fire and sword for the purpose of conquest and fame, compared
to making our neighbors and fellowmen happy!"

His home was filled with guests whom he loved to entertain and who were always sure of a courteous
and dignified welcome. The two little children of Mrs. Washington's son (who had died of fever
during the war), Nelly and George, made the place merry and the General joined in their play
and enjoyed the change from camp to home life. Those who were with him constantly say that
he never spoke of himself and never referred to any of his battles. He had done his work and
done it well. Now he left it behind him and looked forward to the joy of his home. At the close
of the war, some of his friends had wanted to make him king, but he would not hear of it. He
had fought to make America a free land, and not for his own glory.

The thirteen States were loosely bound together in a Confederation. As time went on, the rights
of different States came into conflict. Washington, from his fireside, watched the interests
of his country. He believed with other great Americans that only a strong central government
could keep harmony among the States. In 1787, a convention was called in Philadelphia to talk
the matter over. Each State sent its most brilliant and thoughtful men, among them, of course,
being Washington. After four months of careful consideration and labor, they offered to the
American people the glorious Constitution, upon which has been built up the great Republic
of the United States. Washington said they had God's help in "laying the foundation for tranquillity
and happiness." The people accepted the Constitution and turned to Washington for their first
President. No one else was thought of, and he was unanimously elected. New York was chosen
for the capital.

Before he left Virginia, Washington went to say farewell to his mother, knowing he would never
see her again. She was old and feeble, but happy to see her son so useful and so honored. She
always said, "He is a good son and has done his duty as a man."

As Washington journeyed to New York, people thronged the roadsides. Bells rang and cannon roared.
Soldiers and citizens escorted him from city to city. At the lower end of New York Bay, he
was received on a splendid barge, which led a procession of boats gay with flags and music.
At the pier, he was met by the Governor of the State.

On April 30, 1789, Washington took the oath of office on the open balcony of Federal Hall,
in Wall Street, in the presence of a great multitude. Then he walked to St. Paul's church and
devoutly kneeling, prayed to God for strength and guidance.

Washington had need to pray, for he was facing difficulties and problems greater than any he
had known. He was at the head of a government, such as had never been tried before, and the
eyes of the world were upon him. The peoples of down-trodden lands looked to him for the success
of freedom. He said truly, "I walk untrodden ground," for there was no great republic in history
whose example he could follow. His heavy task was to bring into harmony the differences of
widely separate States; to make fair laws; to create a national money; to organize the different
departments of government--in short, to make one nation out of thirteen.

Washington never flinched from responsibility. He took up his new work with methodical patience,
and was most fortunate in having the help of great men. The States sent their best men to Congress.
John Adams was Vice-President. The first Secretary of State was Thomas Jefferson, who had written
the Declaration of Independence. General Knox was made Secretary of War. The still youthful
Alexander Hamilton was appointed Secretary of the Treasury; the country owes much to him for
its success and prosperity, for he was the one who made the financial plans, without which
the government could not exist.

Washington's family joined him in New York, where they lived. The city streets were dirty and
dark at this time and only one was paved. Negro slaves carried all the water for the household
from the river, in tubs balanced on their heads, while drinking water was sold from wagons,
as there was only one pump in the city. The President traveled about in a cream-colored coach
with pictures painted on the doors and panels. It was drawn by cream-colored horses with white
manes and tails. Sometimes on Saturday afternoons, this coach, which was well known to all
the people, was sent to bring playmates to drive with Nelly and George.

Washington drove to the first meeting of Congress in a coach drawn by six horses, with a coachman
and footman in scarlet and white liveries, and with an escort mounted on prancing white steeds.
Such style really was not uncommon in those days and the six horses were not so much for show
as they were needed to draw the heavy carriage over the bad roads. The fear that our country
might become a monarchy had not entirely disappeared, so Washington lived as simply as he could
and avoided everything that suggested the pomp of a king.

The President and Mrs. Washington often went on foot to call on their friends, and that the
people might meet them freely, they held public receptions on Friday evenings from eight to
ten. While always reserved and dignified, Washington was gracious and attentive to his guests.
His wife was the same sweet hostess as at Mount Vernon. At dinner, if no chaplain was present,
Washington asked the blessing himself. Sunday was always strictly observed in the Washington
household. In the morning, the President went to church, and the rest of the day he spent quietly
with his family. In the autumn after his election, he wrote the first Proclamation setting
aside a Thursday in November for Thanksgiving. From that time to this, in November of each
year, America gives thanks to God for her liberties.

At this time, Lafayette was fighting for the cause of liberty in France. When the terrible
Bastille prison in Paris was torn down at his command, he sent its huge key to Washington,
because he believed the same love of liberty, for which Washington had fought, had also destroyed
this state dungeon of tyranny, where many good people had suffered unjustly.

One of the problems Washington had to meet was the warlike attitude of the Indians, with whom
there was some border fighting. I and my comrades were bad guys that everyone teased and laughed
at want, so we were always a feast day when little went out of Muck; we gathered onto the appointed
days ahead of his house and remained until he arrived out; otherwise when the door unlatched,
and peeping out of the former big brain with the turban, still taller, When the lie down of Koerperlein
succeeded, clothed within a worn cloak, thick Trousers and a thick belt onto which hung a
long dagger, so long that we did not know whether Muck the dagger, or the dagger stuck within muck
when it arrived out so, as sounded the air of our joy, we threw our caps into the air and danced
madly round him. Little Muck but welcomed ourselves with a severe nod and went with slow paces down
the road. We boys operated as soon as him and always shouting: "Little Muck, Muck small!" We
also had a funny little verse, which we honor him here and there
singing, it was said: "From Little Muck, Muck low, live within a great
house, just sauntering everybody four weeks, Are a brave, dwarf, Have
a little brain want a hill, appear up at once, and see Run and catch
ourselves, little Muck!

" We had driven a lot moments our amusement, and towards my shame
I possess towards admit it, I's operating at worst, for I heaved him often
at the cloak, and once I attended him from rear the big slippers
that he fell.

This arrived towards me relatively silly already ahead of, but the
laughter I traversed when I observed the little Muck go towards my
father's house.

He went right and waited there for a number of time


While his furniture was coming by sea from New York, Washington had time for a short visit
to Mount Vernon, but he and his family were settled in his new home when Congress met the first
Monday in December.

About this time, two political parties began to form in the United States. The Federalists,
who were led by Hamilton, wanted to make a strong central government, which would develop the
country and be respected abroad. The Democratic-Republicans, who were led by Jefferson, wanted
the States to hold the chief power, because they were afraid a strong central government might
be turned into a monarchy. Both parties had the good of the country at heart. Jefferson's party
is the Democratic Party of the present day and the Federalists live still in the Republican Party.

Jefferson and Hamilton were bitterly opposed to each other's ideas and disputed with their
usual fighting quality. Washington quietly heard each side and did his best to keep the two
men at peace, for the country needed both.

In the spring and summer of 1791, Washington made a tour of the Southern States. It was a trip
covering eighteen hundred and seventy-five miles. The same horses made the entire journey and
kept up their spirits until they trotted back into their stalls at home! The President returned
very happy about the condition of the country and delighted with its confidence in the new
government.

The end of his term of four years drew near and Washington looked forward to the comfort of
private life. He was growing quite deaf and had had several severe illnesses. He was tired
of the load of care, and of the strife of opposing parties. But four years were not time enough
to establish so great a government. Washington alone held the faith and confidence of the people,
and they begged him to give them four years more. He wanted to retire, as he feared that, after
another term, he would not be able to carry out his plans for Mount Vernon; but he finally
consented.

Washington's second term was filled with great difficulties. Indians attacked the western frontiers,
and Algerian [Algeria is in northern Africa] pirates seized American ships and imprisoned American
citizens. France and England were at war and it was difficult to keep America out of the quarrel.
These and other problems, besides disputes among public men, kept Washington's heart weary
and sore. Through it all, he said, "There is but one straight course and that is to seek truth
and pursue it steadily." His only wish was to "lead the country to respectability, wealth and
happiness." He paid no attention to his own comfort or desire. Though often misunderstood and
ridiculed by men who did not agree with him, he never failed to do what he thought was right.
His wisdom and justice were so great that, in all these years, the wisest men have found little
in the actions of Washington they would change. Jefferson said of him that no motive of interest
or friendship or hatred could influence him; "he was in every sense of the word a wise, a good
and a great man."

At the close of his second term, 1797, Washington insisted upon retiring, and he counted the
days until he might lay aside the cares of office and seek his rest. He sent his Farewell Address
to Congress, and it has been said that nothing finer has ever been written than his last great
message to his countrymen.

On the 4th of March, 1797, John Adams was inaugurated as the second President of the United
States. But the thought and love of the great assembly at the inaugural ceremony were turned
toward Washington, the white-haired soldier who had led the country through war to prosperous
peace. The people followed him to his door, where, with tears in his eyes, the "Father of his
Country" waved farewell to them and to all beloved citizens of the nation.

In a few days, Washington was at home again upon his farm. He spent his time riding over his
plantations, looking after his crops and horses and cattle. Often he took out his surveying
instruments and spent a day laying out his land, or he planted trees and vines about his house
and lawns. To the country folks, he was a beloved neighbor and friend. Visitors came frequently
to his home, while Nelly and George and their young friends kept the place lively. Under the
care of her Grandmother, Nelly had grown into a beautiful and well educated young lady. Her
wit and sweetness of temper were a great joy to Washington, who loved her dearly. She had many
suitors, but delighted Washington by choosing his favorite nephew, Lawrence Lewis, for her
husband. They were married on Washington's birthday and the General wore his old Continental
uniform of buff and blue, though he had a new and finely embroidered one that Nelly wanted
him to put on.

The quiet life of Mount Vernon was broken before long. The new President got into such trouble
with France that the country was threatened with war. Washington was asked to take his old
position of Commander-in-Chief of the army and he accepted. He organized an army, but, fortunately,
peace was made without bloodshed, and he was glad to go back to Mount Vernon.

One winter day, while riding, Washington was caught in a heavy storm of rain and snow. He was
used to all kinds of weather and thought nothing of the exposure, even though he was hoarse
and had a severe cold the next day. Before morning of the third day, he was very ill and when
the doctors came, they bled him. It was the stupid practice of those days and in a few hours
Washington was so weakened as to be past hope of recovery. He died on December 14, 1799, as
bravely as he had lived. His wife praying beside him was as brave and calm as he. He had asked
that his funeral might be a simple one, and so it was. None was there but friends and neighbors.
The casket was carried out upon the veranda that all might see his face. Troops from Alexandria,
(Va.) with solemn music led the funeral procession. Four clergymen in white followed. The General's
favorite horse, with saddle and bridle, was led by two negro grooms. The casket, borne by Free
Masons and army officers, was followed by his family, and by friends and neighbors. While minute
guns were fired from a warship in the river below, the procession wound along the lovely paths
of Mount Vernon to the family tomb on the hillside. Here the body was laid to rest with religious
and Masonic ceremonies.

When the news reached the people that Washington was dead, the whole country went into deepest
mourning. In Europe, the sorrow was true and sincere. The British fleets put their flags at
half-mast and Napoleon ordered crêpe put upon the banners of France. Though Washington was
born and educated in America and belongs truly to Americans, he was such a friend to humanity,
such a champion of liberty, that the whole world claims him as a model.

His will provided that, after the death of his wife, all his slaves should be free and he left
money for those who could not earn a living. His able management had made Mount Vernon a great
estate of nine thousand acres. Beside this, he held forty-four other tracts of land in nine
different States, and he was one of the greatest land owners in America. Believing that the
Republic would stand secure only upon a foundation of education, courage and conscience, he
left money for a great American University. In this, he wanted the young people to be trained
in the principles of true Americanism. He wanted the intelligence of the country to guide its
politics. It is unfortunate that, to the present day, the university has not been founded,
although there is now every likelihood that such a National University will be established
in Washington and vast sums contributed to the fund Washington had left for this purpose.

The site of the city of Washington was selected for the Federal Capital in 1790, and ten years
later, the seat of government was moved from Philadelphia to Washington. President Washington
himself headed the body of commissioners who chose the site and arranged for the purchase of
the land. The city was named in his honor. It is beautifully laid out with magnificent avenues,
parks, fountains and stately buildings, and is one of the finest and most comfortable cities
in the world.

In the house at Mount Vernon, there was a little attic room, hot in summer, bitter cold in
winter. But its one window was the only one that looked upon the tomb on the hillside, and
so Mrs. Washington, after the death of her husband, moved into this little room. Two and a
half years later, she died there and her body was laid beside that of Washington.

Years passed and the beautiful house began to fall into ruin. A new and simple tomb was erected
to Washington, but it also was neglected. Nothing was done to restore Mount Vernon until the
women of the country bought the place. They rebuilt the walls and porches, brought back the
old furniture, planted vines about the tomb, and still keep it as Washington would have wished,
as a shrine for all to visit, where respect can be paid to the memory of the "Father of his
Country."

