TENNYSON

George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd. London ---- Bombay ---- Sydney

First published January 1905 by GEORGE G. HARRAP & COMPANY 39-41 Parker Street, Kingsway, London,
W.C.,

Reprinted: December 1905; July 1906; May 1907; January 1909; September 1909; July 1910; July
1911; October 1912; October 1913; March 1915; February 1917; August 1917; May 1918; October
1919; June 1920; October 1921; October 1922; June 1923; January 1925; April 1936; September
1927; October 1928; January 1930; January 1931; April 1932

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER

       I. OF THE BIRTH OF KING ARTHUR
      II. UTHER'S SON, RIGHTWISE KING OF ALL ENGLAND
     III. HOW ARTHUR GAT HIS SWORD EXCALIBUR
      IV. BALIN AND BALAN
       V. THE NOBLE ORDER OF THE ROUND TABLE
      VI. THE LADIES' KNIGHT
     VII. WISE MERLIN'S FOOLISHNESS
    VIII. A STAG-HUNT AND WHAT CAME OF IT
      IX. THE TREACHERY OF MORGAN LE FAY
       X. SIR LAUNCELOT OF THE LAKE
      XI. A NIGHT-TIME ADVENTURE OF SIR LAUNCELOT
     XII. HOW SIR LAUNCELOT CAME INTO THE CHAPEL PERILOUS
    XIII. THE KNIGHT, THE LADY, AND THE FALCON
     XIV. HOW A KITCHEN-PAGE CAME TO HONOUR
      XV. HOW SIR GARETH FOUGHT FOR THE LADY OF CASTLE PERILOUS
     XVI. HOW SIR GARETH RETURNED TO THE COURT OF KING ARTHUR
    XVII. HOW YOUNG TRISTRAM SAVED THE LIFE OF THE QUEEN
          OF LYONESSE
   XVIII. SIR TRISTRAM'S FIRST BATTLE
     XIX. SIR TRISTRAM AND THE FAIR ISOUD
      XX. HOW SIR TRISTRAM DEMANDED THE FAIR ISOUD FOR KING MARK,
          AND HOW SIR TRISTRAM AND ISOUD DRANK THE LOVE POTION
     XXI. HOW SIR TRISTRAM DEPARTED FROM TINTAGIL, AND WAS LONG
          IN THE FOREST
    XXII. HOW KING MARK WAS SORRY FOR THE GOOD RENOWN
          OF SIR TRISTRAM
   XXIII. HOW SIR PERCIVALE OF GALIS SOUGHT AND FOUND
          SIR LAUNCELOT
    XXIV. OF THE COMING OF SIR GALAHAD
     XXV. HOW THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL WAS BEGUN
    XXVI. HOW GALAHAD GAT HIM A SHIELD
   XXVII. SIR GALAHAD AT THE CASTLE OF MAIDENS
  XXVIII. SIR LAUNCELOT'S REPENTANCE
    XXIX. SIR PERCIVALE'S TEMPTATION
     XXX. THE VICTORY OF SIR BORS OVER HIMSELF
    XXXI. HOW SIR LAUNCELOT FOUND THE HOLY GRAIL
   XXXII. THE END OF THE QUEST
  XXXIII. SIR LAUNCELOT AND THE FAIR MAID OF ASTOLAT
   XXXIV. OF THE GREAT TOURNAMENT ON CANDLEMAS DAY
    XXXV. QUEEN GUENEVER'S MAY-DAY RIDE AND WHAT CAME OF IT
   XXXVI. OF THE PLOT AGAINST SIR LAUNCELOT
  XXXVII. HOW SIR LAUNCELOT DEPARTED FROM THE KING AND
          FROM JOYOUS GARD
 XXXVIII. HOW KING ARTHUR AND SIR GAWAINE INVADED
          SIR LAUNCELOT'S REALM
   XXXIX. OF SIR MORDRED'S TREASON
      XL. OF ARTHUR'S LAST GREAT BATTLE IN THE WEST
     XLI. OF THE PASSING OF KING ARTHUR
    XLII. OF THE END OF THIS BOOK

ILLUSTRATIONS

KING ARTHUR  . . . . . . . . . . . . (W. B. Margetson)  Frontispiece

THE DEDICATION . . . . . . . . . . . (J. Pettie, R.A.)

MERLIN AND NIMUE . . . . . . . . . . (Burne-Jones)

SIR TRISTRAM AND THE FAIR ISOUD  . . (D. G. Rosetti)

SIR GALAHAD  . . . . . . . . . . . . (G. F. Watts)

SIR LAUNCELOT AT THE CROSS . . . . . (Stella Langdale)

ELAINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (J. M. Strudwick)

THE PASSING OF ARTHUR  . . . . . . . (Stella Langdale)

"We have from the kind Creator a variety of mental powers, to which we must not neglect giving
their proper culture in our earliest years, and which cannot be cultivated either by logic
or metaphysics, Latin or Greek.  We have an imagination, before which, since it should not
seize upon the very first conceptions that chance to present themselves, we ought to place
the fittest and most beautiful images, and thus accustom and practise the mind to recognise
and love the beautiful everywhere."

Quoted from Wieland by Goethe in his Autobiography

Introduction

Among the best liked stories of five or six hundred years ago were those which told of chivalrous
deeds--of joust and tourney and knightly adventure.  To be sure, these stories were not set
forth in printed books, for there were no printed books as early as the times of the first
three King Edwards, and few people could have read them if there had been any.  But children
and grown people alike were eager to hear these old-time tales read or recited by the minstrels,
and the interest in them has continued in some measure through all the changing years and tastes.
We now, in the times of the seventh King Edward, still find them far more worth our while than
many modern stories.  For us they have a special interest, because of home setting and Christian
basis, and they may well share in our attention with the legends of Greece and Rome.

In these early romances of chivalry, Arthur and his knights of the Round Table are by far the
most popular heroes, and the finding of the Holy Grail is the highest achievement of knightly
valour.  The material for the Arthur stories came from many countries and from many different
periods of history.  Much of it is wholly fanciful, but the writers connected all the incidents
directly or indirectly with the old Briton king of the fifth century, who was the model of
knighthood, "without fear and without reproach."

Perhaps there was a real King Arthur, who led the Britons against the Saxon invaders of their
land, who was killed by his traitor nephew, and who was buried at Glastonbury,--the valley
of Avilion of the legends; perhaps there was a slight historical nucleus around which all the
romantic material was crystallising through the centuries, but the Arthur of romance came largely
from the imagination of the early writers.

And yet, though our "own ideal knight" may never have trod the soil of Britain or Roman or
Saxon England, his chivalrous character and the knightly deeds of his followers are real to
us, if we read them rightly, for "the poet's ideal was the truest truth."  Though the sacred
vessel--the Holy Grail--of the Christ's last supper with His disciples has not been borne about
the earth in material form, to be seen only by those of stainless life and character, it is
eternally true that the "pure in heart" are "blessed," "for they shall see God." This is what
the Quest of the Holy Grail means, and there is still many a true Sir Galahad, who can say,
as he did,

  "My strength is as the strength of ten,
  Because my heart is pure,"

and who attains the highest glory of knighthood, as before his clear vision

   "down dark tides the glory glides,
  And starlike mingles with the stars."

We call these beautiful stories of long ago Stories of Chivalry, for, in the Middle Ages, chivalry
influenced all that people did and said and thought.  It began in the times of Charlemagne,
a hundred years before our own King Alfred, and only very gradually it made its way through
all the social order.  Charlemagne was really a very great man, and because he was so, he left
Western Europe a far better place to live in than he found it.  Into the social life of his
time he brought something like order and justice and peace, and so he greatly helped the Christian
Church to do its work of teaching the rough and warlike Franks and Saxons and Normans the gentle
ways of thrift and helpfulness.

Charlemagne's "heerban," or call to arms, required that certain of his men should attend him
on horseback, and this mounted service was the beginning of what is known as chivalry.  The
lesser nobles of each feudal chief served their overlords on horseback, à cheval, in times
of war; they were called knights, which originally meant servants,--German knechte; and the
system of knighthood, its rules, customs, and duties, was called chivalry,--French chevalerie.

Chivalry belongs chiefly to the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries,--to about the
time between King Richard of the Lion Heart and Prince Hal.  There is no trace of ideas peculiar
to it in the writings of the old Anglo-Saxons or in the Nibelungen Lied of Germany.  Geoffrey
of Monmouth, who died, it is said, in the year 1154, is about the earliest writer who mentions
customs that belong especially to chivalry.  The Crusades, of Geoffrey's century and of the
one following, gave much opportunity for its growth and practice; but in the fifteenth century
chivalrous fashions and fancies began to seem absurd, and later, perhaps partly through the
ridicule of that old-time book "Don Quixote," chivalry was finally laughed quite out of existence.

The order of knighthood was given only after years of training and discipline.  From his seventh
year to his fourteenth the nobleman's son was a page at the court or in the castle of his patron,
learning the principles of religion, obedience, and gallantry.  At fourteen, as a squire, the
boy began a severer course of training, in order to become skilled in horsemanship, and to
gain strength and courage, as well as the refinements and graces necessary in the company of
knights and ladies.

Finally, at twenty-one, his training was complete, and with elaborate and solemn formality
the squire was made a knight.  Then, after a strict oath to be loyal, courteous, and brave,
the armour was buckled on, and the proud young chevalier rode out into the world, strong for
good or ill in limb, strong in impenetrable armour, strong in a social custom that lifted him
above the common people about him.

When rightly exercised chivalry was a great blessing to the people of its time.  It offered
high ideals of pure-minded, warm-hearted, courtly, courageous Christian manhood.  It did much
to arouse thought, to quicken sympathy, to purify morals, to make men truly brave and loyal.
Of course this ideal of character was not in the days of chivalry--ideals are not often now--very
fully realised.  The Mediaeval, like the Modern, abused his power of muscle, of sword, of rank.
His liberty as a knight-errant sometimes descended into the licence of a highwayman; his pride
in the opportunity for helpfulness grew to be the braggadocio of a bully; his freedom of personal
choice became the insolence of lawlessness; his pretended purity and justice proved wanton
selfishness.

Because of these abuses that crept into the system, it is well for the world that gunpowder
at last came, to break through the knight's coat of mail, to teach the nobility respect for
common men, roughly to end this age of so much superficial politeness and savage bravery, and
to bring in a more democratic social order.

The books of any age are for us a record of how the people of that age thought, how they lived,
and what kind of men and women they tried to be.  The old romances of chivalry give us clear
pictures of the knights and ladies of the Middle Ages, and we shall lose the delight and the
profit they may give us, if we think only of the defects of chivalry, and close our eyes to
the really worthy motives of those far-off times, and so miss seeing what chivalry was able
to do, while it lasted, to make men and women better and happier.

Before reading the Arthur stories themselves it is well to know something about the way they
have been built up, as one writer after another has taken the material left by predecessors,
and has worked into it fresh conceptions of things brave and true.  First there was the old
Latin chronicle of Nennius, the earliest trace of Arthurian fact or fancy, with a single paragraph
given to Arthur and his twelve great battles.  This chronicle itself may have been based on
yet earlier Welsh stories, which had been passed on, perhaps for centuries, by oral tradition
from father to son, and gradually woven together into some legendary history of Oldest England
in the local language of Brittany, across the English Channel.  This original book is referred
to by later writers, but was long ago lost.  Geoffrey of Monmouth says it was the source of
his material for his "Historia Britonum." Geoffrey's history, in Latin prose, written some
time about the middle of the twelfth century, remains as the earliest definite record of the
legends connected with King Arthur.

Only a little later Geoffrey's Latin history was translated by Wace and others into Norman
French, and here the Arthur material first appeared in verse form.  Then, still later in the
twelfth century, Walter Map worked the same stories over into French prose, and at the same
time put so much of his own knowledge and imagination with them, that we may almost say that
he was the maker of the Arthur romances.

Soon after the year twelve hundred,--a half century after Geoffrey of Monmouth first set our
English ancestors to thinking about the legendary old hero of the times of the Anglo-Saxon
conquest--Layamon, parish priest of Ernly, in Worcestershire, gave to the English language
(as distinct from the earlier Anglo-Saxon) his poem "Brut."  This was a translation and enlargement
of Wace's old French poem having Arthur as hero.  So these stories of King Arthur, of Welsh
or Celtic origin, came through the Latin, and then through French verse and prose, into our
own speech, and so began their career down the centuries of our more modern history.

After giving ideas to generation after generation of romance writers of many countries and
in many languages, these same romantic stories were, in the fifteenth century, skilfully brought
together into one connected prose narrative,--one of the choicest of the older English classics,
"Le Morte Darthur," by Sir Thomas Malory.  Those were troublous times when Sir Thomas, perhaps
after having himself fought and suffered in the Wars of the Roses then in progress, found some
quiet spot in Warwickshire in which to put together in lasting form the fine old stories that
already in his day were classics.

Malory finished his book in 1470, and its permanence for all time was assured fifteen years
later, when Caxton, after the "symple connynge" that God had sent him (to use the quaint forms
of expression then common), "under the favour and correctyon of al noble lordes and gentylmen
emprysed to emprynte a book of the noble hystoryes of the sayd Kynge Arthur and of certeyn
of his knyghtes after a copye unto him delyuerd whyche copye Syr Thomas Malorye dyd take oute
of certeyn bookes of Frensche and reduced it in to Englysche."  This hard-headed business man,--this
fifteenth-century publisher,--was rather doubtful about the Briton king of a thousand years
before his day, and to those urging upon him the venture of printing Malory's book he answered:
"Dyuers men holde oppynyon that there was no suche Arthur and that alle suche bookes as been
maad of hym ben fayned and fables by cause that somme cronycles make of him no mencyon ne remember
him noo thynge ne of his knyghtes."

But the arguments of those in favour of the undertaking prevailed, greatly to the advantage
of the four centuries that have followed, during which "Le Morte Darthur" has been a constant
source of poetic inspiration.  Generation after generation of readers and of writers have drawn
life from its chapters, and the new delight in Tennyson's "Idylls of the King," almost of our
own time, shows that the fountain has not yet been drained dry.

Malory's "Morte Darthur" is a long book, and its really great interest is partly hidden from
us by forms of expression that belong only to the time when it was first written.  Besides
this, the ideas of what was right and proper in conduct and speech--moral standards--were far
lower in Malory's day than they are now.

The purpose of this new little volume is to bring the old tales freshly to the attention of
young people of the present time.  It keeps, as far as may be, the exact language and the spirit
of the original, chooses such stories as best represent the whole, and modifies these only
in order to remove what could possibly hide the thought, or be so crude in taste and morals
as to seem unworthy of the really high-minded author of five hundred years ago.  It aims also
so to condense the book that, in this age of hurry, readers may not be repelled from the tales
merely because of their length.

Chivalry of just King Arthur's kind was given up long ago, but that for which it stood--human
fellowship in noble purpose--is far older than the institution of knighthood or than even the
traditions of the energetic, brave, true, helpful King Arthur himself.  It links us with all
the past and all the future.  The knights of the twentieth century do not set out in chain-armour
to right the wrongs of the oppressed by force of arms, but the best influences of chivalry
have been preserved for the quickening of a broader and a nobler world than was ever in the
dreams of knight-errant of old.

"Antiquity produced heroes, but not gentlemen," someone has said.  In the days of Charlemagne
and Alfred began the training which, continued in the days of Chaucer and Sir Thomas Malory
and many, many more, has given to this our age that highest type of manhood, the Christian
gentleman.

U. W. C.

Stories of King Arthur

CHAPTER I

OF THE BIRTH OF KING ARTHUR

It befell in the days of Uther Pendragon, when he was king of all England, that there was a
mighty duke in Cornwall that held war against him a long time.  And the duke was named the
Duke of Tintagil.  Ten miles away from his castle, called Terrabil, there was, in the castle
Tintagil, Igraine of Cornwall, that King Uther liked and loved well, for she was a good and
fair lady, and passing wise.  He made her great cheer out of measure, and desired to have her
love in return; but she would not assent unto him, and for pure anger and for great love of
fair Igraine King Uther fell sick.

At that time there lived a powerful magician named Merlin, who could appear in any place he
chose, could change his looks as he liked, and at will could do wonderful things to help or
to harm knights and ladies.  So to King Uther came Sir Ulfius, a noble knight, and said, "I
will seek Merlin, and he shall do you remedy so that your heart shall be pleased."  So Ulfius
departed, and by adventure met Merlin in beggar's array, and made him promise to be not long
behind in riding to Uther's pavilion.

Soon Merlin stood by the king's side and said: "I know all your heart, and promise ye shall
have your desire, if ye will be sworn to fulfil my wish."  This the king solemnly agreed to
do, and then Merlin said: "After ye shall win Igraine as wife, a child shall be born to you
that is to be given unto me to be brought up as I will; this shall be for your honour and the
child's avail."

That night King Uther met in battle the Duke of Tintagil, who had protected Igraine in her
castle, and overcame him.  Then Igraine welcomed Uther as her true lover, for Merlin had given
him the appearance of one dear to her, and, the barons being all well accorded, the two were
married on a morning with great mirth and joy.

When the time came that Igraine should bear a son, Merlin came again unto the King to claim
his promise, and he said: "I know a lord of yours in this land, a passing true man and a faithful,
named Sir Ector, and he shall have the nourishing of your child.  Let the young Prince be delivered
to me at yonder privy postern, when I come for him."

So the babe, Arthur Pendragon, bound in a cloth of gold, was taken by two knights and two ladies
to the postern gate of the castle and delivered unto Merlin, disguised as a poor man, and by
him was carried forth to Sir Ector, whose wife nourished him as her own child.

Then within two years King Uther fell sick of a great malady. Wherefore all the barons made
great sorrow, and asked Merlin what counsel were best, for few of them had ever seen or heard
of the young child, Arthur.  On the morn all by Merlin's counsel came before the King, and
Merlin said: "Sir, shall your son Arthur be king, after your days, of this realm with all the
appurtenance?"

Then Uther Pendragon turned him and said in hearing of them all, "I give him God's blessing
and mine, and bid him righteously and honourably to claim the crown upon forfeiture of my blessing."

Therewith he died, and he was buried as befitted a king, and the Queen, fair Igraine, and all
the barons made great sorrow.

CHAPTER II

UTHER'S SON, RIGHTWISE KING OF ALL ENGLAND

Then stood the kingdom in great jeopardy a long while, for every lord strengthened himself,
and many a one thought to be king rather than be ruled by a child that they had never known.
All this confusion Merlin had foreseen, and he had taken the young prince away, to keep him
safe from the jealous barons until he should be old enough to rule wisely for himself.  Even
Sir Ector did not know that the boy growing up with his own son Kay was the King's child, and
heir to the realm.

When now young Arthur had grown into a tall youth, well trained in all the exercises of honourable
knighthood, Merlin went to the Archbishop of Canterbury and counselled him to send to all the
lords of the realm and all the gentlemen of arms, that they should come to London at Christmas
time, since God of His great mercy would at that time show by miracle who should be rightwise
king of the realm.  The Archbishop did as Merlin advised, and all the great knights made them
clean of their life so that their prayer might be the more acceptable unto God, and when Christmas
came they went unto London, each one thinking that perchance his wish to be made king should
be granted.  So in the greatest church of the city (whether it was St Paul's or not the old
chronicle maketh no mention) all were at their prayers long ere day.

When matins were done and they came out of the church, there was seen in the churchyard a great
square stone, in the midst of which was an anvil of steel, a foot high, with a fair sword naked
at the point sticking through it.  Written in gold about the sword were letters that read thus:
"Whoso pulleth out this sword from this stone and anvil is rightwise king born of all England."

All the people marvelled at the stone and the inscription, and some assayed--such as would
be king--to draw out the sword.  But none might stir it, and the Archbishop said: "He is not
here that shall achieve this sword, but doubt not God will make him known.  This now is my
counsel, that we cause to be chosen ten knights, men of good fame, to guard this sword until
the rightful possessor shall appear."

So it was ordained, and it was proclaimed that every man should assay that would, to win the
sword.  And upon New Year's Day the barons held jousts and a tournament for all knights that
would engage.  All this was ordained for to keep the lords and the commons together, for the
Archbishop trusted that God would soon make him known that should win the sword.  So upon New
Year's Day the barons rode to the field, some to joust and some to tourney; and it happened
that Sir Ector rode also, and with him Sir Kay, his son, that had just been made knight, and
young Arthur that was his foster-brother.

As they rode to the joust-ward Sir Kay suddenly missed his sword, which he had left at his
father's lodging, and he begged young Arthur to ride and fetch it.  "I will gladly," said Arthur,
and he hastened off home. But the lady and all the household were out to see the jousting,
and he found nobody at home to deliver him the sword.  Then was Arthur troubled, and said to
himself, "I will ride to the churchyard and take the sword that sticketh in the stone, for
my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day."

So when he came to the great stone Arthur alighted, and tied his horse to the stile.  He then
went straight to the tent of the guards, but found no knights there, for they were at the jousting.
So he took the sword by the handles, and lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the anvil; then
he mounted his horse and rode his way till he came to his brother Sir Kay, and delivered him
the sword.

As soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he knew well it was that one of the stone, and so he rode
away to his father, Sir Ector, and said: "Sir, lo here is the sword of the stone; wherefore
I must be king of this land."

When Sir Ector beheld the sword, all three returned to the church and entered it.  Anon Sir
Ector made Sir Kay to swear upon a book how he came by that sword.  And Sir Kay answered that
Arthur had brought it to him.  "And how gat ye the sword?" said he to Arthur; and when Sir
Ector heard how it had been pulled from the anvil, he said to Arthur: "Now I understand ye
must be king of this land."

"Wherefore I?" said Arthur, "and for what cause?"

"Sir," said Ector, "for God will have it so; for there should never man have drawn out this
sword but he that shall be rightwise king.  Now let me see whether ye can put the sword there
as it was, and pull it out again."

"That is no mastery," said Arthur, and so he put it into the stone. Therewith Sir Ector assayed
to pull out the sword, and failed.  Then Sir Kay pulled at it with all his might, but it would
not yield.

"Now shall ye assay again," said Sir Ector to Arthur.

"I will well," said Arthur, and pulled it out easily a second time.

Now was Sir Ector sure that Arthur was of higher blood than had been thought, and that the
rightful king had been made known.  And he told his foster-son all, how he was not his father,
but had taken him to nourish at Merlin's request.  Arthur was grieved indeed when he understood
that Sir Ector was not his father, and that the good lady that had fostered and kept him as
her own son was not his true mother, and he said to Sir Ector, "If ever it be God's will that
I be king, as ye say, ye shall desire of me what I may do, and I shall not fail you."

Therewithal they went unto the Archbishop and told him how the sword was achieved, and by whom.
And all the barons came thither, that whoever would might assay to take the sword.  But there
before them all none might take it out but Arthur.  Now many lords became wroth, and said it
was great shame unto them all and to the realm to be governed by a boy.  They contended so
at that time that the matter was put off till Candlemas, when all the barons should meet there
again.  A pavilion was set over the stone and the sword, and the ten knights were ordained
to watch there day and night, five being always on guard.

So at Candlemas many more great lords came thither to win the sword, but none might prevail
except Arthur.  The barons were sore aggrieved at this, and again put it off in delay till
the high feast of Easter. And as Arthur sped afore, so did he at Easter; yet there were some
of the great lords that had indignation that Arthur should be their king, and put it off in
a delay till the feast of Pentecost.

At the feast of Pentecost all manner of men assayed to pull at the sword, yet none might prevail
but Arthur; and he pulled it out afore all the lords and commons that were there.  Wherefore
all the commons cried at once, "We will have Arthur unto our king; we will put him no more
in delay, for we all see that it is God's will that he shall be our king, and who that holdeth
against it we will slay as traitor." And they kneeled down all at once, both rich and poor,
and begged mercy of Arthur, because they had delayed so long.  And Arthur forgave them, and
took the sword between both his hands, and offered it upon the altar where the Archbishop was,
and so was he made knight of the best man that was there.

And anon was the coronation made, and there Arthur swore unto his lords and the commons to
be a true king, to stand for justice all the days of his life.  Then he made all the lords
that were subject to the crown to come in, and to do service as they ought to do.  And many
great wrongs that had been done since the death of King Uther were righted, and to lords, knights,
ladies, and gentlemen were given back the lands of which they had been unjustly deprived. 
When the king had thus established justice in all the countries about London, he made Sir Kay
seneschal of England, and other officers he appointed also that should aid in keeping back
his enemies and holding his realm in peace and orderliness.

CHAPTER III

HOW ARTHUR GAT HIS SWORD EXCALIBUR

On a day there came into the court of the young King a squire on horseback, bringing a knight,
his master, mortally wounded, and seeking justice against the murderer.  Then came up Griflet,
that was but a squire, a young man of the age of King Arthur, and asked to be given the order
of knighthood, that he might ride out against the knight that had done the evil deed, who dwelt
by a well in the forest.

Arthur was loath to bring this passing brave youth into peril by giving him so high an adventure;
but at the desire of Griflet the King at the last gave him the order of knighthood, and he
rode away till he came to the fountain.

There he saw the pavilion of the knight, and his horse all saddled and bridled, and his shield
of divers colours, and a great spear hanging on a tree hard by.  Griflet struck the shield
with the butt of his spear, so that it fell clattering down to the ground.  With that the knight
came out of the pavilion and said, "Fair knight, why smote ye down my shield?"

"For I will joust with you," said Griflet.

"It is better ye do not," said the knight, "for ye are but a young and late-made knight, and
your might is nothing to mine."

But Griflet would have it so, and the two ran together with such force that Griflet's spear
was all shattered, and horse and rider fell down sore wounded.  When the knight saw the youth
lying on the ground, he was heavy of heart; and he unlaced his helm to give him air, and finally
setting him on his horse, sent him with cheering words back to the court.  Here great dole
was made for him because of his wounds, and Arthur was passing wroth for the hurt of Sir Griflet.

The next morning ere day the King ordered his best horse, and in full armour rode out alone
to encounter the knight of the fountain.  It was a strong battle they had.  Arthur's spear
was all shattered, and his horse fell to the ground.  Then they fought with swords with many
great strokes and much blood-shed on both sides.

Therewithal came Merlin, and made known who Arthur was.  Then by enchantment he caused the
knight to fall into a deep sleep, and bore Arthur away to a hermit to be cured of his wounds.

When, after three days of rest and healing, he was riding with Merlin through the forest, King
Arthur said, "I have no sword."

"No matter," said Merlin; "there is one near by that I can perhaps get for you."

So they rode on till it chanced that they passed a fair and broad lake. In the midst of the
water Arthur became aware of an arm clothed in white samite[1] holding aloft a beautiful sword.

"Lo! there is the sword of which I spake," said Merlin, "and yonder is the Lady of the Lake
ready to help you to it, if ye speak fair to her."

Anon came the damsel unto Arthur and saluted him, and he her again. "Damsel," said Arthur,
"what sword is it that the arm holdeth above the water yonder?  I would it were mine, for I
have no sword."

"Sir Arthur King," said the damsel, "that sword is mine, and if ye will give me a gift when
I ask it you, go ye into yonder barge and row yourself to the sword, and take it and the scabbard
with you."

So Sir Arthur and Merlin alighted and tied their horses to a tree, and then they went into
the magic boat.  Soon they were beside the sword that the hand held up.  Arthur took it by
the handle, the arm and the hand went down beneath the water, and the two travellers rowed
back to the land and went forth.

As they rode along Arthur looked on the sword, which had the name Excalibur, that is as much
as to say Cut-steel, and he liked it passing well, for the handle was all set with precious stones.

"Which like you better," said Merlin, "the sword or the scabbard?"

"The sword," replied Arthur.

"Ye are unwise," said Merlin; "the scabbard is worth ten of the sword, for while ye have the
scabbard upon you, ye shall lose no blood; therefore keep well the scabbard always with you."

In this way Arthur came by Excalibur, and many an adventure he was to have with it, and was
to suffer great danger when by evil interference it was, as we shall see, for a time stolen
from him.  With it in hand the hardest fight went well in the end, for the scabbard kept him
from weakness, and a mysterious power lay in the strong, true blade that none could withstand,
until the time came for King Arthur to give back the sword to the Lady of the Lake and to die
of the wounds of a traitor.

So King Arthur and Merlin rode on, and when they came back safe to Carlion and the court the
knights were passing glad.  Some wondered that the king would risk himself abroad so alone,
but all men of valour said it was merry to be under such a chief that would put his person
in adventure as other poor knights did.

[1] Samite: silk stuff

CHAPTER IV

BALIN AND BALAN

On a day there came a messenger to King Arthur saying that King Ryons of North Wales, a strong
man in body, and passing proud, had discomfited and overcome eleven kings, and each of these
to do him homage had cut his beard clean off as trimming for King Ryons' royal mantle.  One
place of the mantle still lacked trimming; wherefore he sent for Arthur's beard, and if he
did not receive it he would enter England to burn and slay, and never would he leave till he
had Arthur, head and all.

"Well," said Arthur to the messenger, "thou hast said thy message, the most insolent ever sent
unto a king.  Thou seest my beard is full young yet to make a trimming of it.  Tell thou thy
king I owe him no homage, but ere long he shall do me homage on both his knees."  So the messenger
departed.

Among those who, at Arthur's call, gathered at Camelot to withstand King Ryons' invasion of
the land was a knight that had been Arthur's prisoner half a year and more for some wrong done
to one of the court. The name of this knight was Balin, a strong, courageous man, but poor
and so poorly clothed that he was thought to be of no honour.  But worthiness and good deeds
are not all only in arrayment.  Manhood and honour is hid within man's person, and many an
honourable knight is not known unto all people through his clothing.  This Balin felt deeply
the insult of King Ryons, and anon armed himself to ride forth to meet with him and mayhap
to destroy him, in the hope that then King Arthur would again be his good and gracious lord.

The meanwhile that this knight was making ready to depart on this adventure, there came to
Arthur's court the Lady of the Lake, and she now asked of him the gift that he promised her
when she gave him his sword Excalibur.

"Ask what ye will," said the King, "and ye shall have it, if it lie in my power to give."

Thereupon she demanded Balin's head, and would take none other thing.

"Truly," said King Arthur, "I may not grant this with my honour," and Balin was allowed to
make ready for the adventure with King Ryons.

But ere he had left the court he saw the Lady of the Lake.  He went straight to her, and with
his sword lightly smote off her head before King Arthur, for he knew her as the untruest lady
living, one that by enchantment and sorcery had been the destroyer of many good knights.

"Alas! for shame," said Arthur.  "Why have ye done so?  Ye have shamed me and all my court,
for this was a lady that I was beholden to, and hither she came under my safe conduct.  I shall
never forgive you that trespass.  What cause soever ye had, ye should have spared her in my
presence; therefore withdraw you out of my court in all haste that ye may."

So Balin,--called Balin the Wild for his savage and reckless nature,--departed with his squire,
and King Arthur and all the court made great mourning, and had shame at the death of the Lady
of the Lake.  Then the King buried her richly.

In sorrow over the evil he had wrought and the disfavour of his king, Balin turned his horse
towards a great forest, and there by the armour he was ware of his brother Balan.  And when
they were met, they put off their helms and kissed together, and wept for joy.

Anon the knight Balin told his brother of the death of the Lady of the Lake, and said: "Truly
I am right heavy of heart that my lord Arthur is displeased with me, for he is the most honourable
knight that reigneth on earth, and his love I will get or else I will put my life in adventure
with King Ryons, that lieth now at the castle Terrabil. Thither will we ride together in all
haste, to prove our honour and prowess upon him."

"I will gladly do that," said Balan; "we will help each other as brothers ought to do."

So they took their way to find King Ryons, and as they rode along together they encountered
him in a straight way with threescore knights.  Anon Balin and Balan smote him down from his
horse, and slew on the right hand and the left hand more than forty of his men.  The remnant
fled, and King Ryons yielded him unto their grace as prisoner. So they laid him on a horse-litter,
for he was fiercely wounded, and brought him to Camelot.  There they delivered him to the porters
and charged them with him; and then they two returned to further adventure.

And Balin rode towards the castle of King Pellam to revenge the wrongs of knights and ladies
on a treacherous knight named Garlon.  He had a fifteen days' journey thither, and the day
he came unto the castle there began a great feast.  Balin was well received, and led to a chamber,
where he laid off his armour.  They also brought him robes to his pleasure, and would have
had him leave his sword behind him.

"Nay," said Balin, "that do I not, for it is the custom of my country for a knight always to
have his weapon with him, and that custom will I keep, or else I will depart as I came."

Then they gave him leave to wear his sword, and so he went unto the hall and was set among
the knights of honour.

Soon he saw the false knight Garlon, and thought to himself: "If I slay him here I shall not
escape, and if I leave him now, peradventure I shall never meet with him again at such a good
time, and much harm will he do if he live."

Then this Garlon espied that Balin watched him, and he came and smote Balin on the face, and
said: "Knight, why watchest thou me so?  Eat thy meat, and do that thou camest for."

Then Balin said, "I will do that I came for," and rose up fiercely and clove his head to the
shoulders.

Anon all the knights arose from the table to set on Balin, and King Pellam himself caught in
his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at Balin, but Balin put his sword betwixt his head
and the stroke.  With that his sword was broken in sunder, and he, now weaponless, ran into
the chamber to seek some weapon, and so, from chamber to chamber, but no weapon could he find,
and alway King Pellam came after him.

At last Balin entered into a chamber that was marvellously well furnished and richly, wherein
was a bed arrayed with cloth of gold, the richest that might be thought, and thereby a table
of clean gold, and upon the table a marvellous spear, strangely wrought.  And when Balin saw
that spear he took it in his hand, and turned to King Pellam and smote him passing hard with
it so that he fell down in a swoon. Therewith the castle roof and walls brake and fell to the
earth, and Balin also, so that he might not stir foot nor hand, for through that dolorous stroke
the most part of the castle that was fallen down lay upon him and Pellam.

After three days Merlin came thither, and he took up Balin and gat him a good horse, for his
was dead, and bade him ride out of the country. Merlin also told him that his stroke had turned
to great dole, trouble, and grief, for the marvellous spear was the same with which Longius,
the Roman soldier, smote our Lord Jesus Christ to the heart at the crucifixion.

Then departed Balin from Merlin, never to meet him again, and rode forth through the fair countries
and cities about Pellam Castle, and found people dead, slain on every side.  And all that were
left alive cried: "O Balin, thou hast caused great damage in these countries, for by the dolorous
stroke thou gavest unto King Pellam three countries are destroyed, and doubt not but the vengeance
will fall on thee at the last."

When Balin was out of those countries he was passing glad, and after many days he came by a
cross, whereon were letters of gold written that said, "It is not for any knight alone to ride
towards this castle." Then saw he an old hoary gentleman coming towards him that said, "Balin
the Wild, thou passest thy bounds to come this way; therefore turn again and it will avail
thee."  The old gentleman vanished away, and then Balin heard a horn blow, as if for the death
of a beast in the chase.  "That blast," said he, "is blown for me, for I am the prize, yet
am I not dead."  Anon he saw a hundred ladies and many knights, that welcomed him with fair
semblance, and made him passing good cheer seemingly, and led him into the castle, where there
were dancing and minstrelsy, and all manner of joy.

Then the chief lady of the castle said, "Knight, you must have ado with a knight close by that
keepeth an island, for there may no man pass this way but he must joust, ere he go farther."

"That is an unhappy custom," said Balin, "that a knight may not pass this way unless he joust,
but since that is my duty, thereto am I ready.  Travelling men are oft weary, and their horses
also; but though my horse be weary my heart is not weary."

"Sir," said the knight then to Balin, "me thinketh your shield is not good; I will lend you
a better."

So Balin took the shield that was unknown, and left his own, and rode unto the island.  He
put himself and his horse in a great boat, and when he came on the other side he met with a
damsel, and she said, "O Knight Balin, why hast thou left thine own shield?  Alas! thou hast
put thyself in great danger, for by thine own shield thou shouldst have been known.  It is
a great pity, for of thy prowess and hardiness thou hast no equal living."

"Me repenteth," said Balin, "that ever I came within this country, but I may not turn now again
for shame, and what adventure shall fall to me, be it life or death, I will take the adventure
that shall come to me."

Then he looked on his armour, and understood he was well armed, for which he was thankful,
and so he mounted upon his horse.  Then before him he saw come riding out of a castle a knight
in red armour, and his horse was all trapped in the same colour.  When this knight in red beheld
Balin, he thought he was like his brother; but because he knew not his shield, he deemed it
was not he.  And so they couched their spears and came marvellously fast together, and they
smote each other in the shields; but their spears were so heavy and their course so swift that
horse and man were borne down, and both knights lay in a swoon.  Balin was bruised sore with
the fall of his horse, for he was weary with travel, and Balan (for the knight in red was none
other) was the first that rose to his feet.  He drew his sword and went towards Balin, who
arose and went against him.  But Balan smote Balin first, striking through his shield and cleaving
his helm.  Then Balin smote him in return with that unhappy sword that had already wrought
so great harm, and the blow well nigh felled his brother Balan.  So they fought there together
till their breaths failed.

Then Balin looked up to the castle, and saw the towers stand full of ladies; so they went to
battle again and wounded each other dolefully. Then they breathed ofttimes, and yet again went
unto battle, until all the place there was blood-red from the great wounds that either had
smitten other, and their hauberks became unriveted so that naked they were on every side.

At last Balan, the younger brother, withdrew a little and laid himself down.  Then said Balin
the Wild, "What knight art thou? for ere now I found never a knight that matched me."

"My name is," said he, "Balan, brother to the good knight Balin."

"Alas!" said Balin, "that ever I should see this day."  Thereupon he fell backward in a swoon.

Then Balan crept on all fours to his brother and put oft his helm, but he might not know him,
his visage was so disguised by blood and wounds. But when Balin awoke, he said, "O Balan, my
brother, thou hast slain me and I thee, wherefore all the wide world shall speak of us both."

"Alas!" said Balan; "that ever I saw this day, that through mishap I might not know thee! 
Because thou hadst another shield I deemed thou wert another knight."

"Alas!" said Balin, "all this was caused by an unhappy knight in the castle, that made me leave
mine own shield, to the destruction of us both."

Then anon Balan died, and at midnight after, Balin; so both were buried together, and the lady
of the castle had Balan's name written on the tomb and how he was there slain by his brother's
hand, but she knew not Balin's name.  In the morn came Merlin and wrote Balin's inscription
also in letters of gold: "Here lieth Balin the Wild, that smote the dolorous stroke."

Soon after this was done Merlin came to King Arthur and told him of the dolorous stroke that
Balin gave King Pellam, and how Balin and Balan fought together the most marvellous battle
that ever was heard of, and how they buried both in one tomb.  "Alas!" said King Arthur; "this
is the greatest pity that ever I heard tell of two knights, for in the world I know not such
two knights."

Thus endeth the tale of Balin and Balan, two brethren born in Northumberland, good knights both.

CHAPTER V

THE NOBLE ORDER OF THE ROUND TABLE

Arthur was indeed king, but enemies long held out against his just authority.  When he went
into Wales to be crowned at the city of Carlion, he let cry a great feast to be holden at Pentecost.
Unto this feast came the six kings of that region with many of their knights, and Arthur thought
it was to do him honour.  But when he made joy of their coming and sent them great presents,
the kings would none receive, and said they had no joy to receive gifts of a beardless boy
that was come of low birth.  They sent him word that they were come to give him gifts with
hard swords betwixt the neck and the shoulders, for it was great shame to all of them to see
such a boy have rule of so noble a realm as this land was.

This answer was told King Arthur, who now betook himself to a strong tower and five hundred
good men with him.  Here the six kings laid siege to him, but he was well victualled; and soon
Merlin came and bade him fear not, but speak boldly to his enemies, "for," said he, "ye shall
overcome them all, whether they will or nill."

So the King armed himself and all his knights and came out to do battle with his enemies. 
Then three hundred good men of the best that were with the kings went straight over unto King
Arthur, which comforted him greatly.  So he set upon the hosts of the six kings, and he and
his men did marvellous deeds of arms.  Therewith he put them back, and then the commons of
Carlion arose with clubs and staves and slew many of the enemy, and so they fled away.

Since the enemy were still passing strong, Merlin counselled King Arthur to send letters well
devised beyond the sea to the two brethren, marvellous good men of their hands, named one King
Ban of Benwick and the other King Bors of Gaul, and to say to them that, if they would come
and help King Arthur in his wars, he in turn would be sworn unto them to help them in their
wars against King Claudas, a mighty man that strove with them for a castle.

So there were made letters in the pleasantest wise, according to King Arthur's desire, and
Ulfius and Brastias, the messengers, rode forth well horsed and well armed, and so passed the
sea and came to the city of Benwick.  Here they had good cheer as long as they tarried, and
received the answer that King Ban and King Bors would come unto King Arthur in all the haste
they might.

Now those six kings in Wales had by their means gotten unto them five other kings, and all
swore together that for weal or woe they would not leave each other till they had destroyed
Arthur.  So their whole host drew towards Arthur, now strengthened by Ban and Bors with their
followers that had crossed from Gaul to his aid.  Then followed a great battle, and they did
on both sides great deeds of arms until at the last Merlin counselled Arthur to fight no longer,
since the eleven kings had more on hand than they were ware of, and would soon depart home;
for a messenger would come and tell them that lawless people as well as Saracens, forty thousand
in number, had entered their lands and were burning and slaying without mercy.  So the great
battle was ended, and the eleven kings went to their own country.

Now King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors came with their following into the country of Cameliard,
and there aided King Leodegrance against an enemy of that land.  King Leodegrance thanked them
for their goodness, and made them great cheer ere King Ban and King Bors departed back towards
Benwick.

In Cameliard Arthur had the first sight of Guenever, the King's daughter, and ever afterwards
he loved her.  So when peace was once more in his land, King Arthur asked counsel of Merlin
about seeking her as his wife, for to him she was the most valiant and fairest lady living
or to be found.

"Sir," said Merlin, "as for her beauty, she is one of the fairest alive, but if ye loved her
not so well as ye do, I could choose better for you.  Yet when a man's heart is set, he will
be loath to change."

So Merlin was sent forth to King Leodegrance, and he told him of King Arthur's desire.  King
Leodegrance was glad that so worthy a king of prowess and of nobleness would wed his daughter,
and promised him as wedding gift,--not lands, for he had enough and needed none,--but what
would please him much more, the Table Round, which Uther Pendragon had given to the King of
Cameliard,--a table made by Merlin at which an hundred and fifty knights might be seated.

So Guenever, attended by Merlin and an hundred good knights (all King Leodegrance could spare,
so many had been slain in his wars) with the Round Table rode with great pomp by water and
by land to London.  There King Arthur made great joy of their coming, for he had long loved
Guenever.  Also the gift pleased him more than right great riches.  And the marriage and the
coronation were ordained with all speed in the most honourable wise that could be devised.

Merlin was sent to espy out in all the land fifty knights of most prowess and honour, who should
make up the full number for the Round Table.  Only twenty-eight could he find worthy enough,
and these Merlin fetched to Arthur's court.  And Merlin made sieges (seats), an hundred and
fifty in all, for the knights, and he placed in every knight's siege his name in letters of gold.

On that same day King Arthur founded the great order of the Round Table, the fame of which
was to last for all time.  An hundred and twenty-eight were then sworn as Knights of the Table
Round, and every year at the high feast of Pentecost others were to be added as they showed
themselves worthy.  Only one siege was long empty, the Siege Perilous, for no man should sit
therein but one, and if any one of unworthy life were so hardy as to sit therein, he should
be destroyed.

With great ceremony each one took the vows of true knighthood, solemnly promising to do no
wicked deed, to be loyal to the King, to give mercy to those asking it, always to be courteous
and helpful to ladies, and to fight in no wrongful quarrel for wordly gain, upon pain of death
or forfeiture of knighthood and King Arthur's favour.  Unto this were all the knights of the
Round Table sworn, both old and young.  To dishonour knighthood was the greatest disgrace;
to prove themselves worthy of knightly honour by strong, brave, courteous, loyal bearing under
great difficulties was the highest end of living.

So King Arthur stablished all his knights, and to them that were not rich he gave lands; and
they rode abroad to right the wrongs of men, and to give help to the oppressed.  With their
aid he secured order and justice throughout his realm, and then the weakest man might do his
work in peace, and prosper.

CHAPTER VI

THE LADIES' KNIGHT

The King was wedded unto Dame Guenever at Camelot with great solemnity. Just as all were sitting
at the high feast that followed the marriage, there came running into the hall a white hart,
followed by a whole pack of hounds with a great cry, and the hart went about the Table Round.
At a fierce bite from one of the dogs the hart made a great leap, and overthrew a knight that
sat at the table, and so passed forth out of the hall again, with all the dogs after him. 
When they were gone the King was glad, for they made such a noise, but Merlin said, "Ye may
not leave this adventure so lightly.  Let call Sir Gawaine, for he must bring again the white
hart."

"I will," said the King, "that all be done by your advice."  So Sir Gawaine was called, and
he took his charge and armed himself for the adventure.  Sir Gawaine was one of King Arthur's
nephews, and had just been made a knight, for he had asked of the King the gift of knighthood
on the same day that he should wed fair Guenever.

So Sir Gawaine rode quickly forth, and Gaheris his brother rode with him, instead of a squire,
to do him service.  As they followed the hart by the cry of the hounds, they came to a great
river.  The hart swam over, and they followed after, and so at length they chased him into
a castle, where in the chief courtyard the dogs slew the hart before Sir Gawaine and young
Gaheris came up.  Right so there came a knight out of a room, with a sword drawn in his hand,
and he slew two of the greyhounds even in the sight of Sir Gawaine, and the remnant he chased
with his sword out of the castle.

When he came back he said, "O my white hart, me repenteth that thou art dead, for my sovereign
lady gave thee to me, and poorly have I kept thee.  Thy death shall be dear bought, if I live."

Anon he came fiercely towards Sir Gawaine, and they struck mightily together.  They clove their
shields and broke their helms and hauberks so that the blood ran down to their feet.  At the
last Sir Gawaine smote the knight so hard that he fell to the earth; and then he cried for
mercy and yielded himself, and besought Sir Gawaine as he was a knight and gentleman to save
his life.

"Thou shalt die," said Sir Gawaine, "for slaying of my hounds."

"I will make amends," said the knight, "unto my power."

Sir Gawaine would no mercy have, but unlaced his helm to strike off his head, when at that
instant came his lady out of a chamber.  She fell upon her husband just as the blow descended,
and so Sir Gawaine smote off her head by misadventure, and the knight was saved.

"Alas!" said Gaheris, "that is foul and shamefully done; that shame shall never depart from
you.  Ye should give mercy unto them that ask mercy, for a knight without mercy is without honour."

Sir Gawaine was so astonished at the death of the fair lady that he knew not what he did, and
he said unto the knight, "Arise, I will give thee mercy; and go thou unto King Arthur, and
tell him how thou art overcome by the knight that went in the quest of the white hart."

"I care not for mercy now," said the knight, "for thou hast slain my lady that I loved best
of all earthly things it matters not whether I live or die."

Then Sir Gawaine went into the castle and made ready to rest there all night.

"What will ye do?" said Gaheris; "will ye unarm you in this country? Ye may believe ye have
many enemies here."

He had no sooner said that word than there came four knights well armed, and anon they made
Sir Gawaine and Gaheris yield themselves as prisoners, in spite of the brave battle wherein
Sir Gawaine was sore wounded in the arm.

Early on the morrow there came to Sir Gawaine in the prison one of the ladies of the castle,
and said, "Sir Knight, what cheer?"

"Not good," said he.

"It is your own fault," said the lady, "for ye have done a passing foul deed in the slaying
of the lady, which will be great disgrace unto you. Be ye not of King Arthur's kin?"

"Yes, truly," said Sir Gawaine.  "My name is Gawaine, and my mother is King Arthur's sister."

"Ah, then are ye nephew unto King Arthur," said the lady, "and I shall so speak for you that
ye shall have conduct to King Arthur, for love of him."

Then anon they delivered Sir Gawaine under this promise, that he should bear the dead lady
to the court, the severed head hanging about his neck.  Right so he rode forth unto Camelot,
and Merlin made him tell of his adventure, and how he slew the lady, and how he would give
no mercy unto the knight, whereby the lady was slain.  Then the King and the Queen were greatly
displeased with Sir Gawaine, and by ordinance of the Queen there was set a quest of ladies
on Sir Gawaine, and they ordered him for ever while he lived to be with all ladies, and to
fight for their quarrels; and that ever he should be courteous, and never refuse mercy to him
that asketh mercy.  Thus was Gawaine sworn upon the four Evangelists that he should never be
against lady nor gentlewoman, except if he fought for a lady and his adversary fought for another.

Thus endeth the adventure of Sir Gawaine, that he did at the marriage of King Arthur.

CHAPTER VII

WISE MERLIN'S FOOLISHNESS

Arthur was now established as king over all the land.  The great council hall at Camelot, that
is Winchester, had been built, some say by Merlin's skill; and the most loyal and the bravest
knights of the world had been gathered at Arthur's court to do honour to him and his fair Queen
Guenever.

Merlin was Arthur's wisest helper and most powerful friend, as he had before been the helper
and friend of his father Uther, for whom he had made the Round Table, signifying the roundness
of the world.  We have seen how he hid the young Arthur away from the jealousy of the wild
barons, and how, by his power over men and his knowledge of what would be, he had saved the
King's life and guided his wise rule.  The old magician Bleise, that dwelt in Northumberland,
was Merlin's master, and he it was that wrote down all the battles of Arthur with his enemies
word by word as Merlin told him, and all the battles that were done in Arthur's days, until
Merlin was lost, as we shall see, through his own foolishness.

On a time Merlin told King Arthur that he should not endure long, but for all his crafts he
should be put in the earth alive.  Also he told many things that should befall, and how the
king would miss him, so that rather than all his lands he would wish to have him again.

"Ah," said King Arthur, "since ye know of this, provide against it, and put away by your crafts
that misadventure."

"Nay," said Merlin, "it cannot be done."  For Merlin, now grown an old man in his dotage, had
fallen under the spell of a damsel of the court named Nimue.  With her he soon departed from
the King, and evermore went with her wheresoever she went.  Ofttimes he wished to break away
from her, but he was so held that he could not be out of her presence. Ever she made him good
cheer, till she had learned from him all she desired of his secret craft, and had made him
swear that he would never do any enchantment upon her.

They went together over the sea unto the land of Benwick, where Ban was king, that had helped
Arthur against his enemies.  Here Merlin saw young Launcelot, King Ban's son, and he told the
queen that this same child should grow to be a man of great honour, so that all Christendom
should speak of his prowess.  So the queen was comforted of her great sorrow that she made
for the mortal war that King Claudas waged on her lord and on her lands.

Then afterwards Nimue and Merlin departed into Cornwall, and by the way he showed her many
wonders, and wearied her with his desire for her love.  She would fain have been delivered
of him, for she was afraid of him, almost believing him a devil's son, and yet she could not
put him away by any means.

And so on a time it happened that Merlin showed to her a wonderful cavern in the cliff, closed
by an enchanted stone.  By her subtle working she soon made Merlin remove the stone and go
into the cavern to let her know of the marvels there.  Then she so wrought through the magic
he had taught her that the stone was placed back again, so that he never came out for all the
craft that he could do.  And then she departed and left him there.

On a day a certain knight rode to see adventures, and happened to come to the rock where Nimue
had put Merlin, and there he heard him make great lamentation.  The knight would gladly have
helped him, and tried to move the great stone; but it was so heavy that a hundred men might
not lift it up.  When Merlin knew that the knight sought his deliverance, he bade him leave
his labour, for all was in vain.  He could never be helped but by her that put him there.

So Merlin's prophecy of his own end was fulfilled, and he passed from the world of men.  Arthur
truly missed his old friend and marvelled what had become of him.  Afterwards, when the last
great battle came, he would have given everything to have Merlin with him again, but it could
not be.

CHAPTER VIII

A STAG-HUNT AND WHAT CAME OF IT

It befell that Arthur and many of his knights rode on hunting into a deep forest, and King
Arthur, King Uriens of Gore that was the husband of Arthur's sister Morgan le Fay, and Sir
Accolon of Gaul followed a great hart so fast that within a while they were ten miles from
their fellowship.  At the last they chased so sore that they slew their horses underneath them.
Then were they all three on foot, and ever they saw the hart afore them passing weary and hard
bestead[1].  "Let us go on foot," said King Uriens, "till we meet with some lodging."

Then were they ware of the hart that lay on a great water bank, and a dog biting on his throat,
and more other hounds came after.  King Arthur now blew the prize[2] and dight[3] the hart.

But the three knights were in sore straits, so far from home, and without horses, and they
began to look about the world.  Then Arthur saw afore him in a great lake a little ship, all
apparelled with silk down to the water, coming right unto them, and it landed on the sands.
They went on board, all three, to see what was in the ship.  Soon it was dark night, and there
suddenly were about them an hundred torches set upon all the sides of the ship boards, and
it gave great light.

Therewithal there came out twelve fair damsels, and they set forth for the knights a supper
of all meats that they could think.  Then they showed them richly beseen[4] chambers for the
night, where the three huntsmen slept marvellously.  But when they awoke next morning, everything
had been changed through the sorcery of Morgan le Fay, that was secretly plotting against her
brother, to destroy him.  King Uriens awoke in his own bed in Camelot, and Arthur found himself
in a dark prison, with many woeful knights complaining about him, and they soon told him for
what cause they were there.

The lord of the castle where they were prisoners was the falsest knight alive, a treacherous,
cowardly man, named Sir Damas.  He had a younger brother, Sir Ontzlake, a good knight of prowess,
well beloved of all people, from whom he was keeping back unjustly a full fair manor. Great
war had been betwixt these brothers.  Ontzlake was a far better fighter than the cowardly Damas,
and yet he could not bring the elder to give over the younger brother's inheritance.  He offered
to fight for it, and wished Sir Damas to find a knight to fight in his stead, if he himself
dared not engage.  But Sir Damas was so hated that there was never one would fight for him,
though he had by force taken all the knights of that whole region and brought them to his prison
for to make them willing to take up his cause.  Many had died there, and the twenty that were
yet alive were lean and spent with hunger, but no one of them would stand against Sir Ontzlake.

Anon there came a damsel unto Arthur and asked him, "What cheer?"  "I cannot say," said he.
"Sir," said she, "if ye will fight for my lord, ye shall be delivered out of prison, and else
ye escape never with life."

"Now," said Arthur, "that is hard, yet had I liefer to fight with a knight than to die in prison,"
and so it was agreed that he should do the battle on this covenant, that he should be delivered
and all the prisoners.  With that all the twenty knights were brought out of the dark prison
into the hall, and set free, but they all abode to see the battle.

Now turn we unto Accolon of Gaul, that was with King Arthur and King Uriens on the stag-hunt
and that fell asleep on the magic ship.  When he awoke he found himself beside a deep well,
within half a foot of its edge, in great peril of death.

"Heaven save my lord King Arthur and King Uriens," said he, "for these damsels in the ship
have betrayed us.  They were devils and no women, and if I may escape this misadventure, I
shall destroy all false damsels that use enchantments, wherever I may find them."

Right then there came a dwarf with a great mouth and a flat nose, and saluted Sir Accolon and
said he came from Queen Morgan le Fay.  "She greeteth you well," said he, "and biddeth you
be of strong heart, for ye shall fight to-morn with a knight at the hour of prime, and therefore
she hath sent you here Excalibur, Arthur's sword, and the scabbard, and she biddeth you as
ye love her, that ye do the battle to the uttermost without any mercy, like as ye promised
her when ye spake together in private."

Sir Accolon believed he fully understood the message, and he said he should keep his promise
now that he had the sword.  Just then a knight, who was no other than Sir Ontzlake himself,
with a lady and six squires, came up on horseback, saluted Sir Accolon, and begged him to come
and rest himself at his manor.  So Accolon mounted upon a spare horse and rode to the manor,
where he had passing good cheer.

Meantime Sir Damas sent to his brother, Sir Ontzlake, and bade him make ready to fight the
next day with a good knight who had agreed to do battle for the disputed heritage; and it happened
through Morgan le Fay's trickery that Accolon was lodged with Sir Ontzlake at the very time
when this message came.  Now Sir Ontzlake was sore troubled at the message, for he had been
wounded in both thighs by a spear a short time before, and was suffering much.  Still, wounded
as he was, he would have taken the battle in hand, had not Sir Accolon offered to fight in
his stead, because Morgan le Fay had sent Excalibur and the sheath for the battle with the
knight on the morrow.  Then Sir Ontzlake was passing glad, and sent word unto his brother,
Sir Damas, that he had a knight who would be ready in the field by to-morrow at the hour of prime.

So it was arranged that Sir Arthur and Sir Accolon, unknown to one another, were to fight over
the quarrel of the two brothers. Preparations were made accordingly, and all the knights and
commons of the country were there to see the encounter.  Just as Arthur was ready upon horseback,
there came a damsel from Morgan le Fay bringing unto him a sword like unto Excalibur, and the
scabbard, and said: "Morgan le Fay sendeth you here your sword for great love."  He thanked
her, not knowing that the sword and scabbard were counterfeit, and brittle and false.

They went eagerly to the battle, and gave many great strokes.  Sir Accolon had all advantage
on his side, for he had the real Excalibur, Morgan le Fay having so ordained that King Arthur
should have been slain that day.  King Arthur's sword never bit like Sir Accolon's, and almost
every stroke Sir Accolon gave wounded sore, so that it was a marvel that Arthur stood.  Almost
from the first it seemed to him that the sword in Accolon's hand must be Excalibur, but he
was so full of knighthood that knightly he endured the pain of the many wounds, and held out
as well as he might until his sword brake at the cross and fell in the grass among the blood.

Now he expected to die, but he held up his shield, and lost no ground, nor bated any cheer.
All men that beheld him said they never saw knight fight so well as Arthur did, considering
the blood that he bled, and they were sorry for him.  But Accolon was so bold because of Excalibur
that he grew passing hardy, and called upon Arthur to yield himself as recreant.

"Nay," said Sir Arthur, "I may not so, for I have promised to do the battle to the uttermost
by the faith of my body while my life lasteth, and therefore I had rather die with honour than
live with shame; and if it were possible for me to die an hundred times, I had rather die so
oft than yield myself to thee; for, though I lack weapon I shall lack no honour, and if thou
slay me weaponless that shall be thy shame."

But Accolon cared not for shame, and would not spare.  He gave Arthur such a stroke that he
fell nigh to the earth; yet he pressed upon Accolon with his shield, and with the pommel of
his sword in his hand gave such a blow that Accolon fell back a little.

Now it chanced that one of the damsels of the court, she that had put Merlin under the stone,
had come into the field for love of King Arthur, for she knew how Morgan le Fay had determined
that Arthur should be slain; therefore she came to save his life.  She saw how full of prowess
Arthur was, and grieved that so good a knight should be slain through false treason.  So when
Accolon gave another blow, the sword Excalibur fell out of his hand to the earth.  Arthur lightly
leaped to it and got it in his hand, and forthwith knew that it was his own Excalibur.  Then
he saw the scabbard hanging by Accolon's side, and anon pulling it from him, he threw it off
as far as he might throw it. Therewith Sir Arthur rushed upon Accolon with all his might and
pulled him to the earth.  He then snatched off his helmet for the final blow, and the fierce
battle was at an end.

"Slay me ye may well," said Accolon, "if it please you, for ye are the best knight that ever
I found, and I see well that God is with you."

But now Sir Arthur thought he must have seen this knight, and asked, "Of what country art thou,
and of what court?"  And when Sir Accolon told him his name, then he remembered him of his
sister, Morgan le Fay, and of the enchantment of the ship.  He made Accolon tell how he came
by the sword, and then Arthur knew all the plot of his sister and of Accolon to have the King
slain and herself made queen.

For the first time Arthur now let Accolon know against whom he had been fighting.  The fallen
knight cried aloud for mercy, when he learned that he had nearly slain the King, and said to
all the knights and men that were then there gathered together, "O lords, this noble knight
that I have fought withal, which I sorely repent of, is the best man of prowess, of manhood,
and of honour in the world, for it is King Arthur himself, the liege lord of us all, and with
mishap and with misadventure have I done this battle with the king and lord in whose power
I am."  Then all the people fell down on their knees, and called upon King Arthur for mercy,
which he forthwith granted.

The King was sorely hurt and Accolon's wounds were even worse.  Arthur made haste to settle
the quarrel of the brothers Sir Damas and Sir Ontzlake by giving the latter his rights and
charging Sir Damas upon pain of death never to distress knights-errant that ride on their adventures,
and then was carried off to a near-by abbey, and Sir Accolon with him, to have their wounds
searched.

Within four days Sir Accolon died from loss of blood during the fight, but King Arthur was
well recovered.  When Accolon was dead the King let send him on a horse-bier with six knights
unto Camelot and said, "Bear him to my sister Morgan le Fay, and say that I send him to her
as a present, and tell her that I have my sword Excalibur again and the scabbard."

So they departed with the body.

[1] Hard bestead: in a bad plight.

[2] Prize: death note.

[3] Dight: dressed.

[4] Beseen: of good appearance.

CHAPTER IX

THE TREACHERY OF MORGAN LE FAY

The meanwhile Morgan le Fay thought that King Arthur was slain, and that she might now be queen
of the land, with Sir Accolon as King. Then came tidings unto her that Accolon was dead and
King Arthur had his sword again.  When Queen Morgan wist all this she was so sorrowful that
near her heart brake, but because she would not it were known, outward she kept her countenance,
and made no semblance of sorrow.  But well she wist, if she remained till her brother Arthur
came thither, there should no gold go for her life.  Then she went unto Queen Guenever, and
asked her leave to ride into the country.

"Ye may abide," said Queen Guenever, "till your brother the King come home."

"I may not," said Morgan le Fay, "for I have such hasty tidings that I may not tarry."

"Well," said Guenever, "ye may depart when ye will."

So early on the morn, ere it was day, she took her horse and rode all that day and most part
of the night, and on the morn by noon she came to the abbey of nuns where lay King Arthur.
Knowing he was there, she asked where he was at that time; and they answered how he had laid
him in his bed to sleep, for he had had but little rest these three nights.

Then she alighted off her horse, and thought for to steal away Excalibur his sword.  So she
went straight unto his chamber, and no man durst disobey her commandment.  There she found
Arthur asleep in his bed, and Excalibur in his right hand naked.  When she saw that, she was
passing heavy that she might not come by the sword without awaking him, and that she wist well
would be her death.  Then she took the scabbard, and went her way on horseback.

When the King a woke and missed his scabbard, he was wroth, and he asked who had been there.
They said his sister Queen Morgan had been there, and had put the scabbard under her mantle,
and was gone.

"Alas," said Arthur, "falsely have ye watched me."

"Sir," said they all, "we durst not disobey your sister's commandment."

"Ah," said the King, "let fetch the best horse that may be found, and bid Sir Ontzlake arm
him in all haste, and take another good horse and ride with me."

So anon the King and Ontzlake were well armed, and rode after this lady; and so they came by
a cross, and asked a cowherd if there came any lady late riding that way.

"Sir," said the poor man, "right late came a lady riding with forty horses, and to yonder forest
she rode."

Then they spurred their horses and followed fast.  Within a while Arthur had a sight of Morgan
le Fay, and he chased as fast as he might. When she espied him following her, she rode a greater
pace through the forest till she came to a plain.  She saw she might not escape, wherefore
she rode unto a lake thereby, and said, "Whatsoever becometh of me, my brother shall not have
this scabbard."  And then she let throw the scabbard in the deepest of the water, where it
sank anon, for it was heavy of gold and precious stones.

Thereupon Queen Morgan rode into a valley where many great stones were, and when she saw that
she must be overtaken, she shaped herself, horse and man, by enchantment, unto great marble
stones.  Anon came Sir Arthur and Sir Ontzlake, but they might not know the lady from her men,
nor one knight from another.

"Ah," said the King, "here may ye see the vengeance of God, and now I am sorry that this misadventure
is befallen."

And then he looked for the scabbard, but it could not be found, so he returned to the abbey
where he came from.  When Arthur was gone, Queen Morgan turned all into the likeness as she
and they were before, and said, "Sirs, now may we go where we will."

So she departed into the country of Gore, and there was she richly received, and made her castles
and towns passing strong, for always she feared much King Arthur.

When the King had well rested him at the abbey, he rode unto Camelot, and found his Queen and
his barons right glad of his coming.  And when they heard of his strange adventures as is afore
rehearsed, they all had marvel of the falsehood of Morgan le Fay, and many knights wished her
burned because of her wicked enchantments.  "Well," said the King, "I shall so be avenged on
her, if I live, that all Christendom shall speak of it."

On the morn there came a damsel from Morgan to the King, and she brought with her the richest
mantle that ever was seen in that court, for it was set as full of precious stones as one might
stand by another, and there were the richest stones that ever the King saw.  And the damsel
said, "Your sister sendeth you this mantle, and desireth that ye should take this gift of her,
and in what thing she hath offended you, she will amend it at your own pleasure."

When the King beheld this mantle it pleased him much, but he said little.  With that came one
of the Damsels of the Lake unto the King and said, "Sir, I must speak with you in private."

"Say on," said the King, "what ye will."

"Sir," said the damsel, "put not on you this mantle till ye have seen more, and in no wise
let it come on you or any knight of yours, till ye command the bringer thereof to put it upon her."

"Well," said King Arthur, "it shall be done as ye counsel me."  And then he said unto the damsel
that came from his sister, "Damsel, this mantle that ye have brought me I will see upon you."

"Sir," said she, "it will not beseem me to wear a king's garment."

"By my head," said Arthur, "ye shall wear it ere it come on my back, or any man's that here is."

And so the King made it to be put upon her, and forthwithal she fell down dead, and nevermore
spake word after, but burned to coals.

Then was the King wonderfully wroth, more than he was beforehand, and said unto King Uriens,
"My sister, your wife, is alway about to betray me, and well I wot either ye or your son Sir
Uwaine is of counsel with her to have me destroyed; but as for you," said the King to King
Uriens, "I deem not greatly that ye be of her counsel, for she plotted with Accolon to destroy
you as well as me.  Therefore I hold you excused; but as for your son, Sir Uwaine, I hold him
suspected, and therefore I charge you put him out of my court."

So Sir Uwaine was discharged.  And when Sir Gawaine wist that, he made himself ready to go
with his cousin.  So they two departed, and rode into a great forest, and came to an abbey
of monks, where they were well lodged.  But when the King wist that Sir Gawaine was departed
from the court, there was made great sorrow among all the estates.

"Now," said Gaheris, Gawaine's brother, "we have lost two good knights for the sake of one."

CHAPTER X

SIR LAUNCELOT OF THE LAKE

When King Arthur, after long wars, rested and held a royal feast with his allies and noble
knights of the Round Table, there came into his hall, he sitting on his throne royal, twelve
ambassadors from Rome, and said to him: "The high and mighty emperor Lucius sendeth to the
king of Britain greeting, commanding thee to acknowledge him for thy lord and to send the tribute
due from this realm unto the empire according to the statutes and decrees made by the noble
and worthy Julius Caesar, conqueror of this realm and first emperor of Rome.  And if thou refuse
his demand and commandment, know thou for certain that he shall make strong war against thee,
thy realms and lands, and shall chastise thee and thy subjects, so that it shall be warning
perpetual unto all kings and princes not to deny their tribute unto the noble empire which
dominateth the universal world."

Some of the young knights hearing this message would have run on the ambassadors to slay them,
saying that it was a rebuke unto all the knights there present to suffer them to say so to
the King.  But King Arthur commanded that none should do them any harm, and anon let call all
his lords and knights of the Round Table to council upon the matter.  And all agreed to make
sharp war on the Romans, and to aid after their power.

So the messengers were allowed to depart, and they took ship at Sandwich and passed forth by
Flanders, Almaine, the mountains and all Italy until they came unto Rome.  There they said
to Lucius, "Certainly he is a lord to be feared, for his estate is the royalest that ever we
saw, and in his person he is the most manly man that liveth, and is likely to conquer all the
world, for unto his courage it is too little; wherefore we advise you to keep well your marches
and straits[1] in the mountains."

Then Lucius made ready a great host and marched into Gaul, and Arthur met him there with his
army.  The old chronicles tell of the great battles that were fought and the brave deeds of
knights and lords, how Arthur himself with Excalibur cleft the head of Lucius, and at length
passed over the mountains into Lombardy and Tuscany, and so came into Rome.  On a day appointed,
as the romance telleth, he was crowned emperor by the Pope's hand with all the royalty that
could be made.

After he had established all his lands from Rome unto France, and had given lands and realms
unto his servants and knights, to each after his desert in such wise that none complained,
rich nor poor, all his lords and all the great men of estate assembled before him and said:
"Blessed be God, your war is finished and your conquest achieved, insomuch that we know none
so great nor mighty that dare make war against you; wherefore we beseech you to return homeward
and give us licence to go home to our wives, from whom we have been long, and to rest us, for
your journey is finished with honour."

So they all came over sea, and landed at Sandwich, where Queen Guenever came and met the King.
And he was nobly received of all the commons in every city and borough, and great gifts were
presented to him at his home-coming, to welcome him.

Of all the knights that, when Arthur came into England, had increased in honour, Sir Launcelot
of the Lake in especial excelled in deeds of arms both for life and death.  His parents, King
Ban of Benwick and his fair queen, Elaine, had first named him Galahad, and, as has already
been said, Merlin, before he disappeared under the stone, had foretold that within twenty years
he should be known over the whole world as a great and worthy knight.  It is no marvel, therefore,
that Launcelot is the first knight that the French book maketh mention of after King Arthur
came from Rome.  He passed with Arthur into England, where he was received gladly and was made
a knight of the Round Table.  Queen Guenever had him in great favour above all other knights,
and in return he was loyal to her above all other ladies and damsels all his life, and for
love of her he did many deeds of arms, and saved her from the fire through his noble chivalry.
Therefore jealous people spoke evil of Sir Launcelot and the Queen, because they were of less
prowess and honour than he, and thereby great mischief arose in Arthur's court. From this came
Arthur's overthrow in the end, and the downfall of his noble realm.

But for long years Launcelot was the glory of knighthood, and he vied with King Arthur himself
in deeds of prowess and of chivalrous courtesy in the tournament and on adventure.

[1] Strait: narrow pass.

CHAPTER XI

A NIGHT-TIME ADVENTURE OF SIR LAUNCELOT

In fulfilment of his oath as a knight of the Round Table Sir Launcelot rode into many strange
and wild countries and through many waters and valleys.  He slew Sir Turquine, who watched
to destroy knights, and he clove the head of another false traitor who attended to destroy
and distress ladies, damsels, and gentlewomen.  Other wrongs besides these he righted, and
bravely withstood many a struggle.

Now on a day it chanced that he passed a deep forest, where, as often before, he found strait
lodging.  But he was brave and strong, and feared no hardship provided he did nothing contrary
to his honour as a worthy knight.  As he was riding over a long bridge there started upon him
suddenly a passing foul churl, who struck his horse upon the nose and asked Sir Launcelot why
he rode over that bridge without licence.

"Why should I not ride this way?" said Sir Launcelot; "it is the way I choose to ride."

"Thou shall not choose," said the churl, and began to beat him with his great club shod with iron.

Sir Launcelot drew his sword, and made short work of this rough porter. Then he rode right
on to the end of the bridge, through the fair village, where all the people in vain gave him
warning, and on straight into the green courtyard of the castle, which was Tintagil, in Cornwall.

Anon there came upon him two great giants, with horrible clubs in their hands.  With shield
and sword he soon laid on the earth one of these giants.  The other ran away for fear of the
horrible strokes, and Sir Launcelot entered the hall.  Here he set free three-score gentlewomen,
who for seven years had been prisoners of the two giants, working all manner of silk works
for their food.

"Show me such cheer as ye have," said Sir Launcelot, "and what treasure there is in this castle
I give you for a reward for your grievance." Then soon he mounted his horse again, and rode
away upon further adventure.  There Sir Launcelot unarmed him, set his armour beside him, and
went to bed, and anon fell asleep.

Therewith he took his armour and let himself down from the window by a sheet to the four knights.

"Turn you knights unto me," cried Sir Launcelot aloud, "and leave your fighting with that knight."

And then they all three left Sir Kay, for it was he who was so hard bestead, and turned unto
Sir Launcelot.  Sir Launcelot made them yield themselves to Sir Kay and promise to go next
Whitsunday to the court as prisoners of Queen Guenever.  So they were suffered to depart, and
Sir Launcelot knocked at the gate with the pommel of his sword.  The host came, and they entered,
Sir Kay and he.  "Sir," said the host, "I thought you were in your bed."  "So I was," said
Sir Launcelot, "but I arose and leaped out at my window to help an old fellow of mine."

When they came nigh the light, Sir Kay knew well that it was Sir Launcelot, and therewith he
kneeled down and thanked him for all his kindness that he had holpen him from death.

"Sir," said Sir Launcelot, "I have done nothing but that I ought to do, and ye are welcome,
and here shall ye repose you and take your rest."

So when Sir Kay was unarmed he asked for meat; there was meat fetched him, and he ate strongly.
Then they went to their beds, and Sir Launcelot and Sir Kay were lodged together in one bed.
On the morn Sir Launcelot arose early, and left Sir Kay sleeping.  He put on Sir Kay's armour
and took his shield, and so went to the stable.  He here got Sir Kay's horse, took leave of
his host, and so departed.

Then soon afterward Sir Kay arose.  He missed Sir Launcelot, and then he espied that his armour
and his horse had been taken.  "Now by my faith," said he, "I know well that he will grieve
some of the court of King Arthur, for my armour and horse will beguile all knights; they will
believe it is I, and will be bold to him.  And because I have his armour and shield I am sure
I shall ride in peace." Anon as they espied Sir Launcelot they thought by his arms it was Sir Kay.

"Lo, my fellows," said Sir Ector, another of the four, "yonder ye may see what a buffet he
hath; that knight is much bigger than ever was Sir Kay.  Now shall ye see what I may do to him."

So Sir Ector got his spear in his hand and galloped toward Sir Launcelot, and Sir Launcelot
smote him through shield and shoulder so that horse and man went to the earth, and ever his
spear held.

"By my faith," said Sir Uwaine, "yonder is a strong knight, and I am sure he hath slain Sir
Kay; and I see by his great strength it will be hard to match him."

Therewithal Sir Uwaine gat his spear in his hand and rode toward Sir Launcelot.  Sir Launcelot
knew him well, and so he met him on the plain, and gave him such a buffet that he was stunned,
and long he wist not where he was.

"Now see I well," said Sir Gawaine, the last of the four knights, "I must encounter with that
knight."

Then he dressed his shield and gat a good spear in his hand, and then they let run their horses
with all their mights, and either knight smote other in midst of the shield.  But Sir Gawaine's
spear brake, and Sir Launcelot charged so sore upon him that his horse reversed up-so-down.

Much sorrow had Sir Gawaine to get clear of his horse, and so Sir Launcelot passed on a pace,
and smiled, and said, "God give him joy that made this spear, for there came never a better
in my hand."

Then the four knights went each one to other and comforted each other. "What say ye to this
deed?" said Sir Gawaine.

CHAPTER XII

HOW SIR LAUNCELOT CAME INTO THE CHAPEL PERILOUS

On a day as Sir Launcelot rode a great while in a deep forest, he was ware of an old manor
beyond a bridge.  And he passed over the bridge, that was old and feeble, and came into a great
hall, where he saw lie a dead knight, that was a seemly man.  And therewithal came out a lady
weeping and wringing her hands, and she said: "Oh, knight, too much sorrow hast thou brought me."

"Why say ye so?" said Sir Launcelot; "I did never this knight any harm; therefore, fair lady,
be not displeased with me, for I am full sore aggrieved at your grievance."

"Truly sir," she said, "I know it is not ye that have slain my husband, for he that did that
deed is sore wounded, and he is never likely to recover; that I assure you."

"What was your husband's name?" asked Sir Launcelot.

"Sir," said she, "his name was Sir Gilbert, one of the best knights of the world, and he that
hath slain him, I know not his name."

"God send you better comfort," said Sir Launcelot, and so he departed and went into the forest
again, and there he met with a damsel who knew him well, and said aloud, "Well are ye come,
my lord; and now I require thee on thy knighthood help my brother that is sore wounded, and
never ceaseth bleeding, for this day fought he with Sir Gilbert and slew him in plain battle.
My brother was sore wounded, and a sorceress that dwelleth in a castle hard by told me this
day that my brother's wounds should never be whole till I could find a knight that would go
into the Chapel Perilous where he should find a sword and a bloody cloth that the wounded knight
was wrapped in.  A piece of that cloth and the sword should heal my brother's wounds, if his
wounds were searched with the sword and the cloth."

"This is a marvellous thing," said Sir Launcelot, "but what is your brother's name?"

"Sir," said she, "his name is Sir Meliot."

"That me repenteth," said Sir Launcelot, "for he is a fellow of the Table Round, and to help
him I will do all in my power."

"Then, sir," said she, "follow this highway, and it will bring you into the Chapel Perilous,
and here I shall wait till God send you again; except you I know no knight living that may
achieve that adventure."

So Launcelot departed, and when he came unto the Chapel Perilous, he alighted and tied his
horse to the little gate of the churchyard.  And soon he saw on the front of the chapel many
fair rich shields turned up-so-down, and many of these shields he had seen borne by knights
that he had known aforetime.  Then he saw standing there by him thirty great knights, taller
by a yard than any man that ever he had seen, all clad in black armour, ready with their shields,
and their swords drawn. They all grinned and gnashed at Sir Launcelot, and when he saw their
countenances, he put his shield afore him, and took his sword in his hand ready unto battle.
He started to go right past the giants, and then they scattered on every side and gave him
the way.  Therewith he waxed all bold and entered into the chapel, where he saw no light but
a dim lamp burning, and soon became aware of a corpse covered with a cloth of silk.  Sir Launcelot
stooped down and cut off a piece of that cloth, whereupon the earth under him seemed to quake
a little, and at this he feared.  Then he saw a fair sword lying by the dead knight. This he
gat into his hand and hied out of the chapel.

As soon as ever he was in the chapel yard all the giants spake to him with a grimly voice,
and said: "Knight, Sir Launcelot, lay that sword from thee, or else thou shalt die."

"Whether I live or die," said Sir Launcelot, "no loud words will get it again; therefore fight
for it if ye will."

Then he immediately passed right through their midst, and beyond the chapel yard there met
him a fair damsel, who said, "Sir Launcelot, leave that sword behind thee, or thou wilt die
for it."

"I leave it not," said Sir Launcelot, "for any entreaties."

"It is well," said she.  "If thou didst leave that sword thou shouldst never see Queen Guenever
again.  Now, gentle knight, I request one thing of thee.  Kiss me but once."

"Nay," said Sir Launcelot, "God forbid that I should do that."

"It is well, sir," said she; "if thou hadst kissed me thy life days had been done.  But now,
alas, I have lost all my labour, for I ordained this chapel to win thee.  Once I had Sir Gawaine
well nigh within my power, but he fought with that knight that lieth there dead in yonder chapel,
Sir Gilbert, and smote off his left hand and so escaped.  Sir Launcelot, I have loved thee
these seven years, but now I know no woman may have thy love but Queen Guenever."

"Ye say well," said Sir Launcelot.  "God preserve me from your subtile crafts."

Thereupon he took his horse and so departed from her, and soon met the damsel, Sir Meliot's
sister.  Anon she led him to the castle where Sir Meliot lay, pale as the earth from bleeding.
Sir Launcelot leaped unto him and touched his wounds with Sir Gilbert's sword, and then wiped
his wounds with a part of the cloth that Sir Gilbert was wrapped in, and anon he was as whole
a man as ever he had been in all his life.  And then there was great joy between them.  They
made Sir Launcelot all the cheer that they might, and on the morn he took his leave of Sir
Meliot and his sister, and rode away.

CHAPTER XIII

THE KNIGHT, THE LADY, AND THE FALCON

And Sir Launcelot by fortune came to a fair castle, and as he passed by he was ware of a falcon
that came flying over his head toward a high elm.  As the bird flew into the tree to take her
perch, the long lines about her feet caught on a bough, and when she would take flight again
she hung fast by the legs.  Sir Launcelot saw how the fair falcon hung there, and he was sorry
for her.  I was holding my hawk and she slipped from me, and if my lord my husband knows that
she is lost he will slay me."

"What is your lord's name?" said Sir Launcelot.

"Sir," said the lady, "his name is Sir Phelot, a knight of Northgalis."

"Well, fair lady," said Launcelot, "since ye know my name, and request me as a courteous knight
to help you, I will do what I may to get your hawk.  And yet truly I am an ill climber, and
the tree is passing high, with few boughs to cling to."

Thereupon Sir Launcelot alighted, and tied his horse to the elm.  Then the lady helped him
to unarm, and with might and force he climbed up to the falcon.  He tied the lines to a great
rotten branch, brake it off, and threw it and the hawk down.  Anon the lady gat the hawk in
her hand, and thereupon came Sir Phelot suddenly out of the grove, all armed and with his naked
sword in his hand.

Then he looked above and below him, and saw a big leafless bough.  This he brake off; then
he climbed down with it in his hand, and, observing how his horse stood, he suddenly leaped
down to the ground on the farther side of the horse from the knight.

Then Sir Phelot lashed at him eagerly, thinking to slay him.

Thereupon Sir Launcelot gat all his armour as well as he might, and put it on for fear of further
attack, since the knight's castle was so near.  As soon as he might he took his horse, and,
thanking God that he had escaped that adventure, he went on his adventures over many wild ways,
through marsh and valley and forest.

At Pentecost he returned home, and the King and all the court were passing glad of his coming.
And ever now and now came all the knights back, those that had encountered with Sir Launcelot,
those that he had set free from prison, and all those that knew of his great deeds of arms.
And they all bare record of Sir Launcelot's prowess, so at that time he had the greatest name
of any knight of the world, and most he was honoured of high and low.

CHAPTER XIV

HOW A KITCHEN-PAGE CAME TO HONOUR

Arthur was holding the high feast of Pentecost at a city and castle called in those days Kink-Kenadon,
upon the sands nigh Wales, and he sat at meat with all the knights of the Round Table.  Then
came into the hall two men well beseen and richly, and upon their shoulders there leaned the
goodliest young man and the fairest that ever any of the knights had seen.  He was higher than
the other two by a foot and a half, broad in the shoulders, well visaged, and the fairest and
largest handed that ever man saw; but he acted as though he might not walk nor support himself
unless he leaned upon their shoulders.  They went with him right unto the high dais without
saying of any words.

Then this much young man pulled himself away, and easily stretched up straight, saying: "King
Arthur, God you bless and all your fair fellowship of the Round Table.  For this cause I am
come hither, to pray you to give me three gifts.  They shall not be so unreasonable but that
ye may honourably grant them me, and to you no great hurt nor loss.  The first I will ask now,
and the other two gifts I will ask this day twelvemonth wheresoever ye hold your high feast."

"Now ask," said Arthur, "and ye shall have your asking."

"Now, sir, this is my petition for this feast, that you will give me meat and drink sufficiently
for this twelve-month, and at that day I will ask mine other two gifts."

"This is but a simple asking," said the King; "ye shall have meat and drink enough; I never
refuse that to any, neither my friend nor my foe. But what is your name I would know?"

"I cannot tell you," said he.

The King marvelled at this answer, but took him to Sir Kay, the steward, and charged him that
he should give the youth of all manner of meats and drinks of the best, and also that he should
have all manner of finding as though he were a lord's son.

"That need not be," said Sir Kay, "to do such cost upon him; for I dare undertake he is a villain
born, and never will make a man, for had he come of gentlemen he would have asked of you horse
and armour; but such as he is, so he asketh.  And since he hath no name, I shall give him the
name Beaumains, that is Fair-hands, and into the kitchen I shall bring him, and there he shall
have rich broth every day, so that he shall be as fat by the twelvemonth's end as a pork hog."

So the two men departed, and left him to Sir Kay, who scorned him and mocked him.  Thereat
was Sir Gawaine wroth, and especially Sir Launcelot bade Sir Kay leave off his mocking, "for,"
said he, "I dare wager he shall prove a man of great honour." 

The enemy's loss is computed to be from one thousand to one thousand
two hundred.

I am happy in communicating strong hopes of the recovery of the gallant General Shields, who
is so much improved as to have been brought to this place.

"Appended to this report are the following papers:

"(A) General return by name of killed and wounded.

"(B) Copies of report of Lieutenant-Colonel Hitchcock, acting inspector general (of prisoners
taken), and accompanying papers.

"(C) Report of Brigadier-General Twiggs, and subreports.

"(D) Report of Major-General Patterson and report of brigade commanders.

"(E) Copy of report of Brigadier-General Worth announcing the occupation
by his division of the castle and town of Perote without opposition,
with an inventory of ordnance there found.

A Mexican historian gives the following account of the close of the
battle: "General Santa Anna, accompanied by some of his adjutants,
was passing along the road to the left of the battery, when the enemy's
column, now out of the woods, appeared on his line of retreat and
fired upon him, forcing him back.

The carriage in which he had left Jalapa was riddled with shot, the mules killed and taken by
the enemy, as well as a wagon containing sixteen thousand dollars
received the day before for the pay of the soldiers.

Every tie of command and obedience now being broken among our troops, safety alone being the
object, and all being involved in a frightful whirl, they rushed desperately to the narrow
pass of the defile that descended to the Plan del Rio, where the
general in chief had preceded, with the chiefs and officers accompanying
him.

Horrid indeed was the descent by that narrow and rocky path, where
thousands rushed, disputing the passage, with desperation, and leaving
a track of blood upon the road.

All classes being confounded, military distinction and respect were lost; and badges of rank
became marks of sarcasm that were only meted out according to their grade and humiliation. The
enemy, now masters of our camp, turned their guns upon the fugitives,
thus augmenting the terror of the multitude that crowded through the
defile and pressed forward every instant by a new impulse, which increased
the confusion and disgrace of the ill-fated day."

General Scott reports the strength of his army at Cerro Gordo at eight
thousand five hundred, the killed and wounded four hundred and thirty-one,
of which thirty-three were officers and three hundred and ninety-eight
enlisted men.

His estimate of the Mexican force was twelve thousand.

The prisoners captured were about three thousand, and the killed and wounded between one thousand
and twelve hundred. Forty-three cannon and three thousand five hundred small arms were captured.
On the morning of the 22d the army moved to and occupied the town
and castle of Perote without resistance.

General Santa Anna now retired to Orizaba, where he was met by many distinguished citizens.
He addressed a letter to the ad interim President, General Arroya, as follows:

"ORIZABA, April 22, 1847.

"MY ESTEEMED FRIEND: The dispatch which I have forwarded to the Minister
of War will already have informed you of the events which occurred
on the 18th inst.

The enemy made an extraordinary effort to force the pass, and, exasperated by the repulse he
had experienced the day before, and because he knew his ruin was inevitable unless he succeeded,
attacked me with his entire army, which was not less than twelve thousand men. He put everything
on the hazard of the die, and the cast was favorable to him. I do not regard the cause of the
nation as hopeless, if it will defend its honor and independence as circumstances may require.
I presume you have taken all proper measures for the public safety,
and first of all for that of the capital.

I shall be able to aid it very soon if it will defend itself. At present I have with me five
hundred men and four guns, and there is no doubt but I shall collect in a few days a force
equal to that I rallied at Cerro Gordo.

I only require that you send me some money through the medium of bills of exchange, as I find
it impossible to raise a dollar. We must, my friend, not give up ourselves as lost, and, before
God, you shall see that I will make no treaty with the enemy which
will dishonor us or put us in worse condition.

Write to me when convenient, and reckon always on the poor services of your most affectionate
friend, who wishes you every happiness. A.L. DE SANTA ANNA."

The prisoners were all paroled, and the sick and wounded sent to Jalapa, where they were comfortably
provided for.
 
Then Fair-hands alighted down and took Sir Kay's shield and his spear, had his dwarf mount
upon Sir Kay's horse, and started upon his own horse and rode his way.  All this Sir Launcelot
saw, and so did the damsel.

By this time Sir Launcelot had come up, and Fair-hands offered to joust with him.  So they
rushed together like boars, and for upwards of an hour they had a hard fight, wherein Sir Launcelot
had so much ado with Fair-hands that he feared himself to be shamed.  At length he said, "Fair-hands,
fight not so sore; your quarrel and mine is not so great but we may leave off."

"That is truth," said Fair-hands, "but it doth me good to feel your might, and yet, my lord,
I showed not my uttermost."

"Well," said Sir Launcelot, "I promise you I had as much to do as I might to save myself from
you unashamed; therefore ye need have no fear of any earthly knight."

"Hope ye then," said Fair-hands, "that I may anywhere stand as a proved knight?"

"Yea," said Launcelot, "do as ye have done, and I shall be your warrant."

"Then I pray you give me the order of knighthood," said Fair-hands.

"Then must ye tell me your name," said Launcelot, "and of what kin ye be born."

"Sir, if ye will not make me known, I will," said Fair-hands.

"That I promise you by the faith of my body, until it be openly known," said Sir Launcelot.

"Then, sir," he said, "my name is Gareth; I am own brother unto Sir Gawaine."

"Ah! sir," said Launcelot, "I am more glad of you than I was, for ever me thought ye should
be of great blood, and that ye came not to the court either for meat or for drink."

Then Sir Launcelot gave him the order of knighthood, and Sir Gareth went his way.

Sir Launcelot now came to Sir Kay and had him carried home upon his shield.  He was with difficulty
healed of his wounds, and all men scorned him.  In especial Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot said
it was not for Sir Kay to rebuke the young man, for full little he knew of what birth he was
and for what cause he came to this court.

[1] Foin: reach forth.

CHAPTER XV

HOW SIR GARETH FOUGHT FOR THE LADY OF CASTLE PERILOUS

After the damsel rode Fair-hands, now well provided with shield and spear, and known to Sir
Launcelot, at least, as Sir Gareth and nephew to King Arthur.  When he had overtaken the damsel,
anon she said: "What dost thou here?  Thou smellest all of the kitchen; thy clothes be foul
with the grease and tallow that thou gainedst in King Arthur's kitchen; therefore turn again,
foul kitchen-page.  I know thee well, for Sir Kay named thee Fair-hands.  What art thou but
a lubber and a turner of spits, and a ladle washer?"

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "say to me what ye will, I will not go from you, for I have undertaken,
in King Arthur's presence, to achieve your adventure, and so shall I finish it, or I shall
die therefore."

Thus as they rode along in the wood, there came a man flying all that ever he might.  "Whither
wilt thou?" said Fair-hands.

"O lord," he said, "help me, for yonder in a dell are six thieves that have taken my lord and
bound him, and I am afeard lest they will slay him."

So Fair-hands rode with the man until they came to where the knight lay bound, and the thieves
hard by.  Fair-hands struck one unto the death, and then another, and at the third stroke he
slew the third thief; and then the other three fled.  He rode after them and overtook them,
and then those three thieves turned again and assailed Fair-hands hard, but at the last he
slew them also, and returned and unbound the knight. The knight thanked him, and prayed him
to ride with him to his castle there a little beside, and he should honourably reward him for
his good deeds.

"Sir," said Fair-hands, "I will no reward have except as God reward me. And also I must follow
this damsel."

When he came nigh her, she bade him ride from her, "for," said she, "thou smellest all of the
kitchen; thinkest thou that I have joy of thee?  All this deed thou hast done is but mishapped
thee, but thou shalt see a sight that shall make thee turn again, and that lightly."

Then the same knight who was rescued from the thieves rode after that damsel, and prayed her
to lodge with him that night.  And because it was near night the damsel rode with him to the
castle, and there they had great cheer.  At supper the knight set Sir Fair-hands afore the damsel.

"Fie, fie," said she, "sir knight, ye are uncourteous to set a kitchen-page afore me; him beseemeth
better to stick a swine than to sit afore a damsel of high parentage."

Then the knight was ashamed at her words, and took Fair-hands up and set him at a sideboard,
and seated himself afore him.  So all that night they had good cheer and merry rest.

On the morn the damsel and Fair-hands thanked the knight and took their leave, and rode on
their way until they came to a great forest. Therein was a great river with but one passage,
and there were ready two knights on the farther side, to prevent their crossing.  Fair-hands
would not have turned back had there been six more, and he rushed into the water.  One of the
two encountered with him in the midst of the stream, and both spears were broken.  Then they
drew their swords and smote eagerly at one another.  At the last Sir Fair-hands smote the other
upon the helm so that he fell down stunned in the water, and there was he drowned.  Then Sir
Fair-hands spurred his horse upon the land, where the other fell upon him, and they fought
long together.  At the last Sir Fair-hands clove his helm and his head, and so rode unto the
damsel and bade her ride forth on her way.

"Alas," she said, "that ever a kitchen-page should have that fortune to destroy two such doughty
knights.  Thou thinkest thou hast done doughtily, but that is not so, for the first knight's
horse stumbled, and so he was drowned in the water; it was never by thy force or by thy might.
And as for the second knight, by mishap thou camest behind him and slewest him."

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "ye may say what ye will, but whomsoever I have ado with I trust
to God to serve him ere he depart, and therefore I reck not what ye say, provided I may win
your lady."

"Fie, fie, foul kitchen-knave, thou shalt see knights that shall abate thy boast.  I see all
that ever thou doest is but by misadventure, and not by prowess of thy hands."

"Fair damsel," said he, "give me goodly language, and then my care is past.  Ye may say what
ye will; what knights soever I shall meet, I fear them not, and wheresoever ye go I will follow
you."

So they rode on till even-song time, and ever she chid him and would not cease.  And then they
came to a black lawn, and there was a black hawthorn, and thereon hung a black banner, and
on the other side there hung a black shield, and by it stood a black spear great and long,
and a great black horse covered with silk, and a black stone fast by, whereon sat a knight
all armed in black harness, and his name was the Knight of the Black Lawns.

The damsel, when she saw this knight, bade Fair-hands flee down the valley.  "Grammercy," said
he, "always ye would have me a coward."

With that the Black Knight, when she came nigh him, spake and said, "Damsel, have ye brought
this knight of King Arthur to be your champion?"

"Nay, fair knight," said she, "this is but a kitchen-knave, that was fed in King Arthur's kitchen
for alms.  I cannot be rid of him, for with me he rideth against my will.  Would that ye should
put him from me, or else slay him, if ye may, for he is a troublesome knave, and evilly he
hath done this day."

"Thus much shall I grant you," said the Black Knight: "I shall put him down upon one foot,
and his horse and his harness he shall leave with me, for it were shame to me to do him any
more harm."

When Sir Fair-hands heard him say thus, he said, "Sir knight, thou art full generous with my
horse and my harness; I let thee know it cost thee naught, and whether thou like it or not,
this lawn will I pass, and neither horse nor harness gettest thou of me, except as thou win
them with thy hands.  I am no kitchen-page, as the damsel saith I am; I am a gentleman born,
and of more high lineage than thou, and that will I prove on thy body."

Then in great wrath they drew back with their horses, and rushed together as it had been the
thunder.  The Black Knight's spear brake, and Fair-hands thrust him through both his sides,
whereupon his own spear brake also.  Nevertheless the Black Knight drew his sword and smote
many eager strokes of great might, and hurt Fair-hands full sore. But at the last he fell down
off his horse in a swoon, and there he died.

When Fair-hands saw that the Black Knight had been so well horsed and armed, he alighted down
and armed himself in the dead man's armour, took his horse, and rode after the damsel.  When
she saw him come nigh, she said, "Away, kitchen-knave, out of the wind, for the smell of thy
foul clothes offendeth me.  Alas that ever such a knave as thou art should by mishap slay so
good a knight as thou hast done.  All this is my ill luck, but hard by is one that shall requite
thee, and therefore again I counsel thee, flee."

"It may be my lot," said Fair-hands, "to be beaten or slain, but I warn you, fair damsel, I
will not flee away or leave your company for all that ye can say, for ever ye say that they
will kill me or beat me, yet it happeneth that I escape and they lie on the ground.  Therefore
it were as good for you to stop thus all day rebuking me, for away will I not till I see the
uttermost of this journey, or else I will be slain or truly beaten; therefore ride on your
way, for follow you I will, whatsoever happen."

As they rode along together they saw a knight come driving by them all in green, both his horse
and his harness; and when he came nigh the damsel he asked her, "Is that my brother the Black
Knight that ye have brought with you?"

"Nay, nay," said she, "this unlucky kitchen-knave hath slain your brother through mischance."

"Alas," said the Green Knight, "that is great pity that so noble a knight as he was should
so unfortunately be slain, and by a knave's hand, as ye say that he is.  Ah! traitor, thou
shalt die for slaying my brother; he was a full noble knight."

"I defy thee," said Fair-hands, "for I make known to thee I slew him knightly and not shamefully."

Therewithal the Green Knight rode unto a horn that was green that hung on a green thorn, and
there he blew three deadly notes, whereupon came two damsels and armed him lightly.  Then he
took a great horse and a green shield and a green spear, and the two knights ran together with
all their mights.  They brake their spears unto their hands, and then drew their swords.  Now
they gave many sad strokes, and either of them wounded other full ill.

At the last Fair-hands' horse struck the Green Knight's horse upon the side, and it fell to
the earth.  Then the Green Knight left his horse lightly, and prepared to fight on foot.  That
saw Fair-hands, and therewithal he alighted, and they rushed together like two mighty champions
a long while, and sore they bled both.

With that came the damsel and said, "My lord, the Green Knight, why for shame stand ye so long
fighting with the kitchen-knave?  Alas, it is shame that ever ye were made knight, to see such
a lad match such a knight, as if the weed overgrew the corn."

Therewith the Green Knight was ashamed, and gave a great stroke of might, and clave Fair-hands'
shield through.  When the young knight saw his shield cloven asunder he was a little ashamed
of that stroke and of her language, and then he gave the other such a buffet upon the helm
that he fell on his knees, and Fair-hands quickly pulled him upon the ground grovelling.  Then
the Green Knight cried for mercy, and yielded himself unto Sir Fair-hands, and prayed him to
slay him not.

"All is in vain," said Fair-hands, "for thou shalt die unless this damsel that came with me
pray me to save thy life."

Therewithal he unlaced his helm as if to slay him.  "Let be," said the damsel, "thou foul kitchen-knave,
slay him not, for if thou do, thou shalt repent it."

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "your charge is to me a pleasure, and at your commandment his life
shall be saved, and else not.  Sir Knight with the green arms, I release thee quit at this
damsel's request, for I will not make her wroth; I will fulfil all that she chargeth me."

And then the Green Knight kneeled down and did him homage with his sword, promising for ever
to become his man together with thirty knights that held of him.  Then said the damsel, "Me
repenteth, Green Knight, of your damage and of the death of your brother the Black Knight;
of your help I had great need, for I fear me sore to pass this forest."

"Nay, fear ye not," said the Green Knight, "for ye shall lodge with me this night, and to-morn
I shall help you through this forest."

So they took their horses and rode to his manor, which was fast there beside.  And ever the
damsel rebuked Fair-hands, and would not suffer him to sit at her table.  But the Green Knight
took him and set him at a side table, and did him honour, for he saw that he was come of noble
blood and had proved himself a full noble knight.  All that night he commanded thirty men privily
to watch Fair-hands for to keep him from all treason.  And on the morn they arose, and after
breaking their fast they took their horses and rode on their way.

As the Green Knight conveyed them through the forest he said, "My lord Fair-hands, I and these
thirty knights shall be always at your summons, both early and late at your call wherever ye
will send us."

"It is well," said Fair-hands; "when I call upon you ye must go unto King Arthur with all your
knights."

So the Green Knight took his leave, and the damsel said unto Fair-hands, "Why followest thou
me, thou kitchen-boy; cast away thy shield and thy spear and flee, for thou shalt not pass
a pass here, that is called the pass Perilous."

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "who is afraid let him flee, for it were shame to turn again since
I have ridden so long with you."

"Well," said she, "ye shall soon, whether ye will or not."

In like manner on the next day Sir Fair-hands overcame a third brother, the Red Knight, and
in like manner the damsel would have Fair-hands spare his life.  Albeit she spake unto him
many contemptuous words, whereof the Red Knight had great marvel, and all that night made three-score
men to watch Fair-hands that he should have no shame or villainy.  The Red Knight yielded himself
to Fair-hands with fifty knights, and they all proffered him homage and fealty at all times
to do him service.

"I thank you," said Fair-hands; "this ye shall grant me when I call upon you, to come afore
my lord King Arthur and yield yourselves unto him to be his knights."

"Sir," said the Red Knight, "I will be ready and my fellowship at your summons."

So again upon the morn Sir Fair-hands and the damsel departed, and ever she rode chiding him
in the foulest manner.

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "ye are uncourteous so to rebuke me as ye do, for me seemeth I have
done you good service, and ever ye threaten me I shall be beaten with knights that we meet;
but ever for all your boasts they lie in the dust or in the mire, and therefore I pray you
rebuke me no more.  When ye see me beaten or yielded as recreant, then may ye bid me go from
you shamefully, but first I let you wit I will not depart from you, for I were worse than a
fool if I should depart from you all the while that I win honour."

"Well," said she, "right soon there shall come a knight that shall pay thee all thy wages,
for he is the most man of honour of the world, except King Arthur."

"The more he is of honour," said Fair-hands, "the more shall be my honour to have ado with
him.  Have no doubt, damsel, by the grace of God I shall so deal with this knight that within
two hours after noon I shall overcome him, and then shall we come to the siege of your lady's
castle seven miles hence by daylight."

"Marvel have I," said the damsel, "what manner of man ye be, for it may never be otherwise
but that ye be come of noble blood, for so foul and shamefully did never woman rule a knight
as I have done you, and ever courteously ye have suffered me, and that came never but of gentle
blood."

"Damsel," said Fair-hands, "a knight may little do that may not suffer a damsel, for whatsoever
ye said unto me I took no heed to your words, for the more ye said the more ye angered me,
and my wrath I wreaked upon them that I had ado withal.  And therefore all the missaying that
ye missaid me furthered me in my battle, and caused me to think to show and prove myself at
the end what I was.  For peradventure, though I had meat in King Arthur's kitchen, yet I might
have had meat enough in other places.  All that I did to prove and to assay my friends, and
whether I be a gentleman born or not, I let you wit, fair damsel, I have done you gentleman's
service, and peradventure better service yet will I do ere I depart from you."

"Alas," she said, "good Fair-hands, forgive me all that I have missaid or done against thee."

"With all my heart," said he, "I forgive it you, and damsel, since it liketh you to say thus
fair to me, wit ye well it gladdeth mine heart greatly, and now me seemeth there is no knight
living but I am able enough for him."

With this Sir Persant of Inde, the fourth of the brethren that stood in Fair-hands' way to
the siege, espied them as they came upon the fair meadow where his pavilion was.  Sir Persant
was the most lordly knight that ever thou lookedst on.  His pavilion and all manner of thing
that there is about, men and women, and horses' trappings, shields and spears were all of dark
blue colour.  Anon he and Fair-hands prepared themselves and rode against one another that
both their spears were shattered to pieces, and their horses fell dead to the earth.  Then
they fought two hours and more on foot, until their armour was all hewn to pieces, and in many
places they were wounded.  At the last, though loath to do it, Fair-hands smote Sir Persant
above upon the helm so that he fell grovelling to the earth, and the fierce battle was at an
end.  Like his three brethren before, Sir Persant yielded himself and asked for mercy, and
at the damsel's request Fair-hands gladly granted his life, and received homage and fealty
from him and a hundred knights, to be always at his commandment.

On the morn as the damsel and Sir Fair-hands departed from Sir Persant's pavilion, "Fair damsel,"
said Persant, "whitherward are ye away leading this knight?"

"Sir," she said, "this knight is going to the siege that besiegeth my sister in the Castle
Perilous."

"Ah, ah," said Persant, "that is the Knight of the Red Lawns, the most perilous knight that
I know now living, a man that is without mercy, and men say that he hath seven men's strength.
God save you, sir, from that knight, for he doth great wrong to that lady, which is great pity,
for she is one of the fairest ladies of the world, and me seemeth that this damsel is her sister.
Is not your name Linet?"

"Yea, sir," said she, "and my lady my sister's name is Dame Liones. Now, my lord Sir Persant
of Inde, I request you that ye make this gentleman knight or ever he fight with the Red Knight."

"I will with all my heart," said Sir Persant, "if it please him to take the order of knighthood
of so simple a man as I am."

But Fair-hands thanked him for his good will, and told him he was better sped, as the noble
Sir Launcelot had already made him knight. Then, after Persant and the damsel had promised
to keep it close, he told them his real name was Gareth of Orkney, King Arthur's nephew, and
that Sir Gawaine and Sir Agravaine and Sir Gaheris were all his brethren, he being the youngest
of them all.  "And yet," said he, "wot not King Arthur nor Sir Gawaine what I am."

The book saith that the lady that was besieged had word of her sister's coming and a knight
with her, and how he had passed all the perilous passages, had won all the four brethren, and
had slain the Black Knight, and how he overthrew Sir Kay, and did great battle with Sir Launcelot,
and was made knight by him.  She was glad of these tidings, and sent them wine and dainty foods
and bade Sir Fair-hands be of good heart and good courage.

The next day Fair-hands and Linet took their horses again and rode through a fair forest and
came to a spot where they saw across the plain many pavilions and a fair castle and much smoke.
And when they came near the siege Sir Fair-hands espied upon great trees, as he rode, how there
hung goodly armed knights by the necks, nigh forty of them, their shields about their necks
with their swords.  These were knights that had come to the siege to rescue Dame Liones, and
had been overcome and put to this shameful death by the Red Knight of the Red Lawns.

Then they rode to the dykes, and saw how strong were the defences, and many great lords nigh
the walls, and the sea upon the one side of the walls, where were many ships and mariners'
noise, with "hale" and "ho." Fast by there was a sycamore tree, whereupon hung a horn, the
greatest that ever they saw, of an elephant's bone.  This the Knight of the Red Lawns had hung
up there that any errant knight might blow it, if he wished the Knight of the Red Lawns to
come to him to do battle.  The damsel Linet besought Fair-hands not to blow the horn till high
noon, for the Red Knight's might grew greater all through the morn, till, as men said, he had
seven men's strength.

"Ah, fie for shame, fair damsel," said Fair-hands, "say ye never so more to me, for, were he
as good a knight as ever was, I shall never fail him in his most might, for either I will win
honour honourably, or die knightly in the field."

Therewith he spurred his horse straight to the sycamore tree, and blew the horn so eagerly
that all the siege and all the castle rang thereof. And then there leaped out knights out of
their tents, and they within the castle looked over the walls and out at windows.  Then the
Red Knight of the Red Lawns armed himself hastily, and two barons set his spurs upon his heels,
and all was blood red,--his armour, spear, and shield.  And an earl buckled his helm upon his
head, and then they brought him a red steed, and so he rode into a little vale under the castle,
that all that were in the castle and at the siege might behold the battle.

Sir Fair-hands looked up at a window of the castle, and there he saw the Lady Liones, the fairest
lady, it seemed to him, that ever he looked upon.  She made courtesy down to him, and ever
he looked up to the window with glad countenance, and loved her from that time and vowed to
rescue her or else to die.

"Leave, Sir Knight, thy looking," said the Red Knight, "and behold me, I counsel thee, and
make thee ready."

Then they both put their spears in their rests, and came together with all the might that they
had.  Either smote other in the midst of the shield with such force that the breastplates,
horse-girths, and cruppers brake, and both fell to the earth stunned, and lay so long that
all they that were in the castle and in the siege thought their necks had been broken.  But
at length they put their shields afore them, drew their swords, and ran together like two fierce
lions. Either gave other such buffets upon the helm that they reeled backward; then they recovered
both, and hewed off great pieces of their harness and their shields.

Thus they fought till it was past noon, and never would stint, till at last they lacked wind
both, and stood panting and blowing a while. Then they went to battle again, and thus they
endured till even-song time, and none that beheld them might know whether was like to win.
Then by assent of them both they granted either other to rest; and so they sat down on two
molehills, and unlaced their helms to take the cool wind.  Then Sir Fair-hands looked up at
the window, and there he saw the fair lady, Dame Liones.  She made him such countenance that
his heart waxed light and jolly; and therewith he bade the Red Knight of the Red Lawns make
ready to do battle to the uttermost.

So they laced up their helms and fought freshly.  By a cross stroke the Red Knight of the Red
Lawns smote Sir Fair-hands' sword from him, and then gave him another buffet on the helm so
that he fell grovelling to the earth, and the Red Knight fell upon him to hold him down.  Then
Linet cried to him aloud and said that the lady beheld and wept.  When Sir Fair-hands heard
her say so he started up with great might, gat upon his feet, and leaped to his sword.  He
gripped it in his hand, doubled his pace unto the Red Knight, and there they fought a new battle
together.

Now Sir Fair-hands doubled his strokes and smote so thick that soon he had the better of the
Red Knight of the Red Lawns, and unlaced his helm to slay him, whereupon he yielded himself
to Fair-hands' mercy.

Sir Fair-hands bethought him upon the knights that he had made to be hanged shamefully, and
said, "I may not with my honour save thy life."

Then came there many earls and barons and noble knights, and prayed Fair-hands to save his
life and take him as prisoner.  Then he released him upon this covenant that he go within to
the castle and yield himself there to the lady, and if she would forgive him he might have
his life with making amends to the lady of all the trespass he had done against her and her lands.

The Red Knight of the Red Lawns promised to do as Sir Fair-hands commanded and so with all
those earls and barons he made his homage and fealty to him.  Within a while he went unto the
castle, where he made peace with the Lady Liones, and departed unto the court of King Arthur.
There he told openly how he was overcome and by whom, and also he told all the battles of Fair-hands
from the beginning unto the ending.

"Mercy," said King Arthur and Sir Gawaine, "we marvel much of what blood he is come, for he
is a noble knight."  But Sir Launcelot had no marvel, for he knew whence he came, yet because
of his promise he would not discover Fair-hands until he permitted it or else it were known
openly by some other.

Dame Liones soon learned through her brother Sir Gringamore that the knight who had wrought
her deliverance was a king's son, Sir Gareth of Orkney, and nephew of King Arthur himself.
And she made him passing good cheer, and he her again, and they had goodly language and lovely
countenance together.  And she promised the noble knight Sir Gareth certainly to love him and
none other the days of her life.  Then there was not a gladder man than he, for ever since
he saw her at the window of Castle Perilous he had so burned in love for her that he was nigh
past himself in his reason.

CHAPTER XVI

HOW SIR GARETH RETURNED TO THE COURT OF KING ARTHUR

Now leave we Sir Gareth there with Sir Gringamore and his sisters, Liones and Linet, and turn
we unto King Arthur that held the next feast of Pentecost at Carlion.  And there came the Green
Knight with his fifty knights, and they yielded themselves all unto King Arthur.  And so there
came the Red Knight, his brother, and yielded himself and three-score knights with him.  Also
there came the Blue Knight, brother to them, and his hundred knights, and yielded themselves.
These three brethren told King Arthur how they were overcome by a knight that a damsel had
with her, and called him Fair-hands.  Also they told how the fourth brother, the Black Knight,
was slain in an encounter with Sir Fair-hands, and of the adventure with the two brethren that
kept the passage of the water; and ever more King Arthur marvelled who the knight might be
that was in his kitchen a twelvemonth and that Sir Kay in scorn named Fair-hands. 

"Listen to my tale this time," he said, "but it isn't at all amusing. One night I was off the
point of the cliffs below the Haunted House. I was in my boat, fishing for bream. It was full
moon, but me and my boat were in shadow. None could see us. By and bye--I saw a long, narrow boat
shoot out from a cave not far off from me. In it were three or four black looking foreigners.
They pushed their boat close under the cliffs and waited, full an hour. Then, by and bye, down
came Le Mierre and another man with bundles of silk, or what looked
like it ... and the fellow in the boat got up and caught hold of the
bundles and went off with them like the very devil.

Le Mierre and his man were up the cliff again before I could whistle to them that I was by.
I've meant to tell Le Mierre some day; and it seems to me now's the time for him and his girl
to know."

"And what good would that be, I'd like to be told! He'd only do his best to pay you out for
being a sneak."

"I've thought, too, of letting the constables of the parish know of it," pursued Corbet quietly.

"And a fine row there'd be!

Do you think you, a poor fisherman, would be believed when you went
to tell tales of him, a rich farmer!

Bah, you must be mad, Perrin Corbet."

Now the fisherman had all the island reverence for his betters. He really spoke to ease his mind;
but he was very far from longing to deliver up Dominic to justice, in spite of the pricking
of his conscience, which whispered to him that he was like an accomplice in a crime if he did
not tell of the smuggling business. He was silent now, and Ellenor began to speak again.

"If you take my advice you won't meddle with Monsieur Le Mierre at all. Are you forgetting
that his family has always been well known for its wizards and witches? Bah, Perrin, have you
so soon forgotten how the grandfather of Monsieur used to throw black
powder on people if they offended him, and then they would be taken
ill all of a sudden?

And over and over again, at the Sabbat des Sorciers of a Friday night on Catiôroc Hill, the very
mother of Dominic has been seen, dancing with all the rest!"

Perrin stopped short and whistled.

"Well, you won't hardly believe me, but I had quite forgotten! Of course now I remember all you say. No,
no, I can't meddle with him. His whole family has always been known to have dealings with the
devil. Well, here we are to Les Casquets, let's go in and perhaps your mother will give me a
cup of tea."

"Go in by yourself, if you like! As for me, I'm off, à bientôt, Perrin!"

Ellenor walked slowly in the direction which would lead her furthest away from the cottage.
She wound in and out of low, prickly gorze bushes covering the moorland till she reached Pleinmont
Point, then she ran down a gently sloping grass valley till she got to the sea. She had an
appointment with Dominic at Pezerie, the bottom of the valley which skirted the rocky coast.
It was blowing hard, and yet a dense mist hung over the sea. Once, like a ghost, a boat with
a velvety brown sail, flitted across the Pezerie outlook. A bell tolled from Hanois Lighthouse.

Ellenor
shivered, and cruel forebodings took hold of her.

Then, all at once, it was brilliant sunshine in her heart, for Dominic came running down the
valley and clasped her in his arms. With sobs and passionate words of reproach and love, she asked
him if it was true he was going to marry Blaisette.

"Little silly child!" he said, with a laugh, "of course it is not true! There was no thought of
my marriage when I led the cart.

I was just helping the cousin of Blaisette; one does not always exactly
keep to old customs."

Then she told him of Perrin and the smuggling; and he called her a clever garce for stopping Corbet's
mouth. He was in the gayest and most fascinating of moods, and Ellenor
was in a heaven of joy, for his caresses and words had never before
been so tender. It was late before they parted. He could not see her
again for a few days, he explained, as he had special business on
hand.

The next day, when Ellenor was knitting outside Les Casquets,
a messenger arrived from Orvillière. He brought an invitation to Jean
Cartier and to his wife and daughter, to attend the wedding of Monsieur
Dominic Le Mierre and Mademoiselle Blaisette Simon.

She stood up
straight and tall to receive the blow. She did not flinch. Only her
face was grey as ashes; and her large eyes looked like those of a
hunted animal, as she accepted the invitation for her parents and
herself.

The wedding was fixed for that day week, and all the parish,
indeed the two parishes of Saint Pierre du Bois and Torteval, were
wild with excitement.

"That is truth," said Sir Gareth, "and if I have not you and hold not you as my wife I wed
no lady."

"What, nephew," said the King, "is the wind in that door!  Wit ye well I would not for the
stint of my crown be causer to withdraw your hearts.  Ye shall have my love and my lordship
in the uttermost wise that may lie in my power."

Then was there made a provision for the day of marriage, and by the King's advice it should
be at Michaelmas following at Kink-Kenadon by the seaside.  And when the day came the Bishop
of Canterbury made the wedding betwixt Sir Gareth and the Lady Liones with great solemnity.
And at the same time Gaheris was wedded to Linet.

When this solemnisation was done there came in the Green Knight, the Red Knight, and all the
others that had yielded themselves to Sir Gareth, and did homage and fealty to hold their lands
of him for ever, and desired to serve him at the feast.  And the kings and queens, princes,
earls, and barons, and many bold knights went unto meat, and well may ye wit that there was
all manner of meat plenteously, all manner of revels, and games, with all manner of minstrelsy
that was used in those days.  So they held the court forty days with great solemnity.

And this Sir Gareth was a noble knight, and a well ruled, and fair languaged.

CHAPTER XVII

HOW YOUNG TRISTRAM SAVED THE LIFE OF THE QUEEN OF LYONESSE

There was a king called Meliodas, as likely a knight as any living, and he was lord of the
country of Lyonesse.  At that time King Arthur reigned supreme over England, Wales, Scotland,
and many other realms, howbeit there were many lords of countries that held their lands under
King Arthur.  So also was the King of France subject to him, and the King of Brittany, and
all the lordships as far as Rome.  The wife of this King Meliodas was a full good and fair
lady, called Elizabeth, the sister of King Mark of Cornwall.  Well she loved her lord, and
he her again, and there was much joy betwixt them.  There was a lady in that country who bore
ill will towards this king and queen, and therefore upon a day, as he rode on hunting, for
he was a great chaser, she by an enchantment made him chase a hart by himself alone till he
came to an old castle, where anon she had him taken prisoner.

When Queen Elizabeth missed her lord she was nigh out of her wit, and she took a gentlewoman
with her and ran into the forest to seek him. When she was far in the forest and might go no
farther, she sank down exhausted.  For the default of help she took cold there, and she soon
knew that she must die.  So she begged her gentlewoman to commend her to King Meliodas, and
to say that she was full sorry to depart out of this world from him, and that their little
child, that was to have such sorrow even in his infancy, should be christened Tristram.

Therewith this queen gave up the ghost and died.  The gentlewoman laid her under the shadow
of a great tree, and right so there came the barons, following after the queen.  When they
saw that she was dead they had her carried home, and much dole[1] was made for her.

The morn after his queen died King Meliodas was delivered out of prison, and the sorrow he
made for her, when he was come home, no tongue might tell.  He had her richly interred, and
afterwards, as she had commanded afore her death, had his child christened Tristram, the sorrowful
born child.  For seven years he remained without a wife, and all that time young Tristram was
nourished well.

Then, when he wedded King Howell's daughter of Brittany and had other children, the stepmother
was wroth that Tristram should be heir to the country of Lyonesse rather than her own son.
Wherefore this jealous queen resolved to become rid of her stepson, and she put poison into
a silver cup in the chamber where Tristram and her children were together, intending that when
Tristram was thirsty he should drink it. But it happened that the queen's own son espied the
cup with poison, and, because the child was thirsty and supposed it was good drink, he took
of it freely.  Therewithal he died suddenly, and when the queen wist of the death of her son,
wit ye well that she was heavy of heart. But yet the king understood nothing of her treason.

Notwithstanding all this the queen would not leave her jealousy, and soon had more poison put
in a cup.  By fortune King Meliodas, her husband, found the cup where was the poison, and being
much thirsty he took to drink thereout.  Anon the queen espied him and ran unto him and pulled
the cup from him suddenly.  The king marvelled why she did so, and remembered how her son was
suddenly slain with poison.  Then he took her by the hand, and said: "Thou false traitress,
thou shalt tell me what manner of drink this is."  Therewith he pulled out his sword, and swore
a great oath that he should slay her if she told him not the truth.

Then she told him all, and by the assent of the barons she was condemned to be burned as a
traitress, according to the law.  A great fire was made, and just as she was at the fire to
take her execution young Tristram kneeled afore King Meliodas and besought of him a boon. "I
grant it," said the king, whereupon the youth demanded the life of the queen, his stepmother.

"That is unrightfully asked," said King Melodias, "for she would have slain thee, if she had
had her will, and for thy sake most is my cause that she should die."

But Tristram besought his father to forgive her, as he himself did, and required him to hold
his promise.  Then said the king, "Since ye will have it so, I give her to you; go ye to the
fire and take her, and do with her what ye will."

So Sir Tristram went to the fire, and by the commandment of the king delivered her from death.
But thereafter King Meliodas would never have aught to do with her, though by the good means
of young Tristram he at length forgave her.  Ever after in her life she never hated her stepson
more, but loved him and had great joy of him, because he saved her from the fire.  But the
king would not suffer him to abide longer at his court.

[1] Dole: sorrow; mourning.

CHAPTER XVIII

SIR TRISTRAM'S FIRST BATTLE

King Melodias sought out a gentleman that was well learned, and taught, and with him, named
Gouvernail, he sent young Tristram away from Lyonesse court into France, to learn the language
and customs and deeds of arms.  There he learned to be a harper passing all others of his time,
and he also applied himself well to the gentlemanly art of hawking and hunting, for he that
gentle is will draw unto him gentle qualities and follow the customs of noble gentlemen.  The
old chronicle saith he adopted good methods for the chase, and the terms he used we have yet
in hawking and hunting.  Therefore the book of forest sports is called the Book of Sir Tristram.

When he well could speak the language and had learned all that he might in that country, he
came home again, and remained in Cornwall until he was big and strong, of the age of nineteen
years, and his father, King Meliodas, had great joy of him.

Then it befell that King Anguish of Ireland sent to King Mark of Cornwall for the tribute long
paid him, but now seven years behind. King Mark and his barons gave unto the messenger of Ireland
the answer that they would no tribute pay, and bade him tell his king that if he wished tribute
he should send a trusty knight of his land to fight for it against another that Cornwall should
find to defend its right.  With this the messenger departed into Ireland.

When King Anguish understood the answer, he was wonderfully wroth, and called unto him Sir
Marhaus, the good and proved knight, brother unto the queen of Ireland, and a knight of the
Round Table, and said to him: "Fair brother, I pray you go into Cornwall for my sake, and do
battle for the tribute that of right we ought to have."

Sir Marhaus was not loath to do battle for his king and his land, and in all haste he was fitted
with all things that to him needed, and so he departed out of Ireland and arrived in Cornwall
even fast by the castle of Tintagil.

When King Mark understood that the good and noble knight Sir Marhaus was come to fight for
Ireland, he made great sorrow, for he knew no knight that durst have ado with him.  Sir Marhaus
remained on his ship, and every day he sent word unto King Mark that he should pay the tribute
or else find a champion to fight for it with him.

Then they of Cornwall let make cries in every place, that what knight would fight to save the
tribute should be rewarded so that he should fare the better the term of his life.  But no
one came to do the battle, and some counselled King Mark to send to the court of King Arthur
to seek Sir Launcelot of the Lake, that at that time was named for the marvellousest knight
of all the world.  Others said it were labour in vain to do so, because Sir Marhaus was one
of the knights of the Round Table, and any one of them would be loath to have ado with other.
So the king and all his barons at the last agreed that it was no boot to seek any knight of
the Round Table.

Meanwhile came the language and the noise unto young Tristram how Sir Marhaus abode battle
fast by Tintagil, and how King Mark could find no manner of knight to fight for him.  Then
Sir Tristram was wroth and sore ashamed that there durst no knight in Cornwall have ado with
Sir Marhaus, and he went unto his father, King Meliodas, and said: "Alas, that I am not made
knight; if I were, I would engage with him.  I pray you give me leave to ride to King Mark
to be made knight by him."

"I will well," said the father, "that ye be ruled as your courage will rule you."

So Tristram went unto his uncle, who quickly gave him the order of knighthood, and anon sent
a messenger unto Sir Marhaus with letters that said he had found a young knight ready to take
the battle to the uttermost.  Then in all haste King Mark had Sir Tristram horsed and armed
in the best manner that might be had or gotten for gold or silver, and he was put into a vessel,
both his horse and he, and all that to him belonged both for his body and for his horse, to
be taken to an island nigh Sir Marhaus' ships, where it was agreed that they should fight.
And when King Mark and his barons beheld young Sir Tristram depart to fight for the right of
Cornwall, there was neither man nor woman of honour but wept to see so young a knight jeopard
himself for their right.

When Sir Tristram was arrived at the island, he commanded his servant Gouvernail to bring his
horse to the land and to dress his horse rightly, and then, when he was in the saddle well
apparelled and his shield dressed upon his shoulder, he commanded Gouvernail to go to his vessel
again and return to King Mark.  "And upon thy life," said he, "come thou not nigh this island
till thou see me overcome or slain, or else that I win yonder knight."  So either departed
from other.

When Sir Marhaus perceived this young knight seeking to encounter with himself, one of the
most renowned knights of the world, he said, "Fair sir, since thou hopest to win honour of
me, I let thee wit honour mayest thou none lose by me if thou mayest stand me three strokes,
for I let thee wit for my noble deeds, proved and seen, King Arthur made me knight of the Table
Round."

Then they put spears in rest and ran together so fiercely that they smote either other down,
horse and all.  Anon they pulled out their swords and lashed together as men that were wild
and courageous.  Thus they fought more than half a day, and either was wounded passing sore,
so that the blood ran down freshly from them upon the ground.  By then Sir Tristram waxed more
fresh than Sir Marhaus, and better winded, and bigger, and with a mighty stroke he smote Sir
Marhaus upon the helm such a buffet, that it went through his helm and through the coif of
steel and through the brain-pan, and the sword stuck so fast in the helm and in his brain-pan
that Sir Tristram pulled thrice at his sword or ever he might pull it out from his head; and
there Marhaus fell down on his knees, the edge of Tristram's sword left in his brain-pan. Suddenly
Sir Marhaus rose grovelling, and threw his sword and his shield from him, and so ran to his
ships and fled his way, sore groaning.

Anon he and his fellowship departed into Ireland, and, as soon as he came to the king his brother,
he had his wounds searched, and in his head was found a piece of Sir Tristram's sword.  No
surgeons might cure this wound, and so he died of Sir Tristram's sword.  That piece of the
sword the queen his sister kept ever with her, for she thought to be revenged, if she might.

Now turn we again unto Sir Tristram, that was sore wounded by a spear-thrust of Sir Marhaus
so that he might scarcely stir.  He sat down softly upon a little hill, and bled fast.  Then
anon came Gouvernail, his man, with his vessel, and Sir Tristram was quickly taken back into
the castle of Tintagil.  He was cared for in the best manner possible, but he lay there a month
and more, and ever he was like to die of the stroke from Sir Marhaus' spear, for, as the French
book saith, the spear's head was envenomed.  Then was King Mark passing heavy, and he sent
after all manner of surgeons, but there was none that would promise him life.

At last there came a right wise lady, and she said plainly that he should never be whole unless
he went into the same country that the venom came from, and in that country he should be holpen,
or else never.  When King Mark understood that, he let provide for Sir Tristram a fair vessel,
well victualled, and therein was put Sir Tristram and Gouvernail, with him.  Sir Tristram took
his harp with him, and so they put to sea to sail into Ireland.

CHAPTER XIX

SIR TRISTRAM AND THE FAIR ISOUD

By good fortune Sir Tristram with Gouvernail arrived in Ireland fast by a castle where King
Anguish and the queen were.  As he came to land he sat and harped in his bed a merry lay, such
as none in Ireland ever heard afore that time.  And when the king and queen were told of this
stranger that was such a harper, anon they sent for him and let search his wounds, and then
asked him his name.  Then he answered, "I am of the country of Lyonesse; my name is Tramtrist,
and I was thus wounded in a battle, as I fought for a lady's right."

"Truly," said King Anguish, "ye shall have all the help in this land that ye may.  But I let
you wit in Cornwall I had a great loss as ever king had, for there I lost the best knight of
the world.  His name was Marhaus, a full noble knight of the Table Round."  Then he told Sir
Tristram wherefore Sir Marhaus was slain.  Sir Tristram made semblant as if he were sorry,
and yet better knew he how it was than the king.

The king for great favour had Tramtrist put in his daughter's keeping, because she was a noble
surgeon.  When she searched his wound she found that therein was poison, and so she healed
him within a while. Therefore Tramtrist cast great devotion to the Fair Isoud, for she was
at that time the fairest maid of the world.  He taught her to harp, and she soon began to have
a great fancy unto him.  Then soon he showed himself to be so brave and true a knight in the
jousts that she had great suspicion that he was some man of honour proved, and she loved him
more than heretofore.

Thus was Sir Tramtrist long there well cherished by the king and the queen and especially by
Isoud the Fair.  Upon a day as Sir Tramtrist was absent, the queen and Isoud roamed up and
down in the chamber, and beheld his sword there as it lay upon his bed.  And then by mishap
the queen drew out the sword and regarded it a long while.  Both thought it a passing fair
sword, but within a foot and a half of the point there was a great piece thereof broken out
of the edge.  When the queen espied that gap in the sword, she remembered her of a piece of
a sword that was found in the brain-pan of Sir Marhaus, her brother.  "Alas," then said she
unto her daughter, the Fair Isoud, "this is the traitor knight that slew thine uncle."

When Isoud heard her say so she was sore abashed, for much she loved Sir Tramtrist, and full
well she knew the cruelness of her mother. Anon the queen went unto her own chamber and sought
her coffer, and there she took out the piece of the sword that was pulled out of Sir Marhaus'
head.  Then she ran with that piece of iron to the sword that lay upon the bed, and when she
put that piece unto the sword, it was as meet as it could be when new broken.  The queen now
gripped that sword in her hand fiercely, and with all her might ran straight to where she knew
Tramtrist was, and there she would have thrust him through, had not a knight pulled the sword
from her.

Then when she was letted of her evil will, she ran to King Anguish and told him on her knees
what traitor he had in his house.  The king was right heavy thereof, but charged the queen
to leave him to deal with the knight.  He went straight into the chamber unto Sir Tramtrist,
that he found by now all ready armed to mount upon his horse.  King Anguish saw that it was
of no avail to fight, and that it was no honour to slay Sir Tramtrist while a guest within
his court; so he gave him leave to depart from Ireland in safety, if he would tell who he was,
and whether he slew Sir Marhaus.

"Sir," said Tristram, "now I shall tell you all the truth: My father's name is Meliodas, king
of Lyonesse, and my mother is called Elizabeth, that was sister unto King Mark of Cornwall.
I was christened Tristram, but, because I would not be known in this country, I turned my name,
and had myself called Tramtrist.  For the tribute of Cornwall I fought for mine uncle's sake,
and for the right of Cornwall that ye had possessed many years.  And wit ye well I did the
battle for the love of mine uncle, King Mark, for the love of the country of Cornwall, and
to increase mine honour."

"Truly," said the king, "I may not say but ye did as a knight should; howbeit I may not maintain
you in this country with my honour."

"Sir," said Tristram, "I thank you for your good lordship that I have had with you here, and
the great goodness my lady your daughter hath shown me.  It may so happen that ye shall win
more by my life than by my death, for in the parts of England it may be I may do you service
at some season so that ye shall be glad that ever ye showed me your good lordship.  I beseech
your good grace that I may take my leave of your daughter and of all the barons and knights."

This request the king granted, and Sir Tristram went unto the Fair Isoud and took leave of
her.  And he told her all,--what he was, how he had changed his name because he would not be
known, and how a lady told him that he should never be whole till he came into this country
where the poison was made.  She was full woe of his departing, and wept heartily.

"Madam," said Tristram, "I promise you faithfully that I shall be all the days of my life your
knight."

"Grammercy," said the Fair Isoud, "and I promise you against that I shall not be married this
seven years but by your assent."

Then Sir Tristram gave her a ring, and she gave him another, and therewith he departed from
her, leaving her making great dole and lamentation.  And he straight went unto the court among
all the barons, and there he took his leave of most and least, and so departed and took the
sea, and with good wind he arrived up at Tintagil in Cornwall.  And Sir Tristram lived at the
court of King Mark in great joy long time, until at the last there befell a jealousy and an
unkindness between them.  Then King Mark cast always in his heart how he might destroy Sir
Tristram.

The beauty and goodness of the Fair Isoud were so praised by Sir Tristram that King Mark said
he would wed her, and prayed Sir Tristram to take his way into Ireland for him, as his messenger,
to bring her to Cornwall.  All this was done to the intent to slay Sir Tristram. Notwithstanding,
Sir Tristram would not refuse the message for any danger or peril, and made ready to go in
the goodliest wise that might be devised.  He took with him the goodliest knights that he might
find in the court, arrayed them after the guise that was then used, and so departed over sea
with all his fellowship.

Anon as he was in the broad sea a tempest took them and drove them back into the coast of England.
They came to land fast by Camelot, and there Sir Tristram set up his pavilion.  Now it fell
that King Anguish of Ireland was accused of slaying by treason a cousin of Sir Launcelot of
the Lake, and just at this time he was come to the court at the summoning of King Arthur upon
pain of forfeiture of his lands; yet ere he arrived at Camelot he wist not wherefore he was
sent after.  When he heard the accusation he understood full well there was no remedy but to
answer it knightly, for the custom was in those days, that if any man were accused of any treason
or murder, he should fight body for body or else find another knight to fight for him.  Now
King Anguish grew passing heavy when he heard his accusing, for the knights of King Ban's blood,
as Sir Launcelot was, were as hard men to win in battle as any then living.

The meanwhile Sir Tristram was told how King Anguish was come thither in great distress, and
he sent Gouvernail to bring him to his pavilion. When Sir Tristram saw the king coming he ran
unto him and would have holden his stirrup, but King Anguish leaped lightly from his horse,
and either embraced other heartily.  Sir Tristram remembered his promise, made when departing
from Ireland, to do service to King Anguish if ever it lay in his power, and never had there
been so great need of knight's help as now.  So when King Anguish told Sir Tristram all, Sir
Tristram took the battle for the sake of the good lordship showed him in Ireland, and for the
sake of the Fair Isoud, upon the condition that King Anguish grant two things.  One was that
he should swear that he was in the right and had never consented to the death of the knight.
The second request was to be granted after the battle, if God should speed him therein.

King Anguish quickly granted Sir Tristram whatsoever he asked, and anon departed unto King
Arthur's judges, and told them he had found a champion ready to do the battle for him.  So
Sir Tristram fought for King Anguish and overcame his adversary, a most noble knight.  Then
King Anguish and Sir Tristram joyfully took their leave, and sailed into Ireland with great
nobleness.

When they were in Ireland the king let make it known throughout all the land, how and in what
manner Sir Tristram had done for him.  Then the queen and all that were there made the most
of him that they might. But the joy that the Fair Isoud made of Sir Tristram no tongue might
tell, for of men earthly she loved him most.

Then upon a day King Anguish would know from Sir Tristram why he asked not his boon, for whatsoever
had been promised he should have without fail.  "Sir," said Tristram, "now is it time, and
this is what I desire: that ye will give me the Fair Isoud, your daughter, not for myself,
but for mine uncle, King Mark, that shall have her to wife, for so have I promised him."

"Alas," said the king, "I had rather than all the land that I have ye would wed her yourself."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "if I did, then were I ashamed for ever in this world, and false
of my promise.  Therefore I pray you hold your promise that ye gave me, for this is my desire,
that ye will give me the Fair Isoud to go with me into Cornwall, to be wedded to King Mark,
mine uncle."

"As for that," said King Anguish, "ye shall have her with you, to do with her what it please
you; that is to say, if ye list to wed her yourself, that is to me lievest[1]; and if ye will
give her unto King Mark, that is in your choice."

So, to make a short conclusion, the Fair Isoud was made ready to go with Sir Tristram, and
Dame Bragwaine went with her for her chief gentlewoman, with many others.  The queen, Isoud's
mother, gave to Dame Bragwaine and unto Gouvernail a drink, and charged them that what day
King Mark should wed, that same day they should give him that drink, "and then," said the queen,
"I undertake either shall love other the days of their life."

So this drink was given unto Dame Bragwaine and unto Gouvernail, and then anon Sir Tristram
took the sea with the Fair Isoud.  When they were in the cabin, it happened that they were
thirsty, and they saw a little flask of gold stand by them, that seemed by the colour and the
taste to be noble wine.  Then Sir Tristram took the flask in his hand, and said: "Madam Isoud,
here is the best drink that ever ye drank, that Dame Bragwaine your maid and Gouvernail my
servant have kept for themselves."

Then they laughed and made good cheer, and either drank to other, thinking never drink was
so sweet or so good.  But after they had drunk that magic wine, they loved either other so
truly that never their love departed either for weal or for woe.

So they sailed on till by fortune they came into Cornwall.  There all the barons met them,
and anon King Mark and the Fair Isoud were richly wedded with great splendour.  But ever, as
the French book saith, Sir Tristram and the Fair Isoud loved each other truly, and his life
long he was her loyal and honourable knight.

[1] Lievest: dearest.

CHAPTER XXI

HOW SIR TRISTRAM DEPARTED FROM TINTAGIL,
  AND WAS LONG IN THE FOREST

There were great jousts and tourneying at that time in Cornwall, and Sir Tristram was most
praised of all the knights.  But some were jealous because of his prowess, and especially Sir
Andred, that was cousin unto Sir Tristram, ever lay in a watch to wait betwixt him and the
Fair Isoud, for to take them and slander them.  So upon a day Sir Tristram talked with Isoud
in a window, and that espied Sir Andred, and told it to the king.

Then King Mark took a sword in his hand and came to Sir Tristram, and called him false traitor,
and would have stricken him.  But Sir Tristram ran under his sword, and took it out of his
hand.  And then the king cried, "Where are my knights and my men?  I charge you slay this traitor."

But there was not one would move for his words.  When Sir Tristram saw there was not one would
be against him, he shook the sword to the king, and made as though he would strike him.  And
then King Mark fled, for he was a coward, and Sir Tristram followed him, and smote upon him
five or six strokes with the flat of his sword on the neck so that he made him fall upon the
nose.  Sir Tristram then went his way and armed himself, and took his horse and his man, and
so he rode into the forest.

King Mark called his council unto him and asked advice of his barons what was best to do with
Sir Tristram.  Their counsel was to send for him, that they might be friends, for in a quarrel,
if Sir Tristram were hard bestead, many men would hold with him against the king; and if so
peerless a knight should depart from King Mark's court and go to King Arthur's he would get
himself such friends there that Cornwall would be in ill repute.

So the barons sent for Sir Tristram under a safe conduct, and he was welcomed back by King
Mark.  But his enemies ever plotted against him, and on a day Sir Andred and some of the barons
set upon him secretly, seized him, and took him, bound hand and foot, unto a chapel which stood
upon the sea rocks.  When Sir Tristram saw that Andred meant to kill him there, he said: "Fair
Lords, remember what I have done for the country Cornwall, and in what jeopardy I have been
for the weal of you all, and see not me die thus to the shame of all knighthood."

But Andred held to his purpose, and when Sir Tristram saw him draw his sword to kill him, he
looked upon both his hands that were fast bound unto two knights, and suddenly he pulled them
both to him and so freed his hands.  Then he leaped unto his cousin Andred and wrested his
sword out of his hands.  Then he smote Sir Andred to the earth, and fought with the others
till he had killed ten knights.  So Sir Tristram gat the chapel and kept it by force.

Then the uproar became great, and the people gathered unto Sir Andred, more than a hundred,
whereupon Sir Tristram shut fast the chapel door, and brake the bars of a window, and so he
leaped out and fell upon the crags by the sea.  Here Sir Andred and his fellows might not get
to him at that time, and so they departed.

When Sir Tristram's men heard that he was escaped they were passing glad, and on the rocks
they found him, and with towels they pulled him up.  Then Sir Tristram dreaded sore lest he
were discovered unto the king, wherefore he sent Gouvernail for his horse and his spear, and
so he rode his way into the forest.  As he rode he was in great sorrow at departing in this
wise; and there, as he made great dole, by fortune a damsel met him, and she and her lady brought
him meat and drink.  Also they brought him a harp, for they knew him, and wist that for goodly
harping he bore the prize in the world.

So they tried to give him comfort, but he ate little of the food, and at the last, came wholly
out his mind for sorrow.  He would go about in the wilderness breaking down the trees and boughs;
and otherwhile, when he found the harp that the lady sent him, then would he harp and play
thereupon and weep together.  Sometimes when Sir Tristram was in the wood, then would the lady
sit down and play upon the harp; then would he come to that harp and hearken thereto, and sometimes
he would harp himself.

Thus it went on a quarter of a year, when at the last Sir Tristram ran his way, and the lady
wist not what had become of him.  He waxed lean and poor of flesh, and fell into the fellowship
of herdmen and shepherds, and daily they would give him of their meat and drink.  And when
he did any evil deed they would beat him with rods, and so they clipped him with shears and
made him like a fool.

And upon a day Sir Dagonet, King Arthur's fool, came into Cornwall, with two squires with him,
and as they rode through the forest they came by a fair well where Sir Tristram was wont to
be.  The weather was hot, and they alighted to drink of that well, and in the meanwhile their
horses brake loose.  Just then Sir Tristram came unto them, and first he soused Sir Dagonet
in that well, and then his squires, and thereat laughed the shepherds.  Forthwithal he ran
after their horses, and brought them again one by one, and right so, wet as they were, he made
Sir Dagonet and his squires mount and ride their ways.

Thus Sir Tristram endured there a half-year, and would never come in town or village.  Then
Sir Andred, that was cousin unto Sir Tristram, let a tale be brought unto King Mark's court
that Sir Tristram was dead, and that ere he died he besought King Mark to make Sir Andred king
of the country of Lyonesse, of the which Sir Tristram was lord. When Queen Isoud heard of these
tidings she made such sorrow that she was nigh out of her mind, and she lay long sick, at the
point of death.

Meanwhile a knight came unto King Mark and told him of a mad man in the forest at the fair
fountain.  So he commanded his knights to take Sir Tristram with fairness, and bring him to
his castle, yet he knew not that the mad man was Sir Tristram.  They did softly and fair, and
cast mantles upon Sir Tristram, and so led him unto Tintagil.  There they bathed him, and gave
him hot suppings, till they had brought him well to his remembrance.  But all this while there
was no creature that knew Sir Tristram, nor what man he was.

Now it fell upon a day that the queen, the Fair Isoud, heard of this man that ran wild in the
forest and how the king had brought him home to the court, and with Dame Bragwaine she went
to see him in the garden, where he was reposing in the sun.  When she looked upon Sir Tristram
she knew not that it was he, yet it seemed to her she had seen him before.  But as soon as
Sir Tristram saw her he knew her well enough, and he turned away his visage and wept.  The
queen had always with her a little dog that Sir Tristram gave her the first time that ever
she came into Cornwall, and never would that dog depart from her unless Sir Tristram was nigh
there with Isoud.  Anon as this little dog caught a scent of Sir Tristram, she leaped upon
him, licked his cheeks, whined and smelled at his feet and over his whole body.  Then the Fair
Isoud saw that it was her lord, Sir Tristram, and thereupon she fell down in a swoon, and so
lay a great while.

When she might speak, she blessed God that Sir Tristram was still alive, yet she knew that
her lord King Mark would discover him by the little dog that would never leave him.

CHAPTER XXII

HOW KING MARK WAS SORRY FOR THE GOOD
  RENOWN OF SIR TRISTRAM

The queen departed from Sir Tristram but the little dog would not from him.  Therewithal came
King Mark, and the dog set upon him and bayed at all the barons.  Thereupon Sir Andred saw
by the dog that it was Sir Tristram, and King Mark repented that he had brought the mad man
in from the forest.  Then he let call his barons to judge Sir Tristram to death.  They would
not assent thereto, but by the advice of them all he was banished out of the country for ten years.

So Sir Tristram was made to depart out of the country of Cornwall, and there were many barons
brought him into his ship.  When he was ready to set sail he said: "Greet well King Mark and
all mine enemies, and say I will come again when I may.  And well am I rewarded for the fighting
with Sir Marhaus, and delivering all this country from servage, and well am I rewarded for
the fetching of the Fair Isoud out of Ireland, and the danger I was in first and last."

So Sir Tristram departed over sea, and arrived in Wales.  As he rode there through the Forest
Perilous, a lady in great distress met him, that said: "O my lord, come with me, and that in
all the haste ye may, for ye shall see the most honourable knight of the world hard bestead,
and he is none other than the noble King Arthur himself."

"God defend," said Sir Tristram, "that ever he should be in such distress.  I am ready to help
him if I may."

So they rode at a great pace, till they saw a knight, that was King Arthur, on foot fighting
with two knights, and anon the one knight was smitten down, and they unlaced his helm to slay
him.  Therewithal came Sir Tristram with all his might, and smote the two traitors so that
they fell dead.  Then he horsed King Arthur, and as they rode forth together, the King thanked
heartily Sir Tristram and desired to wit his name.  He would not tell him, but said that he
was a poor knight adventurous.  So he bare King Arthur fellowship, till he met with some of
his knights.

Then departed Sir Tristram, and rode straight toward Camelot.  Then was he ware of a seemly
knight riding against him with a covered shield.

"Truly," said the other, "if I was requested, I was never loath to tell my name. And therewithal
Sir Tristram kneeled adown, and yielded him up his sword.  So either gave other the victory.
Thereupon they both forthwithal went to a stone, and sat down upon it, and took off their helms
to cool themselves.  Then after a while they took their helms and rode together to Camelot.
"Welcome," said the damsels; "Welcome," said the knights; "Welcome," said Arthur, "for one
of the best knights and the gentlest of the world, and the man of most honour.

So Tristram agreed to remain with King Arthur, who then went unto the sieges about the Round
Table, and looked in every siege that lacked a knight.  When now he heard of the great prowess
that Sir Tristram did in England he was sore grieved, and sent men to espy what deeds he did.

So King Mark came into England, where he soon became known as the most horrible coward that
ever bestrode horse; and there was much laughing and jesting at the knight of Cornwall, and
much he was despised.

So King Mark was soon brought as recreant before King Arthur, who already knew wherefore he
was come into his country, and that he had not done the service and homage he owed as King
Arthur's under-lord. But King Mark promised to make large amends for the wrongs he had done,
for he was a fair speaker, and false thereunder.  So on a day King Arthur prayed of him one
gift, and King Mark promised to give him whatsoever he desired, if it were in his power.  Then
King Arthur asked him to be good lord unto Sir Tristram, and to take him back into Cornwall,
and to cherish him for Arthur's sake.  King Mark promised this, and swore upon a book afore
Arthur and all his knights.

Then soon afterward King Mark took his leave to ride into Cornwall, and Sir Tristram rode with
him; wherefore the most part of the Round Table were passing heavy, and some were wroth, knowing
that King Mark was the most coward and the villainest knight living.

After a while letters came out of Cornwall that spake ill of Sir Tristram and showed plainly
that King Mark took Sir Tristram for his mortal enemy.

When the Fair Isoud understood Sir Tristram's letter and his intent, she sent him another,
and bade him be of good comfort, for she would make the vessel ready, and all things to purpose.

When Sir Launcelot understood that Sir Tristram was there, he was full glad.  And he charged
all his people to honour them and love them as they would do himself.

Near three years Sir Tristram kept the Fair Isoud with him in Joyous Gard, and then by means
of treaties he brought her again unto King Fox, which was the name Sir Launcelot gave unto
Mark because of his wiles and treason.  But ever the malice of King Fox followed his brave
nephew, and in the end he slew him as he sat harping afore his lady, the Fair Isoud, with a
trenchant glaive, thrust in behind to the heart.

For his death was much bewailing of every knight that ever was in Arthur's days, for he was
traitorously slain.  It was Sir Aglovale, King Pellinore's son, and the squire was his brother,
Percivale, that he wished King Arthur to make knight.  The boy was the youngest of five sons,
and for love of the father and the brothers, good knights all, the King made him a knight the
next day in Camelot; yet the King and all the knights thought it would be long ere he proved
a man of prowess, and Sir Kay and Sir Mordred made sport of his rude manner.

At the dinner, when every knight was set after his honour, the King commanded Sir Percivale
to be placed among mean knights.

Then Sir Percivale rode forth upon adventures, and came unto Cornwall to seek Sir Tristram.
And he delivered him from a prison where King Mark had placed him, and then rode straight unto
King Mark and told him he had done himself great shame to treat so falsely Sir Tristram, the
knight of most renown in all the world.  Then Sir Percivale departed, but anon King Mark bethought
him of more treason, notwithstanding his promise never by any manner of means to hurt Sir Tristram,
and he let take him and put him again in prison.  How he then escaped with Isoud into England
we have already read in the tale of Sir Tristram.

Now it chanced that Sir Launcelot of the Lake had sore offended the Queen Guenever, and she
rebuked him harshly, called him false traitor knight, and sent him from her court.  Therewith
he took such an hearty sorrow at her words that he went clean out of his mind, and leaped out
at a bay window into a garden, and there with thorns he was all scratched up in his visage.
So he ran forth he wist not whither, and for a long while none of his kin wist what was become
of him.

Soon Queen Guenever was right sorry that she had been so angry with her faithful knight, and
on her knees besought Sir Bors and many others to seek Sir Launcelot throughout all England,
Wales, and Scotland.  Then they let carry the dead squire unto a priory, and there they interred
him.  When this was done they rode their way into many countries, ever inquiring after Sir
Launcelot, but never they could hear of him.

At last, at a castle that was called Cardican, Sir Percivale parted from Sir Aglovale, and
with his squire rode alone.  In the afternoon he came upon a bridge of stone, where he found
a knight that was bound with a chain fast about unto a pillar of stone.  This was Sir Persides,
a knight of the Table Round, who by adventure came this way and lodged in the castle at the
bridge foot.  There by an evil custom of the castle men set upon him suddenly or ever he might
come to his weapon, and bound him, and chained him at the bridge.

Had he not had a great matter in hand, he would have remained to do away with the evil customs
there.  But Sir Percivale might not long abide, for he rode to seek Sir Launcelot.  As he wandered
like a mad man here and there, he by fortune came to the castle of King Pelles.  There he was
healed of his madness, and when he was recovered he was sore ashamed that he had thus been
clean out of his wit.  And King Pelles gave him his castle of Bliant, that stood in an island
enclosed with a fair water, deep and large.  Sir Launcelot called it the Joyous Isle, and here
he dwelt a long while.  Because he was driven from King Arthur's court he desired not to be
known, and he named himself "The knight that hath trespassed."

Now it fell at that time that Sir Launcelot heard of a jousting hard by his castle, and he
sent word thither that there was one knight in the Joyous Isle, by name "The knight that hath
trespassed," that will joust against any knights that will come to him.  When this cry was
made, unto Joyous Isle drew many knights, and wit you well there was not seen at Arthur's court
one knight that did so much deeds of arms as were done in that gay castle.

And in the meanwhile came also Sir Percivale nigh to Joyous Isle, and would have gone to that
castle, but might not for the broad water. Then he saw on the other side a lady, and he called
unto her and asked who was in that castle.

"Fair knight," she said, "here within this castle is the fairest knight and the mightiest man
that is, I dare say, living, and he calleth himself 'The knight that hath trespassed.'  He
came into this country like a mad man, with dogs and boys chasing him, and by miracle he was
brought into his wit again.  If ye list to come into the castle, ye must ride unto the farther
side of the isle, and there ye shall find a vessel that will bear you and your horse."  Then
they left their horses, swung out noble swords, and hewed away pieces of their shields, and
dashed together like two boars, and either wounded other passing sore.

At the last Sir Percivale spake, when they had fought there more than two hours: "Fair knight,"
saith he, "I pray thee tell me thy name, for I met never with such a knight."

"Sir," said Sir Launcelot, "my name is 'The knight that hath trespassed.'  Now tell me your
name, I pray you, gentle knight."  Then he begged him upon the high order of knighthood to
tell his true name, and Sir Launcelot told him all.

"Alas," said Sir Percivale, "what have I done!  I was sent by the Queen for to seek you, and
so I have sought you nigh these two years.  I pray you forgive me mine offence that I have
here done."

"It is soon forgiven," said Sir Launcelot.

Then Sir Percivale told him how King Arthur and all his knights, and in especial Queen Guenever,
made great dole and sorrow that ever he departed from them, and that never knight was better
welcome back to the court than he would be.  So Sir Launcelot agreed to do after Sir Percivale's
counsel, and ride with him to the King.

In the meanwhile there came twelve nuns which brought with them Galahad, the which was passing
fair and well made, so that in the world men might scarcely find his match.

Then Sir Launcelot departed from them, and came again unto Camelot by the hour of nine on Whitsunday
morning.  By that time the King and the Queen and all the fellowship were gone to the minster
to hear the service.

When they were come from service all were passing glad of Sir Launcelot's return.  And as they
entered the hall each of the barons sought his name, written with gold letters, in the sieges
of the Round Table.

All thought this a marvellous thing, and an adventurous.

It was an old custom of Arthur's court that on this day they should not sit at their meat until
they had seen some adventure.  As they stood waiting therefor, in came a squire bringing the
marvellous tidings that beneath at the river there was a great stone, as it were of red marble,
floating above the water, wherein a sword stuck.  So the King and all the knights went unto
the river to see this marvel, and they found it even as the squire had said.

"Now, fair nephew," said the King unto Sir Gawaine, "assay ye to take the sword for my love."

Therewith Sir Gawaine took the sword by the handles, though unwillingly and only at the King's
commandment, but he might not stir it.  Then the King said unto Sir Percivale that he should assay.

"Now may ye go to your dinner," said Sir Kay unto King Arthur, "for a marvellous adventure
have ye seen."  Anon the old knight led him unto the Siege Perilous, where beside sat Sir Percivale
and Sir Launcelot.  The good man lifted up the cloth, and found there letters that said thus:
"This is the siege of Galahad, the high prince."  He set him down surely in that siege, saying,
"Wit ye well that place is yours," and then, departed and went his way.  And they foresaw that
Sir Galahad would come to great honour, and outdo them all in knightly courtesy.

Then the King bade him welcome to the court, and taking him by the hand, went down from the
palace to show Galahad the adventures of the stone.

CHAPTER XXV

HOW THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL WAS BEGUN

The dish from which our Lord Jesu Christ ate the paschal lamb at His last supper with His disciples
men call the Holy Grail.

It befell that they came first to a city that was called Sarras, and at the last they crossed
to Britain, and through them all the heathen people of this land were turned to the Christian
faith.

Ever as years went by the Holy Grail became more precious, and the possession of it ever more
a sacred trust.  But after a long while it was lost from the world through men's sinfulness,
and only those of pure heart and life might from time to time see it.

Merlin, before he was put under the stone, had foreseen that by them which should be fellows
of the Round Table the truth of the Holy Grail would be well known, and in the good days of
King Arthur the longing grew to be worthy of the vision of this sign of the Lord's presence
among men.  Moreover a holy hermit had said that, when the Siege Perilous was filled, the achieving
of the Holy Grail should be near.

After Galahad drew the sword out of the stone the King and all estates went thoughtful home
unto Camelot, and so to even-song in the great minster.  After that they went to supper, and
every knight sat in his own place at the Round Table.  Then anon they heard cracking and crying
of thunder that should, as it seemed to them, shake the place all to pieces.  For, when they
departed from hence, they should never all meet again in this world, and many of his true fellowship
of noble knights should die in the quest.

When the Queen also and all the court wist these tidings, they had such sorrow and heaviness
that there might no tongue tell it.  Many of the ladies would have gone with the knights that
they loved, had not an old man in religious clothing said on high that none in this quest should
lead wife with him.  Moreover he warned the knights plainly that he that was not clean of his
sins should not see the mysteries of our Lord Jesu Christ.  Then the King and the Queen went
unto the minster, and all the knights, armed fully save their shields and their helms, followed
them to hear the service.  Then they departed with weeping and mourning cheer, and every knight
took the way that him best liked.

CHAPTER XXVI

HOW GALAHAD GAT HIM A SHIELD

Now Sir Galahad was yet without shield, and so he rode four days without any adventure.  The
monk counselled him to be well advised before taking it, and King Bagdemagus answered:

"Well, I wot well that I am not the best knight of the world, but yet shall I assay to bear it."

And so, bidding Sir Galahad to abide there still, till it was known how he sped, King Bagdemagus
bore the red cross shield out of the monastery, took with him a squire, the which should bring
tidings unto Sir Galahad how he sped, and rode away.  Then the squire fetched his horse, and
brought him with great pain unto an abbey.  Then was he taken down safely, and unarmed, and
laid in a bed.  There his wounds were looked to, and, as the book telleth, he lay there long,
and escaped hard with life.  Then he asked his arms, mounted upon his horse, and, commending
himself unto God, hung the white shield about his neck.  So he departed, and within a while
came by the hermitage, where the White Knight awaited him.  Every each saluted other courteously,
and the knight told Sir Galahad the marvels of the shield.

"Sir," said he, "at that same hour that Joseph of Arimathea came to Sarras, there was a king
in that city called Evelake, that had great war against the Saracens, and there Joseph made
this shield for him in the name of Him that died upon the cross.

"Soon afterwards Joseph departed from Sarras, and King Evelake would go with him whether he
would or nould, and they came unto this land of Britain.  Not long after this, when Joseph
lay on his death-bed, King Evelake begged of him some token that would lead him to think on
the old knight for love of whom he had left his own country.  So Joseph took this shield, and
thereupon he made a cross with his own blood; that should be Evelake's token.  Then he said
that no man should bear this shield until the time that Galahad come, the last of Joseph's
lineage, that should do many marvellous deeds while bearing it about his neck.  To-day is the
time they then set when ye shall have King Evelake's shield."

So spake the White Knight, and then vanished away; and Sir Galahad rode with the squire back
to the abbey.

CHAPTER XXVII

SIR GALAHAD AT THE CASTLE OF MAIDENS

The men of the abbey made great joy of Sir Galahad, and he rested there that night.  Upon the
morn he gave the order of knighthood to the squire who had brought him the red-cross shield,
and asked him his name, and of what kindred he was come.

"Sir," said he, "men call me Melias of Lile, and I am the son of the King of Denmark."

"Now, fair sir," said Galahad, "since ye are of noble birth, see that knighthood be well placed
in you, for ye ought to be a mirror unto all chivalry."

"Sir," said Melias, "ye say truly.

Then Melias said, "Suffer me to ride with you in this quest of the Holy Grail till some adventure
part us."

"I grant you, sir," said Galahad.  And then upon a Monday, in the morning, as they had departed
from an abbey, they came to a fork in the road, where stood written these words: "Now ye knights
errant, who go to seek knights adventurous, see here two ways; the right-hand road ye are warned
against, for knight shall never ride out of that place again unless he be a good man and a
worthy knight; and if ye go to the left hand ye shall not there easily win prowess, for ye
shall in this road be soon attacked."

"Nay, my lord," said Melias, "I pray you, let me have that adventure."

"Take it, in God's name," said Galahad.

So Melias rode far through an old forest, and after two days or more came into a fair meadow.
Here in a fair lodge of boughs he espied a chair wherein was a subtilely-wrought crown of gold,
and near by was a cloth spread upon the ground with many delicious meats upon it.  Sir Melias
had no desire for the food, but the crown of gold pleased him much, so he stooped down and
took it and rode his way with it.  And anon he saw a knight come riding after him, who called
upon him to set down the crown that was not his, and to defend himself.  Then the knight took
the crown and went his way, and Sir Melias lay still, and had no power to stir.  It would have
been better to ride the other way."

"It shall be done," said Galahad, "but where is he that hath wounded you?"  Here he placed
the wounded knight in the care of an old monk, that promised to heal him of his wounds.  And
the other way betokeneth the way of sinners and of misbelievers.  Your pride and presumption
in taking the quest of the blessed Holy Grail made you to be overthrown, for it may not be
achieved but by virtuous living.  Pride is head of all deadly sins, and that caused you to
depart from Sir Galahad.  And when ye took the crown of gold your sin was covetousness and
theft.  But this Galahad, the holy knight, the which fought with the two knights that signify
the two deadly sins which were wholly in you, was able to overthrow them, for he is pure in
his heart."

Then Sir Galahad came unto a mountain.

"Therefore I counsel you, sir knight," said the other, "that ye turn back."

"Sir," said Sir Galahad, "ye may be sure I shall not turn back."

"Fair sir," said Galahad, "I come to destroy the wicked customs of this castle."

"Sir," said the squire, "if ye will abide by that, ye shall have enough to do."

The squire entered into the castle, and anon there came out seven knights, all brethren.  And
when they saw Galahad they cried, "Knight, defend thyself, for we assure thee nothing but death."

Then Galahad put forth his spear, and smote the foremost to the earth.

Then came to him a gentlewoman, and said, "These knights are fled, but they will come again
this night, and here begin again their evil practices."  "It chanced in this wise," said he:
"More than seven years agone the seven brethren came, and lodged with the lord of this castle
and of all the country round about.

By the time the priest had finished, the knights of the country were come at the call from
the ivory horn.  Then Sir Galahad made them do homage and fealty to the duke's daughter, and
set the people in great ease of heart.

And the next morning one came to Galahad and told him how Gawaine, Gareth, and Uwaine had slain
the seven brethren.  "I am glad to hear it," said Sir Galahad, and he took his armour, mounted
his horse, and commended the people of the Castle of Maidens unto God, and so rode away. Therefore
he smote his horse with his spurs, and rode at a great pace away from them.  At last he came
to a stone cross, which pointed two ways, and by the cross was a stone that was of marble;
but it was so dark that he might not wit what it was.

Sir Launcelot looked about him, and saw an old chapel.  Then he saw the candlestick with the
six tapers come before the cross, yet he saw nobody that brought it.  Also there came a table
of silver, and the sacred vessel of the Holy Grail upon it.

Therewith the sick knight sat up, and, holding up both hands, he prayed that he might be whole
of his malady.  "Verily," said he, "I thank God, right well; through the holy vessel I am healed.
But I have great marvel of this sleeping knight, that had no power to awake when the Holy Grail
was brought hither."

"I dare right well say," said the squire, "that he dwelleth in some deadly sin, whereof he
has never repented."

"By my faith," said the knight, "whatsoever he be, he is unhappy, for, as I deem, he is of
the fellowship of the Round Table, the which is entered into the quest of the Holy Grail."

"Sir," said the squire, "here I have brought you all your arms, save your helm and your sword.
Anon Sir Launcelot awoke, and bethought him what he had seen there, and whether it were a dream
or not.  So he arose, sore weeping, and cursed the time when he was born, for he thought never
to have honour more.

Thus he sorrowed till it was day, and he heard the birds sing.  There Launcelot kneeled down
and cried on the Lord for mercy, and begged the hermit for charity to hear his confession.

The hermit beheld him, and had marvel how he was humbled.

"Sir," said he, "thou oughtest to thank God more than any knight living, for He hath caused
thee to have more worldly honour than any other knight that now liveth.  For thy presumption
in taking upon thee, while in deadly sin, to be in His presence through the sacred vessel,
that was the cause that thou mightest not see it with worldly eyes, for He will not appear
where such sinners be, unless to their great hurt and shame.  There is no knight living now
that ought to give God so great thanks as thou; for He hath given thee beauty, seemliness,
and great strength, above all other knights.  Therefore thou art the more beholden unto God
than any other man to love Him and fear Him; for thy strength and manhood will little avail
thee if God be against thee." I pray you counsel me."

"I will counsel thee," said the hermit, "if thou wilt assure me that thou wilt never come into
that queen's companionship when thou canst prevent it."  This Sir Launcelot solemnly promised,
whereupon the good man said, "Look that thy heart and mouth accord, and I assure thee that
thou shalt have more honour than ever thou hadst.  And so Sir Launcelot repented him greatly.
Anon the yeoman came pricking after as fast as ever he might, and asked Sir Percivale, "Saw
ye, sir, any knight riding on my black steed?  It hath been taken from me by force, wherefore
my lord will slay me in what place he findeth me."

Then Sir Percivale mounted upon that hackney, and rode as fast as he might.  There Sir Percivale
had a great fall, and the other rode his way.

So she came soon again, and brought a horse with her that was inky black.  When Sir Percivale
beheld that horse, he marvelled that it was so great and so well apparelled.  Courageously
he leaped upon him, and took no heed of himself.  And when Sir Percivale came nigh the brim,
and saw the water so boisterous, he feared to overpass it.  Then he made a sign of the cross
in his forehead, whereupon the horse shook off Sir Percivale, and he fell into the water, crying
and roaring, making great sorrow; and it seemed unto him that the water burned.

"With whom," said Sir Percivale, "shall I fight?"

"With the most champion of the world," said the old man, "but, if ye quit you well, ye shall
lose no limb, even though vanquished and seemingly shamed to the world's end."

Then the good man leaped over the board, and the ship and all went away, Sir Percivale wist
not whither.  He abode there till midday, when he saw a ship come rowing in the sea as if all
the winds of the world had driven it.

"And I came out of the waste forest where I found the red knight with the white shield," said
the damsel.

"Ah, damsel," said he, "with that knight would I meet passing fain."  But what are ye that
proffereth me thus great kindness?"

"I am," said she, "a gentlewoman that am disherited, which was sometime the richest woman of
the world."

"Damsel," said Sir Percivale, "who hath disherited you? for I have great pity of you."  Since,
sir knight, it hath befallen me so, I and mine have taken from him many of his men, and have
made them to become my men, for they ask never anything of me, but I give it them, that and
much more.  Therefore I and my servants war against him night and day. I know now no good knight
and no good man but I get on my side, if I may.  And since I know that ye are a good knight
I beseech you to help me; and since ye are a fellow of the Round Table, ye ought not to fail
any gentlewoman which is disherited, if she beseech you of help."

Then Sir Percivale promised her all the help that he might.  She thanked him, and since the
weather was at that time hot, she bade a gentlewoman bring a pavilion.  So she did, and pitched
it there upon the gravel.  With that he beheld the gentlewoman, and him thought that she was
the fairest creature that ever he saw.  Then he bethought him of his knighthood and the warning
spoken toforehand by the good man, and he made the sign of the cross in his forehead.  Thereupon
the pavilion turned up-so-down, and changed unto a smoke and a black cloud.

Then Sir Percivale made great sorrow, and drew his sword unto him saying, "Since my flesh will
be my master, I shall punish it."

As he thus made his moan, he saw the same ship come from the Orient that the good man was in
the day before, and the noble knight was ashamed with himself, and therewith he fell in a swoon.
When he awoke he went unto this good man weakly, and saluted him.  Then he asked Sir Percivale,
"How hast thou done since I departed?"

"Sir," said he, "here was a gentlewoman that led me into deadly sin," and there he told him
all his temptation.

"All is welcome," said Sir Bors, "that God sendeth me."

Also the good man in sign of chastisement put on him a scarlet coat, instead of his shirt,
and found him in so vigorous a life, and so stable, that he marvelled, and felt that he was
never corrupt in fleshly lusts.  Then Sir Bors put on his armour, and took his leave, and so
departed.  Just then he chanced to look upon his other side, and saw a knight which brought
a fair gentlewoman, and would have dragged her into the thickest part of the forest out of
the way of them that sought to rescue her.

Anon she espied where Sir Bors came riding.  She deemed him a knight of the Round Table, wherefore
she hoped to have some comfort; and she conjured him by the faith that he owed unto him in
whose service he had entered, and the fidelity he owed unto the high order of knighthood, and
for the noble King Arthur's sake, to help her in her sore distress.

When Sir Bors heard her cry, he had so much sorrow he knew not what to do.  "For," said he,
"if I let my brother be in adventure he must be slain, and that would I not for all the earth.
And if I help not the maid in her peril, I am shamed for ever."

The knight set down the maiden, and drew out his sword, but Bors smote him so hard that he
beat him down to the earth.

When he had said thus, he took the body lightly in his arms and put it upon the bow of his
saddle, and so rode to an old feeble chapel fast by, and put him into a tomb of marble.

Then went Sir Bors from thence, and rode all that day, and then turned to a hermitage, at the
entry of a forest.  There he found Lionel his brother, which sat all armed at the chapel door.
For he was yet on life, and a fiend had deceived Bors with the body left in the chapel, for
to put him in error so that he might not find the blessed adventure of the Holy Grail.

Anon as Sir Lionel saw him he said, "Ah, Bors, ye may make no boast.

When Sir Bors saw that he must fight with his brother or else die, he wist not what to do.
Then when Lionel saw he would none other, and that he would not rise to give him battle, he
rushed over him, so that his horse's feet smote Bors to the earth, and hurt him so sore that
he swooned of distress.

For all that, he restrained him not of his evil will, but took his brother by the helm, and
unlaced it to strike off his head.  Anon he sprang down and took Lionel by the shoulders, and
drew him strongly back from Bors, and said, "Lionel, will ye slay your brother, one of the
worthiest knights of the world?  That should no good man suffer."

"Why," said Sir Lionel, "will ye hinder me?  If ye interfere in this, I shall slay you, and
him after." But he had not so much might as to stand on foot, and must abide so long till Colgrevance
had the worse, for Sir Lionel was of great chivalry and right hardy.

When Bors heard that, he did so much as to rise and put on his helm, making a marvellous sorrow
at the sight of the dead hermit hard by.

Right so came a cloud betwixt them in likeness of a fire, so that both their shields burned.
Then were they sore afraid, and fell both to the earth, and lay there a great while in a swoon.
And either made great joy of other, that it was marvel to hear.

CHAPTER XXXI

HOW SIR LAUNCELOT FOUND THE HOLY GRAIL

When the hermit had kept Sir Launcelot three days, he gat him a horse, a helm, and a sword.
So he departed, and took the adventure that God would send him.  In this joy he laid himself
down on the ship's board, and slept till day.

So Sir Launcelot was a month and more on the ship, and if ye would ask how he lived, as God
fed the people of Israel with manna in the desert, so was he fed.  And there each told other
of the adventures and marvels that were befallen to them in many journeys since they were departed
from the court.  Come out of the ship, and start upon this horse, and go where the adventures
shall lead thee in the quest of the Holy Grail."

So Galahad took sorrowful leave of Sir Launcelot, for they knew that one should never see the
other before the dreadful day of doom.  He in whose service thou art set might more avail thee
than thine armour."  Right so came he to the door at a great pace, entered into the chamber,
and drew towards the table of silver.

When he came nigh he felt a breath that seemed intermingled with fire, which smote him so sore
in the visage that he thought it burned his visage.  Therewith he fell to the earth, and had
no power to arise.  They took him up, and bare him into a chamber, and laid him in a rich bed,
far from all folk, and so he lay still as a dead man four and twenty days, in punishment, he
afterwards thought, for the twenty-four years that he had been a sinner.

At the twenty-fifth day it befell that he opened his eyes, and the folk asked how it stood
with him.  He answered that he was whole of body, and then he would know where he was.  They
told him he was in the castle of Carboneck, and that the quest of the Holy Grail had been achieved
by him, and that he should never see the sacred vessel more nearly than he had seen it.

Soon Sir Launcelot took his leave of all the fellowship that were there at the castle, and
thanked them for the great labour.  So he took his armour and departed, and said that he would
go back to the realm of Logris.

[1] Made semblant: threatened. Then when they were at rest, there came a gentlewoman knocking
at the door, and called Galahad.  So the hermit came to the door to wit what she would, and
she said to him that she would speak with the knight that was lodged there.

So, leaving his horse behind, Galahad entered into the ship, where the two knights received
him with great joy.  And the wind arose, and drove them through the sea marvellously.

Now saith the story that they rode a great while till they came to the castle of Carboneck,
where Sir Launcelot had been tofore.  They entered within the castle, and then there was great
joy, for they wist well that they had fulfilled the quest of the Holy Grail.

As they were alone in the hall, it seemed to them that there came a man, in likeness of a bishop,
with four angels from heaven, and held mass about a table of silver, whereupon the Holy Grail
was.  And in a vision they saw in the bread of the sacrament a figure in likeness of a child,
and the visage was as bright as any fire.

When he had said, he vanished away; and they sat them at the table in great reverence, and
made their prayers.  And knowest thou wherefore?  Because they of this land be turned to evil
living; therefore I shall disinherit them of the honour which I have done them. Therefore go
ye three unto the sea, where ye shall find your ship ready."

Right so departed Galahad, Percivale and Bors with him.  Then were they glad to have such things
in their fellowship.

They had remained some time in the ship, when they awoke of a morning to see the city of Sarras
afore them.

So he assayed, and found himself as whole as ever he was.

Now King Estorause was a tyrant, and was come of a line of pagans.  He took the three knights
and put them in a deep hole.  But as soon as they were there our Lord sent them the Holy Grail,
through whose grace they were always satisfied while that they were in prison.  Since then
was there never man so hard as to say that he had seen the Holy Grail.  All this was made in
great books, and put in chests at Salisbury.

[1] Rivage: bank; shore.

Thus it passed forth till on a day the King let cry great jousts and a tournament that should
be at Camelot, that is Winchester, and thither came many knights.  So King Arthur made him
ready to depart to these jousts, and would have had the Queen with him, but she would not go,
pretending to be sick.  This grieved the King, for such a fellowship of knights had not been
seen together since the Whitsuntide when Galahad departed from the court.  And many deemed
the Queen would not be there because of Sir Launcelot of the Lake, who would not ride with
the King, for he said he was not whole of a wound.

So when the King was departed, the Queen called Sir Launcelot unto her, and told him he was
greatly to blame, thus to hold himself behind his lord, and counselled him to take his way
towards the tournament at Winchester.  So upon the morn he took his leave of the Queen, and
departed.  He rode all that day, and at eventide he came to Astolat, that is Gilford, and was
lodged at the place of an old baron, named Sir Bernard of Astolat.

"Sir," said his host, "ye shall have your desire, for me seemeth ye be one of the likeliest
knights of the world, and I shall show you friendship.  Sir, wit ye well I have two sons which
were but late made knights.  Much my heart leads me to believe that ye should be a noble knight;
therefore I pray you tell me your name."  Ever she beheld Sir Launcelot admiringly, and, as
the book saith, she cast such a love unto him that she could never withdraw her love, so she
besought him to wear at the jousts a token of hers.  "Fair damsel," said Sir Launcelot, "if
I grant you that, ye may say I do more for your love than ever I did for lady or damsel." 
Then he left his shield in the fair maiden's keeping, and prayed her to care for it until that
he came again.  So that night he had merry rest and great cheer, for ever the damsel Elaine
was about Sir Launcelot, all the while she might be suffered.

At the time appointed the jousts began, and Sir Launcelot made him ready in his best manner,
and put the red sleeve upon his head, and fastened it fast.  Then he with Sir Lavaine came
in at the thickest of the press, and did marvellous deeds of arms, so that all wondered what
knight he might be.  Sir Gawaine said it might be Sir Launcelot by his riding and his buffets,
but ever it seemed it should not be he, for he bore the red sleeve upon his head, and he never
wist Sir Launcelot bear token of lady or gentleman at any jousts.  But Sir Launcelot was sore
hurt, and cared not for honour; and groaning piteously, he rode at a great gallop away-ward
from all the knights, until he came under a wood's side.  When he saw that he was from the
field nigh a mile, so that he was sure he might not be seen, he besought Sir Lavaine as he
loved him to draw the truncheon out of his side.  This Sir Lavaine dreaded sore to do, lest
Sir Launcelot should be in peril of death from loss of blood, if the truncheon were drawn out.
Yet he did as his lord would have him do, and Sir Launcelot gave a great shriek, and so swooned
pale and deadly.  He was a full noble surgeon, and anon he stanched Sir Launcelot's blood,
and made him to drink good wine, so that he was well refreshed, and came to himself.

Meanwhile King Arthur let seek the knight that bare the red sleeve, that he might have his
laud and honour, and the prize, as was right. But he could not be found, and the King and all
the knights feared he was sore hurt in the battle.  There by the means of the shield left in
Elaine's care he learned that the knight who won such honour at the tournament was none other
than Sir Launcelot himself, and the Fair Maid of Astolat learned on how valiant a knight she
had fixed her love.

After a long while he was healed of his wounds, and so upon a morn they took their horses,
and Elaine le Blank with them, and departed from the hermit.

When Sir Launcelot should depart from Astolat for to return to King Arthur's court, fair Elaine
seemed like to die for love of him and for sorrow at his going.  But Sir Launcelot loved only
Queen Guenever, and thought never to be wedded man, and could only grieve at her great sorrow;
and for her good will and great kindness he promised that, whensoever she should set her heart
upon some good knight that would wed her, he would give her a thousand pounds yearly, and always
while he lived be her own true knight.

Then Sir Launcelot took his leave, and with Sir Lavaine he came unto Winchester.  And when
Arthur wist that Sir Launcelot was come whole and sound, he made great joy of him, and so did
all the knights of the Round Table except Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred.  When she had thus
endured a ten days, and weakened so that she must needs pass out of this world, she prepared
for death, but ever she mourned for Sir Launcelot.

So she died, and all was done as she desired.  Now by fortune King Arthur and Queen Guenever
were speaking together at a window of the palace, and as they looked they espied this black
barge, and had marvel what it meant.  And the King sent three knights thither to bring him
ready word what was there.  Then the King took the Queen by the hand and went thither, and
there they saw the fair woman in all the rich clothing lying as though she smiled. And the
Queen espied the letter in her right hand, and a clerk read it in the presence of many knights.
I will not say but that she was both fair and good, and much I was beholden unto her, but she
loved me out of measure."

Then said the King unto Sir Launcelot, "It will be your honour that ye oversee that she be
interred honourably."

"Sir," said Sir Launcelot, "that shall be done as I can best devise."

And the Queen sent for Sir Launcelot, and prayed him of mercy, because she had been wroth with
him causeless, and he willingly forgave her.

CHAPTER XXXIV

OF THE GREAT TOURNAMENT ON CANDLEMAS DAY

At Christmas time many knights were together at the court, and every day there was a joust
made.  Sir Lavaine jousted there all that Christmas passing well, and was praised best, for
there were but few that did so well.  Wherefore all knights thought that Sir Lavaine should
be made knight of the Round Table at the next feast of Pentecost.

But Sir Launcelot would joust only when a great tournament was held. So after Christmas King
Arthur had many knights called unto him, and there they agreed together to make a party and
a great tournament near Westminster on Candlemas Day.

"Madam," said Sir Launcelot, "it shall be done."  And when he had come to the hermitage, you
may be sure he had good cheer. Daily he would go to a spring hard by the hermitage, and there
he would lie down and watch the spring bubble, and sometimes he slept there.

At that time a lady dwelt in the forest, who was a great huntress. Every day she used to hunt,
and no men ever went with her, but always women.  They were all shooters, and could well kill
a deer both under cover and in the open.  They always carried bows and arrows, horns and wood-knives,
and many good dogs they had.

Now it happened that this lady, the huntress, was one day chasing a deer, keeping the direction
by the noise of the hounds.  The deer, hard pressed, came down to the spring where Sir Launcelot
was sleeping, and there sank down exhausted, and lay there a great while.  At length the dogs
came fast after, and beat about, for they had lost the very perfect track of the deer.  Just
then there came that lady, the huntress, who knew by the sounds of the dogs that the deer must
be at the spring.  So she came swiftly and found the deer.  She put a broad arrow in her bow,
and shot at it, but aimed too high, and so by misfortune the arrow smote Sir Launcelot deep
in the thick of the thigh.  When Sir Launcelot felt himself so hurt, he jumped up madly, and
saw the lady that had smitten him.  And when he saw it was a woman, he said thus; "Lady or
damsel, whatever thou be, in an evil time ye bare a bow; the devil made you a shooter."

"Now mercy, fair sir," said the lady; "I am a gentlewoman that am wont to hunt here in this
forest, and truly I saw you not; there was the deer by the spring, and I believed I was doing
well to shoot, but my hand swerved."

"Alas," said Sir Launcelot, "ye have done mischief to me."

And so the lady departed, and Sir Launcelot, as well as he might, pulled out the arrow, but
the head remained still in his thigh; and so he went feebly to the hermitage, ever bleeding
as he went.  And when Sir Lavaine and the hermit spied that Sir Launcelot was hurt, wit ye
well they were passing sorry; but neither Sir Lavaine nor the hermit knew how he was hurt,
or by whom.

"Ah, mercy," said Sir Launcelot, "I call myself the most unhappy man that liveth; for ever
when I would most gladly have honour there befalleth me some unhappy thing.  Now, so heaven
help me, I shall be in the field upon Candlemas Day at the jousts, whatsoever come of it."

So all that might heal Sir Launcelot was gotten, and, when the day came, he and Sir Lavaine
had themselves and their horses arrayed, and so departed and came nigh to the field.  Many
proved good knights with their retainers were there ready to joust, and King Arthur himself
came into the field with two hundred knights, the most part noble knights of the Table Round.
And there were old knights set in scaffolds, for to judge with the Queen who did best.

Then they blew to the field, and the knights met in the battle, furiously smiting down one
and another in the rush of the tournament. King Arthur himself ran into the lists with a hundred
followers, smiting to the earth four knights, one after the other, and even when his spear
was broken he did passing well.

All this doing Sir Launcelot saw, and then he came into the field with Sir Lavaine, as if it
had been thunder.  He encountered with Sir Gawaine, and by force smote him and his horse to
the earth, and then one knight after another all with one spear.  And Sir Lavaine encountered
with Sir Palamides, and either met other so hard and so fiercely that both their horses fell
to the earth.  But they were horsed again, and then Sir Launcelot met with Sir Palamides, and
there Sir Palamides had a fall.

"I will well," said the Welsh knight.

So Sir Gareth came driving to Sir Launcelot with all his might, and bore him fellowship for
old love he had shown him.  And so the King and his nine knights encountered with Sir Launcelot
and Sir Lavaine and Sir Gareth.  And Sir Gareth did such deeds of arms that all men wondered
what knight he was with the green shield; for he smote down that day and pulled down more than
thirty knights.  Also Sir Launcelot knew not Sir Gareth, and marvelled, when he beheld him
do such deeds, what knight he might be.

So this tournament and this joust lasted long, till it was near evening, for the knights of
the Round Table ever came to the relief of King Arthur, who was wroth out of measure that he
and his knights could not prevail that day over Sir Launcelot and the knights who were with him.

So when they had long dealt one another great strokes and neither might prevail, King Arthur
said to Sir Gawaine, "Tell me now, nephew, what is your best counsel?"

"Sir," said Sir Gawaine, "ye shall have my counsel.  Have sounded the call unto lodging, for,
trust me, truly it will be of no avail to strive with Sir Launcelot of the Lake and my brother,
Sir Gareth,--for he it is with the green shield,--helped as they are by that good young knight,
Sir Lavaine, unless we should fall ten or twelve upon one knight, and that would be no honour,
but shame."

"Ye say truth," said the King, "and it were shame to us, so many as we are, to set upon them
any more."

So then they blew unto lodging, and King Arthur rode after Sir Launcelot and prayed him and
other of the knights to supper.

"Truly," said King Arthur unto Sir Gareth, "ye say well, and honourably have ye done, and all
the days of my life be sure I shall love you and trust you the more for the great honour ye
have done to yourself.  For ever it is an honourable knight's duty to help another honourable
knight when he seeth him in a great danger, for ever an honourable man will be loath to see
an honourable man put to shame.

CHAPTER XXXV

QUEEN GUENEVER'S MAY-DAY RIDE AND WHAT CAME OF IT

Thus it passed on from Candlemas until after Easter, and soon the month of May was come, when
every manly heart begins to blossom and to bring forth fruit.  For as herbs and trees flourish
in May, likewise every lusty heart springeth and flourisheth in lusty deeds, for more than
any other month May giveth unto all men renewed courage, and calleth again to their mind old
gentleness and old service, and many kind deeds that were forgotten by negligence.  Therefore,
as the month of May flowereth and flourisheth in many gardens, so let every man of honour bring
forth fruit in his heart, first unto God, and next unto the joy of them to whom he has promised
his faith.

So it befell in the month of May that Queen Guenever called unto her ten knights of the Table
Round, and she bade them ride with her a-Maying on the morrow into the woods and fields near
Westminster.

So they made themselves ready in the freshest manner, and in the morning rode with the Queen
a-Maying in woods and meadows as it pleased them in great joy and delight.  The Queen purposed
to be again with King Arthur at the furthest by ten of the clock.

Now there was a knight called Meliagrance, who had at that time a castle, the gift of King
Arthur, within seven miles of Westminster.  He had long lain in wait to steal away the Queen,
but had feared to do the base deed when Sir Launcelot was in her company.  It was her custom
at that time never to ride without a great fellowship of men of arms about her, for the most
part young men eager for honour, and called the Queen's knights.

"As for all this language," said Sir Meliagrance, "be it as it may, never before could I get
you at such advantage as I do now, and therefore I will take you as I find you."

All the ten noble knights sought to dissuade him from dishonouring himself and from forcing
them to jeopard their lives, unarmed as they were, in defending the Queen.  But Sir Meliagrance
would not yield, and the ten knights of the Table Round drew their swords and stood manly against
the spears and swords of the others.  But Sir Meliagrance had them at great advantage, and
anon six of them were smitten to the earth with grimly wounds.  The other four fought long,
but at last they also were sore wounded.

When the Queen saw that her knights needs must be slain at the last, she for pity and sorrow
agreed to go with Sir Meliagrance to his castle upon this covenant, that he suffer not her
knights to be more hurt, and that they be led wheresoever she was taken.  "For," said she,
"I will rather slay myself than go with thee, unless these my noble knights may be in my presence."

Meliagrance consented, and by the Queen's commandment they left battle. The wounded knights
were placed on horseback, some sitting, some across the horses' backs in a pitiful manner,
and all rode in haste to the castle.  Then Sir Meliagrance charged the Queen and all her knights
that no one should depart from her, for full sore he dreaded Sir Launcelot, lest he should
have any knowledging.

But the Queen privily called unto her a page who could ride swiftly, gave him her ring, and
told him to bear it, when he saw a chance to slip away quietly, unto Sir Launcelot of the Lake,
and pray him to rescue her.  "And spare thou not thy horse," said she, "neither for water nor
for land."

Then he eagerly called for his armour, and ever the page told him how the ten knights had fought
marvellously, till at last the Queen made appointment to go with Sir Meliagrance for to save
their lives.

"Alas," said Sir Launcelot, "that most noble lady, that she should be so destroyed!  I would
give all France to have been there well armed."

So when Sir Launcelot was armed and upon his horse, he sent the Queen's page to tell Sir Lavaine
how suddenly he had departed, and for what cause, and to pray him to come anon to the castle
where Sir Meliagrance abideth.  He then followed the path until he came to a straight way through
the wood.  Here he was stopped by thirty archers that Sir Meliagrance had sent out to slay
Sir Launcelot's horse, but in no wise to have ado with him bodily, "for," he had said, "he
is overhard to overcome."  Sir Launcelot now set out on foot, but there were so many ditches
and hedges betwixt the archers and him that he could not meddle with any one of them.

He went on a while, but was much cumbered by his armour, his shield, and his spear.  Wit ye
well he was sore annoyed at his slow progress, but was loath to leave anything that belonged
unto him, for he dreaded sore the treason of Sir Meliagrance.

"Thou shalt not set foot in my cart," said the man, "for I am sent to fetch wood for my lord
Sir Meliagrance."

Then Sir Launcelot jumped upon him and gave the man such a blow that he fell to the earth stark
dead.  Then the other carter, his fellow, was afraid of going the same way, and cried out,
"Fair lord, save my life and I will bring you where ye will."

Sir Launcelot leaped into the cart, and the carter drove at a great gallop, Sir Launcelot's
horse following after with more than forty arrows in him.

More than an hour and a half later, Queen Guenever was in a bay window of the castle with her
ladies, and espied an armed knight approaching, standing in a cart.  "Alas," said the Queen;
"now I see that well is it with him who hath a trusty friend.  Ah, most noble knight, I see
well thou are hard bestead, when thou ridest in a cart."

With these words he burst the gate wide open upon the porter, and smote him under his ear with
his gauntlet so that he staggered back like a dead man.

"Better is peace than ever war," said the Queen, "and the less noise the more is my honour."

So she and her ladies went down to Sir Launcelot, thanked him for all his trouble in her behalf,
told him of Meliagrance's repentance, and bade him come in peaceably with her.

"What," said the Queen, "do ye repent of your good deeds?

Then the Queen and Sir Launcelot went in together, and she commanded him to be unarmed.  Then
he asked where the ten knights were that were wounded sore.  Thus they complained each to other,
and full gladly would they have been revenged, but they restrained themselves because of the
Queen.  So Sir Launcelot was called for many a day thereafter the Chevalier of the Cart, and
he did many deeds, and great adventures he had.  And so we leave this tale of the Knight of
the Cart, and turn to others.

CHAPTER XXXVI

OF THE PLOT AGAINST SIR LAUNCELOT

In this same month of May when every lusty heart flourisheth and bourgeoneth, there befell
in King Arthur's realm a great anger and ill fortune that stinted not till the flower of chivalry
of all the world was destroyed.

So it mishapped that Sir Agravaine on a day said openly, so that many knights might hear, that
the friendship between Sir Launcelot and the Queen was a disgrace to knighthood and a shame
to so noble a king as Arthur.  But Sir Gawaine would not hear any of these tales nor be of
Agravaine's counsel; moreover he charged his brother to move no such matters afore him, for
he wist well what mischief would come, should war arise betwixt Sir Launcelot and the King,
and he remembered how ofttimes Sir Launcelot had proved his goodness and loyalty by knightly
deeds.  Also Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, two other brethren, would know nothing of Agravaine's
base accusation.

But Sir Mordred, the fifth of the brethren, sons of the Queen of Orkney, the which had mocked
the good Percivale when first he came to the court, and who had ever been jealous and ready
to think evil of another, joined with Sir Agravaine.  Therewithal they three, Sir Gawaine,
Sir Gaheris, and Sir Gareth departed, making great dole over the mischief that threatened the
destruction of the realm and the dispersion of the noble fellowship of the Round Table.

So Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred came before King Arthur, and told him they might no longer
suffer Sir Launcelot's deeds, for he was a traitor to his kingly person.  But the King would
believe nothing unless he might have proofs of it, for, as the French book saith, he was full
loath to hear ill of a knight who had done so much for him and for the Queen so many times
that, as was fully known, he loved him passingly well.

Then these two brethren made a plot for taking Sir Launcelot when in the Queen's presence,
and bringing him dead or quick to King Arthur. "I have heretofore endeavored to do justice to
the skill and courage with which the heights of Cerro Gordo were attacked, naming the regiments
most distinguished, and their-commanders, under the lead of Colonel Harney.
 In the battle that followed he was hard bestead, but slew Sir Agravaine
at the first buffet, and within a little while he laid the twelve chosen knights cold to the
earth.  Also he wounded Sir Mordred, who, when he escaped from the noble Sir Launcelot, anon
gat his horse and rode unto King Arthur, sore wounded and all bleeding.

Then he told the King how it was, and how they were all slain save himself only.

So then there was made great ordinance that the Queen must be judged to the death, for the
law was such in those days that whatsoever they were, of what estate or degree, if they were
found guilty of treason, there should be none other remedy but death.  Right so it was ordained
for Queen Guenever, and she was commanded to the fire, there to be burned. But Sir Gawaine
ever believed Dame Guenever guiltless of the treason charged against her, and he would never
have it said that he had any part in her shameful end.  Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth also were
loath to be there present, but they were young, and full unable to say him nay.

So the Queen was led forth without Carlisle, and she prepared herself for death.  There was
weeping and wailing and wringing of hands of many lords and ladies, and few in comparison there
present would bear any armour for to keep order.

Anon as the fire was to be lighted, there was spurring and plucking up of horses, and right
so Sir Launcelot and his followers came hither, and whoever stood against them was slain. 
And so in this rushing and hurling, as Sir Launcelot pressed here and there, it mishapped him
to slay Gaheris and Gareth, the noble knights, for they were unarmed and unaware.  Alas that
ever this war began.  Ah, Agravaine, Agravaine, Jesu forgive it thy soul, for the evil will
thou and thy brother Sir Mordred haddest unto Sir Launcelot hath caused all this sorrow."

"Full well wist I," said then Sir Gawaine, "that Sir Launcelot would rescue her, or else he
would die in that field.  To say the truth, had he not rescued the Queen he would not have
been a man of honour, inasmuch as she was to have been burned for his sake.  He hath done but
knightly, and as I would have done myself, had I stood in like case. But where are my brethren?
I marvel I hear not of them."

Then the man told him that Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris were slain, both by the hand of Launcelot.
"That may I not believe," said Sir Gawaine, "that he slew my brother Sir Gareth, for I dare
say Gareth loved him better than me and all his brethren, and the King also.

When at the last he knew in truth that Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris had died by Sir Launcelot's
hand, all his joy was gone.  He fell down in a swoon, and long he lay there as he had been
dead.  When he arose of his swoon he ran to the King crying, and weeping, and said: "O King
Arthur, my lord and mine uncle, wit ye well, from this day I shall never fail Sir Launcelot,
until the one of us have slain the other.  Therefore dress you to the war, for wit ye well
I will be revenged upon him."  Thus they were on both sides well furnished and provided with
all manner of things that belonged to the war.

But Sir Launcelot was full loath to do battle against the King, and so he withdrew into his
strong castle with all manner of victual and as many noble men as might suffice, and for a
long time would in no wise ride out, neither would he allow any of his good knights to issue
out, though King Arthur with Sir Gawaine came and laid a siege all about Joyous Gard, both
at the town and at the castle.

"My most noble lord and king," answered Sir Launcelot, "ye may say what ye will, for ye wot
well with yourself I will not strive.  I wot well that I have slain your good knights, and
that me sore repenteth; but I was forced to do battle with them in saving of my life, or else
I must have suffered them to slay me.  Howbeit, it hath pleased her good grace to have me in
charity, and to cherish me more than any other knight, and unto my power I in return have deserved
her love; for ofttimes, my lord, it fortuned me to do battle for her, and ye thanked me when
I saved her life.  Now me thinketh ye reward me full ill for my good service, and me seemeth
I had lost a great part of my honour in my knighthood, had I suffered my lady your queen to
be burned, inasmuch as she was to be burned for my sake.  For, since I have done battle for
your queen in other quarrels than in mine own, me seemeth now I had more right to do battle
for her in right quarrel.  Therefore, my good and gracious lord, take your queen unto your
good grace, for she is both fair, true, and good."  Alas, that ever I was so unhappy that I
had not seen Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris."

But Sir Gawaine was mischievously set, and it helped not Sir Launcelot to seek accordment.
He alighted and drew his sword to slay him, and then he said to Sir Launcelot, "Shall I make
an end of this war?"

"Not so hardy," said Sir Launcelot, "upon pain of thy head, touch him no further, for I will
never see that most noble king, that made me knight, either slain or shamed."

And then both sides withdrew to repose themselves, to bury the dead, and to lay soft salves
on the wounded.  Thus they passed the night, but on the morn they made ready again to do battle.
At the end of this day also Sir Launcelot and his party stood better, but for pity he withheld
his knights, and suffered King Arthur's party to withdraw one side, and Sir Launcelot again
returned into his castle.

So the war went on day after day.

So when this bishop was come to Carlisle he showed the King the bulls, and by their means peace
was made between King Arthur and Sir Launcelot.  With great pomp and ceremony Sir Launcelot
rode with the Queen from Joyous Gard to Carlisle, and they knelt before King Arthur, that was
full gladly accorded with them both.  But Sir Gawaine would never be at peace with the knight
that had slain his brethren. 

When all the greetings and congratulations were over, Mozart seated himself at the piano. He
played a part of one of his concertos, which Eugenie happened to be learning. It was a great
delight to have the artist and his genius so near--within one's own
walls.  A banished man departed never out of any realm
with honour; and that is my heaviness, for ever I fear that after my days they will chronicle
upon me that I was banished out of this land."

Then spake many noble knights: "Sir, we will never fail. And a great part," they said all,
"was because of your nobleness."  But to say the sooth, Sir Launcelot and his nephews were
lords of all France, and of all the lands that belong unto France through Sir Launcelot's noble
prowess.  When he had established all these countries, he shortly called a parliament, and
appointed officers for his realm.  Thus Sir Launcelot rewarded his noble knights and many more,
that me seemeth it were too long to rehearse.  When she came to the pavilion of King Arthur
there met her a gentle knight, Sir Lucan the butler, and when he knew that she was a messenger
from Sir Launcelot to the King he said: "I pray God, damsel, ye may speed well.  My Lord Arthur
would love Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine will not suffer him."

So Lucan led the damsel unto the King, and when she had told her tale, all the lords were full
glad to advise him to be accorded with Sir Launcelot, save only Sir Gawaine, who would not
turn again, now that they were past thus far upon the journey.

"Wit ye well, Sir Gawaine," said Arthur, "I will do as ye will advise me; and yet me seemeth
his fair proffers were not good to be refused."

Then Sir Gawaine sent the damsel away with the answer that it was now too late for peace. 
And so the war went on.  Sir Launcelot was never so loath to do battle, but he must needs defend
himself; and when King Arthur's host besieged Benwick round about, and fast began to set up
ladders, then Sir Launcelot beat them from the walls mightily.

At the first ever Sir Gawaine's power increased, and right so his wind and his evil will.

So he doubled his strokes, and soon smote such a buffet upon Sir Gawaine's helm that he sank
down upon his side in a swoon.  Then Sir Mordred sought the Bishop of Canterbury for to slay
him, and he fled, and, taking part of his goods with him, went nigh unto Glastonbury, and there
lived in poverty and in holy prayers as priest-hermit in a chapel, for well he understood that
mischievous war was at hand.  But King Arthur was so courageous that there might no manner
of knights prevent him from landing, and his knights fiercely followed him.

So they landed in spite of Sir Mordred and all his power, and they put him aback, so that he
fled and all his people.  Sir Gawaine felt that he must die, for he was smitten upon the old
wound that Sir Launcelot had given him afore the city of Benwick.  He now knew that he was
the cause of this unhappy war, for had Sir Launcelot remained with the King, it would never
have been, and now King Arthur would sore miss his brave knights of the Round Table.  This
letter was written but two hours and an half afore my death, with mine own hand, and so subscribed
with part of my heart's blood." I shall nevertheless advance, but whether beyond Puebla will depend
upon intervening information and reflection."

The army, having received supplies of medicines, ammunition, clothing,
salt, etc., made preparations to move.

Then Sir Gawaine vanished, and anon the King commanded Sir Lucan and his brother, Sir Bedivere,
with two bishops with them, and charged them to take a treaty for a month with Sir Mordred
in any wise they might.

CHAPTER XL

OF ARTHUR'S LAST GREAT BATTLE IN THE WEST

Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere were agreed with Sir Mordred that King Arthur and he should meet
betwixt both their hosts, for to conclude the treaty they had made, and every each of them
should bring fourteen persons.  And they came with this word unto King Arthur.  Then said he,
"I am glad that this is done."

So Arthur made ready to go into the field, and when he would depart, he warned all his hosts
that if they saw any sword drawn, they should come on fiercely, and slay that traitor Sir Mordred,
for he in no wise trusted him.  "If ye pass this evil day, ye shall be right well revenged
upon him.  "Therefore by my advice," said Sir Lucan, "it is best that we bring you to some town."

"I would it were so," said the King, "but I may not stand, my head works so.  And so again
he hid the sword, and returned, and told the King that he had been at the water, and done his
commandment.

"What sawest thou there?" said the King.

"Sir," he said, "I saw nothing but the waters lap and the waves toss."

When he came into the chapel he saw a hermit praying by a tomb new graven.  The hermit was
the Bishop of Canterbury that Sir Mordred had banished, and Sir Bedivere asked him what man
was there interred.

Then Sir Bedivere knew that King Arthur lay buried in that chapel, and he prayed the hermit
that he might abide with him still there. And there she was abbess and ruler, as reason would.

When Sir Launcelot of the Lake heard in his country that Sir Mordred was crowned king, and
made war against his uncle, then he made all haste with ships and galleys to go unto England.
So he passed over the sea till he came to Dover.  And then certain people of the town brought
him unto the castle of Dover, and showed him the tomb.  And he made a dole for Sir Gawaine,
and all the priests and clerks that might be gotten in the country were there and sang mass
of requiem.

So Sir Launcelot rode forth alone on his journey into the west country. There he sought seven
or eight days, and at the last came to the nunnery where was Queen Guenever.  Once only he
had speech with her, and then took his horse and rode away to forsake the world, as she had done.

He rode all that day and all that night in a forest, and at the last he was ware of an hermitage
and a chapel betwixt two cliffs.  Thither he rode, and there found Sir Bedivere with the Bishop
of Canterbury, for he was come to their hermitage.  And then he besought the Bishop that he
might remain there as a brother.  The Bishop would gladly have it so, and there he put hermit's
clothes upon Sir Launcelot, and there Sir Launcelot served God day and night with prayers and
fasting.

The great host abode in Dover fifteen days, as Sir Launcelot had bidden them.  Then, since
Sir Launcelot did not return, Sir Bors of Ganis made them take ship and return home again to
Benwick.

Thus they remained in true devotion six years, and Sir Launcelot took the habit of priesthood.
And there were none of those other knights but read in books, and holp in the worship and did
bodily all manner of service.  And so their horses went where they would, for they took no
regard of worldly riches.

Thus upon a night there came a vision to Sir Launcelot, and charged him to haste unto Almesbury,
for Queen Guenever was dead, and he should fetch the corpse and bury her by her husband, the
noble King Arthur. Then Sir Launcelot rose up ere day, took seven fellows with him, and on
foot they went from Glastonbury to Almesbury, the which is little more than thirty miles. 
They came thither within two days, for they were weak and feeble to go, and found that Queen
Guenever had died but half an hour before.  The ladies said she had told them all, ere she
passed, that Sir Launcelot had been a priest near a twelvemonth, and that he came thither as
fast as he might, to take her corpse to Glastonbury for burial.

So Sir Launcelot and his seven fellows went back on foot beside the corpse of Queen Guenever
from Almesbury unto Glastonbury, and they buried her with solemn devotion in the chapel at
the hermitage.  When she was put in the earth Sir Launcelot swooned, for he remembered the
noblesse and kindness that was both with the King and with herself, and how by his fault and
his pride they were both laid full low.  Then Sir Launcelot sickened more and more, and within
six weeks afterwards Sir Bors and his fellows found him dead in his bed.  The Bishop did his
mass of requiem, and he and all the nine knights went with the corpse till they came to Joyous
Gard, his own castle, and there they buried him in the choir of the chapel, as he had wished,
with great devotion. Thereafter the knights went all with the Bishop of Canterbury back to
his hermitage. Notwithstanding, it treateth of the byrth, lyf and actes of the sayd Kynge Arthur,
of his noble knyghtes of the Round Table, theyr mervayllous enquestes and adventures, the achyevying
of the Holy Grail, and in the end the dolourous deth and departyng out of thys world of them
al.  Whiche book was reduced in to englysshe by Syr Thomas Malory knyght as afore is sayd,
and by me enprynted and fynyshed in the abbey Westminster the last day of July, the yere of
our Lord MCCCCLXXXV.

Caxton me fieri fecit.

