There is nothing to cause disagreement among the three main classes of people most interested
in wild life--the men whose business depends in any way on animal products, the sportsmen,
and the Nature-lovers of every kind. There are very good reasons why the general public should
support the scheme. And there are equally good reasons why it should be induced to do so by
simply telling it the truth about the senseless extermination that is now going on.

Every reader can help by spreading some knowledge of the subject in his or her home circle.
Canada, like all free countries, is governed by public opinion. And sound public opinion, like
all other good things, should always begin at home.

The Press can help, as it has helped many another good cause, by giving the subject full publicity.
Free use can be made of the present paper in any way desired. It is left non-copyright for
this very purpose.

Experts can help by pointing out mistakes, giving information, and making suggestions of their
own. And if any of them will undertake to lead, the present author will undertake to follow.

It is proposed to issue a supplement in 1912, containing all the additional information collected
in the mean time. Every such item of information will be duly credited to the person supplying it.

All correspondence should be addressed--

                          COLONEL WOOD,
                             59, Grande Allée, Quebec.

Animal Sanctuaries in Labrador BY LIEUT.-COLONEL WILLIAM WOOD, F.R.S.C., ETC.

MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN:--

To be quite honest I must begin by saying that I am not a scientific expert on either animals,
sanctuaries or Labrador. But, by way of excusing my temerity, I can plead a life-long love
of animals, a good deal of experience and study of them--especially down the Lower St. Lawrence,
and considerable attention to sanctuaries in general and their suitability to Labrador in particular.
Moreover, I can plead this most pressingly important fact, that a magnificent opportunity is
fast slipping away before our very eyes there, without a single effort being made to seize
it. I have repeatedly discussed the question with those best qualified to give sound advice--with
naturalists, explorers, missionaries, fishermen, furriers, traders, hunters, sportsmen, and
many who are accustomed to look ahead into the higher development of our public life. I have
also read the books, papers and reports written from up-to-date and first-hand knowledge. And,
though I have been careful to consult men who regard such questions from very different points
of view, and books showing quite as wide a general divergence, I have found a remarkable consensus
of opinion in favour of establishing a system of sanctuaries before it is too late. I should
like to add that any information on the subject, or any correction of what I have written here,
will be most welcome. The simple address, Quebec, will always find me. The only special point
I would ask correspondents to remember is that even the best recommendations must be adapted
to the peculiarities of the Labrador problem, which is new, strange, immense, and full of complex
human factors.

