Later in that month, after the capture of Fort Sumter by the Confederate authorities, a Dr.
Cornyn came to our house on Locust Street, one night after I had gone to bed, and told me he
had been sent by Frank Blair, who was not well, and wanted to see me that night at his house.
I dressed and walked over to his house on Washington Avenue, near Fourteenth, and found there,
in the front-room, several gentlemen, among whom I recall Henry T. Blow. Blair was in the back-room,
closeted with some gentleman, who soon left, and I was called in.  He there told me that the
Government was mistrustful of General Harvey, that a change in the command of the department
was to be made; that he held it in his power to appoint a brigadier-general, and put him in
command of the department, and he offered me the place.  I told him I had once offered my services,
and they were declined; that I had made business engagements in St. Louis, which I could not
throw off at pleasure; that I had long deliberated on my course of action, and must decline
his offer, however tempting and complimentary.  He reasoned with me, but I persisted.  He told
me, in that event, he should appoint Lyon, and he did so.

Finding that even my best friends were uneasy as to my political status, on the 8th of May
I addressed the following official letter to the Secretary of War:

Office of the St. Louis Railroad Company, May 8,1881.

Yours truly,   W. T. SHERMAN.

To this I do not think I received a direct answer; but, on the 10th of the same month, I was
appointed colonel of the Thirteenth Regular Infantry.

I remember going to the arsenal on the 9th of May, taking my children with me in the street-cars.
Within the arsenal wall were drawn up in parallel lines four regiments of the "Home Guards,"
and I saw men distributing cartridges to the boxes.  I also saw General Lyon running about
with his hair in the wind, his pockets full of papers, wild and irregular, but I knew him to
be a man of vehement purpose and of determined action.  I saw of course that it meant business,
but whether for defense or offense I did not know.  The next morning I went up to the railroad-office
in Bremen, as usual, and heard at every corner of the streets that the "Dutch" were moving
on Camp Jackson.  People were barricading their houses, and men were running in that direction.
I hurried through my business as quickly as I could, and got back to my house on Locust Street
by twelve o'clock.  Charles Ewing and Hunter were there, and insisted on going out to the camp
to see "the fun."  I tried to dissuade them, saying that in case of conflict the bystanders
were more likely to be killed than the men engaged, but they would go.  I felt as much interest
as anybody else, but staid at home, took my little son Willie, who was about seven years old,
and walked up and down the pavement in front of our house, listening for the sound of musketry
or cannon in the direction of Camp Jackson.  While so engaged Miss Eliza Dean, who lived opposite
us, called me across the street, told me that her brother-in-law, Dr. Scott, was a surgeon
in Frost's camp, and she was dreadfully afraid he would be killed.  I reasoned with her that
General Lyon was a regular officer; that if he had gone out, as reported, to Camp Jackson,
he would take with him such a force as would make resistance impossible; but she would not
be comforted, saying that the camp was made up of the young men from the first and best families
of St. Louis, and that they were proud, and would fight.  I explained that young men of the
best families did not like to be killed better than ordinary people.  Edging gradually up the
street, I was in Olive Street just about Twelfth, when I saw a man running from the direction
of Camp Jackson at full speed, calling, as he went, "They've surrendered, they've surrendered!"
So I turned back and rang the bell at Mrs. Dean's.  Eliza came to the door, and I explained
what I had heard; but she angrily slammed the door in my face!  Evidently she was disappointed
to find she was mistaken in her estimate of the rash courage of the best families.

I again turned in the direction of Camp Jackson, my boy Willie with me still.  At the head
of Olive Street, abreast of Lindell's Grove, I found Frank Blair's regiment in the street,
with ranks opened, and the Camp Jackson prisoners inside.  A crowd of people was gathered around,
calling to the prisoners by name, some hurrahing for Jeff Davis, and others encouraging the
troops.  Men, women, and children, were in the crowd.  I passed along till I found myself inside
the grove, where I met Charles Ewing and John Hunter, and we stood looking at the troops on
the road, heading toward the city. A band of music was playing at the head, and the column
made one or two ineffectual starts, but for some reason was halted.  The battalion of regulars
was abreast of me, of which Major Rufus Saxton was in command, and I gave him an evening paper,
which I had bought of the newsboy on my way out.  He was reading from it some piece of news,
sitting on his horse, when the column again began to move forward, and he resumed his place
at the head of his command. At that part of the road, or street, was an embankment about eight
feet high, and a drunken fellow tried to pass over it to the people opposite.

One of the regular sergeant file-closers ordered him back, but he attempted to pass through
the ranks, when the sergeant barred his progress with his musket "a-port."  The drunken man
seized his musket, when the sergeant threw him off with violence, and he rolled over and over
down the bank.  By the time this man had picked himself up and got his hat, which had fallen
off, and had again mounted the embankment, the regulars had passed, and the head of Osterhaus's
regiment of Home Guards had come up.  The man had in his hand a small pistol, which he fired
off, and I heard that the ball had struck the leg of one of Osterhaus's staff; the regiment
stopped; there was a moment of confusion, when the soldiers of that regiment began to fire
over our heads in the grove.  I heard the balls cutting the leaves above our heads, and saw
several men and women running in all directions, some of whom were wounded.  Of course there
was a general stampede.  Charles Ewing threw Willie on the ground and covered him with his
body.  Hunter ran behind the hill, and I also threw myself on the ground.  The fire ran back
from the head of the regiment toward its rear, and as I saw the men reloading their pieces,
I jerked Willie up, ran back with him into a gully which covered us, lay there until I saw
that the fire had ceased, and that the column was again moving on, when I took up Willie and
started back for home round by way of Market Street.  A woman and child were killed outright;
two or three men were also killed, and several others were wounded.  The great mass of the
people on that occasion were simply curious spectators, though men were sprinkled through the
crowd calling out, "Hurrah for Jeff Davis!" and others were particularly abusive of the "damned
Dutch" Lyon posted a guard in charge of the vacant camp, and marched his prisoners down to
the arsenal; some were paroled, and others held, till afterward they were regularly exchanged.

A very few days after this event, May 14th, I received a dispatch from my brother Charles in
Washington, telling me to come on at once; that I had been appointed a colonel of the Thirteenth
Regular Infantry, and that I was wanted at Washington immediately.

