LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI

                        BY MARK TWAIN

                           Part 6.

Chapter 26  Under Fire

TALK began to run upon the war now, for we were getting down into the upper edge of the former
battle-stretch by this time. Columbus was just behind us, so there was a good deal said about
the famous battle of Belmont.  Several of the boat's officers had seen active service in the
Mississippi war-fleet. I gathered that they found themselves sadly out of their element in
that kind of business at first, but afterward got accustomed to it, reconciled to it, and more
or less at home in it. One of our pilots had his first war experience in the Belmont fight,
as a pilot on a boat in the Confederate service. I had often had a curiosity to know how a
green hand might feel, in his maiden battle, perched all solitary and alone on high in a pilot
house, a target for Tom, Dick and Harry, and nobody at his elbow to shame him from showing
the white feather when matters grew hot and perilous around him; so, to me his story was valuable--it
filled a gap for me which all histories had left till that time empty.

THE PILOT'S FIRST BATTLE

He said--

It was the 7th of November.  The fight began at seven in the morning. I was on the 'R. H. W.
Hill.'  Took over a load of troops from Columbus. Came back, and took over a battery of artillery.
My partner said he was going to see the fight; wanted me to go along.  I said, no, I wasn't
anxious, I would look at it from the pilot-house. He said I was a coward, and left.

That fight was an awful sight.  General Cheatham made his men strip their coats off and throw
them in a pile, and said, 'Now follow me to hell or victory!'  I heard him say that from the
pilot-house; and then he galloped in, at the head of his troops.  Old General Pillow, with
his white hair, mounted on a white horse, sailed in, too, leading his troops as lively as a
boy.  By and by the Federals chased the rebels back, and here they came! tearing along, everybody
for himself and Devil take the hindmost! and down under the bank they scrambled, and took shelter.
I was sitting with my legs hanging out of the pilot-house window. All at once I noticed a whizzing
sound passing my ear. Judged it was a bullet. I didn't stop to think about anything, I just
tilted over backwards and landed on the floor, and staid there. The balls came booming around.
Three cannon-balls went through the chimney; one ball took off the corner of the pilot-house;
shells were screaming and bursting all around.  Mighty warm times--I wished I hadn't come.
I lay there on the pilot-house floor, while the shots came faster and faster. I crept in behind
the big stove, in the middle of the pilot-house. Presently a minie-ball came through the stove,
and just grazed my head, and cut my hat.  I judged it was time to go away from there.  The
captain was on the roof with a red-headed major from Memphis--a fine-looking man. I heard him
say he wanted to leave here, but 'that pilot is killed.' I crept over to the starboard side
to pull the bell to set her back; raised up and took a look, and I saw about fifteen shot holes
through the window panes; had come so lively I hadn't noticed them. I glanced out on the water,
and the spattering shot were like a hailstorm. I thought best to get out of that place.  I
went down the pilot-house guy, head first--not feet first but head first--slid down--before
I struck the deck, the captain said we must leave there.  So I climbed up the guy and got on
the floor again.  About that time, they collared my partner and were bringing him up to the
pilot-house between two soldiers. The truth is, Hurry, I'd be more than paid ten times over in
having the pleasure of helping you to run off with the lady. I'm in my element in an affair of
this sort--there's nothing I like better, barring a good stand-up scrimmage, and that's generally
too soon over. Now, Hurry, just do as I say.

Promise me!"

I was struck dumb; so rapidly did he pour out his proposals that I could not answer him. He took my
silence for consent, and ran on. At first I was somewhat inclined to resent his remarks, but
his generosity and evident unconsciousness that he was proposing anything in any way incorrect
completely disarmed my anger, and, when he ceased speaking, greatly
to his surprise, I burst out into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.

"I am most thankful, my dear O'Driscoll, for your kind sympathy, and for the assistance you
so liberally offer me," I exclaimed, as soon as I could recover myself.

"But supposing I could or would persuade her to leave her home, and the protection of her family,
just consider all the hardships, inconveniences, and danger she would
be exposed to on board ship before I could place her in safety; and
then, how could she, delicately brought up, live on a lieutenant's
pay, even with such prize-money as I might save, and your aid, my
kind fellow!"

I added. "No, no! the thing is out of the question."

"Faith, I hadn't thought all about those little obstructions to matrimonial felicity," he answered.
"Still I can't give up the idea, in case the chance should offer, of your running away with
the young lady. It seems such a natural thing to do. There's a fine fellow, be prepared, that's all--and
only just let me help you."

"Well, well! I have no friend on whom I can more fully rely than you," I replied. "I promise you
that I will not fail to apply to you if I see that you can in any way help me."

"That's all right," said he, fully satisfied. "I knew that you would, before long, come into
my views."

Our passage to the south was very tedious, for we had light winds, sad were also constantly compelled
to heave-to for the laggards.

Soon after the conversation I have mentioned, on the 23rd of December, it being still calm, one
of the leading ships signalled that a ship and four small sail were in sight to the southward,
and that they had all the appearance of enemies. We, accordingly,
crowded all sail in chase, but scarcely had we got beyond the van
of the fleet when it became evident that, at the rate we were progressing,
we should not come up with the chase before dark. We had, in company,
a small privateer schooner fitted with long sweeps, and which rowed
remarkably well. Captain Symonds directed her by signal to come within
hail, and then ordered me to take thirty men and go on board her and
to proceed in chase of the strangers.

"If they prove to be enemies,"
said he, "bring them to action, and keep them engaged at long range,
knocking away their spars, if you can, so that they cannot escape
till we come up. They'd
shoot one another down, right in the presence of the family. They didn't hunt for each other,
but when they happened to meet, they puffed and begun.  Men would shoot boys, boys would shoot
men. A man shot a boy twelve years old--happened on him in the woods, and didn't give him no
chance.  If he HAD 'a' given him a chance, the boy'd 'a' shot him.  Both families belonged
to the same church (everybody around here is religious); through all this fifty or sixty years'
fuss, both tribes was there every Sunday, to worship. They lived each side of the line, and
the church was at a landing called Compromise.  Half the church and half the aisle was in Kentucky,
the other half in Tennessee. Sundays you'd see the families drive up, all in their Sunday clothes,
men, women, and children, and file up the aisle, and set down, quiet and orderly, one lot on
the Tennessee side of the church and the other on the Kentucky side; and the men and boys would
lean their guns up against the wall, handy, and then all hands would join in with the prayer
and praise; though they say the man next the aisle didn't kneel down, along with the rest of
the family; kind of stood guard.  I don't know; never was at that church in my life; but I
remember that that's what used to be said.

'Twenty or twenty-five years ago, one of the feud families caught a young man of nineteen out
and killed him. Don't remember whether it was the Darnells and Watsons, or one of the other
feuds; but anyway, this young man rode up--steamboat laying there at the time--and the first
thing he saw was a whole gang of the enemy.  He jumped down behind a wood-pile, but they rode
around and begun on him, he firing back, and they galloping and cavorting and yelling and banging
away with all their might.  Think he wounded a couple of them; but they closed in on him and
chased him into the river; and as he swum along down stream, they followed along the bank and
kept on shooting at him; and when he struck shore he was dead. Windy Marshall told me about
it.  He saw it.  He was captain of the boat.

'Years ago, the Darnells was so thinned out that the old man and his two sons concluded they'd
leave the country.  They started to take steamboat just above No. 10; but the Watsons got wind
of it; and they arrived just as the two young Darnells was walking up the companion-way with
their wives on their arms.  The fight begun then, and they never got no further--both of them
killed. After that, old Darnell got into trouble with the man that run the ferry, and the ferry-man
got the worst of it-- and died. But his friends shot old Darnell through and through--filled
him full of bullets, and ended him.'

The country gentleman who told me these things had been reared in ease and comfort, was a man
of good parts, and was college bred. His loose grammar was the fruit of careless habit, not
ignorance. This habit among educated men in the West is not universal, but it is prevalent--
prevalent in the towns, certainly, if not in the cities; and to a degree which one cannot help
noticing, and marveling at. I heard a Westerner who would be accounted a highly educated man
in any country, say 'never mind, it DON'T MAKE NO DIFFERENCE, anyway.' A life-long resident
who was present heard it, but it made no impression upon her.  She was able to recall the fact
afterward, when reminded of it; but she confessed that the words had not grated upon her ear
at the time--a confession which suggests that if educated people can hear such blasphemous
grammar, from such a source, and be unconscious of the deed, the crime must be tolerably common--so
common that the general ear has become dulled by familiarity with it, and is no longer alert,
no longer sensitive to such affronts.

No one in the world speaks blemishless grammar; no one has ever written it--NO one, either
in the world or out of it (taking the Scriptures for evidence on the latter point); therefore
it would not be fair to exact grammatical perfection from the peoples of the Valley; but they
and all other peoples may justly be required to refrain from KNOWINGLY and PURPOSELY debauching
their grammar.

I found the river greatly changed at Island No. 10. The island which I remembered was some
three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide, heavily timbered, and lay near the Kentucky
shore--within two hundred yards of it, I should say.  Now, however, one had to hunt for it
with a spy-glass. Nothing was left of it but an insignificant little tuft, and this was no
longer near the Kentucky shore; it was clear over against the opposite shore, a mile away.
In war times the island had been an important place, for it commanded the situation; and, being
heavily fortified, there was no getting by it.  It lay between the upper and lower divisions
of the Union forces, and kept them separate, until a junction was finally effected across the
Missouri neck of land; but the island being itself joined to that neck now, the wide river
is without obstruction.

In this region the river passes from Kentucky into Tennessee, back into Missouri, then back
into Kentucky, and thence into Tennessee again. So a mile or two of Missouri sticks over into
Tennessee.

The town of New Madrid was looking very unwell; but otherwise unchanged from its former condition
and aspect. Its blocks of frame-houses were still grouped in the same old flat plain, and environed
by the same old forests. It was as tranquil as formerly, and apparently had neither grown nor
diminished in size.  It was said that the recent high water had invaded it and damaged its
looks.  This was surprising news; for in low water the river bank is very high there (fifty
feet), and in my day an overflow had always been considered an impossibility. This present
flood of 1882 Will doubtless be celebrated in the river's history for several generations before
a deluge of like magnitude shall be seen.  It put all the unprotected low lands under water,
from Cairo to the mouth; it broke down the levees in a great many places, on both sides of
the river; and in some regions south, when the flood was at its highest, the Mississippi was
SEVENTY MILES wide! a number of lives were lost, and the destruction of property was fearful.
The crops were destroyed, houses washed away, and shelterless men and cattle forced to take
refuge on scattering elevations here and there in field and forest, and wait in peril and suffering
until the boats put in commission by the national and local governments and by newspaper enterprise
could come and rescue them. The properties of multitudes of people were under water for months,
and the poorer ones must have starved by the hundred if succor had not been promptly afforded.{footnote
[For a detailed and interesting description of the great flood, written on board of the New
Orleans TIMES-DEMOCRAT'S relief-boat, see Appendix A]} The water had been falling during a
considerable time now, yet as a rule we found the banks still under water.

Chapter 27 Some Imported Articles

WE met two steamboats at New Madrid.  Two steamboats in sight at once! an infrequent spectacle
now in the lonesome Mississippi. The loneliness of this solemn, stupendous flood is impressive--and
depressing.  League after league, and still league after league, it pours its chocolate tide
along, between its solid forest walls, its almost untenanted shores, with seldom a sail or
a moving object of any kind to disturb the surface and break the monotony of the blank, watery
solitude; and so the day goes, the night comes, and again the day--and still the same, night
after night and day after day--majestic, unchanging sameness of serenity, repose, tranquillity,
lethargy, vacancy--symbol of eternity, realization of the heaven pictured by priest and prophet,
and longed for by the good and thoughtless!

Immediately after the war of 1812, tourists began to come to America, from England; scattering
ones at first, then a sort of procession of them--a procession which kept up its plodding,
patient march through the land during many, many years. Each tourist took notes, and went home
and published a book--a book which was usually calm, truthful, reasonable, kind; but which
seemed just the reverse to our tender-footed progenitors. A glance at these tourist-books shows
us that in certain of its aspects the Mississippi has undergone no change since those strangers
visited it, but remains to-day about as it was then. The emotions produced in those foreign
breasts by these aspects were not all formed on one pattern, of course; they HAD to be various,
along at first, because the earlier tourists were obliged to originate their emotions, whereas
in older countries one can always borrow emotions from one's predecessors. And, mind you, emotions
are among the toughest things in the world to manufacture out of whole cloth; it is easier
to manufacture seven facts than one emotion.  Captain Basil Hall. R.N., writing fifty-five
years ago, says--

'Here I caught the first glimpse of the object I had so long wished to behold, and felt myself
amply repaid at that moment for all the trouble I had experienced in coming so far; and stood
looking at the river flowing past till it was too dark to distinguish anything. But it was
not till I had visited the same spot a dozen times, that I came to a right comprehension of
the grandeur of the scene.'

Following are Mrs. Trollope's emotions. A value, though marred in the matter of statistics
by inaccuracies; for the catfish is a plenty good enough fish for anybody, and there are no
panthers that are 'impervious to man.'

Later still comes Alexander Mackay, of the Middle Temple, Barrister at Law, with a better digestion,
and no catfish dinner aboard, and feels as follows--

'The Mississippi!  It was with indescribable emotions that I first felt myself afloat upon
its waters.  How often in my schoolboy dreams, and in my waking visions afterwards, had my
imagination pictured to itself the lordly stream, rolling with tumultuous current through the
boundless region to which it has given its name, and gathering into itself, in its course to
the ocean, the tributary waters of almost every latitude in the temperate zone! Here it was
then in its reality, and I, at length, steaming against its tide. I looked upon it with that
reverence with which everyone must regard a great feature of external nature.'

So much for the emotions.  The tourists, one and all, remark upon the deep, brooding loneliness
and desolation of the vast river. Captain Basil Hall, who saw it at flood-stage, says--

'Sometimes we passed along distances of twenty or thirty miles without seeing a single habitation.
An artist, in search of hints for a painting of the deluge, would here have found them in abundance.'

The first shall be last, etc.  just two hundred years ago, the old original first and gallantest
of all the foreign tourists, pioneer, head of the procession, ended his weary and tedious discovery-voyage
down the solemn stretches of the great river--La Salle, whose name will last as long as the
river itself shall last.

New Orleans intended to fittingly celebrate, this present year, the bicentennial anniversary
of this illustrious event; but when the time came, all her energies and surplus money were
required in other directions, for the flood was upon the land then, making havoc and devastation
everywhere.

Chapter 28 Uncle Mumford Unloads

ALL day we swung along down the river, and had the stream almost wholly to ourselves.  Formerly,
at such a stage of the water, we should have passed acres of lumber rafts, and dozens of big
coal barges; also occasional little trading-scows, peddling along from farm to farm, with the
peddler's family on board; possibly, a random scow, bearing a humble Hamlet and Co. on an itinerant
dramatic trip.  But these were all absent. Far along in the day, we saw one steamboat; just
one, and no more. She was lying at rest in the shade, within the wooded mouth of the Obion
River.  The spy-glass revealed the fact that she was named for me --or HE was named for me,
whichever you prefer. As this was the first time I had ever encountered this species of honor,
it seems excusable to mention it, and at the same time call the attention of the authorities
to the tardiness of my recognition of it.

Noted a big change in the river, at Island 21.  It was a very large island, and used to be
out toward mid-stream; but it is joined fast to the main shore now, and has retired from business
as an island.

As we approached famous and formidable Plum Point, darkness fell, but that was nothing to shudder
about--in these modern times. For now the national government has turned the Mississippi into
a sort of two- thousand-mile torchlight procession. In the head of every crossing, and in the
foot of every crossing, the government has set up a clear-burning lamp. You are never entirely
in the dark, now; there is always a beacon in sight, either before you, or behind you, or abreast.
One might almost say that lamps have been squandered there. Dozens of crossings are lighted
which were not shoal when they were created, and have never been shoal since; crossings so
plain, too, and also so straight, that a steamboat can take herself through them without any
help, after she has been through once.  Lamps in such places are of course not wasted; it is
much more convenient and comfortable for a pilot to hold on them than on a spread of formless
blackness that won't stay still; and money is saved to the boat, at the same time, for she
can of course make more miles with her rudder amidships than she can with it squared across
her stern and holding her back.

But this thing has knocked the romance out of piloting, to a large extent. It, and some other
things together, have knocked all the romance out of it. For instance, the peril from snags
is not now what it once was. The government's snag-boats go patrolling up and down, in these
matter-of-fact days, pulling the river's teeth; they have rooted out all the old clusters which
made many localities so formidable; and they allow no new ones to collect.  Formerly, if your
boat got away from you, on a black night, and broke for the woods, it was an anxious time with
you; so was it also, when you were groping your way through solidified darkness in a narrow
chute; but all that is changed now--you flash out your electric light, transform night into
day in the twinkling of an eye, and your perils and anxieties are at an end.  Horace Bixby
and George Ritchie have charted the crossings and laid out the courses by compass; they have
invented a lamp to go with the chart, and have patented the whole. With these helps, one may
run in the fog now, with considerable security, and with a confidence unknown in the old days.

With these abundant beacons, the banishment of snags, plenty of daylight in a box and ready
to be turned on whenever needed, and a chart and compass to fight the fog with, piloting, at
a good stage of water, is now nearly as safe and simple as driving stage, and is hardly more
than three times as romantic.

And now in these new days, these days of infinite change, the Anchor Line have raised the captain
above the pilot by giving him the bigger wages of the two.  This was going far, but they have
not stopped there. They have decreed that the pilot shall remain at his post, and stand his
watch clear through, whether the boat be under way or tied up to the shore. We, that were once
the aristocrats of the river, can't go to bed now, as we used to do, and sleep while a hundred
tons of freight are lugged aboard; no, we must sit in the pilot-house; and keep awake, too.
Verily we are being treated like a parcel of mates and engineers. The Government has taken
away the romance of our calling; the Company has taken away its state and dignity.

