It has already been said that in Count Fathom Smollett appears to some extent as a romanticist,
and this is another fact which lends interest to the book.  That he had a powerful imagination
is not a surprise.  Any one versed in Smollett has already seen it in the remarkable situations
which he has put before us in his earlier works.  These do not indicate, however, that Smollett
possessed the imagination which could excite romantic interest; for in Roderick Random and
in Peregrine Pickle, the wonderful situations serve chiefly to amuse.  In Fathom, however,
there are some designed to excite horror; and one, at least, is eminently successful.  The
hero's night in the wood between Bar-le-duc and Chalons was no doubt more blood-curdling to
our eighteenth-century ancestors than it is to us, who have become acquainted with scores of
similar situations in the small number of exciting romances which belong to literature, and
in the greater number which do not.  Still, even to-day, a reader, with his taste jaded by
trashy novels, will be conscious of Smollett's power, and of several thrills, likewise, as
he reads about Fathom's experience in the loft in which the beldame locks him to pass the night.

This situation is melodramatic rather than romantic, as the word is used technically in application
to eighteenth and nineteenth-century literature.  There is no little in Fathom, however, which
is genuinely romantic in the latter sense.  Such is the imprisonment of the Countess in the
castle-tower, whence she waves her handkerchief to the young Count, her son and would-be rescuer.
And especially so is the scene in the church, when Renaldo (the very name is romantic) visits
at midnight the supposed grave of his lady-love.  While he was waiting for the sexton to open
the door, his "soul .  .  .  was wound up to the highest pitch of enthusiastic sorrow.

We have here such an amount of the usual romantic machinery of the "grave-yard" school of poets--that
school of which Professor W. L. Phelps calls Young, in his Night Thoughts, the most "conspicuous
exemplar"-- that one is at first inclined to think Smollett poking fun at it.  The context,
however, seems to prove that he was perfectly serious.  It is interesting, then, as well as
surprising, to find traces of the romantic spirit in his fiction over ten years before Walpole's
Castle of Otranto. It is also interesting to find so much melodramatic feeling in him, because
it makes stronger the connection between him and his nineteenth-century disciple, Dickens.

From all that I have said, it must not be thought that the usual Smollett is always, or almost
always, absent from Count Fathom.  I have spoken of the dedication and of the opening chapters
as what we might expect from his pen.  There are, besides, true Smollett strokes in the scenes
in the prison from which Melvil rescues Fathom, and there is a good deal of the satirical Smollett
fun in the description of Fathom's ups and downs, first as the petted beau, and then as the
fashionable doctor.  In chronicling the latter meteoric career, Smollett had already observed
the peculiarity of his countrymen which Thackeray was fond of harping on in the next century--"the
maxim which universally prevails among the English people .  .  .  to overlook, .  .  .  on
their return to the metropolis, all the connexions they may have chanced to acquire during
their residence at any of the medical wells.  And this social disposition is so scrupulously
maintained, that two persons who live in the most intimate correspondence at Bath or Tunbridge,
shall, in four-and-twenty hours .  .  .  meet in St. James's Park, without betraying the least
token of recognition."  And good, too, is the way in which, as Dr. Fathom goes rapidly down
the social hill, he makes excuses for his declining splendour.  His chariot was overturned
"with a hideous crash" at such danger to himself, "that he did not believe he should ever hazard
himself again in any sort of wheel carriage."  He turned off his men for maids, because "men
servants are generally impudent, lazy, debauched, or dishonest."  To avoid the din of the street,
he shifted his lodgings into a quiet, obscure court.  And so forth and so on, in the true Smollett
vein.

But, after all, such of the old sparks are struck only occasionally. Apart from its plot, which
not a few nineteenth-century writers of detective-stories might have improved, The Adventures
of Ferdinand Count Fathom is less interesting for itself than any other piece of fiction from
Smollett's pen.  For a student of Smollett, however, it is highly interesting as showing the
author's romantic, melodramatic tendencies, and the growth of his constructive technique.

G. H. MAYNADIER

THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM

TO DOCTOR ------

You and I, my good friend, have often deliberated on the difficulty of writing such a dedication
as might gratify the self-complacency of a patron, without exposing the author to the ridicule
or censure of the public; and I think we generally agreed that the task was altogether impracticable.--Indeed,
this was one of the few subjects on which we have always thought in the same manner.  For,
notwithstanding that deference and regard which we mutually pay to each other, certain it is,
we have often differed, according to the predominancy of those different passions, which frequently
warp the opinion, and perplex the understanding of the most judicious.

In dedication, as in poetry, there is no medium; for, if any one of the human virtues be omitted
in the enumeration of the patron's good qualities, the whole address is construed into an affront,
and the writer has the mortification to find his praise prostituted to very little purpose.

On the other hand, should he yield to the transports of gratitude or affection, which is always
apt to exaggerate, and produce no more than the genuine effusions of his heart, the world will
make no allowance for the warmth of his passion, but ascribe the praise he bestows to interested
views and sordid adulation.

Sometimes too, dazzled by the tinsel of a character which he has no opportunity to investigate,
he pours forth the homage of his admiration upon some false Maecenas, whose future conduct
gives the lie to his eulogium, and involves him in shame and confusion of face.  Such was the
fate of a late ingenious author [the Author of the "Seasons"], who was so often put to the
blush for the undeserved incense he had offered in the heat of an enthusiastic disposition,
misled by popular applause, that he had resolved to retract, in his last will, all the encomiums
which he had thus prematurely bestowed, and stigmatise the unworthy by name--a laudable scheme
of poetical justice, the execution of which was fatally prevented by untimely death.

Whatever may have been the fate of other dedicators, I, for my own part, sit down to write
this address, without any apprehension of disgrace or disappointment; because I know you are
too well convinced of my affection and sincerity to repine at what I shall say touching your
character and conduct.  And you will do me the justice to believe, that this public distinction
is a testimony of my particular friendship and esteem.

Not that I am either insensible of your infirmities, or disposed to conceal them from the notice
of mankind.  There are certain foibles which can only be cured by shame and mortification;
and whether or not yours be of that species, I shall have the comfort to think my best endeavours
were used for your reformation.  I have blushed at the weakness of your conversation, and trembled
at the errors of your conduct--yet, as I own you possess certain good qualities, which overbalance
these defects, and distinguish you on this occasion as a person for whom I have the most perfect
attachment and esteem, you have no cause to complain of the indelicacy with which your faults
are reprehended.  And as they are chiefly the excesses of a sanguine disposition and looseness
of thought, impatient of caution or control, you may, thus stimulated, watch over your own
intemperance and infirmity with redoubled vigilance and consideration, and for the future profit
by the severity of my reproof.

These, however, are not the only motives that induce me to trouble you with this public application.
I must not only perform my duty to my friends, but also discharge the debt I owe to my own
interest.  We live in a censorious age; and an author cannot take too much precaution to anticipate
the prejudice, misapprehension, and temerity of malice, ignorance, and presumption.

I therefore think it incumbent upon me to give some previous intimation of the plan which I
have executed in the subsequent performance, that I may not be condemned upon partial evidence;
and to whom can I with more propriety appeal in my explanation than to you, who are so well
acquainted with all the sentiments and emotions of my breast?

In the drama, which is a more limited field of invention, the chief personage is often the
object of our detestation and abhorrence; and we are as well pleased to see the wicked schemes
of a Richard blasted, and the perfidy of a Maskwell exposed, as to behold a Bevil happy, and
an Edward victorious.

That the mind might not be fatigued, nor the imagination disgusted, by a succession of vicious
objects, I have endeavoured to refresh the attention with occasional incidents of a different
nature; and raised up a virtuous character, in opposition to the adventurer, with a view to
amuse the fancy, engage the affection, and form a striking contrast which might heighten the
expression, and give a relief to the moral of the whole.

If I have not succeeded in my endeavours to unfold the mysteries of fraud, to instruct the
ignorant, and entertain the vacant; if I have failed in my attempts to subject folly to ridicule,
and vice to indignation; to rouse the spirit of mirth, wake the soul of compassion, and touch
the secret springs that move the heart; I have, at least, adorned virtue with honour and applause,
branded iniquity with reproach and shame, and carefully avoided every hint or expression which
could give umbrage to the most delicate reader--circumstances which (whatever may be my fate
with the public) will with you always operate in favour of,

Dear sir, your very affectionate friend and servant,

THE AUTHOR.

CHAPTER ONE

SOME SAGE OBSERVATIONS THAT NATURALLY INTRODUCE OUR IMPORTANT HISTORY.

Cardinal de Retz very judiciously observes, that all historians must of necessity be subject
to mistakes, in explaining the motives of those actions they record, unless they derive their
intelligence from the candid confession of the person whose character they represent; and that,
of consequence, every man of importance ought to write his own memoirs, provided he has honesty
enough to tell the truth, without suppressing any circumstance that may tend to the information
of the reader.  This, however, is a requisite that, I am afraid, would be very rarely found
among the number of those who exhibit their own portraits to the public. Indeed, I will venture
to say, that, how upright soever a man's intentions may be, he will, in the performance of
such a task, be sometimes misled by his own phantasy, and represent objects, as they appeared
to him, through the mists of prejudice and passion.

An unconcerned reader, when he peruses the history of two competitors, who lived two thousand
years ago, or who perhaps never had existence, except in the imagination of the author, cannot
help interesting himself in the dispute, and espousing one side of the contest, with all the
zeal of a warm adherent.  What wonder, then, that we should be heated in our own concerns,
review our actions with the same self-approbation that they had formerly acquired, and recommend
them to the world with all the enthusiasm of paternal affection?

Supposing this to be the case, it was lucky for the cause of historical truth, that so many
pens have been drawn by writers, who could not be suspected of such partiality; and that many
great personages, among the ancients as well as moderns, either would not or could not entertain
the public with their own memoirs.  From this want of inclination or capacity to write, in
our hero himself, the undertaking is now left to me, of transmitting to posterity the remarkable
adventures of FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM; and by the time the reader shall have glanced over the
subsequent sheets, I doubt not but he will bless God that the adventurer was not his own historian.

This mirror of modern chivalry was none of those who owe their dignity to the circumstances
of their birth, and are consecrated from the cradle for the purposes of greatness, merely because
they are the accidental children of wealth.  He was heir to no visible patrimony, unless we
reckon a robust constitution, a tolerable appearance, and an uncommon capacity, as the advantages
of inheritance.  If the comparison obtains in this point of consideration, he was as much as
any man indebted to his parent; and pity it was, that, in the sequel of his fortune, he never
had an opportunity of manifesting his filial gratitude and regard.  From this agreeable act
of duty to his sire, and all those tendernesses that are reciprocally enjoyed betwixt the father
and the son, he was unhappily excluded by a small circumstance; at which, however, he was never
heard to repine.  In short, had he been brought forth in the fabulous ages of the world, the
nature of his origin might have turned to his account; he might, like other heroes of antiquity,
have laid claim to divine extraction, without running the risk of being claimed by an earthly
father.  Not that his parents had any reason to disown or renounce their offspring, or that
there was anything preternatural in the circumstances of his generation and birth; on the contrary,
he was, from the beginning, a child of promising parts, and in due course of nature ushered
into the world amidst a whole cloud of witnesses.  But, that he was acknowledged by no mortal
sire, solely proceeded from the uncertainty of his mother, whose affections were so dissipated
among a number of admirers, that she could never pitch upon the person from whose loins our
hero sprung.

Over and above this important doubt under which he was begotten, other particularities attended
his birth, and seemed to mark him out as something uncommon among the sons of men.  He was
brought forth in a waggon, and might be said to be literally a native of two different countries;
for, though he first saw the light in Holland, he was not born till after the carriage arrived
in Flanders; so that, all these extraordinary circumstances considered, the task of determining
to what government he naturally owed allegiance, would be at least as difficult as that of
ascertaining the so much contested birthplace of Homer.

