Little Wars

(A Game for Boys from twelve years of age to one hundred and fifty and for that more intelligent
sort of girl who likes boys' games and books)

With an Appendix on Kriegspiel

By

H. G. Wells

CONTENTS

   I. OF THE LEGENDARY PAST
  II. THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN LITTLE WARFARE
 III. THE RULES--
        The Country
        The Move
        Mobility of the Various Arms
        Hand-to-Hand Fighting and Capturing
        Varieties of the Battle-Game
        Composition of Forces
        Size of the Soldiers
  IV. THE BATTLE OF HOOK'S FARM
   V. EXTENSIONS AND AMPLIFICATIONS OF LITTLE WAR
  VI. ENDING WITH A SORT OF CHALLENGE

APPENDIX--
  LITTLE WARS AND KRIEGSPIEL

I

OF THE LEGENDARY PAST

"LITTLE WARS" is the game of kings--for players in an inferior social position. It can be played
by boys of every age from twelve to one hundred and fifty--and even later if the limbs remain
sufficiently supple--by girls of the better sort, and by a few rare and gifted women. This
is to be a full History of Little Wars from its recorded and authenticated beginning until
the present time, an account of how to make little warfare, and hints of the most priceless
sort for the recumbent strategist....

But first let it be noted in passing that there were prehistoric "Little Wars." This is no
new thing, no crude novelty; but a thing tested by time, ancient and ripe in its essentials
for all its perennial freshness--like spring. There was a Someone who fought Little Wars in
the days of Queen Anne; a garden Napoleon. His game was inaccurately observed and insufficiently
recorded by Laurence Sterne. It is clear that Uncle Toby and Corporal Trim were playing Little
Wars on a scale and with an elaboration exceeding even the richness and beauty of the contemporary
game. But the curtain is drawn back only to tantalise us. It is scarcely conceivable that anywhere
now on earth the Shandean Rules remain on record. Perhaps they were never committed to paper....

And in all ages a certain barbaric warfare has been waged with soldiers of tin and lead and
wood, with the weapons of the wild, with the catapult, the elastic circular garter, the peashooter,
the rubber ball, and such-like appliances--a mere setting up and knocking down of men. Tin
murder. The advance of civilisation has swept such rude contests altogether from the playroom.
We know them no more....

II

THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN LITTLE WARFARE

THE beginning of the game of Little War, as we know it, became possible with the invention
of the spring breechloader gun. This priceless gift to boyhood appeared somewhen towards the
end of the last century, a gun capable of hitting a toy soldier nine times out of ten at a
distance of nine yards. It has completely superseded all the spiral-spring and other makes
of gun hitherto used in playroom warfare. These spring breechloaders are made in various sizes
and patterns, but the one used in our game is that known in England as the four-point-seven
gun. It fires a wooden cylinder about an inch long, and has a screw adjustment for elevation
and depression. It is an altogether elegant weapon.

It was with one of these guns that the beginning of our war game was made. It was at Sandgate--in
England.

The present writer had been lunching with a friend--let me veil his identity under the initials
J. K. J.--in a room littered with the irrepressible debris of a small boy's pleasures. On a
table near our own stood four or five soldiers and one of these guns. Mr J. K. J., his more
urgent needs satisfied and the coffee imminent, drew a chair to this little table, sat down,
examined the gun discreetly, loaded it warily, aimed, and hit his man. Thereupon he boasted
of the deed, and issued challenges that were accepted with avidity....

He fired that day a shot that still echoes round the world. An affair--let us parallel the
Cannonade of Valmy and call it the Cannonade of Sandgate--occurred, a shooting between opposed
ranks of soldiers, a shooting not very different in spirit--but how different in results!--from
the prehistoric warfare of catapult and garter. "But suppose," said his antagonists; "suppose
somehow one could move the men!" and therewith opened a new world of belligerence.

The matter went no further with Mr J. K. J. The seed lay for a time gathering strength, and
then began to germinate with another friend, Mr W. To Mr W. was broached the idea: "I believe
that if one set up a few obstacles on the floor, volumes of the British Encyclopedia and so
forth, to make a Country, and moved these soldiers and guns about, one could have rather a
good game, a kind of kriegspiel."...

Primitive attempts to realise the dream were interrupted by a great rustle and chattering of
lady visitors. They regarded the objects upon the floor with the empty disdain of their sex
for all imaginative things.

But the writer had in those days a very dear friend, a man too ill for long excursions or vigorous
sports (he has been dead now these six years), of a very sweet companionable disposition, a
hearty jester and full of the spirit of play. To him the idea was broached more fruitfully.
We got two forces of toy soldiers, set out a lumpish Encyclopaedic land upon the carpet, and
began to play. We arranged to move in alternate moves: first one moved all his force and then
the other; an infantry-man could move one foot at each move, a cavalry-man two, a gun two,
and it might fire six shots; and if a man was moved up to touch another man, then we tossed
up and decided which man was dead. So we made a game, which was not a good game, but which
was very amusing once or twice. The men were packed under the lee of fat volumes, while the
guns, animated by a spirit of their own, banged away at any exposed head, or prowled about
in search of a shot. Occasionally men came into contact, with remarkable results. Rash is the
man who trusts his life to the spin of a coin. One impossible paladin slew in succession nine
men and turned defeat to victory, to the extreme exasperation of the strategist who had led
those victims to their doom. This inordinate factor of chance eliminated play; the individual
freedom of guns turned battles into scandals of crouching concealment; there was too much cover
afforded by the books and vast intervals of waiting while the players took aim. And yet there
was something about it.... It was a game crying aloud for improvement.

Improvement came almost simultaneously in several directions. First there was the development
of the Country. The soldiers did not stand well on an ordinary carpet, the Encyclopedia made
clumsy cliff-like "cover", and more particularly the room in which the game had its beginnings
was subject to the invasion of callers, alien souls, trampling skirt-swishers, chatterers,
creatures unfavourably impressed by the spectacle of two middle-aged men playing with "toy
soldiers" on the floor, and very heated and excited about it. Overhead was the day nursery,
with a wide extent of smooth cork carpet (the natural terrain of toy soldiers), a large box
of bricks--such as I have described in Floor Games--and certain large inch-thick boards.

It was an easy task for the head of the household to evict his offspring, annex these advantages,
and set about planning a more realistic country. (I forget what became of the children.) The
thick boards were piled up one upon another to form hills; holes were bored in them, into which
twigs of various shrubs were stuck to represent trees; houses and sheds (solid and compact
piles of from three to six or seven inches high, and broad in proportion) and walls were made
with the bricks; ponds and swamps and rivers, with fords and so forth indicated, were chalked
out on the floor, garden stones were brought in to represent great rocks, and the "Country"
at least of our perfected war game was in existence. We discovered it was easy to cut out and
bend and gum together paper and cardboard walls, into which our toy bricks could be packed,
and on which we could paint doors and windows, creepers and rain-water pipes, and so forth,
to represent houses, castles, and churches in a more realistic manner, and, growing skilful,
we made various bridges and so forth of card. Every boy who has ever put together model villages
knows how to do these things, and the attentive reader will find them edifyingly represented
in our photographic illustrations.

There has been little development since that time in the Country. Our illustrations show the
methods of arrangement, and the reader will see how easily and readily the utmost variety of
battlefields can be made. (It is merely to be remarked that a too crowded Country makes the
guns ineffective and leads to a mere tree to tree and house to house scramble, and that large
open spaces along the middle, or rivers without frequent fords and bridges, lead to ineffective
cannonades, because of the danger of any advance. On the whole, too much cover is better than
too little.) We decided that one player should plan and lay out the Country, and the other
player choose from which side he would come. And to-day we play over such landscapes in a cork-carpeted
schoolroom, from which the proper occupants are no longer evicted but remain to take an increasingly
responsible and less and less audible and distressing share in the operations.

We found it necessary to make certain general rules. Houses and sheds must be made of solid
lumps of bricks, and not hollow so that soldiers can be put inside them, because otherwise
muddled situations arise. And it was clearly necessary to provide for the replacement of disturbed
objects by chalking out the outlines of boards and houses upon the floor or boards upon which
they stood.

And while we thus perfected the Country, we were also eliminating all sorts of tediums, disputable
possibilities, and deadlocks from the game. We decided that every man should be as brave and
skilful as every other man, and that when two men of opposite sides came into contact they
would inevitably kill each other. This restored strategy to its predominance over chance.

We then began to humanise that wild and fearful fowl, the gun. We decided that a gun could
not be fired if there were not six--afterwards we reduced the number to four--men within six
inches of it. And we ruled that a gun could not both fire and move in the same general move:
it could either be fired or moved (or left alone). If there were less than six men within six
inches of a gun, then we tried letting it fire as many shots as there were men, and we permitted
a single man to move a gun, and move with it as far as he could go by the rules--a foot, that
is, if he was an infantry-man, and two feet if he was a cavalry-man. We abolished altogether
that magical freedom of an unassisted gun to move two feet. And on such rules as these we fought
a number of battles. They were interesting, but not entirely satisfactory. We took no prisoners--a
feature at once barbaric and unconvincing. The battles lingered on a long time, because we
shot with extreme care and deliberation, and they were hard to bring to a decisive finish.
The guns were altogether too predominant. They prevented attacks getting home, and they made
it possible for a timid player to put all his soldiers out of sight behind hills and houses,
and bang away if his opponent showed as much as the tip of a bayonet. Monsieur Bloch seemed
vindicated, and Little War had become impossible. And there was something a little absurd,
too, in the spectacle of a solitary drummer-boy, for example, marching off with a gun.

But as there was nevertheless much that seemed to us extremely pretty and picturesque about
the game, we set to work--and here a certain Mr M. with his brother, Captain M., hot from the
Great War in South Africa, came in most helpfully--to quicken it. Manifestly the guns had to
be reduced to manageable terms. We cut down the number of shots per move to four, and we required
that four men should be within six inches of a gun for it to be in action at all. Without four
men it could neither fire nor move--it was out of action; and if it moved, the four men had
to go with it. Moreover, to put an end to that little resistant body of men behind a house,
we required that after a gun had been fired it should remain, without alteration of the elevation,
pointing in the direction of its last shot, and have two men placed one on either side of the
end of its trail. This secured a certain exposure on the part of concealed and sheltered gunners.
It was no longer possible to go on shooting out of a perfect security for ever. All this favoured
the attack and led to a livelier game.

Our next step was to abolish the tedium due to the elaborate aiming of the guns, by fixing
a time limit for every move. We made this an outside limit at first, ten minutes, but afterwards
we discovered that it made the game much more warlike to cut the time down to a length that
would barely permit a slow-moving player to fire all his guns and move all his men. This led
to small bodies of men lagging and "getting left," to careless exposures, to rapid, less accurate
shooting, and just that eventfulness one would expect in the hurry and passion of real fighting.
It also made the game brisker. We have since also made a limit, sometimes of four minutes,
sometimes of five minutes, to the interval for adjustment and deliberation after one move is
finished and before the next move begins. This further removes the game from the chess category,
and approximates it to the likeness of active service. Most of a general's decisions, once
a fight has begun, must be made in such brief intervals of time. (But we leave unlimited time
at the outset for the planning.)

As to our time-keeping, we catch a visitor with a stop-watch if we can, and if we cannot, we
use a fair-sized clock with a second-hand: the player not moving says "Go," and warns at the
last two minutes, last minute, and last thirty seconds. But I think it would not be difficult
to procure a cheap clock--because, of course, no one wants a very accurate agreement with Greenwich
as to the length of a second--that would have minutes instead of hours and seconds instead
of minutes, and that would ping at the end of every minute and discharge an alarm note at the
end of the move. That would abolish the rather boring strain of time-keeping. One could just
watch the fighting.

Moreover, in our desire to bring the game to a climax, we decided that instead of a fight to
a finish we would fight to some determined point, and we found very good sport in supposing
that the arrival of three men of one force upon the back line of the opponent's side of the
country was of such strategic importance as to determine the battle. But this form of battle
we have since largely abandoned in favour of the old fight to a finish again. We found it led
to one type of battle only, a massed rush at the antagonist's line, and that our arrangements
of time-limits and capture and so forth had eliminated most of the concluding drag upon the game.

Our game was now very much in its present form. We considered at various times the possibility
of introducing some complication due to the bringing up of ammunition or supplies generally,
and we decided that it would add little to the interest or reality of the game. Our battles
are little brisk fights in which one may suppose that all the ammunition and food needed are
carried by the men themselves.

But our latest development has been in the direction of killing hand to hand or taking prisoners.
We found it necessary to distinguish between an isolated force and a force that was merely
a projecting part of a larger force. We made a definition of isolation. After a considerable
amount of trials we decided that a man or a detachment shall be considered to be isolated when
there is less than half its number of its own side within a move of it. Now, in actual civilised
warfare small detached bodies do not sell their lives dearly; a considerably larger force is
able to make them prisoners without difficulty. Accordingly we decided that if a blue force,
for example, has one or more men isolated, and a red force of at least double the strength
of this isolated detachment moves up to contact with it, the blue men will be considered to
be prisoners.

That seemed fair; but so desperate is the courage and devotion of lead soldiers, that it came
to this, that any small force that got or seemed likely to get isolated and caught by a superior
force instead of waiting to be taken prisoners, dashed at its possible captors and slew them
man for man. It was manifestly unreasonable to permit this. And in considering how best to
prevent such inhuman heroisms, we were reminded of another frequent incident in our battles
that also erred towards the incredible and vitiated our strategy. That was the charging of
one or two isolated horse-men at a gun in order to disable it. Let me illustrate this by an
incident. A force consisting of ten infantry and five cavalry with a gun are retreating across
an exposed space, and a gun with thirty men, cavalry and infantry, in support comes out upon
a crest into a position to fire within two feet of the retreating cavalry. The attacking player
puts eight men within six inches of his gun and pushes the rest of his men a little forward
to the right or left in pursuit of his enemy. In the real thing, the retreating horsemen would
go off to cover with the gun, "hell for leather," while the infantry would open out and retreat,
firing. But see what happened in our imperfect form of Little War! The move of the retreating
player began. Instead of retreating his whole force, he charged home with his mounted desperadoes,
killed five of the eight men about the gun, and so by the rule silenced it, enabling the rest
of his little body to get clean away to cover at the leisurely pace of one foot a move. This
was not like any sort of warfare. In real life cavalry cannot pick out and kill its equivalent
in cavalry while that equivalent is closely supported by other cavalry or infantry; a handful
of troopers cannot gallop past well and abundantly manned guns in action, cut down the gunners
and interrupt the fire. And yet for a time we found it a little difficult to frame simple rules
to meet these two bad cases and prevent such scandalous possibilities. We did at last contrive
to do so; we invented what we call the melee, and our revised rules in the event of a melee
will be found set out upon a later page. They do really permit something like an actual result
to hand-to-hand encounters. They abolish Horatius Cocles.

