"Yes, very," I said, and lifting my hat to her, I went home. And truly I had the feeling as
if somebody had left, who in case of need would have given me a helping hand. I felt very despondent.
Possibly the gloomy evening, the mist and drizzling rain, in the midst of which the street
lamps looked like miniature rainbow arches, had something to do with it. The last spark of
hope seemed to have died out. There was darkness not only within me, but it seemed to encompass
the whole world, and weigh upon it as the atmosphere weighs upon us and permeates all nature.

I carried home with me a heaviness of feeling and great restlessness and a fear as if something
unknown was threatening me. There woke up within me a sudden longing for the sun and brighter
skies, for countries where there is no mist, no rain, and no darkness. It seemed to me that
if I went where there was sun and brightness, it would shield me from some unknown danger.

Oh, to go away! The entire capacity of my thoughts was filled with that eager desire. Then
suddenly another fear clutched at my heart: if I went away, Aniela would be exposed to that
same impalpable danger from which I wanted to fly. I knew it was only a delusion of my brain,
and that really my departure would be the best thing for her. Yet I could not get rid of the
sensation that to desert her would be cowardice and meanness. All my reasoning cannot get over
this. Besides, the going away is only an empty word; I may say it to myself a hundred times,
but if I were to try to change it into fact I should find it altogether beyond my power. I
have put so much of my life in that one feeling that it would be easier to cut me into pieces
than to part me from it.

I possess so much control over my thoughts, such a consciousness of self that it seems to me
impossible that I could ever lose my reason. I cannot even imagine it; but at moments I feel
as if my nerves could not bear the strain any longer.

I am sorry Clara is gone. I have seen but little of her lately; but I liked to know that she
was not far off; now Aniela will absorb me altogether, because I give to her that power which
rules our likings, and makes us conscious of friendship.

When I returned home, I found there young Chwastowski, who had come to town in order to consult
with his brother, the bookseller. They have some scheme in hand about selling elementary books.
They are always scheming something, always busy, and that fills their life. I have come to
such a pass that I rejoiced to see him as a child that is afraid of ghosts is glad to see somebody
coming into the room. His spiritual healthiness seems to brace me. He said that Pani Celina
was so much better that within a week she would be able to bear the journey to Gastein. Oh
yes! yes! Anything for a change! I shall push that plan with all my powers. I will persuade
my aunt to go too. She will do it for my sake, and in that case nobody will be astonished at
my going. There is at least something I desire, and desire very much. I shall have so many
chances of taking care of Aniela, and shall be nearer to her than at Ploszow. I feel somewhat
relieved; but it has been a terrible day, and nothing oppresses me so much as dark, rainy weather.
I still hear the drops falling from the waterspouts; but there is a rift in the clouds, and
a few stars are visible.

12 June.

Kromitzki arrived to-day.

Gastein, 23 June.

We arrived at Gastein a week ago,--the whole family: Aniela, my aunt, Pani Celina, Kromitzki,
and myself. I interrupted my diary for some time, not because I had lost the zest for it, nor
because I did not feel the necessity for writing, but simply because I was in a state of mind
which words cannot express. As long as a man tries to resist his fate, and wages war against
the forces that crush him, he has neither brains nor time for anything else. I was like the
prisoner in Sansson's memoirs, who when they tore his flesh and poured molten lead into the
wounds shouted in nervous ecstasy, "Encore! encore!" until he fainted. I have fainted too,
which means that I am exhausted and resigned.

A great hand seems to weigh upon me, as immense as the mountains that loom up before me. What
can I do against it? Nothing but submit and remain passive while it crushes me. I did not know
that one could find, if not comfort, at least some kind of peace in this consciousness of impotence
and the looking straight at one's misery.

If only I could keep from struggling against it, and not disturb this state of quiescence.
I could write then about things that happen to me as if they had happened to somebody else.
But I know from experience that one day does not resemble another, and I am afraid of what
the morrow will bring forth.

24 June.

Towards the end of my sojourn at Warsaw I put down these words: "Love for another man's wife,
if only a pastime, is a great villany, and if real, is one of the greatest misfortunes that
can happen to a man." Writing this before Kromitzki's arrival, I had not taken into account
all the items which make up the sum of this misfortune. I also thought it nobler than it really
is. Now I begin to see that besides great suffering, it includes a quantity of small humiliations,
the consciousness of villany, ridicule, the necessity of falsehood, the doing of mean things,
and the need of precautions unworthy of a man. What a bouquet! Truly the scent of it is enough
to overpower any man.

God knows with what delight I would take such a Kromitzki by the throat, press him to the wall,
and tell him straight in his face, "I love your wife!" Instead of that I must be careful lest
the thought should enter his mind that she pleases me. What a noble part to play in her presence!
What must she think of me? That too is one of the flowers in the bouquet.

As long as I live I shall not forget the day of Kromitzki's arrival. He had gone straight to
my house. Coming home late at night, I found somebody's luggage in the anteroom. I do not know
why it did not occur to me that it might be Kromitzki's. Suddenly he himself looked out from
the adjacent room, and dropping his eyeglass rushed up with open arms to salute his new relative.
I saw as in a dream that dry skull, so like a death's-head, the glittering eyes, and the crop
of black hair. Kromitzki's arrival was the most natural thing in the world, and yet I felt
as if I had looked into the face of death. It seemed to me like a nightmare, and the words,
"How do you do, Leon?" the most fantastic and most improbable words I could have heard anywhere.
Presently such a rage, such a loathing combined with fear, seized me that it took all my self-control
to prevent me from throwing him down and dashing out his brains. I have sometimes felt such
paroxysms of rage and loathing, but never combined with fear; it was not so much fear of a
living man as horror of the dead. For some time I could not find a word to say. Fortunately
he might suppose I had not recognized him at first, or was astonished that a man I scarcely
knew should treat me so familiarly. It still irritates me when I think of it.

I tried to recover myself; he in the mean while readjusted his eyeglass, and shaking my hand
once more, said:--

"Well, and how are you? How are Aniela and her mother? Old lady always ill, I suppose. And
our aunt, how is she?"

I was seized with amazement and anger that this man should mention those nearest and dearest
to me as if they belonged to him. A man of the world bears most things and hides his emotions,
because he is trained from his earliest years to keep himself under control; nevertheless I
felt that I could not bear it any longer, and in order to pull myself together and occupy my
thoughts with something else, I called for the servant and told him to get tea ready.

Kromitzki appeared uneasy that I did not reply at once to his questions; the eyeglass dropped
again, and he said, hurriedly:--

"There is nothing wrong, is there? Why don't you speak?"

"They are all well," I replied.

It suddenly struck me that my emotion might give the hateful man an advantage over me, and
the thought restored all my self-possession at once. I led him into the dining-room, asked
him to sit down, and then said:--

"How is it going with you? Have you come to make a long stay?"

"I do not know," he replied. "I was longing for Aniela; and I fancy she too must have been
anxious to have me back again. We have only been a few months together, and for a newly married
couple that is not much, is it?" and he burst out into one of his wooden laughs. "Besides,"
he added, "I have some business here to look after. Always business, you see."

Then he began a long-winded harangue about his affairs; of which I did not hear much, except
the often repeated words "combined forces," observing meanwhile the motion of the eyeglass.
It is a strange thing how in presence of some great calamity small things will thrust themselves
into evidence. I do not know whether this be so with everybody, but in the present instance
the reiterated words "combined forces" and the shifting of the eyeglass irritated me beyond
endurance. In the earlier moments of the interview I was almost unconscious, and yet I could
count how often that eyeglass dropped and was put up again. It always used to be thus with
me, and it was so now.

After tea I conducted Kromitzki to the room he was to occupy for the night. He did not cease
talking, but went on in the same strain while with the help of the servant he unpacked his
portmanteau. Sometimes he interrupted his flow of words in order to show me some specimens
brought from the East. He undid his travelling straps, unfolded two small Eastern rugs, and said:--

"I bought these at Batoum. Pretty things, are they not? They will do to put before our bed."

He got tired at last, and after the servant had gone he sat down in the armchair, and still
continued to talk about his affairs, while I thought of something else. When we are not able
to defend ourselves from a great misfortune, there is one safety-valve,--we may be able to
grapple with some of its details. I was now mainly busy with the thought whether Kromitzki
would go with us to Gastein or not. Therefore after some time I remarked:--

"I did not know you formerly; but I begin to think that you are the kind of man to make your
fortune. You are not in the least flighty, and would never sacrifice important affairs for
mere sentimentality."

He pressed my hand warmly. "You have no idea," he said, "how much I wish you to trust me."

At the moment I did not attach any special meaning to his words. I was too much occupied with
my own thoughts, and especially with the reflection that in regard to Kromitzki I had already
been guilty of a lie and a meanness,--a lie, because I did not believe in his business capacities
at all; a meanness, because I flattered the man I should have liked to kill with a glance.
But I was only anxious to induce him not to go to Gastein; therefore I went deeper and deeper
into the quagmire.

"I see this journey does not suit you in the least," I said.

Thereupon, egoist that he is, feeling things only in so far as they concern himself, he began
to grumble at his mother-in-law.

"Of course it does not suit me," he said; "and between ourselves I do not see the necessity
of it. There is a limit to everything, even to a daughter's affection for her mother. Once
married, a woman ought to understand that her first duty is toward her husband. Besides, a
mother-in-law who is always there, either in the same room or in the next, is a nuisance, and
prevents a young married couple from drawing near to each other, and living exclusively for
themselves. I do not say but that love for one's parents is a good thing, if not carried too
far and made an impediment in one's life."

Once embarked upon that theme he gave expression to very commonplace and mean sentiments, which
irritated me all the more that from his point of view there was certainly some truth in what
he said.

"There is no help for it," he concluded; "I made a bargain, and must stick to it."

"Then you mean to go with them to Gastein?"

"Yes; I have some personal interest in the journey. I want to enter into closer relation with
my wife's family and gain your confidence. We will speak of that later on. I am free for a
month or six weeks. I left Lucian Chwastowski in charge of the business, and he is, as the
English say, a 'solid' man. Besides, when one has a wife like Aniela one wants to stop with
her a little while,--you understand, eh?"

Saying this he laughed, showing his yellow, decayed teeth, and clapped me on the knee. A cold
shiver penetrated to my very brain. I felt myself growing pale. I rose and turned away from
the light to hide my face, then made a powerful effort to collect myself and asked "When do
you intend going to Ploszow?"

"To-morrow, to-morrow."

"Good-night."

"Good-night," he replied, his eyeglass dropping once more. He put out both hands, adding: "I
am tremendously glad to have the opportunity to get more acquainted with you. I always liked
you, and I am sure we shall understand each other."

We understand each other! How intensely stupid the man is! But the more stupid he is, the more
horrible to me is the thought that Aniela belongs to him, is simply a thing of his! I did not
even try to undress that night. I never had seen so clearly that there may be situations where
words come to an end, the power of reasoning ceases, even the power of feeling one's calamity,--to
which there seems to be no limit. A truly magnificent life which is given unto us! It is enough
to say that those former occasions when Aniela trampled upon my feelings, and when I thought
I had reached the height of misery, appear now to me as times of great happiness. If then,
if even now, the Evil One promised me in exchange for my soul that everything should remain
as it was, Aniela forever to reject my love, but Kromitzki not to come near her,--I would sign
the agreement without hesitation. Because in the man rejected by a woman there grows involuntarily
a conviction that she is like a Gothic tower far out of his reach, to which he scarcely dares
to lift his eyes. Thus I always thought of Aniela. And then comes a Pan Kromitzki, with two
rugs from Batoum, and drags her from the height, that inexorable priestess, down to a level
with those rugs. What a terrible thing it is, that imagination can bring it all so clear before
us! And how repulsively mean he is, and how ridiculous withal!

Where are all my theories, my reasonings, that love is far above matrimonial bonds,--that I
have a right to love Aniela? I still have my theories, while Kromitzki has Aniela. As the wind
is tempered to the shorn lamb I thought the human being capable of carrying only a certain
weight, and that if more were put upon his back he must needs break down. In my misery without
bounds, and in my equally great foolishness and degradation, I felt that from the time of Kromitzki's
arrival I was beginning to despise Aniela. Why? I could not justify it upon any common grounds.
"One wife, one husband." This law I know by heart, like any other fool; but in relation to
my own feelings it is a degradation for Aniela. What does it matter that it does not stand
to reason? I know that I despise her, and it is more than I can bear. I felt that existence
under these conditions would become simply impossible, and that necessarily there must be some
change and the past be buried. What change? If my scorn could throttle my love, as a wolf throttles
a lamb, it would be well. But I had a foreboding that something else would take place. If I
did not love Aniela I could not despise her now; therefore my scorn is only another link in
the chain, I understand perfectly that beyond Pani Kromitzka, beyond Pan Kromitzki and their
relation to each other, nothing interests me,--nothing whatever; neither light nor darkness,
war nor peace, nor any other thing. She, Aniela, or rather both she and her husband, and my
part in their life, are my reason for existence. If for this same reason I cannot bear my existence
any longer, what will happen then? Suddenly it came upon me, as a surprise, that I had not
thought of the most simple solution of the problem,--death.

What a tremendous power there is in human hands,--the power of cutting the thread. Now I am
ready. Evil genius of my life, do thy worst; pile weight upon weight,--but only up to a certain
time, as long as I consent. If I find it too much I throw off the burden! "E poi eterna silenza,"
Nirvana, the "fourth dimension" of Zöllner--what do I know? The thought that it all depended
upon me gave me an immense relief.

I remained thus an hour, stretched out on the couch, thinking how and when I would do it; and
that very abstraction of my thoughts from Kromitzki seemed to calm me. Such a thing as the
taking of one's life wants some preparation, and this also forced my thoughts into another
groove. I remembered at once that my travelling revolver was of too small a calibre. I got
up to look at it and resolved to buy a new one. I began to calculate ways and means to make
it appear an accident. All this of course as a mere theory. Nothing was settled into a fixed
purpose. I might call it rather a contemplating the possibility of suicide than a purpose.
On the contrary, I was now certain it would not come to that soon. Now that I knew the door
by which I could escape I thought I might wait a little to see how far my evils would extend,
and what new tortures fate had in store for me. I was consumed by a burning and painful curiosity
as to what would happen next, how those two would meet, and how Aniela would face me? I became
very tired, and dressed as I was I fell into a troubled sleep, full of Kromitzkis, eyeglasses,
revolvers, and all sorts of confused combinations of things and people.

I woke up late. The servant told me that Pan Kromitzki had gone to Ploszow. My first impulse
was to follow and see them together. But when seated in the carriage I suddenly felt I could
not bear it, that it would be too great a trial, and might hasten my escape through the open
door into the unknown; and I gave orders to drive somewhere else.

The greatest pessimist instinctively avoids pain, and fights against it with all his might.
He clutches at every hope and expects relief through every change. There awoke within me such
a desire to make them go to Gastein as if my very life depended upon it. To make them leave
Ploszow! The thought did not give me rest, and took such possession of me that I gave my whole
mind to its realization. This did not present great difficulties. The ladies were almost ready
to start. Kromitzki had come unexpectedly, evidently intending to give his wife a surprise.
A few days later he would not have found us at Ploszow. I went to the railway office and secured
places in a sleeping-car for Vienna; then sent a messenger with a letter to my aunt telling
her I had bought tickets for the following day, as all the carriages were engaged for the following
week, and we should have to go to-morrow.

26 June.

I still linger over the last moments spent at Warsaw. These memories impressed themselves so
strongly on my mind that I cannot pass them over in silence. The day following Kromitzki's
arrival I had a strange sensation. It seemed to me that I did not love Aniela any longer, and
yet could not live without her. It was the first time I felt this--I might call it psychical
dualism. Formerly my love went through its regular course. I said to myself, "I love her, therefore
I desire her,"--with the same logic as Descartes employs in the statement, "I think, therefore
I exist." Now the formula is changed into, "I do not love her, but desire her still;" and both
elements exist in me as if they were engraved on two separate stones. For some time I did not
realize that the "I do not love her" was merely a delusion. I love her as before, but in such
a sorrowing manner, with so much bitterness and venom, that the love has nothing in common
with happiness.

Sometimes I fancy that even if Aniela were to confess to me her love, if she were divorced
or a widow, I should not be happy any more. I would buy such an hour at the price of my life,
but truly I do not know whether I should be able to convert it into real happiness. Who knows
whether the nerves that feel happiness be not paralyzed in me? Such a thing might happen. Really,
what is life worth under such conditions?

The day before our departure, I went to a gunsmith's shop. It was a quaint old man who sold
me the revolver. If he were not a gunsmith he might become a professor of psychology. I told
him I wanted a revolver, no matter whose make, Colt's or Smith's, provided it were good and
of a large calibre. The old man picked out the weapon, which I accepted at once.

"You will want cartridges, sir?"

"Yes, I was going to ask you for them."

"And a case, sir?" he said, looking at me keenly.

"Of course, a case."

"That's all right, sir; then I will give you cartridges of the same number as the revolver."

It was now my turn to look attentively at him. He understood the inquiring look, and said:--

"I have been in the trade over forty years, sir, and learned something about my customers.
It often happens that people buy revolvers to blow out their brains. Would you believe it never
happens that such a one buys a case? It is always this way: 'Please give me a revolver.' 'With
the case?' 'No, never mind the case.' It is a strange thing that a man about to throw away
his life should grudge a rouble for the case. But such is human nature. Everybody says to himself,
'What the devil do I want with a case?' And that's how I always find out whether a man means
mischief or not."

"That is very curious indeed," I replied; and it seemed to me a very characteristic sign.

The gunsmith, with a slight twinkle in his eye, went on: "Therefore as soon as I perceive his
drift I make a point of giving him cartridges a size too large. It is not a small thing, the
taking away one's life; it requires a deal of courage and determination. I fancy many a man
breaks into a cold perspiration as he finally says: 'Now for the revolver! Ah, the cartridges
do not fit; the gunsmith made a mistake;' and he has to put it off until the following day.
And do you think, sir, it is an easy thing to do it twice over? Many a man who has faced death
once cannot do it again. There were some who came the next day to buy a case. I laughed in
my sleeve and said: 'There's your case, and may it last you a long time.'"

I note down this conversation because everything relating to suicide has become of interest
to me, and the old gunsmith's words appeared to contain a bit of philosophy worth preserving.

27 June.

