But another, and not a secondary, curiosity of this ocean-labyrinth is, that it is the habitat
of a multitude of marine creatures, not to be seen at home in many other places. Except twice
a month, at the neaptides, the lower chambers are filled with the sea; and here live and flourish
thousands, upon thousands of those mollusks and zoophytes which can exist only in its salt
waters. The sides of the caves, as far as the highest tides swept, were studded with crimson
and purple and amber mollusca, glistening like jewels in the light pouring down upon them from
the eyelet-openings overhead. Not the space of a finger-tip was clear. Above them in the clefts
of the rock hung fringes of delicate ferns of the most vivid green, while here and there were
nooks and crevices of profound darkness, black with perpetual, unbroken shadow.

I had known the caves well when I was a boy, but it was many years since I had been there.
Now I was alone in them with Olivia, no other human being in sight or sound of us. I had scarcely
eyes for any sight but that of her face, which had grown shy and downcast, and was generally
turned away from me. She would be frightened, I thought, if I spoke to her in that lonesome
place, I would wait till we were on the cliffs, in the open eye of day.

She left my side for one moment while I was poking under a stone for a young pieuvre, which
had darkened the little pool of water round it with its inky fluid. I heard her utter an exclamation
of delight, and I gave up my pursuit instantly to learn what was giving her pleasure. She was
stooping down to look beneath a low arch, not more than two feet high, and I knelt down beside
her. Beyond lay a straight narrow channel of transparent water, blue from a faint reflected
light, with smooth, sculptured walls of rock, clear from mollusca, rising on each side of it.
Level lines of mimic waves rippled monotonously upon it, as if it was stirred by some soft
wind which we could not feel. You could have peopled it with tiny boats flitting across it,
or skimming lightly down it. Tears shone in Olivia's eyes.

"It reminds me so of a canal in Venice," she said, in a tremulous voice.

"Do you know Venice?" I asked; and the recollection of her portrait taken in Florence came
to my mind. Well, by-and-by I should have a right to hear about all her wanderings.

"Oh, yes!" she answered; "I spent three months there once, and this place is like it."

"Was it a happy time?" I inquired, jealous of those tears.

"It was a hateful time," she said, vehemently. "Don't let us talk of it. I hate to remember
it. Why cannot we forget things, Dr. Martin? You, who are so clever, can tell me that."

"That is simple enough," I said, smiling. "Every circumstance of our life makes a change in
the substance of the brain, and, while that remains sound and in vigor, we cannot forget. To-day
is being written on our brain now. You will have to remember this, Olivia."

"I know I shall remember it," she answered, in a low tone.

"You have travelled a great deal, then?" I pursued, wishing her to talk about herself, for
I could scarcely trust my resolution to wait till we were out of the caves. "I love you with
all my heart and soul" was on my tongue's end.

"We travelled nearly all over Europe," she replied.

I wondered whom she meant by "we." She had never used the plural pronoun before, and I thought
of that odious woman in Guernsey--an unpleasant recollection.

We had wandered back to the opening where Tardif had left us. The rapid current between us
and Breckhou was running in swift eddies, which showed the more plainly because the day was
calm, and the open sea smooth. Olivia stood near me; but a sort of chilly diffidence had crept
over me, and I could not have ventured to press too closely to her, or to touch her with my hand.

"How have you been content to live here?" I asked.

"This year in Sark has saved me," she answered, softly.

"What has it saved you from?" I inquired, with intense eagerness. She turned her face full
upon me, with a world of reproach in her gray eyes.

"Dr. Martin," she said, "why will you persist in asking me about my former life? Tardif never
does. He never implies by a word or look that he wishes to know more than I choose to tell.
I cannot tell you any thing about it."

I felt uncomfortably that she was drawing a comparison unfavorable to me between Tardif and
myself--the gentleman, who could not conquer or conceal his desire to fathom a mystery, and
the fisherman, who acted as if there were no mystery at all. Yet Olivia appeared more grieved
than offended; and when she knew how I loved her she would admit that my curiosity was natural.
She should know, too, that I was willing to take her as she was, with all the secrets of her
former life kept from me. Some day I would make her own I was as generous as Tardif.

Just then my ear caught for the first time a low boom-boom, which had probably been sounding
through the caves for some minutes.

"Good Heavens!" I ejaculated.

Yet a moment's thought convinced me that, though there might be a little risk, there was no
paralyzing danger. I had forgotten the narrowness of the gully through which alone we could
gain the cliffs. From the open span of beach where we were now standing, there was no chance
of leaving the caves except as we had come to them, by a boat; for on each side a crag ran
like a spur into the water. The comparatively open space permitted the tide to lap in quietly,
and steal imperceptibly higher upon its pebbles. But the low boom I heard was the sea rushing
in through the throat of the narrow outlet through which lay our only means of escape. There
was not a moment to lose. Without a word, I snatched up Olivia in my arms, and ran back into
the caves, making as rapidly as I could for the long, straight passage.

Neither did Olivia speak a word or utter a cry. We found ourselves in a low tunnel, where the
water was beginning to flow in pretty strongly. I set her down for an instant, and tore off
my coat and waistcoat. Then I caught her up again, and strode along over the slippery, slimy
masses of rock which lay under my feet, covered with seaweed.

"Olivia," I said, "I must have my right hand free to steady myself with. Put both your arms
round my neck, and cling to me so. Don't touch my arms or shoulders."

Yet the clinging of her arms about my neck, and her cheek close to mine, almost unnerved me.
I held her fast with my left arm, and steadied myself with my right. We gained in a minute
or two the mouth of the tunnel. The drift was pouring into it with a force almost too great
for me, burdened as I was. But there was the pause of the tide, when the waves rushed out again
in white floods, leaving the water comparatively shallow. There were still six or eight yards
to traverse before we could reach an archway in the cliffs, which would land us in safety in
the outer caves. Across this small space the tide came in strongly, beating against the foot
of the rocks, and rebounding with great force. There was some peril; but we had no alternative.
I lifted Olivia a little higher against my shoulder, for her long serge dress wrapped dangerously
around us both; and then, waiting for the pause in the throbbing of the tide, I dashed hastily
across.

One swirl of the water coiled about us, washing up nearly to my throat, and giving me almost
a choking sensation of dread; but before a second could swoop down upon us I had staggered
half-blinded to the arch, and put down Olivia in the small, secure cave within it. She had
not spoken once. She did not seem able to speak now. Her large, terrified eyes looked up at
me dumbly, and her face was white to the lips. I clasped her in my arms once more, and kissed
her forehead and lips again and again in a paroxysm of passionate love and gladness.

"Thank God!" I cried. "How I love you, Olivia!"

I had told her only a few minutes before that the brain is ineffaceably stamped with the impress
of every event in our lives. But how much more deeply do some events burn themselves there
than others' I see it all now--more clearly, it seems to me, than my eyes saw it then. There
is the huge, high entrance to the outer caves where we are standing, with a massive lintel
of rocks overhead, all black but for a few purple and gray tints scattered across the blackness.
Behind us the sea is glistening, and prismatic colors play upon the cliffs. Shadows fall from
rocks we cannot see. Olivia stands before me, pale and terrified, the water running from her
heavy dress, which clings about her slender figure. She shrinks away from me a pace or two.

"Hush!" she cries, in a tone of mingled pain and dread--"hush!"

There was something so positive, so prohibitory in her voice and gesture, that my heart contracted,
and a sudden chill of despondency ran through me. But I could not be silent now. It was impossible
for me to hold my peace, even at her bidding.

"Why do you say hush?" I asked, peremptorily. "I love you, Olivia. Is there any reason why
I should not love you?"

"Yes," she said, very slowly and with quivering lips. "I was married four years ago, and my
husband is living still!"

CHAPTER THE THIRTIETH.

A GLOOMY ENDING.

Olivia's answer struck me like an electric shock. For some moments I was simply stunned, and
knew neither what she had said, nor where we were.

I suppose half a minute had elapsed before I fairly received the meaning of her words into
my bewildered brain. It seemed as if they were thundering in my ears, though she had uttered
them in a low, frightened voice. I scarcely understood them when I looked up and saw her leaning
against the rock, with her hands covering her face.

"Olivia!" I cried, stretching out my arms toward her, as though she would flutter back to them
and lay her head again where it had been resting upon my shoulder, with her face against my neck.

But she did not see my gesture, and the next moment I knew that she could never let me hold
her in my arms again. I dared not even take one step nearer to her.

"Olivia," I said again, after another minute or two of troubled silence, with no sound but
the thunders of the sea reverberating through the perilous strait where we had almost confronted
death together--"Olivia, is it true?"

She bowed her head still lower upon her hands, in speechless confirmation. A stricken, helpless,
cowering child she seemed to me, standing there in her drenched clothing. An unutterable tenderness,
altogether different from the feverish passion of a few minutes ago, filled my heart as I looked
at her.

"Come," I said, as calmly as I could speak, "I am at any rate your doctor, and I am bound to
take care of you. You must not stay here wet and cold. Let us make haste back to Tardif's, Olivia."

I drew her hand down from her face and through my arm, for we had still to re-enter the outer
cave, and to return through a higher gallery, before we could reach the cliffs above. I did
not glance at her. The road was very rough, strewed with huge bowlders, and she was compelled
to receive my help. But we did not speak again till we were on the cliffs, in the eye of day,
with our faces and our steps turned toward Tardif's farm.

"Oh!" she cried, suddenly, in a tone that made my heart ache the keener, "how sorry I am!"

"Sorry that I love you?" I asked, feeling that my love was growing every moment in spite of
myself. The sun shone on her face, which was just below my eyes. There was an expression of
sad perplexity and questioning upon it, which kept away every other sign of emotion. She lifted
her eyes to me frankly, and no flush of color came over her pale cheeks.

"Yes," she answered; "it is such a miserable, unfortunate thing for you. But how could I have
helped it?"

"You could not help it," I said.

"I did not mean to deceive you," she continued--"neither you nor any one. When I fled away
from him I had no plan of any kind. I was just like a leaf driven about by the wind, and it
tossed me here. I did not think I ought to tell any one I was married. I wish I could have
foreseen this. Why did God let me have that accident in the spring? Why did he let you come
over to see me?"

"Are you surprised that I love you?" I asked.

Now I saw a subtle flush steal across her face, and her eyes fell to the ground.

"I never thought of it till this afternoon," she murmured. "I knew you were going to marry
your cousin Julia, and I knew I was married, and that there could be no release from that.
All my life is ruined, but you and Tardif made it more bearable. I did not think you loved
me till I saw your face this afternoon."

"I shall always love you," I cried, passionately, looking down on the shining, drooping head
beside me, and the sad face and listless arms hanging down in an attitude of dejection. She
seemed so forlorn a creature that I wished I could take her to my heart again; but that was
impossible now.

"No," she answered in her calm, sorrowful voice. "When you see clearly that it is an evil thing,
you will conquer it. There will be no hope whatever in your love for me, and it will pass away.
Not soon, perhaps; I can scarcely wish you to forget me soon. Yet it would be wrong for you
to love me now. Why was I driven to marry him so long ago?"

A sharp, bitter tone rang through her quiet voice, and for a moment she hid her face in her hands.

"Olivia," I said, "it is harder upon me than you can think, or I can tell."

She had not the faintest notion of how hard this trial was. I had sacrificed every plan and
purpose of my life in the hope of winning her. I had cast away, almost as a worthless thing,
the substantial prosperity which had been within my grasp, and now that I stretched out my
hand for the prize, I found it nothing but an empty shadow. Deeper even than this lay the thought
of my mother's bitter disappointment.

"Your husband must have treated you very badly, before you would take such a desperate step
as this," I said again, after a long silence, scarcely knowing what I said.

"He treated me so ill," said Olivia, with the same hard tone in her voice, "that when I had
a chance of escape it seemed as if God Himself opened the door for me. He treated me so ill
that, if I thought there was any fear of him finding me out here, I would rather a thousand
times you had left me to die in the caves."

That brought to my mind what I had almost forgotten--the woman whom my imprudent curiosity
had brought into pursuit; of her. I felt ready to curse my folly aloud, as I did in my heart,
for having gone to Messrs. Scott and Brown.

"Olivia," I said, "there is a woman in Guernsey who has some clew to you--"

But I could say no more, for I thought she would have fallen to the ground in her terror. I
drew her hand through my arm, and hastened to reassure her.

"No harm can come to you," I continued, "while Tardif and I are here to protect you. Do not
frighten yourself; we will defend you from every danger."

"Martin," she whispered--and the pleasant familiarity of my name spoken by her gave me a sharp
pang, almost of gladness--"no one can help me or defend me. The law would compel me to go back
to him. A woman's heart may be broken without the law being broken. I could prove nothing that
would give me a right to be free--nothing. So I took it into my own hands. I tell you I would
rather have been drowned this afternoon. Why did you save me?"

I did not answer, except by pressing her hand against my side. I hurried her on silently toward
the cottage. She was shivering in her cold, wet dress, and trembling with fear. It was plain
to me that even her fine health should not be trifled with, and I loved her too tenderly, her
poor, shivering, trembling frame, to let her suffer if I could help it. When we reached the
fold-yard gate, I stopped her for a moment to speak only a few words.

"Go in." I said, "and change, every one of your wet clothes. I will see you again, once again,
when we can talk with one another calmly. God bless and take care of you, my darling!"

She smiled faintly, and laid her hand in mine.

"You forgive me?" she said.

"Forgive you!" I repeated, kissing the small brown hand lingeringly; "I have nothing to forgive."

She went on across the little fold and into the house, without looking back toward me. I could
see her pass through the kitchen into her own room, where I had watched her through the struggle
between life and death, which had first made her dear to me. Then I made my way, blind and
deaf, to the edge of the cliff, seeing nothing, hearing-nothing. I flung myself down on the
turf with my face to the ground, to hide my eyes from the staring light of the summer sun.

Already it seemed a long time since I had known that Olivia was married. The knowledge had
lost its freshness and novelty, and the sting of it had become a rooted sorrow. There was no
mystery about her now. I almost laughed, with a resentful bitterness, at the poor guesses I
had made. This was the solution, and it placed her forever out of my reach. As with Tardif,
so she could be nothing for me now, but as the blue sky, and the white clouds, and the stars
shining in the night. My poor Olivia! whom I loved a hundredfold more than I had done even
this morning. This morning I had been full of my own triumph and gladness. Now I had nothing
in my heart but a vast pity and reverential tenderness for her.

Married? That was what she had said. It shut out all hope for the future. She must have been
a mere child four years ago; she looked very young and girlish still. And her husband treated
her ill--my Olivia, for whom I had given up all I had to give. She said the law would compel
her to return to him, and I could do nothing. I could not interfere even to save her from a
life which was worse to her than death.

My heart was caught in a vice, and there was no escape from the torture of its relentless grip.
Whichever way I looked there was sorrow and despair. I wished, with a faint-heartedness I had
never felt before, that Olivia and I had indeed perished together down in the caves where the
tide was now sweeping below me.

"Martin!" said a clear, low, tender tone in my ear, which could never be deaf to that voice.
I looked up at Olivia without moving. My head was at her feet, and I laid my hand upon the
hem of her dress.

"Martin," she said again, "see, I have brought you Tardifs coat in place of your own. You must
not lie here in this way. Captain Carey's yacht is waiting for you below."

I staggered giddily when I stood on my feet, and only Olivia's look of pain steadied me. She
had been weeping bitterly. I could not trust myself to look in her face again. At any rate
my next duty was to go away without adding to her distress, if that were possible. Tardif was
standing behind her, regarding us both with great concern.

"Doctor," he said, "when I came in from my lobster-pots, the captain sent a message by me to
say the sun would be gone down before you reach Guernsey. He has come round to the Havre Gosselin.
I'll walk down the cliff with you."

I should have said no, but Olivia caught at his words eagerly.

"Yes, go, my good Tardif," she cried, "and bring me word that Dr. Martin is safe on board.--Good-by!"

Her hand in mine again for a moment, with its slight pressure. Then she was gone, Tardif was
tramping down the stony path before me, speaking to me over his shoulder.

"It has not gone well, then, doctor?" he said.

"She will tell you," I answered, briefly, not knowing how much Olivia might wish him to know.

"Take care of mam'zelle," I said, when we had reached the top of the ladder, and the little
boat from the yacht was dancing at the foot of it. "There is some danger ahead, and you can
protect her better than I."

"Yes, yes," he replied; "you may trust her with me. But God knows I should have been glad if
it had gone well with you."

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST.

A STORY IN DETAIL.

"Well?" said Captain Carey, as I set my foot on the deck. His face was all excitement; and
he put his arm affectionately through mine.

"It is all wrong," I answered, gloomily.

"You don't mean that she will not have you?" he exclaimed.

I nodded, for I had no spirit to explain the matter just then.

"By George!" he cried; "and you've thrown over Julia, and offended all our Guernsey folks,
and half broken your poor mother's heart, all for nothing!"

The last consideration was the one that stung me to the quick. It had half broken my mother's
heart. No one knew better than I that it had without doubt tended to shorten her fleeting term
of life. At this moment she was waiting for me to bring her good news--perhaps the promise
that Olivia had consented to become my wife before her own last hour arrived; for my mother
and I had even talked of that. I had thought it a romantic scheme when my mother spoke of it,
but my passion had fastened eagerly upon it, in spite of my better judgment. These were the
tidings she was waiting to hear from my lips.

When I reached home I found her full of dangerous excitement. It was impossible to allay it
without telling her either an untruth or the whole story. I could not deceive her, and with
a desperate calmness I related the history of the day. I tried to make light of my disappointment,
but she broke down into tears and wailings.

"Oh, my boy!" she lamented; "and I did so want to see you happy before I died: I wanted to
leave some one who could comfort you; and Olivia would have comforted you and loved you when
I am gone! You had set your heart upon her. Are you sure it is true? My poor, poor Martin,
you must forget her now. It becomes a sin for you to love her."

"I cannot forget her," I said; "I cannot cease to love her. There can be no sin in it as long
as I think of her as I do now."

"And there is poor Julia!" moaned my mother.

Yes, there was Julia; and she would have to be told all, though she would rejoice over it.
Of course, she would rejoice; it was not in human nature, at least in Julia's human nature,
to do otherwise. She had warned me against Olivia; had only set me free reluctantly. But how
was I to tell her? I must not leave to my mother the agitation of imparting such tidings. I
couldn't think of deputing the task to my father. There was no one to do it but myself.

My mother passed a restless and agitated night, and I, who sat up with her, was compelled to
listen to all her lamentation. But toward the morning she fell into a heavy sleep, likely to
last for some hours. I could leave her in perfect security; and at an early hour I went down
to Julia's house, strung up to bear the worst, and intending to have it all out with her, and
put her on her guard before she paid her daily visit to our house. She must have some hours
for her excitement and rejoicing to bubble over, before she came to talk about it to my mother.

"I wish to see Miss Dobrée," I said to the girl who quickly answered my noisy peal of the house-bell.

"Please, sir,'" was her reply, "she and Miss Daltrey are gone to Sark with Captain Carey."

"Gone to Sark!" I repeated, in utter amazement.

"Yes, Dr. Martin. They started quite early because of the tide, and Captain Carey's man brought
the carriage to take them to St. Sampson's. I don't look for them back before evening. Miss
Dobrée said I was to come, with her love, and ask how Mrs. Dobrée is to-day, and if she's home
in time she'll come this evening; but if she's late she'll come to-morrow morning."

"When did they make up their minds to go to Sark?" I inquired, anxiously.

"Only late last night, sir," she answered. "Cook had settled with Miss Dobrée to dine early
to-day; but then Captain Carey came in, and after he was gone she said breakfast must be ready
at seven this morning in their own rooms while they were dressing; so they must have settled
it with Captain Carey last night."

I turned away very much surprised and bewildered, and in an irritable state which made the
least thing jar upon me. Curiosity, which had slept yesterday, or was numbed by the shock of
my disappointment, was feverishly awake to-day. How little I knew, after all, of the mystery
which surrounded Olivia! The bitter core of it I knew, but nothing of the many sheaths and
envelops which wrapped it about. There might be some hope, some consolation to be found wrapped
up with it. I must go again to Sark in the steamer on Monday, and hear Olivia tell me all she
could tell of her history.

Then, why were Julia and Kate Daltrey gone to Sark? What could they have to do with Olivia?
It made me almost wild with anger to think of them finding Olivia, and talking to her perhaps
of me and my love--questioning her, arguing with her, tormenting her! The bare thought of those
two badgering my Olivia was enough to drive me frantic.

In the cool twilight, Julia and Kate Daltrey were announced. I was about to withdraw from my
mother's room, in conformity with the etiquette established among us, when Julia recalled me
in a gentler voice than she had used toward me since the day of my fatal confession.

"Stay, Martin," she said; "what we have to tell concerns you more than any one."

I sat down again by my mother's sofa, and she took my hand between both her own, fondling it
in the dusk.

"It is about Olivia," I said, in as cool a tone as I could command.

"Yes," answered Julia; "we have seen her, and we have found out why she has refused you. She
is married already."

"She told me so yesterday," I replied.

"Told you so yesterday!" repeated Julia, in an accent of chagrin. "If we had only known that,
we might have saved ourselves the passage across to Sark."

"My dear Julia," exclaimed my mother, feverishly, "do tell us all about it, and begin at the
beginning."

There was nothing Julia liked so much, or could do so well, as to give a circumstantial account
of any thing she had done. She could relate minute details with so much accuracy, without being
exactly tedious, that when one was lazy or unoccupied it was pleasant to listen. My mother
enjoyed, with all the delight of a woman, the small touches by which Julia embellished her
sketches. I resigned myself to hearing a long history, when I was burning to ask one or two
questions and have done with the topic.

"To begin at the beginning, then," said Julia, "dear Captain Carey came into town very late
last night to talk to us about Martin, and how the girl in Sark had refused him. I was very
much astonished, very much indeed! Captain Carey said that he and dear Johanna had come to
the conclusion that the girl felt some delicacy, perhaps, because of Martin's engagement to
me. We talked it over as friends, and thought of you, dear aunt, and your grief and disappointment,
till all at once I made up my mind in a moment. 'I will go over to Sark and see the girl myself,'
I said. 'Will you?' said Captain Carey. 'Oh, no, Julia, it will be too much for you.' 'It would
have been a few weeks ago,' I said; 'but now I could do any thing to give Aunt Dobrée a moment's
happiness.'"

"God bless you, Julia!" I interrupted, going across to her and kissing her cheek impetuously.

"There, don't stop me, Martin," she said, earnestly. "So it was arranged off-hand that Captain
Carey should send for us at St. Sampson's this morning, and take us over to Sark. You know
Kate has never been yet. We had a splendid passage, and landed at the Creux, where the yacht
was to wait till we returned. Kate was in raptures with the landing-place, and the lovely lane
leading up into the island. We went on past Vaudin's Inn and the mill, and turned down the
nearest way to Tardifs. Kate said she never felt any air like the air of Sark. Well, you know
that brown pool, a very brown pool, in the lane leading to the Havre Gosselin? Just there,
where there are some low, weather-beaten trees meeting overhead and making a long green isle,
with the sun shining down through the knotted branches, we saw all in a moment a slim, erect,
very young-looking girl coming toward us. She was carrying her bonnet in her hand, and her
hair curled in short, bright curls all over her head. I knew in an instant that it was Miss
Ollivier."

She paused for a minute. How plainly I could see the picture! The arching trees, and the sunbeams
playing fondly with her shining golden hair! I held my breath to listen.

"What completely startled me," said Julia, "was that Kate suddenly darted forward and ran to
meet her, crying 'Olivia!'"

"How does she know her?" I exclaimed.

"Hush. Martin! Don't interrupt me. The girl went so deadly pale, I thought she was going to
faint, but she did not. She stood for a minute looking at us, and then she burst into the most
dreadful fit of crying!

"I ran to her, and made her sit down on a little bank of turf close by, and gave her my smelling-bottle,
and did all I could to comfort her. By-and-by, as soon as she could speak, she said to Kate,
'How did you find me out?' and Kate told her she had not the slightest idea of finding her
there. 'Dr. Martin Dobrée, of Guernsey, told me you were looking for me, only yesterday,' she said.

"That took us by surprise, for Kate had not the faintest idea of seeing her. I have always
thought her name was Ollivier, and so did Kate. 'For pity's sake,' said the girl, 'if you have
any pity, leave me here in peace. For God's sake do not betray me!'

"I could hardly believe it was not a dream. There was Kate standing over us, looking very stern
and severe, and the girl was clinging to me--to me, as if I were her dearest friend. Then all
of a sudden up came old Mother Renouf, looking half crazed, and began to harangue us for frightening
mam'zelle. Tardif, she said, would be at hand in a minute or two, and he would take care of
her from us and everybody else. 'Take me away!' cried the girl, running to her; and the old
woman tucked her hand under her arm, and walked off with her in triumph, leaving us by ourselves
in the lane."

"But what does it all mean?" asked my mother, while I paced to and fro in the dim room, scarcely
able to control my impatience, yet afraid to question Julia too eagerly.

"I can tell you," said Kate Daltrey, in her cold, deliberate tones; "she is the wife of my
half-brother, Richard Foster, who married her more than four years ago in Melbourne; and she
ran away from him last October, and has not been heard of since."

"Then you know her whole history," I said, approaching her and pausing before her. "Are you
at liberty to tell it to us?"

"Certainly," she answered; "it is no secret. Her father was a wealthy colonist, and he died
when she was fifteen, leaving her in the charge of her step-mother, Richard Foster's aunt.
The match was one of the stepmother's making, for Olivia was little better than a child. Richard
was glad enough to get her fortune, or rather the income from it, for of course she did not
come into full possession of it till she was of age. One-third of it was settled upon her absolutely;
the other two-thirds came to her for her to do what she pleased with it. Richard was looking
forward eagerly to her being one-and-twenty, for he had made ducks and drakes of his own property,
and tried to do the same with mine. He would have done so with his wife's; but a few weeks
before Olivia's twenty-first birthday, she disappeared mysteriously. There her fortune lies,
and Richard has no more power than I have to touch it. He cannot even claim the money lying
in the Bank of Australia, which has been remitted by her trustees; nor can Olivia claim it
without making herself known to him. It is accumulating there, while both of them are on the
verge of poverty."

"But he must have been very cruel to her before she would run away!" said my mother in a very
pitiful voice. Poor mother! she had borne her own sorrows dumbly, and to leave her husband
had probably never occurred to her.

"Cruel!" repeated Kate Daltrey. "Well, there are many kinds of cruelty. I do not suppose Richard
would ever transgress the limits of the law. But Olivia was one of those girls who can suffer
great torture--mental torture I mean. Even I could not live in the same house with him, and
she was a dreamy, sensitive, romantic child, with as much knowledge of the world as a baby.
I was astonished to hear she had had daring enough to leave him."

"But there must be some protection for her from the law," I said, thinking of the bold, coarse
woman, no doubt his associate, who was in pursuit of Olivia. "She might sue for a judicial
separation, at the least, if not a divorce."

"I am quite sure nothing could be brought against him in a court of law," she answered. "He
is very wary and cunning, and knows very well what he may do and what he may not do. A few
months before Olivia's flight, he introduced a woman as her companion--a disreputable woman
probably; but he calls her his cousin, and I do not know how Olivia could prove her an unfit
person to be with her. Our suspicions may be very strong, but suspicion is not enough for an
English judge and jury. Since I saw her this morning I have been thinking of her position in
every light, and I really do not see any thing she could have done, except running away as
she did, or making up her mind to be deaf and blind and dumb. There was no other alternative."

"But could he not be induced to leave her in peace if she gave up a portion of her property?"
I asked.

"Why should he?" she retorted. "If she was in his hands the whole of the property would be
his. He will never release her--never. No, her only chance is to hide herself from him. The
law cannot deal with wrongs like hers, because they are as light as air apparently, though
they are as all-pervading as air is, and as poisonous as air can be. They are like choke-damp,
only not quite fatal. He is as crafty and cunning as a serpent. He could prove himself the
kindest, most considerate of husbands, and Olivia next thing to an idiot. Oh, it is ridiculous
to think of pitting a girl like her against him!"

"If she had been older, or if she had had a child, she would never have left him," said my
mother's gentle and sorrowful voice.

"But what can be done for her?" I asked, vehemently and passionately. "My poor Olivia! what
can I do to protect her?"

"Nothing!" answered Kate Daltrey, coldly. "Her only chance is concealment, and what a poor
chance that is! I went over to Sark, never thinking that your Miss Ollivier whom I had heard
so much of was Olivia Foster. It is an out-of-the-world place; but so much the more readily
they will find her, if they once get a clew. A fox is soon caught when it cannot double; and
how could Olivia escape if they only traced her to Sark?"

My dread of the woman into whose hands my imbecile curiosity had put the clew was growing greater
every minute. It seemed as if Olivia could not be safe now, day or night; yet what protection
could I or Tardif give to her?

"You will not betray her?" I said to Kate Daltrey, though feeling all the time that I could
not trust her in the smallest degree.

"I have promised dear Julia that," she answered.

I should fail to give you any clear idea of my state of mind should I attempt to analyze it.
The most bitter thought in it was that my own imprudence had betrayed Olivia. But for me she
might have remained for years, in peace and perfect seclusion, in the home to which she had
drifted. Richard Foster and his accomplice must have lost all hope of finding her during the
many months that had elapsed between her disappearance and my visit to their solicitors. That
had put them on the track again. If the law forced her back to her husband, it was I who had
helped him to find her. That was a maddening thought. My love for her was hopeless; but what
then? I discovered to my own amazement that I had loved her for her sake, not my own. I had
loved the woman in herself, not the woman as my wife. She could never become that, but she
was dearer to me than ever. She was as far removed from me as from Tardif. Could I not serve
her with as deep a devotion and as true a chivalry as his? She belonged to both of us by as
unselfish and noble a bond as ever knights of old were pledged to.

It became my duty to keep a strict watch over the woman who had come to Guernsey to find Olivia.
If possible I must decoy her away from the lowly nest where my helpless bird was sheltered.
She had not sent for me again, but I called upon her the next morning professionally, and stayed
some time talking with her. But nothing resulted from the visit beyond the assurance that she
had not yet made any progress toward the discovery of my secret. I almost marvelled at this,
so universal had been the gossip about my visits to Sark in connection with the breaking-off
of my engagement to Julia. But that had occurred in the spring, and the nine-days' wonder had
ceased before my patient came to the island. Still, any accidental conversation might give
her the information, and open up a favorable chance for her. I must not let her go across to
Sark unknown to myself.

Neither did I feel quite safe about Kate Daltrey. She gave me the impression of being as crafty
and cunning as she described her half-brother. Did she know this woman by sight? That was a
question I could not answer. There was another question hanging upon it. If she saw her, would
she not in some way contrive to give her a sufficient hint, without positively breaking her
promise to Julia? Kate Daltrey's name did not appear in the newspapers among the list of visitors,
as she was staying in a private house; but she and this woman might meet any day in the streets
or on the pier.

Then the whole story had been confided by Julia at once to Captain Carey and Johanna. That
was quite natural; but it was equally natural for them to confide it again to some one or two
of their intimate friends. The secret was already an open one among six persons. Could it be
considered a secret any longer? The tendency of such a singular story, whispered from one to
another, is to become in the long-run more widely circulated than if it were openly proclaimed.
I had a strong affection for my circle of cousins, which widened as the circle round a stone
cast into water; but I knew I might as well try to arrest the eddying of such waters as stop
the spread of a story like Olivia's.

I had resolved, in the first access of my curiosity, to cross over to Sark the next week, alone
and independent of Captain Carey. Every Monday the Queen of the Isles made her accustomed trip
to the island, to convey visitors there for the day.

I had not been on deck two minutes the following Monday when I saw my patient step on after
me. The last clew was in her fingers now, that was evident.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SECOND.

OLIVIA GONE.

She did not see me at first; but her air was exultant and satisfied. There was no face on board
so elated and flushed. I kept out of her way as long as I could without consigning myself to
the black hole of the cabin; but at last she caught sight of me, and came down to the forecastle
to claim me as an acquaintance.

"Ha! ha! Dr. Dobrée!" she exclaimed; "so you are going to visit Sark too?"

"Yes," I answered, more curtly than courteously.

"You are looking rather low," she said, triumphantly--"rather blue, I might say. Is there any
thing the matter with you? Your face is as long as a fiddle. Perhaps it is the sea that makes
you melancholy."

"Not at all," I answered, trying to speak briskly; "I am an old sailor. Perhaps you will feel
melancholy by-and-by."

Luckily for me, my prophecy was fulfilled shortly after, for the day was rough enough to produce
uncomfortable sensations in those who were not old sailors like myself. My tormentor was prostrate
to the last moment.

When we anchored at the entrance of the Creux, and the small boats came out to carry us ashore,
I managed easily to secure a place in the first, and to lose sight of her in the bustle of
landing. As soon as my feet touched the shore I started off at my swiftest pace for the Havre
Gosselin.

But I had not far to go, for at Vaudin's Inn, which stands at the top of the steep lane running
from the Creux Harbor, I saw Tardif at the door. Now and then he acted as guide when young
Vaudin could not fill that office, or had more parties than he could manage; and Tardif was
now waiting the arrival of the weekly stream of tourists. He came to me instantly, and we sat
down on a low stone wall on the roadside, but well out of hearing of any ears but each other's.

"Tardif," I said, "has mam'zelle told you her secret?"

"Yes, yes," he answered; "poor little soul! and she is a hundredfold dearer to me now than before."

He looked as if he meant it, for his eyes moistened and his face quivered.

"She is in great danger at this moment," I continued. "A woman sent by her husband has been
lurking about in Guernsey to get news of her, and she has come across in the steamer to-day.
She will be in sight of us in a few minutes. There is no chance of her not learning where she
is living. But could we not hide Olivia somewhere? There are caves strangers know nothing of.
We might take her over to Breckhou. Be quick, Tardif! we must decide at once what to do."

"But mam'zelle is not here. She is gone!" he answered.

"Gone!" I ejaculated. I could not utter another word; but I stared at him as if my eyes could
tear further information from him.

"Yes," he said; "that lady came last week with Miss Dobrée, your cousin. Then mam'zelle told
me all, and we took counsel together. It was not safe for her to stay any longer, though I
would have died for her gladly. But what could be done? We knew she must go elsewhere, and
the next morning I rowed her over to Peter-Port in time for the steamer to England. Poor little
thing! poor little hunted soul!"

His voice faltered as he spoke, and he drew his fisherman's cap close down over his eyes. I
did not speak again for a minute or two.

"Tardif," I said at last, as the foremost among the tourists came in sight, "did she leave
no message for me?"

"She wrote a letter for you," he said, "the very last thing. She did not go to bed that night,
neither did I. I was going to lose her, doctor, and she had been like the light of the sun
to me. But what could I do? She was terrified to death at the thought of her husband claiming
her. I promised to give the letter into your own hands; but we settled I must not show myself
in Peter-Port the day she left. Here it is."

It had been lying in his breast-pocket, and the edges were worn already. He gave it to me lingeringly,
as if loath to part with it. The tourists were coming up in greater numbers, and I made a retreat
hastily toward a quiet and remote part of the cliffs seldom visited in Little Sark.

There, with the sea, which had carried her away from me, playing buoyantly among the rocks,
I read her farewell letter. It ran thus:

"My dear Friend: I am glad I can call you my friend, though nothing can ever come of our friendship--nothing,
for we may not see one another as other friends do. My life was ruined four years ago, and
every now and then I see afresh how complete and terrible the ruin is. Yet if I had known beforehand
how your life would be linked with mine, I would have done any thing in my power to save you
from sharing in my ruin. Ought I to have told you at once that I was married? But just that
was my secret, and it seemed so much safer while no one knew it but myself. I did not see,
as I do now, that I was acting a falsehood. I do not see how I can help doing that. It is as
shocking to me as to you. Do not judge me harshly.

"I do not like to speak to you about my marriage. I was very young and very miserable; any
change seemed better than living with my step-mother. I did not know what I was doing. The
Saviour said, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.' I hope I shall be forgiven
by you, and your mother, and God, for indeed I did not know what I was doing.

"Last October when I escaped from them, it was partly because I felt I should soon be as wicked
as they. I do not think any one ought to remain where there is no chance of being good. If
I am wrong, remember I am not old yet. I may learn what my duty is, and then I will do it.
I am only waiting to find out exactly what I ought to do, and then I will do it, whatever it
may be.

"Now I am compelled to flee away again from this quiet, peaceful home where you and Tardif
have been so good to me. I began to feel perfectly safe here, and all at once the refuge fails
me. It breaks my heart, but I must go, and my only gladness is that it will be good for you.
By-and-by you will forget me, and return to your cousin Julia, and be happy just as you once
thought you should be--as you would have been but for me. You must think of me as one dead.
I am quite dead--lost to you.

"Yet I know you will sometimes wish to hear what has become of me. Tardif will. And I owe you
both more than I can ever repay. But it would not be well for me to write often. I have promised
Tardif that I will write to him once a year, that you and he may know that I am still alive.
When there comes no letter, say, 'Olivia is dead!' Do not be grieved for that; it will be the
greatest, best release God can give me. Say, 'Thank God, Olivia is dead!'

"Good-by, my dear friend; good-by, good-by!

"OLIVIA."

The last line was written in a shaken, irregular hand, and her name was half blotted out, as
if a tear had fallen upon it. I remained there alone on the wild and solitary cliffs until
it was time to return to the steamer.

Tardif was waiting for me at the entrance of the little tunnel through which the road passes
down to the harbor. He did not speak at first, but he drew out of his pocket an old leather
pouch filled with yellow papers. Among them lay a long curling tress of shining hair. He touched
it gently with his finger, as if it had feeling and consciousness.

"You would like to have it, doctor?" he said.

"Ay," I answered, and that only. I could not venture upon another word.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-THIRD.

THE EBB OF LIFE.

There was nothing now for me to do but to devote myself wholly to my mother.

I made the malady under which she was slowly sinking my special study. There remained a spark
of hope yet in my heart that I might by diligent, intense, unflagging search, discover some
remedy yet untried, or perhaps unthought of. I succeeded only in alleviating her sufferings.
I pored over every work which treated of the same class of diseases. At last in an old, almost-forgotten
book, I came upon a simple medicament, which, united with appliances made available by modern
science, gave her sensible relief, and without doubt tended to prolong her shortening days.
The agonizing thought haunted me that, had I come upon this discovery at an earlier stage of
her illness, her life might have been spared for many years.

But it was too late now. She suffered less, and her spirits grew calm and even. We even ventured,
at her own wish, to spend a week together in Sark, she and I--a week never to be forgotten,
full of exquisite pain and exquisite enjoyment to us both. We revisited almost every place
where we had been many years before, while I was but a child and she was still young and strong.
Tardif rowed us out in his boat under the cliffs. Then we came home again, and she sank rapidly,
as if the flame of life had been burning too quickly in the breath of those innocent pleasures.

Now she began to be troubled again with the dread of leaving me alone and comfortless. There
is no passage in Christ's farewell to His disciples which, touches me so much as those words,
"I will not leave you comfortless; I will come unto you." My mother could not promise to come
back to me, and her dying vision looked sorrowfully into the future for me. Sometimes she put
her fear into words--faltering and foreboding words; but it was always in her eyes, as they
followed me wherever I went with a mute, pathetic anxiety. No assurances of mine, no assumed
cheerfulness and fortitude could remove it. I even tried to laugh at it, but my laugh only
brought the tears into her eyes. Neither reason nor ridicule could root it out--a root of bitterness
indeed.

"Martin," she said, in her failing, plaintive voice, one evening when Julia and I were both
sitting with her, for we met now without any regard to etiquette--"Martin, Julia and I have
been talking about your future life while you were away."

Julia's face flushed a little. She was seated on a footstool by my mother's sofa, and looked
softer and gentler than I had ever seen her look. She had been nursing my mother with a single-hearted,
self-forgetful devotion that had often touched me, and had knit us to one another by the common
bond of an absorbing interest. Certainly I had never leaned upon or loved Julia as I was doing now.

"There is no chance of your ever marrying Olivia now," continued my mother, faintly, "and it
is a sin for you to cherish your love for her. That is a very plain duty, Martin."

"Such love as I cherish for Olivia will hurt neither her nor myself," I answered. "I would
not wrong her by a thought."

"But she can never be your wife," she said.

"I never think of her as my wife," I replied; "but I can no more cease to love her than I can
cease to breathe. She has become part of my life, mother."

"Still, time and change must make a difference," she said. "You will realize your loneliness
when I am gone, though you cannot before. I want to have some idea of what you will be doing
in the years to come, before we meet again. If I think at all, I shall be thinking of you,
and I do long to have some little notion. You will not mind me forming one poor little plan
for you once more, my boy?"

"No," I answered, smiling to keep back the tears that were ready to start to my eyes.

"I scarcely know how to tell you," she said. "You must not be angry or offended with us. But
my dear Julia has promised me, out of pure love and pity for me, you know, that if ever--how
can I express it?--if you ever wish you could return to the old plans--it may be a long time
first, but if you conquered your love for Olivia, and could go back, and wished to go back
to the time before you knew her--Julia will forget all that has come between. Julia would consent
to marry you if you asked her to be your wife. O Martin, I should die so much happier if I
thought you would ever marry Julia, and go to live in the house I helped to get ready for you!"

Julia's head had dropped upon my mother's shoulder, and her face was hidden, while my mother's
eyes sought mine beseechingly. I was irresistibly overcome by this new proof of her love for
both of us, for I knew well what a struggle it must have been to her to gain the mastery over
her proper pride and just resentment. I knelt down beside her, clasping her hand and my mother's
in my own.

"Mother, Julia," I said, "I promise that if ever I can be true in heart and soul to a wife,
I will ask Julia to become mine. But it may be many years hence; I dare not say how long. God
alone knows how dear Olivia is to me. And Julia is too good to waste herself upon so foolish
a fellow. She may change, and see some one she can love better."

"That is nonsense, Martin," answered Julia, with a ring of the old sharpness in her tone; "at
my age I am not likely to fall in love again.--Don't be afraid, aunt; I shall not change, and
I will take care of Martin. His home is ready, and he will come back to me some day, and it
will all be as you wish."

I know that promise of ours comforted her, for she never lamented over my coming solitude again.

I have very little more I can say about her. When I look back and try to write more fully of
those last, lingering days, my heart fails me. The darkened room, the muffled sounds, the loitering,
creeping, yet too rapid hours! I had no time to think of Julia, of Olivia, or of myself; I
was wrapped up in her.

One evening--we were quite alone--she called me to come closer to her, in that faint, far-off
voice of hers, which seemed already to be speaking from another world. I was sitting so near
to her that I could touch her with my hand, but she wanted me nearer--with my arm across her,
and my cheek against hers.

"My boy," she whispered, "I am going."

"Not yet, mother," I cried; "not yet! I have so much to say. Stay with me a day or two longer."

"If I could," she murmured, every word broken with her panting breath, "I would stay with you
forever! Be patient with your father, Martin. Say good-by for me to him and Julia. Don't stir.
Let me die so!"

"You shall not die, mother," I said, passionately.

"There is no pain," she whispered--"no pain at all; it is taken away. I am only sorry for my
boy. What will he do when I am gone? Where are you, Martin?"

"I am here, mother!" I answered--"close to you. O God! I would go with you if I could."

Then she lay still for a time, pressing my arm about her with her feeble fingers. Would she
speak to me no more? Had the dearest voice in the world gone away altogether into that far-off,
and, to us, silent country whither the dying go? Dumb, blind, deaf to me? She was breathing
yet, and her heart fluttered faintly against my arm. Would not my mother know me again?

"O Martin!" she murmured, "there is great love in store for us all! I did not know how great
the love was till now!"

There had been a quicker, more irregular throbbing of her heart as she spoke. Then--I waited,
but there came no other pulsation. Suddenly I felt as if I also must be dying, for I passed
into a state of utter darkness and unconsciousness.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FOURTH.

A DISCONSOLATE WIDOWER.

My senses returned painfully, with a dull and blunted perception that some great calamity had
overtaken me. I was in my mother's dressing-room, and Julia was holding to my nostrils some
sharp essence, which had penetrated to the brain and brought back consciousness. My father
was sitting by the empty grate, sobbing and weeping vehemently. The door into my mother's bedroom
was closed. I knew instantly what was going on there.

I suppose no man ever fainted without being ashamed of it. Even in the agony of my awakening
consciousness I felt the inevitable sting of shame at my weakness and womanishness. I pushed
away Julia's hand, and raised myself. I got up on my feet and walked unsteadily and blindly
toward the shut door.

"Martin," said Julia, "you must not go back there. It is all over."

I heard my father calling me in a broken voice, and I turned to him. His frame was shaken by
the violence of his sobs, and he could not lift up his head from his hands. There was no effort
at self-control about him. At times his cries grew loud enough to be heard all over the house.

"Oh, my son!" he said, "we shall never see any one like your poor mother again! She was the
best wife any man ever had! Oh, what a loss she is to me!"

I could not speak of her just then, nor could I say a word to comfort him. She had bidden me
be patient with him, but already I found the task almost beyond me. I told Julia I was going
up to my own room for the rest of the night, if there were nothing for me to do. She put her
arms round my neck and kissed me as if she had been my sister, telling me I could leave every
thing to her. Then I went away into the solitude that had indeed begun to close around me.

When the heart of a man is solitary, there is no society for him even among a crowd of friends.
All deep love and close companionship seemed stricken out of my life.

We laid her in the cemetery, in a grave where the wide-spreading branches of some beech-trees
threw a pleasant shadow over it during the day. At times the moan of the sea could be heard
there, when the surf rolled in strongly upon the shore of Cobo Bay. The white crest of the
waves could be seen from it, tossing over the sunken reefs at sea; yet it lay in the heart
of our island. She had chosen the spot for herself, not very long ago, when we had been there
together. Now I went there alone.

I counted my father and his loud grief as nothing. There was neither sympathy nor companionship
between us. He was very vehement in his lamentations, repeating to every one who came to condole
with us that there never had lived such a wife, and his loss was the greatest that man could
bear. His loss was nothing to mine.

Yet I did draw a little nearer to him in the first few weeks of our bereavement. Almost insensibly
I fell into our old plan of sharing the practice, for he was often unfit to go out and see
our patients. The house was very desolate now, and soon lost those little delicate traces of
feminine occupancy which constitute the charm of a home, and to which we had been all our lives
accustomed. Julia could not leave her own household, even if it had been possible for her to
return to her place in our deserted dwelling. The flowers faded and died unchanged in the vases,
and there was no dainty woman's work lying about--that litter of white and colored shreds of
silk and muslin, which give to a room an inhabited appearance. These were so familiar to me,
that the total absence of them was like the barrenness of a garden without flowers in bloom.

My father did not feel this as I did, for he was not often at home after the first violence
of his grief had spent itself. Julia's house was open to him in a manner it could not be open
to me. I was made welcome there, it is true; but Julia was not unembarrassed and at home with
me. The half-engagement renewed between us rendered it difficult to us both to meet on the
simple ground of friendship and relationship. Moreover, I shrank from setting gossips' tongues
going again on the subject of my chances of marrying my cousin; so I remained at home, alone,
evening after evening, unless I was called out professionally, declining all invitations, and
brooding unwholesomely over my grief. There is no more cowardly a way of meeting a sorrow.
But I was out of heart, and no words could better express the morbid melancholy I was sinking into.

There was some tedious legal business to go through, for my mother's small property, bringing
in a hundred a year, came to me on her death. I could not alienate it, but I wished Julia to
receive the income as part payment of my father's defalcations. She would not listen to such
a proposal, and she showed me that she had a shrewd notion of the true state of our finances.
They were in such a state that if I left Guernsey with my little income my father would positively
find some difficulty in making both ends meet; the more so as I was becoming decidedly the
favorite with our patients, who began to call him slightingly the "old doctor." No path opened
up for me in any other direction. It appeared as if I were to be bound to the place which was
no longer a home to me.

I wrote to this effect to Jack Senior, who was urging my return to England. I could not bring
myself to believe that this dreary, monotonous routine of professional duties, of very little
interest or importance, was all that life should offer to me. Yet for the present my duty was
plain. There was no help for it.

I made some inquiries at the lodging-house in Vauvert Road, and learned that the person who
had been in search of Olivia had left Guernsey about the time when I was so fully engrossed
with my mother as to have but little thought for any one else. Of Olivia there was neither
trace nor tidings. Tardif came up to see me whenever he crossed over from Sark, but he had
no information to give to me. The chances were that she was in London; but she was as much
lost to me as if she had been lying beside my mother under the green turf of Foulon Cemetery.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIFTH.

THE WIDOWER COMFORTED.

In this manner three months passed slowly away after my mother's death. Dr. Dobrée, who was
utterly inconsolable the first few weeks, fell into all his old maundering, philandering ways
again, spending hours upon his toilet, and paying devoted attentions to every passable woman
who came across his path. My temper grew like touch-wood; the least spark would set it in a
blaze. I could not take such things in good part.

We had been at daggers-drawn for a day or two, he and I, when one morning I was astonished
by the appearance of Julia in our consulting-room, soon after my father, having dressed himself
elaborately, had quitted the house. Julia's face was ominous, the upper lip very straight,
and a frown upon her brow. I wondered what could be the matter, but I held my tongue. My knowledge
of Julia was intimate enough for me to hit upon the right moment for speech or silence--a rare
advantage. It was the time to refrain from speaking. Julia was no termagant--simply a woman
who had had her own way all her life, and was so sure it was the best way that she could not
understand why other people should wish to have theirs.

"Martin," she began in a low key, but one that might run up to shrillness if advisable, "I
am come to tell you something that fills me with shame and anger. I do not know how to contain
myself. I could never have believed that I could have been so blind and foolish. But it seems
as if I were doomed to be deceived and disappointed on every hand--I who would not deceive
or disappoint anybody in the world. I declare it makes me quite ill to think of it. Just look
at my hands, how they tremble."

"Your nervous system is out of order," I remarked.

"It is the world that is out of order," she said, petulantly; "I am well enough. Oh, I do not
know how ever I am to tell you. There are some things it is a shame to speak of."

"Must you speak of them?" I asked.

"Yes; you must know, you will have to know all, sooner or later. If there was any hope of it
coming to nothing, I should try to spare you this; but they are both so bent upon disgracing
themselves, so deaf to reason! If my poor, dear aunt knew of it, she could not rest in her
grave. Martin, cannot you guess? Are men born so dull that they cannot see what is going on
under their own eyes?"

"I have not the least idea of what you are driving at," I answered. "Sit down, my dear Julia,
and calm yourself. Shall I give you a glass of wine?"

"No, no," she said, with a gesture of impatience. "How long is it since my poor, dear aunt died?"

"You know as well as I do," I replied, wondering that she should touch the wound so roughly.
"Three months next Sunday."

"And Dr. Dobrée," she said, in a bitter accent--then stopped, looking me full in the face.
I had never heard her call my father Dr. Dobrée in my life. She was very fond of him, and attracted
by him, as most women were, and as few women are attracted by me. Even now, with all the difference
in our age, the advantage being on my side, it was seldom I succeeded in pleasing as much as
he did. I gazed back in amazement at Julia's dark and moody face.

"What now?" I asked. "What has my unlucky father been doing now?"

"Why," she exclaimed, stamping her foot, while the blood mantled to her forehead, "Dr. Dobrée
is in haste to take a second wife! He is indeed, my poor Martin. He wishes to be married immediately
to that viper, Kate Daltrey."

"Impossible!" I cried, stung to the quick by these words. I remembered my mother's mild, instinctive
dislike to Kate Daltrey, and her harmless hope that I would not go over to her side. Go over
to her side! No. If she set her foot into this house as my mother's successor, I would never
dwell under the same roof. As soon as my father made her his wife I would cut myself adrift
from them both. But he knew that; he would never venture to outrage my mother's memory or my
feelings in such a flagrant manner.

"It is possible, for it is true," said Julia. She had not let her voice rise above its low,
angry key, and now it sank nearly to a whisper, as she glanced round at the door. "They have
understood each other these four weeks. You may call it an engagement, for it is one; and I
never suspected them, not for a moment! He came down to my house to be comforted, he said:
his house was so dreary now. And I was as blind as a mole. I shall never forgive myself, dear
Martin. I knew he was given to all that kind of thing, but then he seemed to mourn for my poor
aunt so deeply, and was so heart-broken. He made ten times more show of it than you did. I
have heard people say you bore it very well, and were quite unmoved, but I knew better. Everybody
said he could never get over it. Couldn't you take out a commission of lunacy against him?
He must be mad to think of such a thing."

"How did you find it out?" I inquired.

"Oh, I was so ashamed!" she said. "You see I had not the faintest shadow of a suspicion. I
had left them in the drawing-room to go up-stairs, and I thought of something I wanted, and
went back suddenly, and there they were--his arm around her waist, and her head on his shoulder--he
with his gray hairs too! She says she is the same age as me, but she is forty if she is a day.
The simpletons! I did not know what to say, or how to look. I could not get out of the room
again as if I had not seen, for I cried 'Oh!' at the first sight of them. Then I stood staring
at them; but I think they felt as uncomfortable as I did."

"What did they say?" I asked, sternly.

"Oh, he came up to me quite in his dramatic way, you know, trying to carry it off by looking
grand and majestic; and he was going to take my hand and lead me to her, but I would not stir
a step. 'My love,' he said, 'I am about to steal your friend from you.' 'She is no friend of
mine,' I said, 'if she is going to be what all this intimates, I suppose. I will never speak
to her or you again, Dr. Dobrée.' Upon that he began to weep, and protest, and declaim, while
she sat still and glared at me. I never thought her eyes could look like that. 'When do you
mean to be married?' I asked, for he made no secret of his intention to make her his wife.
'What is the good of waiting?' he said, 'My home is miserable with no woman in it.' 'Uncle,'
I said, 'if you will promise me to give up the idea of a second marriage, which is ridiculous
at your age, I will come back to you, in spite of all the awkwardness of my position with regard
to Martin. For my aunt's sake I will come back.' Even an arrangement like this would be better
than his marriage with that woman--don't you think so?"

"A hundred times better," I said, warmly. "It was very good of you, Julia. But he would not
agree to that, would he?"

"He wouldn't hear of it. He swore that Kate was as dear to him as ever my poor aunt was. He
vowed he could not live without her and her companionship. He maintained that his age did not
make it ridiculous. Kate hid her brazen face in her hands, and sobbed aloud.

"That made him ten times worse an idiot. He knelt down before her, and implored her to look
at him. I reminded him how all the island would rise against him--worse than it did against
you, Martin--and he declared he did not care a fig for the island! I asked him how he would
face the Careys, and the Brocks, and the De Saumarez, and all the rest of them, and he snapped
his fingers at them all. Oh, he must be going out of his mind."

I shook my head. Knowing him as thoroughly as a long and close study could help me to know
any man, I was less surprised than Julia, who had only seen him from a woman's point of view,
and had always been lenient to his faults. Unfortunately, I knew my father too well.

"Then I talked to him about the duty he owed to our family name," she resumed, "and I went
so far as to remind him of what I had done to shield him and it from disgrace, and he mocked
at it--positively mocked at it! He said there was no sort of parallel. It would be no dishonor
to our house to receive Kate into it, even if they were married at once. What did it signify
to the world that only three months had elapsed? Besides, he did not mean to marry her for
a month to come, as the house would need beautifying for her--beautifying for her! Neither
had he spoken of it to you; but he had no doubt you would be willing to go on as you have done."

"Never!" I said.

"I was sure not," continued Julia. "I told him I was convinced you would leave Guernsey again,
but he pooh-poohed that. I asked him how he was to live without any practice, and he said his
old patients might turn him off for a while, but they would be glad to send for him again.
I never saw a man so obstinately bent upon his own ruin."

"Julia," I said, "I shall leave Guernsey before this marriage can come off. I would rather
break stones on the highway than stay to see that woman in my mother's place. My mother disliked
her from the first."

"I know it," she replied, with tears in her eyes, "and I thought it was nothing but prejudice.
It was my fault, bringing her to Guernsey. But I could not bear the idea of her coming as mistress
here. I said so distinctly. 'Dr. Dobrée,' I said, 'you must let me remind you that the house
is mine, though you have paid me no rent for years. If you ever take Kate Daltrey into it,
I will put my affairs into a notary's hands. I will, upon my word, and Julia Dobrée never broke
her word yet.' That brought him to his senses better than any thing. He turned very pale, and
sat down beside Kate, hardly knowing what to say. Then she began. She said if I was cruel,
she would be cruel too. Whatever grieved you, Martin, would grieve me, and she would let her
brother Richard Foster know where Olivia was."

"Does she know where she is?" I asked, eagerly, in a tumult of surprise and hope.

"Why, in Sark, of course," she replied.

"What! Did you never know that Olivia left Sark before my mother's death?" I said, with a chill
of disappointment. "Did I never tell you she was gone, nobody knows where?"

"You have never spoken of her in my hearing, except once--you recollect when, Martin? We have
supposed she was still living in Tardif's house. Then there is nothing to prevent me from carrying
out my threat. Kate Daltrey shall never enter this house as mistress."

"Would you have given it up for Olivia's sake?" I asked, marvelling at her generosity.

"I should have done it for your sake," she answered, frankly.

"But," I said, reverting to our original topic, "if my father has set his mind upon marrying
Kate Daltrey, he will brave any thing."

"He is a dotard," replied Julia. "He positively makes me dread growing old. Who knows what
follies one may be guilty of in old age! I never felt afraid of it before. Kate says she has
two hundred a year of her own, and they will go and live on that in Jersey, if Guernsey becomes
unpleasant to them. Martin, she is a viper--she is indeed. And I have made such a friend of
her! Now I shall have no one but you and the Careys. Why wasn't I satisfied with Johanna as
my friend?"

She stayed an hour longer, turning over this unwelcome subject till we had thoroughly discussed
every point of it. In the evening, after dinner, I spoke to my father briefly but decisively
upon the same topic. After a very short and very sharp conversation, there remained no alternative
for me but to make up my mind to try my fortune once more out of Guernsey. I wrote by the next
mail to Jack Senior, telling him my purpose, and the cause of it, and by return of post I received
his reply:

     "Dear old boy: Why shouldn't you come, and go halves with me?
     Dad says so. He is giving up shop, and going to live in the
     country at Fulham. House and practice are miles too big for
     me. 'Senior and Dobrée,' or 'Dobrée and Senior,' whichever you
     please. If you come I can pay dutiful attention to Dad without
     losing my customers. That is his chief reason. Mine is that I
     only feel half myself without you at hand. Don't think of
     saying no.

     "JACK."

It was a splendid opening, without question. Dr. Senior had been in good practice for more
than thirty years, and he had quietly introduced Jack to the position he was about to resign.
Yet I pondered over the proposal for a whole week before agreeing to it. I knew Jack well enough
to be sure he would never regret his generosity; but if I went I would go as junior partner,
and with a much smaller proportion of the profits than that proffered by Jack. Finally I resolved
to accept the offer, and wrote to him as to the terms upon which alone I would join him.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SIXTH.

FINAL ARRANGEMENTS.

I did not wait for my father to commit the irreparable folly of his second marriage. Guernsey
had become hateful to me. In spite of my exceeding love for my native island, more beautiful
in the eyes of its people than any other spot on earth, I could no longer be happy or at peace
there. A few persons urged me to stay and live down my chagrin and grief, but most of my friends
congratulated me on the change in my prospects, and bade me God-speed. Julia could not conceal
her regret, but I left her in the charge of Captain Carey and Johanna. She promised to be my
faithful correspondent, and I engaged to write to her regularly. There existed between us the
half-betrothal to which we had pledged ourselves at my mother's urgent request. She would wait
for the time when Olivia was no longer the first in my heart; then she would be willing to
become my wife. But if ever that day came, she would require me to give up my position in England,
and settle down for life in Guernsey.

Fairly, then, I was launched upon the career of a physician in the great city. The completeness
of the change suited me. Nothing here, in scenery, atmosphere, or society, could remind me
of the fretted past. The troubled waters subsided into a dull calm, as far as emotional life
went. Intellectual life, on the contrary, was quickened in its current, and day after day drifted
me farther away from painful memories. To be sure, the idea crossed me often that Olivia might
be in London--even in the same street with me. I never caught sight of a faded green dress
but my steps were hurried, and I followed till I was sure that the wearer was not Olivia. But
I was aware that the chances of our meeting were so small that I could not count upon them.
Even if I found her, what then? She was as far away from me as though the Atlantic rolled between
us. If I only knew that she was safe, and as happy as her sad destiny could let her be, I would
be content. For this assurance I looked forward through the long months that must intervene
before her promised communication would come to Tardif.

Thus I was thrown entirely upon my profession for interest and occupation. I gave myself up
to it with an energy that amazed Jack, and sometimes surprised myself. Dr. Senior, who was
an old veteran, loved it with ardor for its own sake, was delighted with my enthusiasm. He
prophesied great things for me.

So passed my first winter in London.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SEVENTH.

THE TABLES TURNED.

A dreary season was that first winter in London.

It happened quite naturally that here, as in Guernsey, my share of the practice fell among
the lower and least important class of patients. Jack Senior had been on the field some years
sooner, and he was London-born and London-bred. All the surroundings of his life fitted him
without a wrinkle. He was at home everywhere, and would have counted the pulse of a duchess
with as little emotion as that of a dairy-maid. On the other hand, I could not accommodate
myself altogether to haughty and aristocratic strangers--though I am somewhat ante-dating later
experiences, for during the winter our fashionable clients were all out of town, and our time
comparatively unoccupied. To be at ease anywhere, it was, at that time, essential to me to
know something of the people with whom I was associating--an insular trait, common to all those
who are brought up in a contracted and isolated circle.

Besides this rustic embarrassment which hung like a clog about me out-of-doors, within-doors
I missed wofully the dainty feminine ways I had been used to. There was a trusty female servant,
half cook, half house-keeper, who lived in the front-kitchen and superintended our household;
but she was not at all the angel in the house whom I needed. It was a well-appointed, handsome
dwelling, but it was terribly gloomy. The heavy, substantial leather chairs always remained
undisturbed in level rows against the wall, and the crimson cloth upon the table was as bare
as a billiard-table. A thimble lying upon it, or fallen on the carpet and almost crushed by
my careless tread, would have been as welcome a sight to me as a blade of grass or a spring
of water in some sandy desert. The sound of a light foot and rustling dress, and low, soft
voice, would have been the sweetest music in my ears. If a young fellow of eight-and-twenty,
with an excellent appetite and in good health, could be said to pine, I was pining for the
pretty, fondling woman's ways which had quite vanished out of my life.

At times my thoughts dwelt upon my semi-engagement to Julia. As soon as I could dethrone the
image of Olivia from its pre-eminence in my heart, she was willing to welcome me back again--a
prodigal suitor, who had spent all his living in a far country. We corresponded regularly and
frequently, and Julia's letters were always good, sensible, and affectionate. If our marriage,
and all the sequel to it, could have been conducted by epistles, nothing could have been more
satisfactory. But I felt a little doubtful about the termination of this Platonic friendship,
with its half-betrothal. It did not appear to me that Olivia's image was fading in the slightest
degree; no, though I knew her to be married, though I was ignorant where she was, though there
was not the faintest hope within me that she would ever become mine.

During the quiet, solitary evenings, while Jack was away at some ball or concert, to which
I had no heart to go, my thoughts were pretty equally divided between my lost mother and my
lost Olivia--lost in such different ways! It would have grieved Julia in her very soul if she
could have known how rarely, in comparison, I thought of her.

Yet, on the whole, there was a certain sweetness in feeling myself not altogether cut off from
womanly love and sympathy. There was a home always open to me--a home, and a wife devotedly
attached to me, whenever I chose to claim them. That was not unpleasant as a prospect. As soon
as this low fever of the spirit was over, there was a convalescent hospital to go to, where
it might recover its original tone and vigor. At present the fever had too firm and strong
a hold for me to pronounce myself convalescent; but if I were to believe all that sages had
said, there would come a time when I should rejoice over my own recovery.

Early in the spring I received a letter from Julia, desiring me to look out for apartments,
somewhere in my neighborhood, for herself, and Johanna and Captain Carey. They were coming
to London to spend two or three months of the season. I had not had any task so agreeable since
I left Guernsey. Jack was hospitably anxious for them to come to our own house, but I knew
they would not listen to such a proposal. I found some suitable rooms for them, however, in
Hanover Street, where I could be with them at any time in five minutes.

On the appointed day I met them at Waterloo Station, and installed them in their new apartments.

It struck me that, notwithstanding the fatigue of the journey, Julia was looking better and
happier than I had seen her look for a long time. Her black dress suited her, and gave her
a style which she never had in colors. Her complexion looked dark, but not sallow; and her
brown hair was certainly more becomingly arranged. Her appearance was that of a well-bred,
cultivated, almost elegant woman, of whom no man need be ashamed. Johanna was simply herself,
without the least perceptible change. But Captain Carey again looked ten years younger, and
was evidently taking pains with his appearance. That suit of his had never been made in Guernsey;
it must have come out of a London establishment. His hair was not so gray, and his face was
less hypochondriac. He assured me that his health had been wonderfully good all the winter.
I was more than satisfied, I was proud of all my friends.

"We want you to come and have a long talk with us to-morrow," said Johanna; "it is too late
to-night. We shall be busy shopping in the morning, but can you come in the evening?"

"Oh, yes," I answered; "I am at leisure most evenings, and I count upon spending them with
you. I can escort you to as many places of amusement as you wish to visit."

"To-morrow, then," she said, "we shall take tea at eight o'clock."

I bade them good-night with a lighter heart than I had felt for a long while. I held Julia's
hand the longest, looking into her face earnestly, till it flushed and glowed a little under
my scrutiny.

"True heart!" I said to myself, "true and constant! and I have nothing, and shall have nothing,
to offer it but the ashes of a dead passion. Would to Heaven," I thought as I paced along Brook
Street, "I had never been fated to see Olivia!"

I was punctual to my time the next day. The dull, stiff drawing-room was already invested with
those tokens of feminine occupancy which I missed so greatly in our much handsomer house. There
were flowers blooming in the centre of the tea-table, and little knick-knacks lay strewed about.
Julia's work-basket stood on a little stand near the window. There was the rustle and movement
of their dresses, the noiseless footsteps, the subdued voices caressing my ear. I sat among
them quiet and silent, but revelling in this partial return of olden times. When Julia poured
out my tea, and passed it to me with her white hand, I felt inclined to kiss her jewelled fingers.
If Captain Carey had not been present I think I should have done so.

We lingered over the pleasant meal as if time were made expressly for that purpose, instead
of hurrying over it, as Jack and I were wont to do. At the close Captain Carey announced that
he was about to leave us alone together for an hour or two. I went down to the door with him,
for he had made me a mysterious signal to follow him. In the hall he laid his hand upon my
shoulder, and whispered a few incomprehensible sentences into my ear.

"Don't think any thing of me, my boy. Don't sacrifice yourself for me. I'm an old fellow compared
to you, though I'm not fifty yet; everybody in Guernsey knows that. So put me out of the question,
Martin. 'There's many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip.' That I know quite well, my dear fellow."

He was gone before I could ask for an explanation, and I saw him tearing off toward Regent
Street. I returned to the drawing-room, pondering over his words. Johanna and Julia were sitting
side by side on a sofa, in the darkest corner of the room--though the light was by no means
brilliant anywhere, for the three gas-jets were set in such a manner as not to turn on much gas.

"Come here, Martin," said Johanna; "we wish to consult you on a subject of great importance
to us all."

I drew up a chair opposite to them, and sat down, much as if it was about to be a medical consultation.
I felt almost as if I must feel somebody's pulse, and look at somebody's tongue.

"It is nearly eight months since your poor dear mother died," remarked Johanna.

Eight months! Yes; and no one knew what those eight months had been to me--how desolate! how empty!

"You recollect," continued Johanna, "how her heart was set on your marriage with Julia, and
the promise you both made to her on her death-bed?"

"Yes," I answered, bending forward and pressing Julia's hand, "I remember every word."

There was a minute's silence after this; and I waited in some wonder as to what this prelude
was leading to.

"Martin," asked Johanna, in a solemn tone, "are you forgetting Olivia?"

"No," I said, dropping Julia's hand as the image of Olivia flashed across me reproachfully,
"not at all. What would you have me say? She is as dear to me at this moment as she ever was."

"I thought you would say so," she replied; "I did not think yours was a love that would quickly
pass away, if it ever does. There are men who can love with the constancy of a woman. Do you
know any thing of her?"

"Nothing!" I said, despondently; "I have no clew as to where she may be now."

"Nor has Tardif," she continued; "my brother and I went across to Sark last week to ask him."

"That was very good of you," I interrupted.

"It was partly for our own sakes," she said, blushing faintly. "Martin, Tardif says that if
you have once loved Olivia, it is once for all. You would never conquer it. Do you think that
this is true? Be candid with us."

"Yes," I answered, "it is true. I could never love again as I love Olivia."

"Then, my dear Martin," said Johanna, very softly, "do you wish to keep Julia to her promise?"

I started violently. What! Did Julia wish to be released from that semi-engagement, and be
free? Was it possible that any one else coveted my place in her affections, and in the new
house which we had fitted up for ourselves? I felt like the dog in the manger. It seemed an
unheard-of encroachment for any person to come between my cousin Julia and me.

"Do you ask me to set you free from your promise, Julia?" I asked, somewhat sternly.

"Why, Martin," she said, averting her face from me, "you know I should never consent to marry
you, with the idea of your caring most for that girl. No, I could never do that. If I believed
you would ever think of me as you used to do before you saw her, well, I would keep true to
you. But is there any hope of that?"

"Let us be frank with one another," I answered; "tell me, is there any one else whom you would
marry if I release you from this promise, which was only given, perhaps, to soothe my mothers
last hours?"

Julia hung her head, and did not speak. Her lips trembled. I saw her take Johanna's hand and
squeeze it, as if to urge her to answer the question.

"Martin," said Johanna, "your happiness is dear to every one of us. If we had believed there
was any hope of your learning to love Julia as she deserves, and as a man ought to love his
wife, not a word of this would have been spoken. But we all feel there is no such hope. Only
say there is, and we will not utter another word."

"No," I said, "you must tell me all now. I cannot let the question rest here. Is there any
one else whom Julia would marry if she felt quite free?"

"Yes," answered Johanna, while Julia hid her face in her hands, "she would marry my brother."

Captain Carey! I fairly gasped for breath. Such an idea had never once occurred to me; though
I knew she had been spending most of her time with the Careys at the Vale. Captain Carey to
marry! and to marry Julia! To go and live in our house! I was struck dumb, and fancied that
I had heard wrongly. All the pleasant, distant vision of a possible marriage with Julia, when
my passion had died out, and I could be content in my affection and esteem for her--all this
vanished away, and left my whole future a blank. If Julia wished for revenge--and when is not
revenge sweet to a jilted woman?--she had it now. Then turning round on the music-stool she looked
at her father, and said, "Now, Papasito querido, what shall I sing for you?"

"You know, dear, what I always love to hear," answered he.

With gentle touch, she drew from the keys a plaintive prelude, which soon modulated itself into
"The Light of other Days." She played and sang it with so much feeling, that it seemed the voice
of memory floating with softened sadness over the far-off waters of the past. The tune was
familiar to Alfred, but it had never sung itself into his heart, as now. "I felt as I did
in Italy, listening to a vesper-bell sounding from a distance in
the stillness of twilight," said he, turning toward his host.

"All who hear Rosabella sing notice a bell in her voice," rejoined her father.

"Undoubtedly it is the voice of a belle," said Mr. Fitzgerald.

Her father, without appearing to notice the commonplace pun, went
on to say, "You don't know, Mr. King, what tricks she can play with
her voice.

I call her a musical ventriloquist. If you want to hear the bell to perfection, ask her to sing
'Toll the bell for lovely Nell.'"

"Do give me that pleasure," said Alfred, persuasively.

She sang the pathetic melody, and with voice and piano imitated to
perfection the slow tolling of a silver-toned bell.

After a short pause, during which she trifled with the keys, while
some general remarks were passing, she turned to Mr. Fitzgerald, who
was leaning on the piano, and said, "What shall I sing for you?"

It was a simple question, but it pierced the heart of Alfred King with a strange new pain. What
would he not have given for such a soft expression in those glorious eyes when she looked at
him!

"Since you are in a ventriloqual mood," answered Mr. Fitzgerald, "I should like to hear again
what you played the last time I was here,--Agatha's Moonlight Prayer, from Der Freyschütz."

She smiled, and with voice and instrument produced the indescribably
dreamy effect of the two flutes.

It was the very moonlight of sound.

"This is perfectly magical," murmured Alfred. He spoke in a low, almost reverential tone; for
the spell of moonlight was on him, and the clear, soft voice of the singer, the novelty of
her peculiar beauty, and the surpassing gracefulness of her motions,
as she swayed gently to the music of the tones she produced, inspired
him with a feeling of poetic deference.

Through the partially open window came the lulling sound of a little
trickling fountain in the garden, and the air was redolent of jasmine
and orange-blossoms.

On the pier-table was a little sleeping Cupid, from whose torch rose the fragrant incense of a
nearly extinguished pastille.

The pervasive spirit of beauty in the room, manifested in forms,
colors, tones, and motions, affected the soul as perfume did the senses.

The visitors felt they had stayed too long, and yet they lingered. Alfred examined the reclining
Cupid, and praised the gracefulness of its outline.

"Cupid could never sleep here, nor would the flame of his torch ever go out," said Mr. Fitzgerald;
"but it is time we were going out."

The young gentlemen exchanged parting salutations with their host
and his daughters, and moved toward the door.

But Mr. Fitzgerald paused on the threshold to say, "Please play us out with Mozart's 'Good
Night.'"

"As organists play worshippers out of the church," added Mr. King.

Rosabella bowed compliance, and, as they crossed the outer threshold, they heard the most musical of
voices singing Mozart's beautiful little melody, "Buona Notte, amato
bene."

The young men lingered near the piazza till the last sounds floated
away, and then they walked forth in the moonlight,--Fitzgerald repeating
the air in a subdued whistle.

His first exclamation was, "Isn't that girl a Rose Royal?"

"She is, indeed," replied Mr. King; "and the younger sister is also extremely fascinating."

"Yes, I thought you seemed to think so," rejoined his companion. "Which do you prefer?"
Shy of revealing his thoughts to a stranger, Mr. King replied that
each of the sisters was so perfect in her way, the other would be
wronged by preference.

"Yes, they are both rare gems of beauty,"
rejoined Fitzgerald. "If I were the Grand Bashaw, I would have them
both in my harem."

The levity of the remark jarred on the feelings
of his companion, who answered, in a grave, and somewhat cold tone,
"I saw nothing in the manners of the young ladies to suggest such
a disposition of them."

"Excuse me," said Fitzgerald, laughing. "I
forgot you were from the land of Puritans. I meant no indignity to
the young ladies, I assure you. But when one amuses himself with imagining
the impossible, it is not worth while to be scrupulous about details.
I am not the Grand Bashaw; and when I pronounced them fit for his
harem, I merely meant a compliment to their superlative beauty. That
Floracita is a mischievous little sprite. Did you ever see anything
more roguish than her expression while she was singing 'Petit blanc,
mon bon frère'?"

"Listen to me," I said; "I do not think there is another man in London as well qualified to
do him good."

"Why?" she asked, eagerly.

"Because I have made this disease my special study," I answered. "Mind, I am not anxious to
attend him. I came here simply because my friend is out of town. If he wishes to see me, I
will see him, and do my best for him. It rests entirely with himself."

"Will you wait here a few minutes?" she asked, "while I see what he will do?"

She left me in the dimly-lighted hall, pervaded by a musty smell of unventilated rooms, and
a damp, dirty underground floor. The place was altogether sordid, and dingy, and miserable.
At last I heard her step coming down the two flights of stairs, and I went to meet her.

"He will see you," she said, eying me herself with a steady gaze of curiosity.

Her curiosity was not greater than mine. I was anxious to see Olivia's husband, partly from
the intense aversion I felt instinctively toward him. He was lying back in an old, worn-out
easy-chair, with a woman's shawl thrown across his shoulders, for the night was chilly. His
face had the first sickly hue and emaciation of the disease, and was probably refined by it.
It was a handsome, regular, well-cut face, narrow across the brows, with thin, firm lips, and
eyes perfect in shape, but cold and glittering as steel. I knew afterward that he was fifteen
years older than Olivia. Across his knees lay a shaggy, starved-looking cat, which he held
fast by the fore-paws, and from time to time entertained himself by teasing and tormenting
it. He scrutinized me as keenly as I did him.

"I believe we are in some sort connected. Dr. Martin Dobrée," he said, smiling coldly; "my
half-sister, Kate Daltrey, is married to your father, Dr. Dobrée."

"Yes," I answered, shortly. The subject was eminently disagreeable to me, and I had no wish
to pursue it with him.

"Ay! she will make him a happy man," he continued, mockingly; "you are not yourself married,
I believe, Dr. Martin Dobrée?"

I took no notice whatever of his question, or the preceding remark, but passed on to formal
inquiries concerning his health. My close study of his malady helped me here. I could assist
him to describe and localize his symptoms, and I soon discovered that the disease was as yet
in a very early stage.

"You have a better grip of it than Lowry," he said, sighing with satisfaction. "I feel as if
I were made of glass, and you could look through me. Can you cure me?"

"I will do my best," I answered.

"So you all say," he muttered, "and the best is generally good for nothing. You see I care
less about getting over it than my wife does. She is very anxious for my recovery."

"Your wife!" I repeated, in utter surprise; "you are Richard Foster, I believe?"

"Certainly," he replied.

"Does your wife know of your present illness?" I inquired.

"To be sure," he answered; "let me introduce you to Mrs. Richard Foster."

The woman looked at me with flashing eyes and a mocking smile, while Mr. Foster indulged himself
with extorting a long and plaintive mew from the poor cat on his knees.

"I cannot understand," I said. I did not know how to continue my speech. Though they might
choose to pass as husband and wife among strangers, they could hardly expect to impose upon me.

"Ah! I see you do not," said Mr. Foster, with a visible sneer. "Olivia is dead."

"Olivia dead!" I exclaimed.

I repeated the words mechanically, as if I could not make any meaning out of them. Yet they
had been spoken with such perfect deliberation and certainty that there seemed to be no question
about the fact. Mr. Foster's glittering eyes dwelt delightedly upon my face.

"You were not aware of it?" he said, "I am afraid I have been too sudden. Kate tells us you
were in love with my first wife, and sacrificed a most eligible match for her. Would it be
too late to open fresh negotiations with your cousin? You see I know all your family history."

"When did Olivia die?" I inquired, though my tongue felt dry and parched, and the room, with
his fiendish face, was swimming giddily before my eyes.

"When was it, Carry?" he asked, turning to his wife.

"We heard she was dead on the first of October," she answered. "You married me the next day."

"Ah, yes!" he said; "Olivia had been dead to me for more than twelve months and the moment
I was free I married her, Dr. Martin. We could not be married before, and there was no reason
to wait longer. It was quite legal."

"But what proof have you?" I asked, still incredulous, yet with a heart so heavy that it could
hardly rouse itself to hope.

"Carry, have you those letters?" said Richard Foster.

She was away for a few minutes, while he leaned back again in his chair, regarding nic with
his half-closed, cruel eyes. I said nothing, and resolved to betray no emotion. Olivia dead!
my Olivia! I could not believe it.

"Here are the proofs," said Mrs. Foster, reentering the room. She put into my hand an ordinary
certificate of death, signed by J. Jones, M.D. It stated that the deceased, Olivia Foster,
had died on September the 27th, of acute inflammation of the lungs. Accompanying this was a
letter written in a good handwriting, purporting to be from a clergyman or minister, of what
denomination it was not stated, who had attended Olivia in her fatal illness. He said that
she had desired him to keep the place of her death and burial a secret, and to forward no more
than the official certificate of the former event. This letter was signed E. Jones. No clew
was given by either document as to the place where they were written.

"Are you not satisfied?" asked Foster.

"No," I replied; "how is it, if Olivia is dead, that you have not taken possession of her property?"

"A shrewd question," he said, jeeringly. "Why am I in these cursed poor lodgings? Why am I
as poor as Job, when there are twenty thousand pounds of my wife's estate lying unclaimed?
My sweet, angelic Olivia left no will, or none in my favor, you may be sure; and by her father's
will, if she dies intestate or without children, his property goes to build almshouses, or
some confounded nonsense, in Melbourne. All she bequeaths to me is this ring, which I gave
to her on our wedding-day, curse her!"

He held out his hand, on the little finger of which shone a diamond, which might, as far as
I knew, be the one I had once seen in Olivia's possession.

"Perhaps you do not know," he continued, "that it was on this very point, the making of her
will, or securing her property to me in some way, that my wife took offence and ran away from
me. Carry was just a little too hard upon her, and I was away in Paris. But consider, I expected
to be left penniless, just as you see me left, and Carry was determined to prevent it."

"Then you are sure of her death?" I said.

"So sure," he replied, calmly, "that we were married the next day. Olivia's letter to me, as
well as those papers, was conclusive of her identity. Will you like to see it?"

Mrs. Foster gave me a slip of paper, on which were written a few lines. The words looked faint,
and grew paler as I read them. They were without doubt Olivia's writing:

"I know that, you are poor, and I send you all I can spare--the ring you once gave to me. I
am even poorer than yourself, but I have just enough for my last necessities. I forgive you,
as I trust that God forgives me."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no more to be said or done. Conviction had been brought home to me. I rose to take
my leave, and Foster held out his hand to me, perhaps with a kindly intention. Olivia's ring
was glittering on it, and I could not take it into mine.

"Well, well," he said, "I understand; I am sorry for you. Come again, Dr. Martin Dobrée. If
you know of any remedy for my ease, you are no true man if you do not try it."

I went down the narrow staircase, closely followed by Mrs. Foster. Her face had lost its gayety
and boldness, and looked womanly and careworn, as she laid her hand upon my arm before opening
the house-door.

"For God's sake, come again," she said, "if you can do any thing for him! We have money left
yet, and I am earning more every day. We can pay you well. Promise me you will come again."

"I can promise nothing to-night," I answered.

"You shall not go till you promise," she said, emphatically.

"Well, then, I promise," I answered, and she unfastened the chain almost noiselessly, and opened
the door into the street.

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-NINTH.

SAD SEWS.

A fine, drizzling rain was falling; I was just conscious of it as an element of discomfort,
but it did not make me quicken my steps. I wanted no rapidity of motion now. There was nothing
to be done, nothing to look forward to, nothing to flee away from. Olivia was dead!

I had said the same thing again and again to myself, that Olivia was dead to me; but at this
moment I learned how great a difference there was between the words as a figure of speech and
as a terrible reality. I could no longer think of her as treading the same earth--the same
streets, perhaps; speaking the same language; seeing the same daylight as myself. I recalled
her image, as I had seen her last in Sark; and then I tried to picture her white face, with
lips and eyes closed forever, and the awful chill of death resting upon her. It seemed impossible;
yet the cuckoo-cry went on in my brain, "Olivia is dead--is dead!"

I reached home just as Jack was coming in from his evening amusement. He let me in with his
latch-key, giving me a cheery greeting; but as soon as we had entered the dining-room, and
he saw my face, he exclaimed. "Good Heavens! Martin, what has happened to you?"

"Olivia is dead," I answered.

His arm was about my neck in a moment, for we were like boys together still, when we were alone.
He knew all about Olivia, and he waited patiently till I could put my tidings into words.

"It must be true," he said, though in a doubtful tone; "the scoundrel would not have married
again if he had not sufficient proof."

"She must have died very soon after my mother," I answered, "and I never knew it!"

"It's strange!" he said. "I wonder she never got anybody to write to you or Tardif."

There was no way of accounting for that strange silence toward us. We sat talking in short,
broken sentences, while Jack smoked a cigar; but we could come to no conclusion about it. It
was late when we parted, and I went to bed, but not to sleep.

For as soon as the room was quite dark, visions of Olivia haunted me. Phantasms of her followed
one another rapidly through my brain. She had died, so said the certificate, of inflammation
of the lungs, after an illness of ten days. I felt myself bound to go through every stage of
her illness, dwelling upon all her sufferings, and thinking of her as under careless or unskilled
attendance, with no friend at hand to take care of her. She ought not to have died, with her
perfect constitution. If I had been there she should not have died.

About four o'clock Jack tapped softly upon the wall between our bedrooms--it was a signal we
had used when we were boys--as though to inquire if I was all right; but it was quiet enough
not to wake me if I were asleep. It seemed like the friendly "Ahoy!" from a boat floating on
the same dark sea. Jack was lying awake, thinking of me as I was thinking of Olivia. There
was something so consolatory in this sympathy that I fell asleep while dwelling upon it.

Upon going downstairs in the morning I found that Jack was already off, having left a short
note for me, saving he would visit my patients that day. I had scarcely begun breakfast when
the servant announced "a lady," and as the lady followed close upon his heels, I saw behind
his shoulder the familiar face of Johanna, looking extremely grave. She was soon seated beside
me, watching me with something of the tender, wistful gaze of my mother. Her eyes were of the
same shape and color, and I could hardly command myself to speak calmly.

"Your friend Dr. John Senior called upon us a short time since," she said; "and told us this
sad, sad news."

I nodded silently.

"If we had only known it yesterday," she continued, "you would never have heard what we then
said. This makes so vast a difference. Julia could not have become your wife while there was
another woman living whom you loved more. You understand her feeling?"

"Yes," I said; "Julia is right."

"My brother and I have been talking about the change this will make," she resumed. "He would
not rob you of any consolation or of any future happiness; not for worlds. He relinquishes
all claim to or hope of Julia's affection--"

"That would be unjust to Julia," I interrupted. "She must not be sacrificed to me any longer.
I do not suppose I shall ever marry--"

"You must marry, Martin," she interrupted in her turn, and speaking emphatically; "you are
altogether unfitted for a bachelor's life. It is all very well for Dr. John Senior, who has
never known a woman's companionship, and who can do without it. But it is misery to you--this
cold, colorless life. No. Of all the men I ever knew, you are the least fitted for a single life."

"Perhaps I am," I admitted, as I recalled my longing for some sign of womanhood about our bachelor
dwelling.

"I am certain of it," she said. "Now, but for our precipitation last night, you would have
gone naturally to Julia for comfort. So my brother sends word that he is going back to Guernsey
to-night, leaving us in Hanover Street, where we are close to you. We have said nothing to
Julia yet. She is crying over this sad news--mourning for your sorrow. You know that my brother
has not spoken directly to Julia of his love; and now all that is in the past, and is to be
as if it had never been, and we go on exactly as if we had not had that conversation yesterday."

"But that cannot be," I remonstrated. "I cannot consent to Julia wasting her love and time
upon me. I assure you most solemnly I shall never marry my cousin now."

"You love her?" said Johanna.

"Certainly," I answered, "as my sister."

"Better than any woman now living?" she pursued.

"Yes," I replied.

"That is all Julia requires," she continued; "so let us say no more at present, Martin. Only
understand that all idea of marriage between her and my brother is quite put away. Don't argue
with me, don't contradict me. Come to see us as you would have done but for that unfortunate
conversation last night. All will come right by-and-by."

"But Captain Carey--" I began.

"There! not a word!" she interrupted imperatively. "Tell me all about that wretch, Richard
Foster. How did you come across him? Is he likely to die? Is he any thing like Kate Daltrey?--I
will never call her Kate Dobrée as long as the world lasts. Come, Martin, tell me every thing
about him."

She sat with me most of the morning, talking with animated perseverance, and at last prevailed
upon me to take her a walk in Hyde Park. Her pertinacity did me good in spite of the irritation
it caused me. When her dinner-hour was at hand I felt bound to attend her to her house in Hanover
Street; and I could not get away from her without first speaking to Julia. Her face was very
sorrowful, and her manner sympathetic. We said only a few words to one another, but I went
away with the impression that her heart was still with me.

CHAPTER THE FORTIETH.

A TORMENTING DOUBT.

At dinner Jack announced his intention of paying a visit to Richard Foster.

"You are not fit to deal with the fellow," he said; "you may be sharp enough upon your own
black sheep in Guernsey, but you know nothing of the breed here. Now, if I see him, I will
squeeze out of him every mortal thing he knows about Olivia. Where did those papers come from?"

"There was no place given," I answered.

"But there would be a post-mark on the envelop," he replied; "I will make him show me the envelop
they were in."

"Jack," I said, "you do not suppose he has any doubt of her death?"

"I can't say," he answered. "You see he has married again, and if she were not dead that would
be bigamy--an ugly sort of crime. But are you sure they are married?"

"How can I be sure?" I asked fretfully, for grief as often makes men fretful as illness. "I
did not ask for their marriage-certificate."

"Well, well! I will go," he answered.

I awaited his return with impatience. With this doubt insinuated by Jack, it began to seem
almost incredible that Olivia's exquisitely healthy frame should have succumbed suddenly under
a malady to which she had no predisposition whatever. Moreover, her original soundness of constitution
had been strengthened by ten months' residence in the pure, bracing air of Sark. Yet what was
I to think in face of those undated documents, and of her own short letter to her husband?
The one I knew was genuine; why should I suppose the others to be forged? And if forgeries,
who had been guilty of such a cruel and crafty artifice, and for what purpose?

I had not found any satisfactory answer to these queries before Jack returned, his face kindled
with excitement. He caught my hand, and grasped it heartily.

"I no more believe she is dead than I am," were his first words. "You recollect me telling
you of a drunken brawl in a street off the Strand, where a fellow, as drunk as a lord, was
for claiming a pretty girl as his wife; only I had followed her out of Ridley's agency-office,
and was just in time to protect her from him--a girl I could have fallen in love with myself.
You recollect?"

"Yes, yes," I said, almost breathless.

"He was the man, and Olivia was the girl!" exclaimed Jack.

"No!" I cried.

"Yes!" continued Jack, with an affectionate lunge at me; "at any rate I can swear he is the
man; and I would bet a thousand to one that the girl was Olivia."

"But when was it?" I asked.

"Since he married again," he answered; "they were married on the 2d of October, and this was
early in November. I had gone to Ridley's after a place for a poor fellow as an assistant to
a druggist; and I saw the girl distinctly. She gave the name of Ellen Martineau. Those letters
about her death are all forgeries."

"Olivia's is not," I said; "I know her handwriting too well."

"Well, then," observed Jack, "there is only one explanation. She has sent them herself to throw
Foster off the scent; she thinks she will be safe if he believes her dead."

"No," I answered, hotly, "she would never have done such a thing as that."

"Who else is benefited by it?" he asked, gravely. "It does not put Foster into possession of
any of her property; or that would have been a motive for him to do it. But he gains nothing
by it; and he is so convinced of her death that he has married a second wife."

It was difficult to hit upon any other explanation; yet I could not credit this one. I felt
firmly convinced that Olivia could not be guilty of an artifice so cunning. I was deceived
in her indeed if she would descend to any fraud so cruel. But I could not discuss the question
even with Jack Senior. Tardif was the only person who knew Olivia well enough to make his opinion
of any value. Besides, my mind was not as clear as Jack's that she was the girl he had seen
in November. Yet the doubt of her death was full of hope; it made the earth more habitable,
and life more endurable.

"What can I do now?" I said, speaking aloud, though I was thinking to myself.

"Martin," he replied, gravely, "isn't it wisest to leave the matter as it stands? If you find
Olivia, what then? she is as much separated from you as she can be by death. So long as Foster
lives, it is worse than useless to be thinking of her. There is no misery like that of hanging
about a woman you have no right to love."

"I only wish to satisfy myself that she is alive," I answered. "Just think of it, Jack, not
to know whether she is living or dead! You must help me to satisfy myself. Foster has got the
only valuable thing she had in her possession, and if she is living she may be in absolute
want. I cannot be contented with that dread on my mind. There can be no harm in my taking some
care of her at a distance. This mystery would be intolerable to me."

"You're right, old fellow," he said, cordially; "we will go to Ridley's together to-morrow
morning."

We were there soon after the doors were open. There were not many clients present, and the
clerks were enjoying a slack time. Jack had recalled to his mind the exact date of his former
visit; and thus the sole difficulty was overcome. The clerk found the name of Ellen Martineau
entered under that date in his book.

"Yes," he said, "Miss Ellen Martineau, English teacher in a French school; premium to be paid,
about 10 Pounds; no salary; reference, Mrs. Wilkinson, No. 19 Bellringer Street."

"No. 19 Bellringer Street!" we repeated in one breath.

"Yes, gentlemen, that is the address," said the clerk, closing the book. "Shall I write it
down for you? Mrs. Wilkinson was the party who should have paid our commission; as you perceive,
a premium was required instead of a salary given. We feel pretty sure the young lady went to
the school, but Mrs. Wilkinson denies it, and it is not worth our while to pursue our claim
in law."

"Can you describe the young lady?" I inquired.

"Well, no. We have such hosts of young ladies here. But she was pretty, decidedly pretty; she
made that impression upon me, at least. We are too busy to take particular notice; but I should
know her again if she came in. I think she would have been here again, before this, if she
had not got that engagement."

"Do you know where the school is?" I asked.

"No. Mrs. Wilkinson was the party," he said. "We had nothing to do with it, except send any
ladies to her who thought it worth their while. That was all."

As we could obtain no further information, we went away, and paced up and down the tolerably
quiet street, deep in consultation. That we should have need for great caution, and as much
craftiness as we both possessed, in pursuing our inquiries at No. 19 Bellringer Street, was
quite evident. Who could be this unknown Mrs. Wilkinson? Was it possible that she might prove
to be Mrs. Foster herself? At any rate, it would not do for either of us to present ourselves
there in quest of Miss Ellen Martineau. It was finally settled between us that Johanna should
be intrusted with the diplomatic enterprise. There was not much chance that Mrs. Foster would
know her by sight, though she had been in Guernsey; and it would excite less notice for a lady
to be inquiring after Olivia. We immediately turned our steps toward Hanover Street, where
we found her and Julia seated at some fancy-work in their sombre drawing-room.

Julia received me with a little embarrassment, but conquered it sufficiently to give me a warm
pressure of the hand, and to whisper in my ear that Johanna had told her every thing. Unluckily,
Johanna herself knew nothing of our discovery the night before. I kept Julia's hand in mine,
and looked steadily into her eyes.

"My dear Julia," I said, "we bring strange news. We have reason to believe that Olivia is not
dead, but that something underhand is going on, which we cannot yet make out."

Julia's face grew crimson, but I would not let her draw her hand away from my clasp. I held
it the more firmly; and, as Jack was busy talking to Johanna, I continued speaking to her in
a lowered tone.

"My dear," I said, "you have been as true, and faithful, and generous a friend as any man ever
had. But this must not go on, for your own sake. You fancied you loved me, because every one
about us wished it to be so; but I cannot let you waste your life on me. Speak to me exactly
as your brother. Do you believe you could be really happy with Captain Carey?"

"Arthur is so good," she murmured, "and he is so fond of me."

I had never heard her call him Arthur before. The elder members of our Guernsey circle called
him by his Christian name, but to us younger ones he had always been Captain Carey. Julia's
use of it was more eloquent than many phrases. She had grown into the habit of calling him
familiarly by it.

"Then, Julia," I said, "what folly it would be for you to sacrifice yourself to a false notion
of faithfulness! I could not accept such a sacrifice. Think no more of me or my happiness."

"But my poor aunt was so anxious for you to have a home of your own," she said, sobbing, "and
I do love you dearly. Now you will never marry. I know you will not, if you can have neither
Olivia nor me for your wife."

"Very likely," I answered, trying to laugh away her agitation; "I shall be in love with two
married women instead. How shocking that will sound in Guernsey! But I'm not afraid that Captain
Carey will forbid me his house."

"How little we thought!" exclaimed Julia. I knew very well what her mind had gone back to--the
days when she and I and my mother were furnishing and settling the house that would now become
Captain Carey's home.

"Then it is all settled," I said, "and I shall write to him by to-night's post, inviting him
back again--that is, if he really left you last night."

"Yes," she replied; "he would not stay a day longer."

Her face had grown calm as we talked together. A scarcely perceptible smile was lurking about
her lips, as if she rejoiced that her suspense was over. There was something very like a pang
in the idea of some one else filling the place I had once fully occupied in her heart; but
the pain was unworthy of me. I drove it away by throwing myself heart and soul into the mystery
which hung over the fate of Olivia.

"We have hit upon a splendid plan," said Jack: "Miss Carey will take Simmons's cab to Bellringer
Street, and reach the house about the same time as I visit Foster. That is for me to be at
hand if she should need any protection, you know. I shall stay up-stairs with Foster till I
hear the cab drive off again, and it will wait for me at the corner of Dawson Street. Then
we will come direct here, and tell you every thing at once. Of course, Miss Dobrée will wish
to hear it all."

"Cannot I go with Johanna?" she asked.

"No," I said, hastily; "it is very probable Mrs. Foster knows you by sight, though she is less
likely to know Johanna. I fancy Mrs. Wilkinson will turn out to be Mrs. Foster herself. Yet
why they should spirit Olivia away into a French school, and pretend that she is dead, I cannot
see."

Nor could any one of the others see the reason. But as the morning was fast waning away, and
both Jack and I were busy, we were compelled to close the discussion, and, with our minds preoccupied
to a frightful extent, make those calls upon our patients which were supposed to be in each
case full of anxious and particular thought for the ailments we were attempting to alleviate.

Upon meeting again for a few minutes at luncheon, we made a slight change in our plan; for
we found a note from Foster awaiting me, in which he requested me to visit him in the future,
instead of Dr. John Senior, as he felt more confidence in my knowledge of his malady.

CHAPTER THE FORTY-FIRST.

MARTIN DOBRÉE'S PLEDGE.

I followed Simmons's cab up Bellringer Street, and watched Johanna alight and enter the house.
The door was scarcely closed upon her when I rang, and asked the slatternly drudge of a servant
if I could see Mr. Foster. She asked me to go up to the parlor on the second floor, and I went
alone, with little expectation of finding Mrs. Foster there, unless Johanna was there also,
in which case I was to appear as a stranger to her.

The parlor looked poorer and shabbier by daylight than at night. There was not a single element
of comfort in it. The curtains hung in rags about a window begrimed with soot and smoke. The
only easy-chair was the one occupied by Foster, who himself looked as shabby and worn as the
room. The cuffs and collar of his shirt were yellow and tattered; his hair hung long and lank;
and his skin had a sallow, unwholesome tint. The diamond ring upon his finger was altogether
out of keeping with his threadbare coat, buttoned up to the chin, as if there were no waistcoat
beneath it. From head to foot he looked a broken-down, seedy fellow, yet still preserving some
lingering traces of the gentleman. This was Olivia's husband!

A good deal to my surprise, I saw Mrs. Foster seated quietly at a table drawn close to the
window, very busily writing--engrossing, as I could see, for some miserable pittance a page.
She must have had some considerable practice in the work, for it was done well, and her pen
ran quickly over the paper. A second chair left empty opposite to her showed that Foster had
been engaged at the same task, before he heard my step on the stairs. He looked weary, and
I could not help feeling something akin to pity for him. I did not know that they had come
down as low as that.

"I did not expect you to come before night," he said, testily; "I like to have some idea when
my medical attendant is coming."

"I was obliged to come now," I answered, offering no other apology. The man irritated me more
than any other person that had ever come across me. There was something perverse and splenetic
in every word he uttered, and every expression upon his face.

"I do not like your partner," he said; "don't send him again. He knows nothing about his business."

He spoke with all the haughtiness of a millionnaire to a country practitioner. I could hardly
refrain from smiling as I thought of Jack's disgust and indignation.

"As for that," I replied, "most probably neither of us will visit you again. Dr. Lowry will
return to-morrow, and you will be in his hands once more."

"No!" he cried, with a passionate urgency in his tone--"no, Martin Dobrée; you said if any
man in London could cure me, it was yourself. I cannot leave myself in any other hands. I demand
from you the fulfilment of your words. If what you said is true, you can no more leave me to
the care of another physician, than you could leave a fellow-creature to drown without doing
your utmost to save him. I refuse to be given up to Dr. Lowry."

"But it is by no means a parallel ease," I argued; "you were under his treatment before, and
I have no reason whatever to doubt his skill. Why should you feel safer in my hands than in his?"

"Well!" he said, with a sneer, "if Olivia were alive, I dare scarcely have trusted you, could
I? But you have nothing to gain by my death, you know; and I have so much faith in you, in
your skill, and your honor, and your conscientiousness--if there be any such qualities in the
world--that I place myself unfalteringly under your professional care. Shake hands upon it,
Martin Dobrée."

In spite of my repugnance, I could not resist taking his offered hand. His eyes were fastened
upon me with something of the fabled fascination of a serpent's. I knew instinctively that
he would have the power, and use it, of probing every wound he might suspect in me to the quick.
Yet he interested me; and there was something not entirely repellent to me about him. Above
all for Olivia's sake, should we find her still living, I was anxious to study his character.
It might happen, as it does sometimes, that my honor and straight-forwardness might prove a
match for his crafty shrewdness.

"There," he said, exultantly, "Martin Dobrée pledges himself to cure me.--Carry, you are the
witness of it. If I die, he has been my assassin as surely as if he had plunged a stiletto
into me."

"Nonsense!" I answered; "it is not in my power to heal or destroy. I simply pledge myself to
use every means I know of for your recovery."

"Which comes to the same thing," he replied; "for, mark you, I will be the most careful patient
you ever had. There should be no chance for you, even if Olivia were alive."

Always harping on that one string. Was it nothing more than a lore of torturing some one that
made him reiterate those words? Or did he wish to drive home more deeply the conviction that
she was indeed dead?

"Have you communicated the intelligence of her death to her trustee in Australia?" I asked.

"No; why should I?" he said, "no good would come of it to me. Why should I trouble myself about
it?"

"Nor to your step-sister?" I added.

"To Mrs. Dobrée?" he rejoined; "no, it does not signify a straw to her either. She holds herself
aloof from me now, confound her! You are not on very good terms with her yourself, I believe?"

"The cab was still standing at the door, and I could not leave before it drove away, or I should
have made my visit a short one. Mrs. Foster was glancing through the window from time to time,
evidently on the watch to see the visitor depart. Would she recognize Johanna? She had stayed
some weeks in Guernsey; and Johanna was a fine, stately-looking woman, noticeable among strangers.
I must do something to get her away from her post of observation.

"Mrs. Foster," I said, and her eyes sparkled at the sound of her name, "I should be exceedingly
obliged to you if you will give me another sight of those papers you showed to me the last
time I was here."

She was away for a few minutes, and I heard the cab drive off before she returned. That was
the chief point gained. When the papers were in my hand, I just glanced at them, and that was all.

"Have you any idea where they came from?" I asked.

"There is the London post-mark on the envelop," answered Foster.--"Show it to him, Carry. There
is nothing to be learned from that."

"No," I said, comparing the handwriting on the envelop with the letter, and finding them the
same. "Well, good-by! I cannot often pay you as long a visit as this."

I hurried off quickly to the corner of Dawson Street, where Johanna was waiting for me. She
looked exceedingly contented when I took my seat beside her in the cab.

"Well, Martin," she said, "you need suffer no more anxiety. Olivia has gone as English teacher
in an excellent French school, where the lady is thoroughly acquainted with English ways and
comforts. This is the prospectus of the establishment. You see there are 'extensive grounds
for recreation, and the comforts of a cheerfully happy home, the domestic arrangements being
on a thoroughly liberal scale.' Here is also a photographic view of the place: a charming villa,
you see, in the best French style. The lady's husband is an avocat; and every thing is taught
by professors--cosmography and pedagogy, and other studies of which we never heard when I was
a girl. Olivia is to stay there twelve months, and in return for her services will take lessons
from any professors attending the establishment. Your mind may be quite at ease now."

"But where is the place?" I inquired.

"Oh! it is in Normandy--Noireau," she said--"quite out of the range of railways and tourists.
There will be no danger of any one finding her out there; and you know she has changed her
name altogether this time."

"Did you discover that Olivia and Ellen Martineau are the same persons?" I asked.

An expression of bewilderment and consternation came across her contented face.

"No, I did not," she answered; "I thought you were sure of that."

But I was not sure of it; neither could Jack be sure. He puzzled himself in trying to give
a satisfactory description of his Ellen Martineau; but every answer he gave to my eager questions
plunged us into greater uncertainty. He was not sure of the color either of her hair or eyes,
and made blundering guesses at her height. The chief proof we had of Olivia's identity was
the drunken claim made upon Ellen Martineau by Foster, a month after he had received convincing
proof that she was dead. What was I to believe?

It was running too great a risk to make any further inquiries at No. 19 Bellringer Street.
Mrs. Wilkinson was the landlady of the lodging-house, and she had told Johanna that Madame
Perrier boarded with her when she was in London. But she might begin to talk to her other lodgers,
if her own curiosity were excited; and once more my desire to fathom the mystery hanging about
Olivia might plunge her into fresh difficulties, should they reach the ears of Foster or his wife.

"I must satisfy myself about her safety now," I said. "Only put yourself in my place, Jack.
How can I rest till I know more about Olivia?"

"I do put myself in your place," he answered. "What do you say to having a run down to this
place in Basse-Normandie, and seeing for yourself whether Miss Ellen Martineau is your Olivia?"

"How can I?" I asked, attempting to hang back from the suggestion. It was a busy time with
us. The season was in full roll, and our most aristocratic patients were in town. The easterly
winds were bringing in their usual harvest of bronchitis and diphtheria. If I went, Jack's
hands would be more than full. Had these things come to perplex us only two months earlier,
I could have taken a holiday with a clear conscience.

"Dad will jump at the chance of coming back for a week," replied Jack; "he is bored to death
down at Fulham. Go you must, for my sake, old fellow. You are good for nothing as long as you're
so down in the mouth. I shall be glad to be rid of you."

We shook hands upon that, as warmly as if he had paid me the most flattering compliments.

CHAPTER THE FORTY-SECOND.

NOIREAU

In this way it came to pass that two evenings later I was crossing the Channel to Havre, and
found myself about five o'clock in the afternoon of the next day at Falaise. It was the terminus
of the railway in that direction; and a very ancient conveyance, bearing the name of La Petite
Vitesse, was in waiting to carry on any travellers who were venturesome enough to explore the
regions beyond. There was space inside for six passengers, but it smelt too musty, and was
too full of the fumes of bad tobacco, for me; and I very much preferred sitting beside the
driver, a red-faced, smooth-cheeked Norman, habited in a blue blouse, who could crack his long
whip with almost the skill of a Parisian omnibus-driver. We were friends in a trice, for my
patois was almost identical with his own, and he could not believe his own ears that he was
talking with an Englishman.

"La Petite Vitesse" bore out its name admirably, if it were meant to indicate exceeding slowness.
We never advanced beyond a slow trot, and at the slightest hint of rising ground the trot slackened
into a walk, and eventually subsided into a crawl. By these means the distance we traversed
was made to seem tremendous, and the drowsy jingle of the collar-bells, intimating that progress
was being accomplished, added to the delusion. But the fresh, sweet air, blowing over leagues
of fields and meadows, untainted with a breath of smoke, gave me a delicious tingling in the
veins. I had not felt such a glow of exhilaration since that bright morning when I bad crossed
the channel to Sark, to ask Olivia to become mine.

The sun sank below the distant horizon, with the trees showing clearly against it, for the
atmosphere was as transparent as crystal; and the light of the stars that came out one by one
almost cast a defined shadow upon our path, from the poplar-trees standing in long, straight
rows in the hedges. If I found Olivia at the end of that starlit path my gladness in it would
be completed. Yet if I found her, what then? I should see her for a few minutes in the dull
salon of a school perhaps with some watchful, spying Frenchwoman present. I should simply satisfy
myself that she was living. There could be nothing more between us. I dare not tell her how
dear she was to me, or ask her if she ever thought of me in her loneliness and friendlessness.
I began to wish that I had brought Johanna with me, who could have taken her in her arms, and
kissed and comforted her. Why had I not thought of that before?

As we proceeded at our delusive pace along the last stage of our journey, I began to sound
the driver, cautiously wheeling about the object of my excursion into those remote regions.
I had tramped through Normandy and Brittany three or four times, but there had been no inducement
to visit Noireau, which resembled a Lancashire cotton-town, and I had never been there.

"There are not many English at Noireau?" I remarked, suggestively.

"Not one," he replied--"not one at this moment. There was one little English mam'zelle--peste!--a
very pretty little English girl, who was voyaging precisely like you, m'sieur, some months
ago. There was a little child with her, and the two were quite alone. They are very intrepid,
are the English mam'zelles. She did not know a word of our language. But that was droll, m'sieur!
A French demoiselle would never voyage like that."

The little child puzzled me. Yet I could not help fancying that this young Englishwoman travelling
alone, with no knowledge of French, must be my Olivia. At any rate it could be no other than
Miss Ellen Martineau.

"Where was she going to?" I asked.

"She came to Noireau to be an instructress in an establishment," answered the driver, in a
tone of great enjoyment--"an establishment founded by the wife of Monsieur Emile Perrier, the
avocat! He! he! he! Mon Dieu! how droll that was, m'sieur! An avocat! So they believed that
in England? Bah! Emile Perrier an avocat--mon Dieu!"

"But what is there to laugh at?" I asked, as the man's laughter rang through the quiet night.

"Am I an avocat?" he inquired derisively, "am I a proprietor? am I even a curé? Pardon, m'sieur,
but I am just as much avocat, proprietor, curé, as Emile Perrier. He was an impostor. He became
bankrupt; he and his wife ran away to save themselves; the establishment was broken up. It
was a bubble, m'sieur, and it burst comme ça."

My driver clapped his hands together lightly, as though Monsieur Perrier's bubble needed very
little pressure to disperse it.

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed, "but what became of Oli--of the young English lady, and the child?"

"Ah, m'sieur!" he said, "I do not know. I do not live in Noireau, but I pass to and fro from
Falaise in La Petite Vitesse. She has not returned in my omnibus, that is all I know. But she
could go to Granville, or to Caen. There are other omnibuses, you see. Somebody will tell you
down there."

For three or four miles before us there lay a road as straight as a rule, ending in a small
cluster of lights glimmering in the bottom of a valley, into which we were descending with
great precaution on the part of the driver and his team. That was Noireau. But already my exhilaration
was exchanged for profound anxiety. I extorted from the Norman all the information he possessed
concerning the bankrupt; it was not much, and it only served to heighten my solicitude.

It was nearly eleven o'clock before we entered the town; but I learned a few more particulars
from the middle-aged woman in the omnibus bureau. She recollected the name of Miss Ellen Martineau,
and her arrival; and she described her with the accuracy and faithfulness of a woman. If she
were not Olivia herself, she must be her very counterpart. But who was the child, a girl of
nine or ten years of age, who had accompanied her? It was too late to learn any more about
them. The landlady of the hotel confirmed all I had heard, and added several items of information.
Monsieur Perrier and his wife had imposed upon several English families, and had succeeded
in getting dozens of English pupils, so she assured me, who had been scattered over the country,
Heaven only knew where, when the school was broken up, about a month ago.

I started out early the next morning to find the Rue de Grâce, where the inscription on my
photographic view of the premises represented them as situated. The town was in the condition
of a provincial town in England about a century ago. The streets were as dirty as the total
absence of drains and scavengers could make them, and the cleanest path was up the kennel in
the centre. The filth of the houses was washed down into them by pipes, with little cisterns
at each story, and under almost every window. There were many improprieties, and some indecencies,
shocking to English sensibilities. In the Rue de Grâce I saw two nuns in their hoods and veils,
unloading a cart full of manure. A ladies' school for English people in a town like this seemed
ridiculous.

There was no difficulty in finding the houses in my photographic view. There were two of them,
one standing in the street, the other lying back beyond a very pleasant garden. A Frenchman
was pacing up and down the broad gravel-path which connected them, smoking a cigar, and examining
critically the vines growing against the walls. Two little children were gambolling about in
close white caps, and with frocks down to their heels. Upon seeing me, he took his cigar from
his lips with two fingers of one hand, and lifted his hat with the other. I returned the salutation
with a politeness as ceremonious as his own.

"Monsieur is an Englishman?" he said, in a doubtful tone.

"From the Channel Islands," I replied.

"Ah! you belong to us," he said, "but you are hybrid, half English, half French; a fine race.
I also have English blood in my veins."

I paid monsieur a compliment upon the result of the admixture of blood in his own instance,
and then proceeded to unfold my object in visiting him.

"Ah!" he said, "yes, yes, yes; Perrier was an impostor. These houses are mine, monsieur. I
live in the front, yonder; my daughter and son-in-law occupy the other. We had the photographs
taken for our own pleasure, but Perrier must have bought them from the artist, no doubt. I
have a small cottage at the back of my house; voilà, monsieur! there it is. Perrier rented
it from me for two hundred francs a year. I permitted him to pass along this walk, and through
our coach-house into a passage which leads to the street where madame had her school. Permit
me, and I will show it to you."

He led me through a shed, and along a dirty, vaulted passage, into a mean street at the back.
A small, miserable-looking house stood in it, shut up, with broken persiennes covering the
windows. My heart sank at the idea of Olivia living here, in such discomfort, and neglect,
and sordid poverty.

"Did you ever see a young English lady here, monsieur?" I asked; "she arrived about the beginning
of last November."

"But yes, certainly, monsieur," he replied, "a charming English demoiselle! One must have been
blind not to observe her. A face sweet and gracieuse; with hair of gold, but a little more
sombre. Yes, yes! The ladies might not admire her, but we others--"

He laughed, and shrugged his shoulders in a detestable manner.

"What height was she, monsieur?" I inquired.

"A just height," he answered, "not tall like a camel, nor too short like a monkey. She would
stand an inch or two above your shoulder, monsieur."

It could be no other than my Olivia! She had been living here, then, in this miserable place,
only a month ago; but where could she be now? How was I to find any trace of her?

"I will make some inquiries from my daughter," said the Frenchman; "when the establishment
was broken up I was ill with the fever, monsieur. We have fever often here. But she will know--I
will ask her."

He returned to me after some time, with the information that the English demoiselle had been
seen in the house of a woman who sold milk, Mademoiselle Rosalie by name; and he volunteered
to accompany me to her dwelling.

It was a poor-looking house, of one room only, in the same street as the school; but we found
no one there except an old woman, exceedingly deaf, who told us, after much difficulty in making
her understand our object, that Mademoiselle Rosalie was gone somewhere to nurse a relative,
who was dangerously ill. She had not had any cows of her own, and she had easily disposed of
her small business to this old woman and her daughter. Did the messieurs want any milk for
their families? No. Well, then, she could not tell us any thing more about Mam'zelle Rosalie;
and she knew nothing of an Englishwoman and a little girl.

I turned away baffled and discouraged; but my new friend was not so quickly depressed. It was
impossible, he maintained, that the English girl and the child could have left the town unnoticed.
He went with me to all the omnibus bureaus, where we made urgent inquiries concerning the passengers
who had quitted Noireau during the last month. No places had been taken for Miss Ellen Martineau
and the child, for there was no such name in any of the books. But at each bureau I was recommended
to see the drivers upon their return in the evening; and I was compelled to give up the pursuit
for that day.

CHAPTER THE FORTY-THIRD.

A SECOND PURSUER.

No wonder there was fever in the town, I thought, as I picked my way among the heaps of garbage
and refuse lying out in the streets. The most hideous old women I ever saw, wrinkled over every
inch of their skin, blear-eyed, and with eyelids reddened by smoke, met me at each turn. Sallow
weavers, in white caps, gazed out at me from their looms in almost every house. There was scarcely
a child to be seen about. The whole district, undrained and unhealthy, bears the name of the
"Manufactory of Little Angels," from the number of children who die there. And this was the
place where Olivia had been spending a very hard and severe winter!

There was going to be a large cattle-fair the next day, and all the town was alive. Every inn
in the place was crowded to overflowing. As I sat at the window of my café, watching the picturesque
groups which formed in the street outside, I heard a vehement altercation going on in the archway,
under which was the entrance to my hotel.

"Grands Dieux!" cried the already familiar voice of my landlady, shrill as the cackling of
a hen--"grands Dieux! not a single soul from Ville-en-bois can rest here, neither man nor woman!
They have the fever like a pest there. No, no, m'sieur, that is impossible; go away, you and
your beast. There is room at the Lion d'or. But the gensdarmes should not let you enter the
town. We have fever enough of our own."

"But my farm is a league from Ville-en-bois," was the answer, in the slow, rugged accents of
a Norman peasant.

"But I tell you it is impossible,'" she retorted; "I have an Englishman here, very rich, a
milor, and he will not hear of any person from Ville-en-bois resting in the house. Go away
to the Lion d'or, my good friend, where there are no English. They are as afraid of the fever
as of the devil."

I laughed to myself at my landlady's ingenious excuses; but after this the conversation fell
into a lower key, and I heard no more of it.

I went out late in the evening to question each of the omnibus--drivers, but in vain. Whether
they were too busy to give me proper attention, or too anxious to join the stir and mirth of
the townspeople, they all declared they knew nothing of any Englishwoman. As I returned dejectedly
to my inn, I heard a lamentable voice, evidently English, bemoaning in doubtful French. The
omnibus from Falaise had just come in, and under the lamp in the entrance of the archway stood
a lady before my hostess, who was volubly asserting that there was no room left in her house.
I hastened to the assistance of my countrywoman, and the light of the lamp falling full upon
her face revealed to me who she was.

"Mrs. Foster!" I exclaimed, almost shouting her name in my astonishment. She looked ready to
faint with fatigue and dismay, and she laid her hand heavily on my arm, as if to save herself
from sinking to the ground.

"Have you found her?" she asked, involuntarily.

"Not a trace of her," I answered.

Mrs. Foster broke into an hysterical laugh, which was very quickly followed by sobs. I had
no great difficulty in persuading the landlady to find some accommodation for her, and then
I retired to my own room to smoke in peace, and turn over the extraordinary meeting which had
been the last incident of the day.

It required very little keenness to come to the conclusion that the Fosters had obtained their
information concerning Miss Ellen Martineau, where we had got ours, from Mrs. Wilkinson. Also
that Mrs. Foster had lost no time in following up the clew, for she was only twenty-four hours
behind me. She had looked thoroughly astonished and dismayed when she saw me there; so she
had had no idea that I was on the same track. But nothing could be more convincing than this
journey of hers that neither she nor Foster really believed in Olivia's death. That was as
clear as day. But what explanation could I give to myself of those letters, of Olivia's above
all? Was it possible that she had caused them to be written, and sent to her husband? I could
not even admit such a question, without a sharp sense of disappointment in her.

I saw Mrs. Foster early in the morning, somewhat as a truce-bearer may meet another on neutral
ground. She was grateful to me for my interposition in her behalf the night before; and, as
I knew Ellen Martineau to be safely out of the way, I was inclined to be tolerant toward her.
I assured her, upon my honor, that I had failed in discovering any trace of Olivia in Noireau,
and I told her all I had learned about the bankruptcy of Monsieur Perrier, and the scattering
of the school.

"But why should you undertake such a chase?" I asked; "if you and Foster are satisfied that
Olivia is dead, why should you be running after Ellen Martineau? You show me the papers which
seem to prove her death, and now I find you in this remote part of Normandy, evidently in pursuit
of her. What does this mean?"

"You are doing the same thing yourself," she answered.

"Yes," I replied, "because I am not satisfied. But you have proved your conviction by becoming
Richard Foster's second wife."

"That is the very point," she said, shedding a few tears; "as soon as ever Mrs. Wilkinson described
Ellen Martineau to me, when she was talking about her visitor who had come to inquire after
her, in that cab which was standing at the door the last time you visited Mr. Foster--and I
had no suspicion of it--I grew quite frightened lest he should ever be charged with marrying
me while she was alive. So I persuaded him to let me come here and make sure of it, though
the journey costs a great deal, and we have very little money to spare. We did not know what
tricks Olivia might do, and it made me very miserable to think she might be still alive, and
I in her place."

I could not but acknowledge to myself that there was some reason in Mrs. Foster's statement
of the case.

"There is not the slightest chance of your finding her," I remarked.

"Isn't there?" she asked, with an evil gleam in her eyes, which I just caught before she hid
her face again in her handkerchief.

"At any rate," I said, "you would have no power over her if you found her. You could not take
her back with you by force. I do not know how the French laws would regard Foster's authority,
but you can have none whatever, and he is quite unfit to take this long journey to claim her.
Really I do not see what you can do; and I should think your wisest plan would be to go back
and take care of him, leaving her alone. I am here to protect her, and I shall stay until I
see you fairly out of the place."

She did not speak again for some minutes, but she was evidently reflecting upon what I had
just said.

"But what are we to live upon?" she asked at last; "there is her money lying in the bank, and
neither she nor Richard can touch it. It must be paid to her personally or to her order; and
she cannot prove her identity herself without the papers Richard holds. It is aggravating.
I am at my wits' end about it."

"Listen to me," I said. "Why cannot we come to some arrangement, supposing Ellen Martineau
proves to be Olivia? It would be better for you all to make some division of her property by
mutual agreement. You know best whether Olivia could insist upon a judicial separation. But
in any other case why should not Foster agree to receive half her income, and leave her free,
as free as she can be, with the other half? Surely some mutual agreement could be made."

"He would never do it!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands round her knees, and swaying to and
fro passionately; "he never loses any power. She belongs to him, and he never gives up any
thing. He would torment her almost to death, but he would never let her go free. No, no. You
do not know him, Dr. Martin."

"Then we will try to get a divorce," I said, looking at her steadily.

"On what grounds?" she asked, looking at me as steadily.

I could not and would not enter into the question with her.

"There has been no personal cruelty on Richard's part toward her," she resumed, with a half-smile.
"It's true I locked her up for a few days once, but he was in Paris, and had nothing to do
with it. You could not prove a single act of cruelty toward her."

Still I did not answer, though she paused and regarded me keenly.

"We were not married till we had reason to believe her dead," she continued; "there is no harm
in that. If she has forged those papers, she is to blame. We were married openly, in our parish
church; what could be said against that?"

"Let us return to what I told you at first," I said; "if you find Olivia, you have no more
authority over her than I have. You will be obliged to return to England alone; and I shall
place her in some safe custody. I shall ascertain precisely how the law stands, both, here
and in England. Now I advise you, for Foster's sake, make as much haste home as you can; for
he will be left without nurse or doctor while we two are away."

She sat gnawing her under lip for some minutes, and looking as vicious as Madam was wont to
do in her worst tempers.

"You will let me make some inquiries to satisfy myself?" she said.

"Certainly," I replied; "you will only discover, as I have, that the school was broken up a
month ago, and Ellen Martineau has disappeared."

I kept no very strict watch over her during the day, for I felt sure she would find no trace
of Olivia in Noireau. At night I saw her again. She was worn out and despondent, and declared
herself quite ready to return to Falaise by the omnibus at five o'clock in the morning. I saw
her off, and gave the driver a fee, to bring me word for what town she took her ticket at the
railway-station. When he returned in the evening, he told me he had himself bought her one
for Honfleur, and started her fairly on her way home.

As for myself, I had spent the day in making inquiries at the offices of the octrois--those
local custom-houses which stand at every entrance into a town or village in France, for the
gathering of trifling, vexatious taxes upon articles of food and merchandise. At one of these
I had learned, that, three or four weeks ago, a young Englishwoman with a little girl had passed
by on foot, each carrying a small bundle, which had not been examined. It was the octroi on
the road to Granville, which was between thirty and forty miles away. From Granville was the
nearest route to the Channel Islands. Was it not possible that Olivia had resolved to seek
refuge there again? Perhaps to seek me! My heart, bowed down by the sad picture of her and
the little child leaving the town on foot, beat high again at the thought of Olivia in Guernsey.

I set off for Granville by the omnibus next morning, and made further inquiries at every village
we passed through, whether any thing had been seen of a young Englishwoman and a little girl.
At first the answer was yes; then it became a matter of doubt; at last everywhere they replied
by a discouraging no. At one point of our journey we passed a dilapidated sign-post with a
rude, black figure of the Virgin hanging below it. I could just decipher upon one finger of
the post, in half-obliterated letters, "Ville-en-bois." It recurred to me that this was the
place where fever was raging like the pest.

"It is a poor place," said the driver, disparagingly; "there is nothing there but the fever,
and a good angel of a curé, who is the only doctor into the bargain. It is two leagues and
a kilometre, and it is on the road to nowhere."

I could not stop in my quest to turn aside, and visit this village smitten with fever, though
I felt a strong inclination to do so. At Granville I learned that a young lady and a child
had made the voyage to Jersey a short time before; and I went on with stronger hope. But in
Jersey I could obtain no further information about her; nor in Guernsey, whither I felt sure
Olivia would certainly have proceeded. I took one day more to cross over to Sark, and consult
Tardif; but he knew no more than I did. He absolutely refused to believe that Olivia was dead.

"In August," he said, "I shall hear from her. Take courage and comfort. She promised it, and
she will keep her promise. If she had known herself to be dying, she would have sent me word."

"It is a long time to wait," I said, with an utter sinking of spirit.

"It is a long time to wait!" he echoed, lifting up his hands, and letting them fall again with
a gesture of weariness; "but we must wait and hope."

To wait in impatience, and to hope at times, and despair at times, I returned to London.

CHAPTER THE FORTY-FOURTH.

THE LAW OF MARRIAGE.

One of my first proceedings, after my return, was to ascertain how the English law stood with
regard to Olivia's position. Fortunately for me, one of Dr. Senior's oldest friends was a lawyer
of great repute, and he discussed the question with me after a dinner at his house at Fulham.

"There seems to be no proof against the husband of any kind," he said, after I had told him all.

"Why!" I exclaimed, "here you have a girl, brought up in luxury and wealth, willing to brave
any poverty rather than continue to live with him."

"A girl's whim," he said; "mania, perhaps. Is there insanity in her family?"

"She is as sane as I am," I answered. "Is there no law to protect a wife against the companionship
of such a woman as this second Mrs. Foster?"

"The husband introduces her as his cousin," he rejoined, "and places her in some little authority
on the plea that his wife is too young to be left alone safely in Continental hotels. There
is no reasonable objection to be taken to that."

"Then Foster could compel her to return to him?" I said.

"As far as I see into the case, he certainly could," was the answer, which drove me nearly frantic.

"But there is this second marriage," I objected.

"There lies the kernel of the case," he said, daintily peeling his walnuts. "You tell me there
are papers, which you believe to be forgeries, purporting to be the medical certificate, with
corroborative proof of her death. Now, if the wife be guilty of framing these, the husband
will bring them against her as the grounds on which he felt free to contract his second marriage.
She has done a very foolish and a very wicked thing there."

"You think she did it?" I asked.

He smiled significantly, but without saying any thing.

"I cannot!" I cried.

"Ah! you are blind," he replied, with the same maddening smile; "but let me return. On the
other hand, if the husband has forged these papers, it would go far with me as strong presumptive
evidence against him, upon which we might go in for a divorce, not a separation merely. If
the young lady had remained with him till she had collected proof of his unfaithfulness to
her, this, with his subsequent marriage to the same person during her lifetime, would probably
have set her absolutely free."

"Divorced from him?" I said.

"Divorce," he repeated.

"But what can be done now?" I asked.

"All you can do," he answered, "is to establish your influence over this fellow, and go cautiously
to work with him. As long as the lady is in France, if she be alive, and he is too ill to go
after her, she is safe. You may convince him by degrees that it is to his interest to come
to some terms with her. A formal deed of separation might be agreed upon, and drawn up; but
even that will not perfectly secure her in the future."

I was compelled to remain satisfied with this opinion. Yet how could I be satisfied, while
Olivia, if she was still living, was wandering about homeless, and, as I feared, destitute,
in a foreign country?

I made my first call upon Foster the next evening. Mrs. Foster had been to Brook Street every
day since her return, to inquire for me, and to leave an urgent message that I should go to
Bellringer Street as soon as I was again in town. The lodging-house looked almost as wretched
as the forsaken dwelling down at Noireau, where Olivia had perhaps been living; and the stifling,
musty air inside it almost made me gasp for breath.

"So you are come back!" was Foster's greeting, as I entered the dingy room.

"Yes." I replied.

"I need not ask what success you've had," he said, sneering, 'Why so pale and wan, fond lover?'
Your trip has not agreed with you, that is plain enough. It did not agree with Carry, either,
for she came back swearing she would never go on such a wild-goose chase again. You know I
was quite opposed to her going?"

"No," I said, incredulously. The diamond ring had disappeared from his finger, and it was easy
to guess how the funds had been raised for the journey.

"Altogether opposed," he repeated. "I believe Olivia is dead. I am quite sure she has never
been under this roof with me, as Miss Ellen Martineau has been. I should have known it as surely
as ever a tiger scented its prey. Do you suppose I have no sense keen enough to tell me she
was in the very house where I was?"

"Nonsense!" I answered. His eyes glistened cruelly, and made me almost ready to spring upon
him. I could have seized him by the throat and shaken him to death, in my sudden passion of
loathing against him; but I sat quiet, and ejaculated "Nonsense!" Such power has the spirit
of the nineteenth century among civilized classes.

"Olivia is dead," he said, in a solemn tone. "I am convinced of that from another reason: through
all the misery of our marriage, I never knew her guilty of an untruth, not the smallest. She
was as true as the Gospel. Do you think you or Carry could make me believe that she would trifle
with such an awful subject as her own death? No. I would take my oath that Olivia would never
have had that letter sent, or write to me those few lines of farewell, but to let me know that
she was really dead."

His voice faltered a little, as though even he were moved by the thought of her early death.
Mrs. Foster glanced at him jealously, and he looked back at her with a provoking curve about
his lips. For the moment there was more hatred than love in the regards exchanged between them.
I saw it was useless to pursue the subject.

"Well," I said, "I came to arrange a time for Dr. Lowry to visit you with me, for the purpose
of a thorough examination. It is possible that Dr. Senior may be induced to join us, though
he has retired from practice. I am anxious for his opinion as well as Lowry's." "You really
wish to cure me?" he answered, raising his eyebrows.

"To be sure," I replied. "I can have no other object in undertaking your case. Do you imagine
it is a pleasure to me? It is possible that your death would be a greater benefit to the world
than your life, but that is no question for me to decide. Neither is it for me to consider
whether you are my friend or my enemy. There is simply a life to be saved if possible; whose,
is not my business. Do you understand me?"

"I think so," he said. "I am nothing except material for you to exercise your craft upon."

"Precisely," I answered; "that and nothing more. As some writer says, 'It is a mere matter
of instinct with me. I attend you just as a Newfoundland dog saves a drowning man.'"

I went from him to Hanover Street, where I found Captain Carey, who met me with the embarrassment
and shamefacedness of a young girl. I had not yet seen them since my return from Normandy.
There was much to tell them, though they already knew that my expedition had failed, and that
it was still doubtful whether Ellen Martineau and Olivia were the same person.

Captain Carey walked along the street with me toward home. He had taken my arm in his most
confidential manner, but he did not open his lips till we reached Brook Street.

"Martin," he said, "I've turned it over in my own mind, and I agree with Tardif. Olivia is
no more dead than you or me. We shall find out all about it in August, if not before. Cheer
up, my boy! I tell you what: Julia and I will wait till we are sure about Olivia."

"No, no," I interrupted; "you and Julia have nothing to do with it. It was three months after those cruel blows fell upon her loving heart
before she spoke and feebly called them by their names.

And not until a month later was she able to write a few lines to
quiet the anxiety of Madame and the Signor.

A few days before her last ghostly visit to Magnolia Lawn, she had written them a very joyful letter,
telling them of Gerald's preparations to acknowledge her as his wife,
and make her the mistress of his beautiful home.

They received the tidings with great joy, and answered with hearty
congratulations.

The Signor was impatient to write to Mr. King; but Madame, who had learned precaution and
management by the trials and disappointments of a changing life, thought it best to wait till
they could inform him of the actual fact. As Rosa had never been in the habit of writing oftener
than once in four or five weeks, they felt no uneasiness until after
that time had elapsed; and even then they said to each other, "She
delays writing, as we do, until everything is arranged."

But when seven or eight weeks had passed, Madame wrote again, requesting
an immediate answer.

Owing to the peculiar position of the sisters, letters to them had
always been sent under cover to Mr. Fitzgerald; and when this letter
arrived, he was naturally curious to ascertain whether Madame was
aware of his marriage.

It so happened that it had not been announced in the only paper taken by the Signor; and as they
lived in a little foreign world of their own, they remained in ignorance
of it.

Having read the letter, Mr. Fitzgerald thought, as Rosa was not in a condition to read it, it
had better be committed to the flames. But fearing that Madame or the Signor might come to
Savannah in search of tidings, and that some unlucky accident might bring them to speech of his
bride, he concluded it was best to ward off such a contingency.
 Only once before had I watched the conflict
between disease and its remedy with so intense an interest.

It was a day or two after our consultation that I came accidentally upon the little note-book
which I had kept in Guernsey--a private note-book, accessible only to myself. It was night;
Jack, as usual, was gone out, and I was alone. I turned over the leaves merely for listless
want of occupation. All at once I came upon an entry, made in connection with my mother's illness,
which recalled to me the discovery I believed I had made of a remedy for her disease, had it
only been applied in its earlier stages. It had slipped out of my mind, but now my memory leaped
upon it with irresistible force.

I must tell the whole truth, however terrible and humiliating it may be. Whether I had been
true or false to myself up to that moment I cannot say. I had taken upon myself the care, and,
if possible, the cure of this man, who was my enemy, if I had an enemy in the world. His life
and mine could not run parallel without great grief and hurt to me, and to one dearer than
myself. Now that a better chance was thrust upon me in his favor, I shrank from seizing it
with unutterable reluctance. I turned heart-sick at the thought of it. I tried my utmost to
shake off the grip of my memory. Was it possible that, in the core of my heart, I wished this
man to die?

Yes, I wished him to die. Conscience flashed the answer across the inner depths of my soul,
as a glare of lightning over the sharp crags and cruel waves of our island in a midnight storm.
I saw with terrible distinctness that there had been lurking within a sure sense of satisfaction
in the certainty that he must die. I had suspected nothing of it till that moment. When I told
him it was the instinct of a physician to save his patient, I spoke the truth. But I found
something within me deeper than instinct, that was wailing and watching for the fatal issue
of his malady, with a tranquil security so profound that it never stirred the surface of my
consciousness, or lifted up its ghostly face to the light of conscience.

I took up my note-book, and went away to my room, lest Jack should come in suddenly, and read
my secret on my face. I thrust the book into a drawer in my desk, and locked it away out of
my sight. What need had I to trouble myself with it or its contents? I found a book, one of
Charles Dickens's most amusing stories, and set myself resolutely to read it; laughing aloud
at its drolleries, and reading faster and faster; while all the time thoughts came crowding
into my mind of my mother's pale, worn face, and the pains she suffered, and the remedy found
out too late. These images grew so strong at last that my eyes ran over the sentences mechanically,
but my brain refused to take in the meaning of them. I threw the book from me; and, leaning
my head on my hands, I let all the waves of that sorrowful memory flow over me.

How strong they were! how persistent! I could hear the tones of her languid voice, and see
the light lingering to the last in her dim eyes, whenever they met mine. A shudder crept through
me as I recollected how she travelled that dolorous road, slowly, day by day, down to the grave.
Other feet were beginning to tread the same painful journey; but there was yet time to stay
them, and the power to do it was intrusted to me. What was I to do with my power?

It seemed cruel that this power should come to me from my mother's death. If she were living
still, or if she had died from any other cause, the discovery of this remedy would never have
been made by me. And I was to take it as a sort of miraculous gift, purchased by her pangs,
and bestow it upon the only man I hated. For I hated him; I said so to myself, muttering the
words between my teeth.

What was the value of his life, that I should ransom it by such a sacrifice? A mean, selfish,
dissipated life--a life that would be Olivia's curse as long as it lasted. For an instant a
vision stood out clear before me, and made my heart beat fast, of Olivia free, as she must
be in the space of a few months, should I leave the disease to take its course; free and happy,
disenthralled from the most galling of all bondage. Could I not win her then? She knew already
that I loved her; would she not soon learn to love me in return? If Olivia were living, what
an irreparable injury it would be to her for this man to recover!

That seemed to settle the question. I could not be the one to doom her to a continuation of
the misery she was enduring. It was irrational and over-scrupulous of my conscience to demand
such a thing from me. I would use all the means practised in the ordinary course of treatment
to render the recovery of my patient possible, and so fulfil my duty. I would carefully follow
all Dr. Senior's suggestions. He was an experienced and very skilful physician; I could not
do better than submit my judgment to his.

Besides, how did I know that this fancied discovery of mine was of the least value? I had never
had a chance of making experiment of it, and no doubt it was an idle chimera of my brain, when
it was overwrought by anxiety for my mother's sake. I had not hitherto thought enough of it
to ask the opinion of any of my medical friends and colleagues. Why should I attach any importance
to it now? Let it rest. Not a soul knew of it but myself. I had a perfect right to keep or
destroy my own notes. Suppose I destroyed that one at once?

I unlocked the desk, and took out my book again. The leaf on which these special notes were
written was already loose, and might have been easily lost at any time, I thought. I burned
it by the flame of the gas, and threw the brown ashes into the grate. For a few minutes I felt
elated, as if set free from an oppressive burden; and I returned to the story I had been reading,
and laughed more heartily than before at the grotesque turn of the incidents. But before long
the tormenting question came up again. The notes were not lost. They seemed now to be burned
in upon my brain.

The power has been put into your hands to save life, said my conscience, and you are resolving
to let it perish. What have you to do with the fact that the nature is mean, selfish, cruel?
It is the physical life simply that you have to deal with. What is beyond that rests in the
hands of God. What He is about to do with this soul is no question for you. Your office pledges
you to cure him if you can, and the fulfilment of this duty is required of you. If you let
this man die, you are a murderer.

But, I said in answer to myself, consider what trivial chances the whole thing has hung upon.
Besides the accident that this was my mother's malady, there was the chance of Lowry not being
called from home. The man was his patient, not mine. After that there was the chance of Jack
going to see him, instead of me; or of him refusing my attendance. If the chain had broken
at one of these links, no responsibility could have fallen upon me. He would have died, and
all the good results of his death would have followed naturally. Let it rest at that.

But it could not rest at that. I fought a battle with myself all through the quiet night, motionless
and in silence, lest Jack should become aware that I was not sleeping. How should I ever face
him, or grasp his hearty hand again, with such a secret weight upon my soul? Yet how could
I resolve to save Foster at the cost of dooming Olivia to a life-long bondage should he discover
where she was, or to life-long poverty should she remain concealed? If I were only sure that
she was alive! But if she were dead--why, then all motive for keeping back this chance of saving
him would be taken away. It was for her sake merely that I hesitated.

For her sake, but for my own as well, said my conscience; for the subtle hope, which had taken
deeper root day by day, that by-and-by the only obstacle between us would be removed. Suppose
then that he was dead, and Olivia was free to love me, to become my wife. Would not her very
closeness to me be a reproving presence forever at my side? Could I ever recall the days before
our marriage, as men recall them when they are growing gray and wrinkled, as a happy golden
time? Would there not always be a haunting sense of perfidy, and disloyalty to duty, standing
between me and her clear truth and singleness of heart? There could be no happiness for me,
even with Olivia, my cherished and honored wife, if I had this weight and cloud resting upon
my conscience.

The morning dawned before I could decide. The decision, when made, brought no feeling of relief
or triumph to me. As soon as it was probable that Dr. Senior could see me; I was at his house
at Fulham; and in rapid, almost incoherent words laid what I believed to be my important discovery
before him. He sat thinking for some time, running over in his own mind such cases as had come
under his own observation. After a while a gleam of pleasure passed over his face, and his
eyes brightened as he looked at me.

"I congratulate you, Martin," he said, "though I wish Jack had hit upon this. I believe it
will prove a real benefit to our science. Let me turn it over a little longer, and consult
some of my colleagues about it. But I think you are right. You are about to try it on poor Foster?"

"Yes," I answered, with a chilly sensation in my veins, the natural reaction upon the excitement
of the past night.

"It can do him no harm," he said, "and in my opinion it will prolong his life to old age, if
he is careful of himself. I will write a paper on the subject for the Lancet, if you will allow
me."

"With all my heart," I said sadly.

The old physician regarded me for a minute with his keen eyes, which had looked through the
window of disease into many a human soul. I shrank from the scrutiny, but I need not have done
so. He grasped my hand firmly and closely in his own.

"God bless you, Martin!" he said, "God bless you!"

CHAPTER THE FORTY-SIXTH.

A DEED OF SEPARATION.

That keen, benevolent glance of Dr. Senior's was like a gleam of sunlight piercing through
the deepest recesses of my troubled spirit. I felt that I was no longer fighting my fight out
alone. A friendly eye was upon me; a friendly voice was cheering me on. "The dead shall look
me through and through," says Tennyson. For my part I should wish for a good, wise man to look
me through and through; feel the pulse of my soul from time to time, when it was ailing, and
detect what was there contrary to reason and to right. Dr. Senior's hearty "God bless you!"
brought strength and blessing with it.

I went straight from Fulham to Bellringer Street. A sensation of faintness came over her; and,
holding on by the chairs and tables, she staggered back to the bed she had left.

Before the babe was a fortnight old, Tom announced that he was to
accompany his master to New Orleans, whither he had been summoned
by business.

The occasion was eagerly seized by Rosa to send a letter and some small articles to Madame and the Signor.
Tulee gave him very particular directions how to find the house, and charged him over and over
again to tell them everything. I followed her to Foster's bedroom, a small close attic at the back, with a cheerless
view of chimneys and the roofs of houses. There was no means of ventilation, except by opening
a window near the head of the bed, when the draught of cold air would blow full upon him. He
looked exceedingly worn and wan. The doubt crossed me, whether the disease had not made more
progress than we supposed. His face fell as he saw the expression upon mine.

"Worse, eh?" he said; "don't say I am worse."

I sat down beside him, and told him what I believed to be his chance of life; not concealing
from him that I proposed to try, if he gave his consent, a mode of treatment which had never
been practised before. His eye, keen and sharp as that of a lynx, seemed to read my thoughts
as Dr. Senior's had done.

"Martin Dobrée," he said, in a voice so different from his ordinary caustic tone that it almost
startled me, "I can trust you. I put myself with implicit confidence into your hands."

The last chance--dare I say the last hope?--was gone. I stood pledged on my honor as a physician,
to employ this discovery, which had been laid open to me by my mother's fatal illness, for
the benefit of the man whose life was most harmful to Olivia and myself. I felt suffocated,
stifled. I opened the window for a minute or two, and leaned through it to catch the fresh
breath of the outer air.

"I must tell you," I said, when I drew my head in again, "that you must not expect to regain
your health and strength so completely as to be able to return to your old dissipations. You
must make up your mind to lead a regular, quiet, abstemious life, avoiding all excitement.
Nine months out of the twelve at least, if not the whole year, you must spend in the country
for the sake of fresh air. A life in town would kill you in six months. But if you are careful
of yourself you may live to sixty or seventy."

"Life at any price!" he answered, in his old accents, "yet you put it in a dreary light before
me. It hardly seems worth while to buy such an existence, especially with that wife of mine
downstairs, who cannot endure the country, and is only a companion for a town-life. Now, if
it had been Olivia--you could imagine life in the country endurable with Olivia?"

What could I answer to such a question, which ran through me like an electric shock? A brilliant
phantasmagoria flashed across my brain--a house in Guernsey with Olivia in it--sunshine--flowers--the
singing of birds--the music of the sea--the pure, exhilarating atmosphere. It had vanished
into a dead blank before I opened my mouth, though probably a moment's silence had not intervened.
Foster's lips were curled into a mocking smile.

"There would be more chance for you now," I said, "if you could have better air than this."

"How can I?" he asked.

"Be frank with me," I answered, "and tell me what your means are. It would be worth your while
to spend your last farthing upon this chance."

"Is it not enough to make a man mad," he said, "to know there are thousands lying in the bank
in his wife's name, and he cannot touch a penny of it? It is life itself to me; yet I may die
like a dog in this hole for the want of it. My death will lie at Olivia's door, curse her!"

He fell back upon his pillows, with a groan as heavy and deep as ever came from the heart of
a wretch perishing from sheer want. I could not choose but feel some pity for him; but this
was an opportunity I must not miss.

"It is of no use to curse her," I said; "come, Foster, let us talk over this matter quietly
and reasonably. If Olivia be alive, as I cannot help hoping she is, your wisest course would
be to come to some mutual agreement, which-would release you both from your present difficulties;
for you must recollect she is as penniless as yourself. Let me speak to you as if I were her
brother. Of this one thing you may be quite certain, she will never consent to return to you;
and in that I will aid her to the utmost of my power. But there is no reason why you should
not have a good share of the property, which she would gladly relinquish on condition that
you left her alone. Now just listen carefully. I think there would be small difficulty, if
we set about it, in proving that you were guilty against her with your present wife; and in
that case she could claim a divorce absolutely, and her property would remain her own. Your
second marriage with the same person would set her free from you altogether."

"You could prove nothing." he replied, fiercely, "and my second marriage is covered by the
documents I could produce."

"Which are forged," I said, calmly; "we will find out by whom. You are in a net of your own
making. But we do not wish to push this question to a legal issue. Let us come to some arrangement.
Olivia will consent to any terms I agree to."

Unconsciously I was speaking as if I knew where Olivia was, and could communicate with her
when I chose. I was merely anticipating the time when Tardif felt sure of hearing from her.
Foster lay still, watching me with his cold, keen eyes.

"If those letters are forged," he said, uneasily, "it is Olivia who has forged them. But I
must consult my lawyers. I will let you know the result in a few days."

But the same evening I received a note, desiring me to go and see him immediately. I was myself
in a fever of impatience, and glad at the prospect of any settlement "of this subject, in the
hope of setting Olivia free, as far as she could be free during his lifetime. He was looking
brighter and better than in the morning, and an odd smile played now and then about his face
as he talked to me, after having desired Mrs. Foster to leave us alone together.

"Mark!" he said, "I have not the slightest reason to doubt Olivia's death, except your own
opinion to the contrary, which is founded upon reasons of which I know nothing. But, acting
on the supposition that she may be still alive, I am quite willing to enter into negotiations
with her, I suppose it must be through you."

"It must," I answered, "and it cannot be at present. You will have to wait for some months,
perhaps, while I pursue my search for her. I do not know where she is any more than you do."

A vivid gleam crossed his face at these words, but whether of incredulity or satisfaction I
could not tell.

"But suppose I die in the mean time?" he objected.

That objection was a fair and obvious one. His malady would not pause in its insidious attack
while I was seeking Olivia. I deliberated for a few minutes, endeavoring to look at a scheme
which presented itself to me from every point of view.

"I do not know that I might not leave you in your present position," I said at last; "it may
be I am acting from an over-strained sense of duty. But if you will give me a formal deed protecting
her from yourself, I am willing to advance the funds necessary to remove you to purer air,
and more open quarters than these. A deed of separation, which both of you must sign, can be
drawn up, and receive your signature. There will be no doubt as to getting hers, when we find
her. But that may be some months hence, as I said. Still I will run the risk."

"For her sake?" he said, with a sneer.

"For her sake, simply," I answered; "I will employ a lawyer to draw up the deed, and as soon
as you sign it I will advance the money you require. My treatment of your disease I shall begin
at once; that falls, under my duty as your doctor; but I warn you that fresh air and freedom
from agitation are almost, if not positively, essential to its success. The sooner you secure
these for yourself, the better your chance."

Some further conversation passed between us, as to the stipulations to be insisted upon, and
the division of the yearly income from Olivia's property, for I would not agree to her alienating
any portion of it. Foster wished to drive a hard bargain, still with that odd smile on his
face; and it was after much discussion that we came to an agreement.

I had the deed drawn up by a lawyer, who warned me that, if Foster sued for a restitution of
his rights, they would be enforced. But I hoped that when Olivia was found she would have some
evidence in her own favor, which would deter him from carrying the case into court. The deed
was signed by Foster, and left in my charge till Olivia's signature could be obtained.

As soon as the deed was secured, I had my patient removed from Bellringer Street to some apartments
in Fulham, near to Dr. Senior, whose interest in the case was now almost equal to my own. Here,
if I could not visit him every day, Dr. Senior did, while his great professional skill enabled
him to detect symptoms which might have escaped my less experienced eye. Never had any sufferer,
under the highest and wealthiest ranks, greater care and science expended upon him than Richard
Foster.

The progress of his recovery was slow, but it was sure. I felt that it would be so from the
first. Day by day I watched the pallid hue of sickness upon his face changing into a more natural
tone. I saw his strength coming back by slight but steady degrees. The malady was forced to
retreat into its most hidden citadel, where it might lurk as a prisoner, but not dwell as a
destroyer, for many years to come, if Foster would yield himself to the régime of life we prescribed.
But the malady lingered there, ready to break out again openly, if its dungeon-door were set
ajar. I had given life to him, but it was his part to hold it fast.

There was no triumph to me in this, as there would have been had my patient been any one else.
The cure aroused much interest among my colleagues, and made my name more known. But what was
that to me? As long as this man lived, Olivia was doomed to a lonely and friendless life. I
tried to look into the future for her, and saw it stretch out into long, dreary years. I wondered
where she would find a home. Could I persuade Johanna to receive her into her pleasant dwelling,
which would become so lonely to her when Captain Carey had moved into Julia's house in St.
Peter-Port? That was the best plan I could form.

CHAPTER THE FORTY-SEVENTH.

A FRIENDLY, CABMAN.

Julia's marriage arrangements were going on speedily. There was something ironical to me in
the chance that made me so often the witness of them. We were so merely cousins again, that
she discussed her purchases, and displayed them before me, as if there had never been any notion
between us of keeping house together. Once more I assisted in the choice of a wedding-dress,
for the one made a year before was said to be yellow and old-fashioned. But this time Julia
did not insist upon having white satin. A dainty tint of gray was considered more suitable,
either to her own complexion or the age of the bridegroom. Captain Carey enjoyed the purchase
with the rapture I had failed to experience.

The wedding was fixed to take place the last week in July, a fortnight earlier than the time
proposed; it was also a fortnight earlier than the date I was looking forward to most anxiously,
when, if ever, news would reach Tardif from Olivia. All my plans were most carefully made,
in the event of her sending word where she was. The deed of separation, signed by Foster, was
preserved by me most cautiously, for I had a sort of haunting dread that Mrs. Foster would
endeavor to get possession of it. She was eminently sulky, and had been so ever since the signing
of the deed. Flora laughed. "To think of Mamita Lila in such costume!" exclaimed she. "The old
Contadina would make a charming picture; but a picture of the Campagna,
sleepy with purple haze, would be more like you."

"Am I then so sleepy?" inquired her friend.

"O, no, not sleepy. You know I don't mean that. But so quiet; and
always with some sort of violet or lilac cloud for a dress. But here
comes Carlina to call us to breakfast," said she, as she laid down
her crayon, and drummed the saltarello on her picture while she paused
a moment to look at it. In fact he could not very well fall back now, with common prudence and self-denial.
We impressed upon him the urgent necessity of these virtues, and required Mrs. Foster to write
us fully, three times a week, every variation she might observe in his health. After that we
started them off to a quiet village in Sussex. I breathed more freely when they were out of
my daily sphere of duty.

But before they went a hint of treachery reached me, which put me doubly on my guard. One morning,
when Jack and I were at breakfast, each deep in our papers, with an occasional comment to one
another on their contents, Simmons, the cabby, was announced, as asking to speak to one or
both of us immediately. He was a favorite with Jack, who bade the servant show him in; and
Simmons appeared, stroking his hat round and round with his hand, as if hardly knowing what
to do with his limbs off the box.

"Nothing amiss with your wife, or the brats. I hope?" said Jack.

"No, Dr. John, no," he answered, "there ain't any thing amiss with them, except being too many
of 'em p'raps, and my old woman won't own to that. But there's some thing in the wind as concerns
Dr. Dobry, so I thought I'd better come and give you a hint of it."

"Very good, Simmons," said Jack.

"You recollect taking my cab to Gray's-Inn Road about this time last year, when I showed up
so green, don't you?" he asked.

"To be sure," I said, throwing down my paper, and listening eagerly.

"Well, doctors," he continued, addressing us both, "the very last Monday as ever was, a lady
walks slowly along the stand, eying us all very hard, but taking no heed to any of 'em, till
she catches sight of me. That's not a uncommon event, doctors. My wife says there's something
about me as gives confidence to her sex. Anyhow, so it is, and I can't gainsay it. The lady
comes along very slowly--she looks hard at me--she nods her head, as much as to say, 'You,
and your cab, and your horse, are what I'm on the lookout for;' and I gets down, opens the
door, and sees her in quite comfortable. Says she, 'Drive me to Messrs. Scott and Brown, in
Gray's-Inn Road.'"

"No!" I ejaculated.

"Yes, doctors," replied Simmons. "'Drive me,' she says, 'to Messrs. Scott and Brown, Gray's-Inn
Road.' Of course I knew the name again; I was vexed enough the last time I were there, at showing
myself so green. I looks hard at her. A very fine make of a woman, with hair and eyes as black
as coals, and a impudent look on her face somehow. I turned it over and over again in my head,
driving her there--could there be any reason in it? or had it any thing to do with last time?
and cetera. She told me to wait for her in the street; and directly after she goes in, there
comes down the gent I had seen before, with a pen behind his ear. He looks very hard at me,
and me at him. Says he, 'I think I have seen your face before, my man.' Very civil; as civil
as a orange, as folks say. 'I think you have,' I says. 'Could you step up-stairs for a minute
or two?' says he, very polite; 'I'll find a boy to take charge of your horse.' And he slips
a arf-crown into my hand, quite pleasant."

"So you went in, of course?" said Jack.

"Doctors," he answered, solemnly, "I did go in. There's nothing to be said against that. The
lady is sitting in a orfice up-stairs, talking to another gent, with hair and eyes like hers,
as black as coals, and the same look of brass on his face. All three of 'em looked a little
under the weather. 'What's your name, my man?' asked the black gent. 'Walker,' I says. 'And
where do you live?' he says, taking me serious. 'In Queer Street,' I says, with a little wink
to show 'em I were up to a trick or two. They all three larfed a little among themselves, but
not in a pleasant sort of way. Then the gent begins again. 'My good fellow,' he says, 'we want
you to give us a little information that 'ud be of use to us, and we are willing to pay you
handsome for it. It can't do you any harm, nor nobody else, for it's only a matter of business.
You're not above taking ten shillings for a bit of useful information?' 'Not by no manner of
means.' I says."

"Go on," I said, impatiently, as Simmons paused to look as hard at us as he had done at these
people.

"Jest so doctors," he continued, "but this time I was minding my P's and Q's. 'You know Dr.
Senior, of Brook Street?' he says. 'The old doctor?' I says; 'he's retired out of town.' 'No,'
he says, 'nor the young doctor neither; but there's another of 'em isn't there?' 'Dr. Dobry?'
I says. 'Yes,' he says, 'he often takes your cab, my friend?' 'First one and then the other,'
I says, 'sometimes Dr. John and sometimes Dr. Dobry. They're as thick as brothers, and thicker.'
'Good friends of yours?' he says. 'Well,' says I, 'they take my cab when they can have it;
but there's not much friendship, as I see, in that. It's the best cab and horse on the stand,
though I say it, as shouldn't. Dr. John's pretty fair, but the other's no great favorite of
mine.' 'Ah!' he says."

Simmons's face was illuminated with delight, and he winked sportively at us.

"It were all flummery, doctors," he said; "I don't deny as Dr. John is a older friend, and
a older favorite; but that is neither here nor there. I jest see them setting a trap, and I
wanted to have a finger in it. 'Ah!' he says, 'all we want to know, but we do want to know
that very particular, is where you drive Dr. Dobry to the oftenest. He's going to borrow money
from us, and we'd like to find out something about his habits; specially where he spends his
spare time, and all that sort of thing, you understand. You know where he goes in your cab.'
'Of course I do,' I says; 'I drove him and Dr. John here nigh a twelvemonth ago. The other
gent took my number down, and knew where to look for me when you wanted me.' 'You're a clever
fellow,' he says. 'So my old woman thinks,' I says. 'And you'd be glad to earn a little more
for your old woman?' he says. 'Try me,' I says. 'Well then,' says he, 'here's a offer for you.
If you'll bring us word where he spends his spare time, we'll give you ten shillings; and if
it turns out of any use to us, well make it five pounds.' 'Very good,' I says. 'You've not
got any information to tell us at once?' he says. 'Well, no,' I says, 'but I'll keep my eye
upon him now.' 'Stop,' he says, as I were going away; 'they keep a carriage, of course?' 'Of
course,' I says; 'what's the good of a doctor that hasn't a carriage and pair?' 'Do they use
it at night?' says he. 'Not often,' says I; 'they take a cab; mine if it's on the stand.' 'Very
good,' he says; 'good-morning, my friend.' So I come away, and drives back again to the stand."

"And you left the lady there?" I asked, with no doubt in my mind that it was Mrs. Foster.

"Yes, doctor," he answered, "talking away like a poll-parrot with the black-haired gent. That
were last Monday; to-day's Friday, and this morning there comes this bit of a note to me at
our house in Dawson Street. So my old woman says. 'Jim, you'd better go and show it to Dr.
John.' That's what's brought me here at this time, doctors."

He gave the note into Jack's hands; and he, after glancing at it, passed it on to me. The contents
were simply these words: "James Simmons is requested to call at No.--Gray's-Inn Road, at 6.30
Friday evening." The handwriting struck me as one I had seen and noticed before. I scanned
it more closely for a minute or two; then a glimmering of light began to dawn upon my memory.
Could it be? I felt almost sure it was. In another minute I was persuaded that it was the same
hand as that which had written the letter announcing Olivia's death. Probably if I could see
the penmanship of the other partner, I should find it to be identical with that of the medical
certificate which had accompanied the letter.

"Leave this note with me, Simmons," I said, giving him half a crown in exchange for it. I was
satisfied now that the papers had been forged, but not with Olivia's connivance. Was Foster
himself a party to it? Or had Mrs. Foster alone, with the aid of these friends or relatives
of hers, plotted and carried out the scheme, leaving him in ignorance and doubt like my own?

CHAPTER THE FORTY-EIGHTH.

JULIA'S WEDDING.

Before the Careys and Julia returned to Guernsey, Captain Carey came to see me one evening,
at our own house in Brook Street. He seemed suffering from some embarrassment and shyness;
and I could not for some time lead him to the point he was longing to gain.

"You are quite reconciled to all this, Martin?" he said, stammering. I knew very well what
he meant.

"More than reconciled," I answered, "I am heartily glad of it. Julia will make you an excellent
wife."

"I am sure of that," he said, simply, "yet it makes me nervous a little at times to think I
may be standing in your light. I never thought what it was coming to when I tried to comfort
Julia about you, or I would have left Johanna to do it all. It is very difficult to console
a person without seeming very fond of them; and then there's the danger of them growing fond
of you. I love Julia now with all my heart: but I did not begin comforting her with that view,
and I am sure you exonerate me, Martin?"

"Quite, quite," I said, almost laughing at his contrition; "I should never have married Julia,
believe me; and I am delighted that she is going to be married, especially to an old friend
like you. I shall make your house my home."

"Do, Martin," he answered, his face brightening; "and now I am come to ask you a great favor--a
favor to us all."

"I'll do it, I promise that beforehand," I said.

"We have all set our hearts on your being my best man," he replied--"at the wedding, you know.
Johanna says nothing will convince the Guernsey people that we are all good friends except
that. It will have a queer look, but if you are there everybody will be satisfied that you
do not blame either Julia or me. I know it will be hard for you, dear Martin, because of your
poor mother, and your father being in Guernsey still; but if you can conquer that, for our
sakes, you would make us every one perfectly happy."

I had not expected them to ask this; but, when I came to think of it, it seemed very natural
and reasonable. There was no motive strong enough to make me refuse to go to Julia's wedding;
so I arranged to be with them the last week in July.

About ten days before going, I ran down to the little village on the Sussex coast to visit
Foster, from whom, or from his wife, I had received a letter regularly three times a week.
I found him as near complete health as he could ever expect to be, and I told him so; but I
impressed upon him the urgent necessity of keeping himself quiet and unexcited. He listened
with that cool, taunting sneer which had always irritated me.

"Ah! you doctors are like mothers," he said, "who try to frighten their children with bogies.
A doctor is a good crutch to lean upon when one is quite lame, but I shall be glad to dispense
with my crutch as soon as my lameness is gone."

"Very good," I replied; "you know your life is of no value to me. I have simply done my duty
by you."

"Your mother, Mrs. Dobrée, wrote to me this week." he remarked, smiling as I winced at the
utterance of that name; "she tells me there is to be a grand wedding in Guernsey; that of your
fiancée, Julia Dobrée, with Captain Carey. You are to be present, so she says."

"Yes," I replied.

"It will be a pleasure to you to revisit your native island," he said, "particularly under
such circumstances."

I took no notice of the taunt. My conversation with this man invariably led to full stops.
He said something to which silence was the best retort. I did not stay long with him, for the
train by which I was to return passed through the village in less than an hour from my arrival.
As I walked down the little street I turned round once by a sudden impulse, and saw Foster
gazing after me with his pale face and glittering eyes. Ho waved his hand in farewell to me,
and that was the last I saw of him.

Some days after this I crossed in the mail-steamer to Guernsey, on a Monday night, as the wedding
was to take place at an early hour on Wednesday morning, in time for Captain Carey and Julia
to catch the boat to England. Bis!"

The duet with Adalgisa was more difficult; for she had not yet learned
to be an actress, and she was embarrassed by the consciousness of
being an object of jealousy to the seconda donna, partly because she
was prima, and partly because the tenor preferred her. I did
not even know where I was to go. I did not like the idea of staying under Julia's roof, where
every thing would remind me of that short spell of happiness in my mother's life, when she
was preparing it for my future home. Luckily, before the steamer touched the pier, I caught
sight of Captain Carey's welcome face looking out for my appearance. He stood at the end of
the gangway, as I crossed over it with my portmanteau.

"Come along, Martin," hee said; "you are to go with me to the Vale, as my groomsman, you know.
Are all the people staring at us, do you think? I daren't look round. Just look about you for
me, my boy."

"They are staring awfully," I answered, "and there are scores of them waiting to shake hands
with us."

"Oh, they must not!" he said, earnestly; "look as if you did not see them, Martin. That's the
worst of getting married; yet most of them are married themselves, and ought to know better.
There's the dog-cart waiting for us a few yards off, if we could only get to it. I have kept
my face seaward ever since I came on the pier, with my collar turned up, and my hat over my
eyes. Are you sure they see who we are?"

"Sure!" I cried, "why, there's Carey Dobrée, and Dobrée Carey, and Brock de Jersey, and De
Jersey le Cocq, and scores of others. They know us as well as their own brothers. We shall
have to shake hands with every one of them."

"Why didn't you come in disguise?" asked Captain Carey, reproachfully; but before I could answer
I was seized upon by the nearest of our cousins, and we were whirled into a very vortex of
greetings and congratulations. It was fully a quarter of an hour before we were allowed to
drive off in the dog-cart; and Captain Carey was almost breathless with exhaustion.

"They are good fellows," he said, after a time, "very good fellows, but it is trying, isn't
it, Martin? It is as if no man was ever married before; though they have gone through it themselves,
and ought to know how one feels. Now you take it quietly, my boy, and you do not know how deeply
I feel obliged to you."

There was some reason for me to take it quietly. I could not help thinking how nearly I had
been myself in Captain Carey's position. I knew that Julia and I would have led a tranquil,
matter-of-fact, pleasant enough life together, but for the unlucky fate that had carried me
across to Sark to fall in love with Olivia. There was something enviable in the tranquil prosperity
I had forfeited. Guernsey was the dearest spot on earth to me, yet I was practically banished
from it. Julia was, beyond all doubt, the woman I loved most, next to Olivia, but she was lost
to me. There was no hope for me on the other hand. Foster was well again, and by my means.
Probably I might secure peace and comparative freedom for Olivia, but that was all. She could
never be more to me than she was now. My only prospect was that of a dreary bachelorhood; and
Captain Carey's bashful exultation made the future seem less tolerable to me.

I felt it more still when, after dinner in the cool of the summer evening, we drove lack into
town to see Julia for the last time before we met in church the next morning. There was an
air of glad excitement pervading the house. Friends were running in, with gifts and pleasant
words of congratulation. Julia herself had a peculiar modest stateliness and frank dignity,
which suited her well. She was happy and content, and her face glowed. Captain Carey's manner
was one of tender chivalry, somewhat old-fashioned. I found it a hard thing to "look at happiness
through another man's eyes."

I drove Captain Carey and Johanna home along the low, level shore which I had so often traversed
with my heart full of Olivia. It was dusk, the dusk of a summer's night; but the sea was luminous,
and Sark lay upon it a bank of silent darkness, sleeping to the music of the waves. A strong
yearning came over me, a longing to know immediately the fate of my Olivia. Would to Heaven
she could return to Sark, and be cradled there in its silent and isolated dells! Would to Heaven
this huge load of anxiety and care for her, which bowed me down, might be taken away altogether!

"A fortnight longer," I said to myself, "and Tardif will know where she is; then I can take
measures for her tranquillity and safety in the future."

It was well for me that I had slept during my passage, for I had little sleep during that night.
Twice I was aroused by the voice of Captain Carey at my door, inquiring what the London time
was, and if I could rely upon my watch not having stopped. At four o'clock he insisted upon
everybody in the house getting up. The ceremony was to be solemnized at seven, for the mail-steamer
from Jersey to England was due in Guernsey at nine, and there were no other means of quitting
the island later in the day. Under these circumstances there could be no formal wedding-breakfast,
a matter not much to be regretted. There would not be too much time, so Johanna said, for the
bride to change her wedding-dress at her own house for a suitable travelling-costume, and the
rest of the day would be our own.

Captain Carey and I were standing at the altar of the old church some minutes before the bridal
procession appeared. He looked pale, but wound up to a high pitch of resolute courage. The
church was nearly full of eager spectators, all of whom I had known from my childhood--faces
that would have crowded about me, had I been standing in the bridegroom's place. Far back,
half sheltered by a pillar, I saw the white head and handsome face of my father, with Kate
Daltrey by his side; but though the church was so full, nobody had entered the same pew. His
name had not been once mentioned in my hearing. As far as his old circle in Guernsey was concerned,
Dr. Dobrée was dead.

At length Julia appeared, pale like the bridegroom, but dignified and prepossessing. She did
not glance at me; she evidently gave no thought to me. That was well, and as it should be.
If any fancy had been lingering in my head that she still regretted somewhat the exchange she
had made, that fancy vanished forever. Julia's expression, when Captain Carey drew her hand
through his arm, and led her down the aisle to the vestry, was one of unmixed contentment.

Yet there was a pang in it--reason as I would, there was a pang in it for me. I should have
liked her to glance once at me, with a troubled and dimmed eye. I should have liked a shade
upon her face as I wrote my name below hers in the register. But there was nothing of the kind.
She gave me the kiss, which I demanded as her cousin Martin, without embarrassment, and after
that she put her hand again upon the bridegroom's arm, and marched off with him to the carriage.

A whole host of us accompanied the bridal pair to the pier, and saw them start off on their
wedding-trip, with a pyramid of bouquets before them on the deck of the steamer. We ran round
to the light-house, and waved out hats and handkerchiefs as long as they were in sight. A very
close observer would have noticed that time had slightly touched
her head; but the general effect of the wavy hair was as dark and
glossy as ever.

She had grown somewhat stouter, but that only rendered her tall figure
more majestic.



I had had some hope of running over to Sark to see Tardif, but that could not be. I was needed
too much by the party that had been left behind by Captain Carey and Julia. We tried to while
away the time by a drive round the island, and by visiting many of my old favorite haunts;
but I could not be myself.

Everybody rallied me on my want of spirits, but I found it impossible to shake off my depression.
I was glad when the day was over, and Johanna and I were left in the quiet secluded house in
the Vale, where the moan of the sea sighed softly through the night air.

"This has been a trying day for you, Martin," said Johanna.

"Yes," I answered; "though I can hardly account for my own depression. Johanna, in another
fortnight I shall learn where Olivia is. I want to find a home for her. Just think of her desolate
position! She has no friends but Tardif and me; and you know how the world would talk if I
were too openly her friend. Indeed, I do not wish her to come to live in London; the trial
would be too great for me. I could not resist the desire to see her, to speak to her--and that
would be fatal to her. Dearest Johanna, I want such a home as this for her."

Johanna made no reply, and I could not see her face in the dim moonlight which filled the room.
I knelt down beside her, to urge my petition more earnestly.

"Your name would be such a protection to her." I went on, "this house such a refuge! If my
mother were living, I would ask her to receive her. You have been almost as good to me as my
mother. Save me, save Olivia from the difficulty I see before us."

"Will you never get over this unfortunate affair?"' she asked, half angrily.

"Never!" I said; "Olivia is so dear to me that I am afraid of harming her by my love. Save
her from me, Johanna. You have it in your power. I should be happy if I knew she was here with
you. I implore you, for my mother's sake, to receive Olivia into your home."

"She shall come to me," said Johanna, after a few minutes' silence. I was satisfied, though
the consent was given with a sigh. I knew that, before long, Johanna would be profoundly attached
to my Olivia.

It was almost midnight the next day when I reached Brook Street, where I found Jack expecting
my return. He had bought, in honor of it, some cigars of special quality, over which I was
to tell him all the story of Julia's wedding. But a letter was waiting for me, directed in
queer, crabbed handwriting, and posted in Jersey a week before. It had been so long on the
road in consequence of the bad penmanship of the address. I opened it carelessly as I answered
Jack's first inquiries; but the instant I saw the signature I held up my hand to silence him.
It was from Tardif. This is a translation:

     "DEAR DOCTOR AND FRIEND: This day I received a letter from
     mam'zelle; quite a little letter with only a few lines in it.
     She says, 'Come to me. My husband has found me; he is here. I
     have no friends but you and one other, and I cannot send for
     him. You said you would come to me whenever I wanted you. I
     have not time to write more. I am in a little village called
     Ville-en-bois, between Granville and Noireau. Come to the
     house of the curé; I am there.'

     "Behold, I am gone, dear monsieur. I write this in my boat,
     for we are crossing to Jersey to catch the steamboat to
     Granville. To-morrow evening I shall be in Ville-en-bois. Will
     you learn the law of France about this affair? They say the
     code binds a woman to follow her husband wherever he goes. At
     London you can learn any thing. Believe me, I will protect
     mam'zelle, or I should say madame, at the loss of my life.
     Write to me as soon as you receive this. There will be an inn
     at Ville-en-bois; direct to me there. Take courage, monsieur.
     Your devoted TARDIF."

"I must go!" I exclaimed, starting to my feet, about to rush out of the house.

"Where?" cried Jack, catching my arm between both his hands, and holding me fast.

