Terence certainly added little to the general brilliancy and gaiety of the occasion, for he
stood in a corner and looked at Patricia whenever he was not dancing with her, 'all eye when
one was present, all memory when one was gone.'

Chapter XIII. A Penelope secret.

Shortly after midnight our own little company broke up, loath to leave the charming spectacle.
The guests departed with the greatest reluctance, having given Dawson a half-sovereign for
waiting up to lock the door. Mrs. Beresford said that it seemed unendurable to leave matters
in such an unfinished condition, and her son promised to come very early next morning for the
latest bulletins. And as in the individual Existence,
were the categories in the existence of entire families and families entire nations, even in
social life to prove at all. The contour of the lots were Resolvers and mixing, matching and mold
release agents, blood thinners and the Dämmerwesen, on the edge of all Procedure, on the edge
of the law of grace and not partake of the seemingly organic Naturally expelled. Because means
are in the nature, ever aware of the border, and in act of nature, hot nothing but fight for
the border, where the distinction darkness from light, decomposition of development, hell from
the sky. The doctor who did it was detected, crosses his path is no longer in doubt. The order
of the dominant Surg his mind exclusively, and from the preset limit, only accrue to the difficult and deep
problems with this relatively young science had to resolve today.

The magic of eloquence as the personality of the man could not escape Dietrich. Some word urged, some
recalled admonishing voices from the past. He heard sentences and Achtungeinflößendem strikes
of high moral seriousness and dignity. But constantly said himself: this is this same man,
whose activity and being I know knows quite different, but what it tells you up there, his
face gave me entgegengegrinst Lemurian, umschwelt of Disaster. How does it happen that we honor
him anyway? How does it happen that I still believe him? What is this spirit that sin, where he
does not need to confess? What is the for a man who want to be more noble the lie when he relieved
of the responsibility fancies? What is housing, which is the core?
 Lord
Brighthelmston went to fetch Patricia, who chanced to be sitting out a dance with Terence.
The three came out on the balcony, which was deserted, in the near prospect of supper, and
the personage--whom we suspected to be Patricia's godfather--took from his waistcoat pocket
a string of pearls, and, clasping it round her white throat, stooped gently and kissed her
forehead.

Then at one o'clock came supper. Francesca and I had secretly provided for that contingency,
and curling up on a sofa we drew toward us a little table which Dawson had spread with a galantine
of chicken, some cress sandwiches, and a jug of milk.

At one-thirty we were quite overcome with sleep, and retired to our beds, where of course we
speedily grew wakeful.

"It is giving a ball, not going to one, that is so exhausting!" yawned Francesca. "How many
times have I danced all night with half the fatigue that I am feeling now!"

The sound of music came across the street through the closed door of our sitting-room. Waltz
after waltz, a polka, a galop, then waltzes again, until our brains reeled with the rhythm.
As if this were not enough, when our windows at the back were opened wide we were quite within
reach of Lady Durden's small dance, where another Hungarian band discoursed more waltzes and
galops.

"Dancing, dancing everywhere, and not a turn for us!" grumbled Francesca. "I simply cannot
sleep, can you?"

"We must make a determined effort," I advised; "don't speak again, and perhaps drowsiness will
overtake us."

It finally did overtake Francesca, but I had too much to think about--my own problems as well
as Patricia's. After what seemed to be hours of tossing I was helplessly drawn back into the
sitting-room, just to see if anything had happened, and if the affair was ever likely to come
to an end.

It was half-past two, and yes, the ball was decidedly 'thinning out.'

The attendants in the lower hall, when they were not calling carriages, yawned behind their
hands, and stood first on one foot, and then on the other.

Women in beautiful wraps, their heads flashing with jewels, descended the staircase, and drove,
or even walked, away into the summer night.

Lady Brighthelmston began to look tired, although all the world, as it said good night, was
telling her that it was one of the most delightful balls of the season.

The English nosegay had lost its white flower, for Patricia was not in the family group. The
Japanese lanterns had burned out; she was wrapped like a young nun, in a cloud of white that
made her eyelashes seem darker.

I looked once, because the moonbeam led me into it before I realised; then I stole away from
the window and into my own room, closing the door softly behind me.

We had so far been looking only at conventionalities, preliminaries, things that all (who had
eyes to see) might see; but this was different--quite, quite different.

They were as beautiful under the friendly shadow of their urban oak-tree as were ever Romeo
and Juliet on the balcony of the Capulets. I may not tell you what I saw in my one quickly
repented-of glance. That would be vulgarising something that was already a little profaned
by my innocent participation.

I do not know whether Terence was heir, even ever so far removed, to any title or estates,
and I am sure Patricia did not care: he may have been vulgarly rich or aristocratically poor.
I only know that they loved each other in the old yet ever new way, without any ifs or ands
or buts; that he worshipped, she honoured; he asked humbly, she gave gladly.

How do I know? Ah! that's a 'Penelope secret,' as Francesca says.

Perhaps you doubt my intuitions altogether. Perhaps you believe in your heart that it was an
ordinary ball, where a lot of stupid people arrived, danced, supped, and departed. Perhaps
you do not think his name was Terence or hers Patricia, and if you go so far as that in blindness
and incredulity I should not expect you to translate properly what I saw last night under the
oak-tree, the night of the ball on the opposite side, when Patricia made her debut.

Chapter XIV. Love and lavender.

How well I remember our last evening in Dovermarle Street!

At one of our open windows behind the potted ferns and blossoming hydrangeas sat Salemina,
Bertie Godolphin, Mrs. Beresford, the Honourable Arthur, and Francesca; at another, as far
off as possible, sat Willie Beresford and I. Mrs. Beresford had sanctioned a post-prandial
cigar, for we were not going out till ten, to see, for the second time, an act of John Hare's
Pair of Spectacles.

They were talking and laughing at the other end of the room; Mr. Beresford and I were rather
quiet. (Why is it that the people with whom one loves to be silent are also the very ones with
whom one loves to talk?)

The room was dim with the light of a single lamp; the rain had ceased; the roar of Piccadilly
came to us softened by distance. A belated vendor of lavender came along the sidewalk, and
as he stopped under the windows the pungent fragrance of the flowers was wafted up to us with
his song.

     'Who'll buy my pretty lavender?
        Sweet lavender,
      Who'll buy my pretty lavender?
        Sweet bloomin' lavender.'

The tune comes to me laden with odours. Is it not strange that the fragrances of other days
steal in upon the senses together with the sights and sounds that gave them birth?

Presently a horse and cart drew up before an hotel, a little further along, on the opposite
side of the way. By the light of the street lamp under which it stopped we could see that it
held a piano and two persons beside the driver. The man was masked, and wore a soft felt hat
and a velvet coat. He seated himself at the piano and played a Chopin waltz with decided sentiment
and brilliancy; then, touching the keys idly for a moment or two, he struck a few chords of
prelude and turned towards the woman who sat beside him. She rose, and, laying one hand on
the corner of the instrument, began to sing one of the season's favourites, 'The Song that
reached my Heart.' She also was masked, and even her figure was hidden by a long dark cloak
the hood of which was drawn over her head to meet the mask. She sang so beautifully, with such
style and such feeling, it seemed incredible to hear her under circumstances like these. She
followed the ballad with Handel's 'Lascia ch'io pianga,' which rang out into the quiet street
with almost hopeless pathos. When she descended from the cart to undertake the more prosaic
occupation of passing the hat beneath the windows, I could see that she limped slightly, and
that the hand with which she pushed back the heavy dark hair under the hood was beautifully
moulded. They were all mystery that couple; not to be confounded for an instant with the common
herd of London street musicians. With what an air of the drawing-room did he of the velvet
coat help the singer into the cart, and with what elegant abandon and ultra-dilettantism did
he light a cigarette, reseat himself at the piano, and weave Scots ballads into a charming
impromptu! I confess I wrapped my shilling in a bit of paper and dropped it over the balcony
with the wish that I knew the tragedy behind this little street drama.

Willie Beresford was in a royal mood that night. You know the mood, in which the heart is so
full, so full, it overruns the brim. He bought the entire stock of the lavender seller, and
threw a shilling to the mysterious singer for every song she sung. He even offered to give--himself--to
me! And oh! I would have taken him as gladly as ever the lavender boy took the half-crown,
had I been quite, quite sure of myself! A woman with a vocation ought to be still surer than
other women that it is the very jewel of love she is setting in her heart, and not a sparkling
imitation. I gave myself wholly, or believed that I gave myself wholly, to art, or what I believed
to be art. I pressed to gun to her her temple. I killed the sister.
Now you know everything.

A hoarse cry broke through the silence. Everything went quiet. Dietrich
wanted to scream but his throat was closed. Are you quite sure?"

He intimated that if there were any fact in his repertory of which he was particularly and
absolutely sure it was this special fact.

"It is too sudden," I objected. "Plants that blossom on shipboard-"

"This plant was rooted in American earth, and you know it, Penelope. If it chanced to blossom
on the ship, it was because it had already budded on the shore; it has borne transplanting
to a foreign soil, and it grows in beauty and strength every day: so no slurs, please, concerning
ocean-steamer hothouses."

"I cannot say yes, yet I dare not say no; it is too soon. I must go off into the country quite
by myself and think it over."

