After the invading army had retired, no one will gainsay the sound sense of his behaviour.
Old age debarred him from active service on foot or horse, and what the city chiefly needed
now, he saw, was money, if she looked to gain allies. To the task therefore of providing that
he set himself. Everything that could be done by stopping at home he deftly turned his hand
to; or when the call arose and he could better help his country by departure he had no false
pride; he set off on foreign service, not as general, but as ambassador. Yet on such embassy
he achieved acts worthy of the greatest general. Autophradates (30) was besieging Ariobarzanes,
(31) who was an ally of Sparta, in Assos; but before the face of Agesilaus he fled in terror
and was gone. Cotys, (32) besieging Sestos, which still adhered to Ariobarzanes, broke up the
siege and departed crestfallen. Well might the ambassador have set up a trophy in commemoration
of the two bloodless victories. Once more, Mausolus (33) was besieging both the above-named
places with a squadron of one hundred sail. He too, like, and yet unlike, the former two, yielded
not to terror but to persuasion, and withdrew his fleet. These, then, were surely admirable
achievements, since those who looked upon him as a benefactor and those who fled from before
him both alike made him the richer by their gifts.

 (30) Satrap of Lydia.

 (31) Satrap of Propontis or Hellespontine Phrygia.

 (32) Satrap of Paphlagonia, king of Thrace. Iphicrates married his
    daughter. See Grote, "H. G." x. 410.

 (33) Satrap of Caria.

Tachos, (34) indeed, and Mausolus gave him a magnificent escort; and, for the sake of his former
friendship with Agesilaus, the latter contributed also money for the state of Lacedaemon; and
so they sped him home.

 (34) King of Egypt.

And now the weight of, may be, fourscore years was laid upon him, (35) when it came under his
observation that the king of Egypt, (36) with his hosts of foot and horse and stores of wealth,
had set his heart on a war with Persia. Joyfully he learned that he himself was summoned by
King Tachos, and that the command-in-chief of all the forces was promised to him. By this one
venture he would achieve three objects, which were to requite the Egyptian for the benefits
conferred on Lacedaemon; to liberate the Hellenes in Asia once again; and to inflict on the
Persian a just recompense, not only for the old offences, but for this which was of to-day;
seeing that, while boasting alliance with Sparta, he had dictatorially enjoined the emancipation
of Messene. (37) But when the man who had summoned him refused to confer the proffered generalship,
Agesilaus, like one on whom a flagrant deception has been practised, began to consider the
part he had to play. Meanwhile a separate division (38) of the Egyptian armies held aloof from
their king. Then, the disaffection spreading, all the rest of his troops deserted him; whereat
the monarch took flight and retired in exile to Sidon in Phoenicia, leaving the Egyptians,
split in faction, to choose to themselves a pair of kings. (39) Thereupon Agesilaus took his
decision. If he helped neither, it meant that neither would pay the service-money due to his
Hellenes, that neither would provide a market, and that, whichever of the two conquered in
the end, Sparta would be equally detested. But if he threw in his lot with one of them, that
one would in all likelihood in return for the kindness prove a friend. Accordingly he chose
between the two that one who seemed to be the truer partisan of Hellas, and with him marched
against the enemy of Hellas and conquered him in a battle, crushing him. His rival he helped
to establish on the throne, and having made him a friend to Lacedaemon, and having acquired
vast sums besides, he turned and set sail homewards, even in mid-winter, hastening so that
Sparta might not lie inactive, but against the coming summer be alert to confront the foe.

 (35) Or, "But to pass on, he was already, may be, eighty years of age,
    when it came under his observation...."

 (36) This same Tachos.

 (37) See "Hell." VII. i. 36; iv. 9.

 (38) I.e. "the army under Nectanebos." See Diod. xv. 92; Plut. "Ages."
    xxxvii.  (Clough, iv. 44 foll.)

 (39) I.e. "Nectanebos and a certain Mendesian."

III

Such, then, is the chronicle of this man's achievements, or of such of them as were wrought
in the presence of a thousand witnesses. Being of this sort they have no need of further testimony;
the mere recital of them is sufficient, and they at once win credence. But now I will endeavour
to reveal the excellence indwelling in his soul, the motive power of his acts, in virtue of
which he clung to all things honourable and thrust aside all baseness.

Agesilaus showed such reverence for things divine that even his enemies regarded his oaths
and solemn treaties as more to be relied on than the tie of friendship amongst themselves.
These same men, who would shrink from too close intercourse with one another, delivered themselves
into the hands of Agesilaus without fear. And lest the assertion should excite discredit, I
may name some illustrious examples. Such was Spithridates the Persian, who knew that Pharnabazus,
(1) whilst negotiating to marry the daughter of the great king, was minded to seize his own
daughter unwedded. Resenting such brutality, Spithridates delivered up himself, his wife, his
children, and his whole power, into the hands of Agesilaus. Cotys (2) also, the ruler of Paphlagonia,
had refused to obey a summons from the king, although he sent him the warrant of his right
hand; (3) then fear came upon him lest he should be seized, and either be heavily fined or
die the death; yet he too, simply trusting to an armistice, came to the camp of Agesilaus and
made alliance, and of his own accord chose to take the field with Agesilaus, bringing a thousand
horsemen and two thousand targeteers. Lastly, Pharnabazus (4) himself came and held colloquy
with Agesilaus, and openly agreed that if he were not himself appointed general-in-chief of
the royal forces he would revolt from the king. "Whereas, if I do become general," he added,
"I mean to make war upon you, Agesilaus, might and main," thus revealing his confidence that,
say what he might, nothing would befall him contrary to the terms of truce. Of so intrinsic
a value to all, and not least to a general in the field, is the proud possession of an honest
and God-fearing character, known and recognised. Thus far, as touching the quality of piety.

 (1) See "Hell." III. iv. 10; Plut. "Ages." xi.  (Clough, iv. 9).

 (2) See "Hell." IV. i. 3; Plut. "Ages." xi.  (Clough, iv. 13).

 (3) Diod. xvi. 34.

 (4) See "Hell." IV. i. 37.

IV

To speak next of his justice (1) in affairs of money. As to this, what testimony can be more
conclusive than the following? During the whole of his career no charge of fraudulent dealing
was ever lodged against Agesilaus; against which set the many-voiced acknowledgment of countless
benefits received from him. A man who found pleasure in giving away his own for the benefit
of others was not the man to rob another of his goods at the price of infamy. Had he suffered
from this thirst for riches it would have been easier to cling to what belonged to him than
to take that to which he had no just title. This man, who was so careful to repay debts of
gratitude, where (2) the law knows no remedy against defaulters, was not likely to commit acts
of robbery which the law regards as criminal. And as a matter of act Agesilaus judged it not
only wrong to forgo repayment of a deed of kindness, but, where the means were ample, wrong
also not to repay such debts with ample interest.

 (1) See Muller and Donaldson, "Hist. Gk. Lit." ii. 196, note 2.

 (2) Or, "a state of indebtedness beyond the reach of a tribunal." See
    "Cyrop." I. ii. 7.

The charge of embezzlement, could it be alleged, would no less outrage all reason in the case
of one who made over to his country the benefit in full of grateful offerings owed solely to
himself. Indeed the very fact that, when he wished to help the city or his friends with money,
he might have done so by the aid of others, goes a long way to prove his indifference to the
lure of riches; since, had he been in the habit of selling his favour, or of playing the part
of benefactor for pay, there had been no room for a sense of indebtedness. (3) It is only the
recipient of gratuitous kindness who is ever ready to minister to his benefactor, both in return
for the kindness itself and for the confidence implied in his selection as the fitting guardian
of a good deed on deposit. (4)

 (3) Or, "no one would have felt to owe him anything."

 (4) See "Cyrop." VI. i. 35; Rutherford, "New Phrynichus," p. 312.

Again, who more likely to put a gulf impassable between himself and the sordid love of gain
(5) than he, who nobly preferred to be stinted of his dues (6) rather than snatch at the lion's
share unjustly? It is a case in point that, being pronounced by the state to be the rightful
heir to his brother's (7) wealth, he made over one half to his maternal relatives because he
saw that they were in need; and to the truth of this assertion all Lacedaemon is witness. What,
too, was his answer to Tithraustes when the satrap offered him countless gifts if he would
but quit the country?"Tithraustes, with us it is deemed nobler for a ruler to enrich his army
than himself; it is expected of him to wrest spoils from the enemy rather than take gifts."

 (5) Or, "base covetousness."

 (6) Or reading, {sun auto to gennaio}  (with Breitenbach), "in
    obedience to pure generosity." See "Cyrop." VIII. iii. 38.

 (7) I.e. Agis. See Plut. "Ages." iv.

V

Or again, reviewing the divers pleasures which master human beings, I defy any one to name
a single one to which Agesilaus was enslaved: Agesilaus, who regarded drunkenness as a thing
to hold aloof from like madness, and immoderate eating like the snare of indolence. Even the
double portion (1) allotted to him at the banquet was not spent on his own appetite; rather
would he make distribution of the whole, retaining neither portion for himself. In his view
of the matter this doubling of the king's share was not for the sake of surfeiting, but that
the king might have the wherewithal to honour whom he wished. And so, too, sleep (2) he treated
not as a master, but as a slave, subservient to higher concerns. The very couch he lay upon
must be sorrier than that of any of his company or he would have blushed for shame, since in
his opinion it was the duty of a leader to excel all ordinary mortals in hardihood, not in
effeminacy. Yet there were things in which he was not ashamed to take the lion's share, as,
for example, the sun's heat in summer, or winter's cold. Did occasion ever demand of his army
moil and toil, he laboured beyond all others as a thing of course, believing that such ensamples
are a consolation to the rank and file. Or, to put the patter compendiously, Agesilaus exulted
in hard work: indolence he utterly repudiated.

 (1) See "Pol. Lac." xv. 4. See J. J. Hartman, "An. Xen." 257.

 (2) See Hom. "Il." ii. 24, {ou khro pannukhion eudein boulephoron
    andra}, "to sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a
    counsellor."--W. Leaf.

And, as touching the things of Aphrodite, if for nothing else, at any rate for the marvel of
it, the self-restraint of the man deserves to be put on record. It is easy to say that to abstain
from that which excites no desire is but human; yet in the case of Megabates, the son of Spithridates,
he was moved by as genuine a love as any passionate soul may feel for what is lovely. Now,
it being a national custom among the Persians to salute those whom they honour with a kiss,
Megabates endeavoured so to salute Agesilaus, but the latter with much show of battle, resisted--"No
kiss might he accept." (3) I ask whether such an incident does not reveal on the face of it
the self-respect of the man, and that of no vulgar order. (4) Megabates, who looked upon himself
as in some sense dishonoured, for the future endeavoured not to offend in like sort again.
(5) Whereupon Agesilaus appealed to one who was his comrade to persuade Megabates again to
honour him with his regard; and the comrade, so appealed to, demanding, "If I persuade him,
will you bestow on him a kiss?" Agesilaus fell into a silence, but presently exclaimed: "No,
by the Twins, not if I might this very instant become the swiftest-footed, strongest, and handsomest
of men. (6) And as to that battle I swear by all the gods I would far rather fight it over
again than that everything on which I set my eyes might turn to gold." (7)

 (3) See Plut. "Ages."  (Clough, iv. p. 13 foll.)

 (4) Reading, {kai lian gennikon}; or, "a refinement of self-respect,"
    "a self-respect perhaps even over-sensitive."

 (5) Lit. "made no further attempt to offer kisses."

 (6) See Plut. "Ages." ii.  (Clough, iv. p. 2): "He is said to have been
    a little man of a contemptible presence."

 (7) See Plut. "Ages." xi.  (Clough, iv. p. 14); "Parall. Min." v; Ovid.
    "Met." xi. 102 foll.

What construction some will put upon the story I am well aware, but for myself I am persuaded
that many more people can master their enemeis than the foes we speak of. (8) Doubtless such
incidents when known to but few may well be discredited by many, but here we are in the region
of establishing facts, seeing that the more illustrious a man is the less can his every act
escape notice. As to Agesilaus no eye-witness has ever reported any unworthy behaviour, nor,
had he invented it, would his tale have found credence, since it was not the habit of the king,
when abroad, to lodge apart in private houses. He always lay up in some sacred place, where
behaviour of the sort was out of the question, or else in public, with the eyes of all men
liable to be called as witnesses to his sobriety. For myself, if I make these statements falsely
against the knowledge of Hellas, this were not in any sense to praise my hero, but to dispraise
myself.

 (8) Or, "than the seductions in question."

VI

Nor, in my opinion, were those obscure proofs of courage and true manliness which he furnished
by his readiness ever to wage war against the strongest enemies, whether of Sparta or of Hellas,
placing himself in the forefront of the contests decided on. If the enemy cared to join issue
in fair field he would not chance upon a victory won by panic, but in stubborn battle, blow
for blow, he mastered him; and set up trophies worthy of the name, seeing that he left behind
him imperishable monuments of prowess, and bore away on his own body indelible marks of the
fury with which he fought; (1) so that, apart from hearsay, by the evidence of men's eyes his
valour stood approved.

 (1) Or, "visible signs of the spirit," etc. See Plut. "Ages." xxxvi.

And amongst these we must not deem them trophies alone which he actually set up, but reckon
the many campaigns which he undertook, since they were victories truly, even when the enemy
refused to encounter him, victories devoid of danger, yet fraught with even more solid advantage
to the state of Sparta and her fellow-combatants; just as in our games we crown as victor him
who walks over the field (2) no less than him who conquers by dint of battle.

 (2) Or, "without striking a blow." Lit. "without the dust of the
    arena, 'sine pulvere.'" See Thuc. iv. 73, {akoniti}.

And to speak next of his wisdom, (3) I suppose there is not one of all his doings but must
illustrate it;--this man whose bearing towards his fatherland was such that by dint of implicit
obedience  (he grew to so greate a height of power), (4) whose zeal in the service of his comrades
won for him the unhesitating attachment of his friends, who infused into the hearts of his
soldiers a spirit, not of discipline only, but of self-devotion to their chief. And yet surely
that is the strongest of all battle-lines (5) in which obedience creates tactical efficiency,
and alacrity in the field springs out of loyal affection for the general.

 (3) Or, "his sagacity." The lacuna in the MS. was
    first noted, I believe, by Weiske. See Breitenbach's note ad loc.

 (5) See "Cyrop." VII. i. 30; "Econ." xxi. 7.

Enemies he had to cope with, who had little excuse to disparage, however much they might be
compelled to hate their opponent, seeing that he was for ever contriving to give his allies
some advantage over them--by sheer deception, if occasion offered; now anticipating them if
speed were requisite; now skulking in corners if concealment served; in all points observing
one rule of behaviour to his friends and another towards his foes. By turning night into day
and day into night (6) he drew so close a veil of mystery over his movements that frequently
there was no saying where he was, or whither he would go, or what he might do next. The fastnesses
of the enemy he transformed into so many weaknesses, (7) passing this one by, and scaling that,
and stealing like a thief into a third.

 (6) See "Hell." VI. i. 15; "Pol. Lac." v. 7; "Cyrop." I. v. 12.

 (7) Or, "the strongholds of the enemy might to all intents and
    purposes have been open places."

When he was on the march, and was well aware that an enemy might, if he chose, deliver battle,
his habit was to lead his troops in compact battle order ready to confront emergencies, with
soft, slow step, advancing, as it were, with maidenly demureness, (8) for in such procedure,
as he believed, lay the secret of true calm, engendering a dauntless self-assurance, imperturbable,
unerring, impervious to treacherous assault. Therefore by such behaviour he was a terror to
the enemy, whilst he infused courage and strength in the hearts of his friends, so that throughout
his life he continued to be a man whom his foes dared not despise, whom his fellow-citizens
cared not to arraign, within the circle of his friends held blameless, the idol and admiration
of the outer world. (9)

 (8) See above, ii. 3; "Pol. Lac." iii. 5.

 (9) Cf. Tacitus's phrase concerning Titus, "deliciae humani generis."

VII

To describe his patriotism (1) point by point in detail were a tedious story, since, as I suppose,
there is not one of his several achievements but must finally resolve itself into that. For,
to put it briefly, we all know well that where Agesilaus expected in any way to benefit his
country there was no toil he shrank from, no danger he avoided, no money he stinted, no excuse
whether of age or body he admitted, but deemed it ever the true function of a good king (2)
to shower blessings to the utmost on the subjects of his rule.

 (1) Lit. "love for his own city."

 (2) Or, "regarded it as the cardinal virtue of a real prince." See
    "Mem." III. ii. 3.

