All rights reserved

CONTENTS

      I THE RIM AND WHAT LAY BENEATH IT                              1
     II THE LORRIGAN TREE GROWS THRIFTILY                           16
    III MARY HOPE DOUGLAS APPEARS                                   30
     IV A MATTER OF BRANDS                                          44
      V THEY RIDE AND THEY DO NOT TELL WHERE                        57
     VI BELLE MEETS AN EMERGENCY IN HER OWN WAY                     67
    VII THE NAME                                                    82
   VIII THE GAME                                                    90
     IX A LITTLE SCOTCH                                            102
      X THE LORRIGAN WAY                                           118
     XI LANCE RIDES AHEAD                                          133
    XII SHE WILL, AND SHE WON'T                                    145
   XIII A WAY HE HAD WITH HIM                                      156
    XIV IN WHICH LANCE FINISHES ONE JOB                            172
     XV HE TACKLES ANOTHER                                         180
    XVI ABOUT A PIANO                                              192
   XVII THE LORRIGAN VIEWPOINT                                     204
  XVIII PEDDLED RUMORS                                             219
    XIX MARY HOPE HAS MUCH TROUBLE                                 232
     XX AS HE LIVED, SO HE DIED                                    250
    XXI LANCE TRAILS A MYSTERY                                     258
   XXII LANCE RIDES ANOTHER TRAIL                                  272
  XXIII LANCE PLAYS THE GAME                                       283
   XXIV WHEN A LORRIGAN LOVES                                      297
    XXV BELLE LORRIGAN WINS                                        312
    XVI THE DOPE                                                   323
  XXVII HOW ONE TRAIL ENDED                                        336
 XXVIII THE MAKING OF NEW TRAILS                                   345

RIM O' THE WORLD

CHAPTER ONE

THE RIM AND WHAT LAY BENEATH IT

Not all of the West is tamed and trained to run smoothly on pneumatic tires and to talk more
enthusiastically of the different "makes" of cars than of bits and saddles. There are still
wide stretches unknown of tourists and movie men hunting locations for Western melodrama where
men live in the full flavor of adventure and romance and never know it, because they have never
known any other way to live.

In the Black Rim country there is such a place,--a wide, rough, sage-grown expanse where cattle
and horses and sheep scarce know the look of barbed wire, and where brands are still the sole
mark of ownership. Set down between high mountain ranges, remote, sufficient unto itself, rudely
prosperous, the Black Rim country has yet to be tamed.

Black Rim country is called bad. The men from Black Rim are eyed askance when they burr their
spur rowels down the plank sidewalks of whatever little town they may choose to visit. A town
dweller will not quarrel with one of them. He will treat him politely, straightway seek some
acquaintance whom he wishes to impress, and jerk a thumb toward the departing Black Rim man,
and say importantly: "See that feller I was talking with just now? That's one of them boys
from the Black Rim. Man, he'd kill yuh quick as look at yuh! He's bad. Yep. You want to walk
'way round them birds from the Rim country. They're a hard-boiled bunch up that way." And he
would be as nearly correct in his estimate as such men usually are.

Tom Lorrigan's father used to carry a rifle across his thighs when he rode up the trail past
Devil's Tooth Ridge to the benchland beyond, where his cattle fed on the sweet bunch grass.
He never would sit close to a camp-fire at night save when his back was against a huge boulder
and he could keep the glare of the fire from his eyes. Indians he killed as he killed rattlers,
on the range theory that if they did not get him then they might some other time, and that
every dead Indian counted one less to beware of. Tom Lorrigan's father was called a bad man
even in Black Rim country,--which meant a good deal. Hard-bitted men of the Black Rim chose
their words wisely when they spoke to Tom's father; chose wisely their words when they spoke
of him, unless they had full faith in the listener's loyalty and discretion.

Tom Lorrigan's father lived to be sixty,--chiefly because he was "quick on the draw" and because
he never missed anything that he shot at. But at sixty, when he was still hated by many, loved
by a very few and feared by every one, he died,--crushed under his horse when it fell on the
Devil's Tooth trail one sleety day in midwinter.

Young Tom Lorrigan learned to shoot when he learned to ride, and he was riding pitching horses
before he could be certain which was p and which was q in his dad's old spelling book. Which
does not by any means prove that young Tom was an ignoramus. Tom once had three brothers, but
these were somehow unlucky and one by one they dropped out of the game of life. The oldest
brother died with the smell of burnt black powder in his nostrils, and Tom's father stood over
the body and called his dead son a fool for wearing his gun so it could stick in the holster.
"If I ever ketch yuh doin' a trick like that, I'll thrash yuh till yuh can't stand," he admonished
young Tom sternly. Young Tom always remembered how his dad had looked when brother Bill was shot.

The second brother was overtaken while riding a big sorrel horse that did not happen to carry
the Lorrigan brand. So he too died with the smell of powder smoke in his nostrils, taking three
of his pursuers with him into the Dark Land. Him Tom's father cursed for being caught.

So young Tom learned early two lessons of the Black Rim book of wisdom: His gun must never
stick in the holster; he must never get caught by the law.

He was twenty when Brother Jim was drowned while trying to swim his horse across the Snake
in flood time on a dare. Young Tom raced along the bank, frantically trying to cast his forty-foot
rope across sixty feet of rushing current that rolled Jim and his horse along to the boil of
rapids below. Young Tom was a long, long while forgetting the terror in Jim's eyes, the helplessness
of Jim's gloved hand which he threw up to catch at the rope that never came within twenty feet
of him, and at the last, the hopeless good-by wave he sent Tom when he whirled into the moil
that pulled him under and never let him go. Tom learned on the bank of the Snake another lesson:
He must never be so weak as to let another man badger him into doing something against his
own desires or judgment.

Jim's pitiful going left Tom in full possession of the Devil's Tooth ranch and the cattle and
horses that fed on the open range of the Black Rim country,--and they were many. Young Tom
was lonely, but his loneliness was smothered under a consuming desire to add to his possessions
and to avoid the mistakes of his brothers and of his father who had carelessly ridden where
he should have walked.

Men of the Rim country frequently predicted that young Tom Lorrigan would die with his boots
on; preferably in mid-air. They said he was going to be like his dad in more than looks, and
that times were changing and a man couldn't steal cattle and kill off anybody that argued with
him, and get away with it as Tom's father had done. They complained that the country was getting
too damn Sunday school, and young Tom had better tame down a little before he got into trouble.

As Black Rim defines the word, Tom was quite as bad as they called him. A handsome young dare-devil
he was, slanting his glance downward when he looked into the eyes of a six-foot man,--and every
inch of him good healthy bone and muscle. Women eyed him pleasantly, wistful for his smile.
Men spoke to him friendlywise and consciously side-stepped his wrath. On the Black Rim range
his word was law, his law was made for himself and the wealth he hankered for. That wealth
he named a million dollars, and he named it often because he liked the sound of the word. Without
any ifs he declared it. There was a million to be had in Idaho, was there not? Very well, he
would have his million, and he would have it in cattle and horses and land. He would not go
mucking in the gold mines for it; his million should graze on the bunch grass. He wanted, he
said, to see a million dollars walking around. And since old Tom Lorrigan had left him a mere
forty thousand--according to the appraisers of the Devil's Tooth estate--young Tom had a long
way to go to see his dream a reality.

Men of the Black Rim hinted that young Tom rode with a long rope; meaning that his rope would
reach the cattle of his neighbor cowmen if they came in his way. But they only hinted, for
unless they could prove beyond the doubt of any twelve men in the county that his brand was
burned on any cattle save his own, they had no wish to offend. For young Tom had learned well
his three lessons from the fate of his three brothers; his gun never stuck in its holster;
he was wily and not to be caught; he could neither be harried nor coaxed into setting aside
his own judgment while it seemed to him good.

You would think that young Tom would speedily find himself a mate amongst the girls of the
Black Rim country,--though they were as scarce as princesses of the royal blood and choice
was of necessity restricted to a half-dozen or so. None of the girls he knew pleased his fancy,
untrained though that fancy might be. Instinct told him that they were too tame, too commonplace
to hold his interest for long. A breathless dance or two, a kiss stolen in a shadowy corner,
and blushes and giggles and inane remonstrances that bored him because he knew they would come.
Tom had reached the sere age of twenty-two when he began to wonder if he must go beyond the
Black Rim world for his wife, or resign himself to the fate of an old bachelor. None of the
Black Rim girls, he told himself grimly, should ever have a share in that million.

Then that purple-lidded, putty-face jade we call Fate whimsically sent him a mate; curious,
I suppose, to see what would happen when the two whose trails had lain so far apart should meet.

A girl from some far city she was; a small star that had twinkled behind the footlights and
had fled--or had fallen--to the Black Rim country. Like many another, she had gone as far as
her money would take her. That it took her to the end of the little branch railroad that stopped
abruptly with its nose against a mountain twenty miles from the Devil's Tooth ranch was a coincidence,--or
the whim of Fate. There she was, as strange to the outland as young Tom would have been to
the city whence she had come; thinking perhaps to start life afresh in some little Western
town; with no money to carry her back to the outskirts of civilization, and no town wherein
she might win fresh successes. The train that had brought her panted upon a siding, deserted,
its boiler cooling, its engineer, fireman, conductor and brakeman leaning over a bar in the
shack that called itself a saloon. To-morrow it would rattle back to the junction, if all went
well and the rails held fast to the ties, which was not certain.

The station's name was Jumpoff. The train's conductor, who had the misfortune to be considered
a humorist, liked to say that Jumpoff was a knot at the end of the road to keep the track from
unraveling. He had told the girl that, on the long, jolty ride from the junction. The girl
replied that at any rate she liked the name.

What really held Jumpoff on the time-table in those days before it became a real town were
the stockyards, where the Black Rim cattle came to start their journey to market. The trail
over the mountains to the main line was rough, with a two-day drive without water. Yet the
Black Rim country had many cattle, and a matter of a few tunnels and a trestle or two let the
railroad in by a short cut which minimized the distance to the main line. The branch line paid
a fair interest on the investment,--but not with its passenger service.

The girl found herself stranded in a settlement whose business was represented by one saloon,
one section house, one stable, one twelve-by-twelve depot and a store that was no more than
an addition to the saloon, with the bartender officiating in both places as customers required
his services. Times when cattle were being shipped, the store was closed and the saloon had
no rival.

It was while the girl was hesitating half-way between the store-saloon and the section house,
wondering which she would choose, that young Tom Lorrigan galloped up to the hitch rail, stopped
his horse in two stiff-legged jumps, swung down and came toward her. Like a picture on a wall
calendar she looked to young Tom, who had never seen her like in flesh and blood. He lifted
his big, range hat, and she smiled at him,--though it must have been a stage smile, she had
so little heart for smiling then.

Tom blinked as though he had looked at the sun. Such a smile he had never seen in his life;
nor such hair, like real, gold-colored silk all in curls around her face; nor such eyes, which
were blue as the sky at twilight when the stars first begin to show.

"Jumpoff is not much of a town," said the girl and laughed to hide how close she was to tears.

Young Tom caught his breath. He had thought that women had only two forms of laughter, the
giggle of youth or the cackle of age. He had never dreamed that a woman could laugh like a
mountain stream gurgling down over the rocks. Immediately he visioned young ferns dripping
diamonds into a shadowed pool, though he did not attempt to formulate the vision in words.
His answer was obvious and had nothing to do with gurgling brooks, or with ferns and shadowed
pools.

"It sure ain't, Miss. Might you be looking for somebody in particular?"

"No-o--I'm just here. It would be a poor place to look for anybody, wouldn't it?"

"Sure would." Young Tom found his courage and smiled, and the girl looked at him again, as
though she liked that white-toothed smile of Tom's.

"Well, I started out to find the jumping-off place, and this sounded like it on the railroad
map. I guess it's It, all right; there's nothing to do but jump."

Young Tom pulled his black eyebrows together, studying her. By her speech she was human; therefore,
in spite of her beauty that dazzled him, she was not to be feared.

"You mean you ain't got any particular place to go from here?"

The girl tilted her head and stared up the mountain's steep, pine-covered slope. She swung
her head a little and looked at Tom. She smiled bravely still, but he thought her eyes looked
sorry for something.

"Is there any particular place to go from here?" she asked him wistfully, keeping the smile
on her lips as the world had taught her to do.

"Not unless you went back."

She shook her head. "No," she said, firmly, "I'll climb that mountain and jump off the top
before I'll go back."

Young Tom felt that she spoke in sober earnest in spite of her smile; which was strange. He
had seen men smile in deadly earnest,--his dad had smiled when he reached for his gun to kill
Buck Sanderson. But women cried.

"Don't you know anybody at all, around here?"

"Not a soul--except you, and I don't know whether your name is Tom or Bill."

"My name's Tom--Tom Lorrigan. Say! If you ain't got any place to go--why--I've got a ranch
and about twenty-five hundred head of cattle and some horses. If you didn't mind marrying me,
I could take you out there and give yuh a home. I'd be plumb good to you, if you're willing
to take a chance."

The girl stood back and looked him over. Tall as Tom was she came almost to his chin. He saw
her eyes darken like the sky at dusk, and it seemed to him quite possible that stars could
shine in them.

"You'd be taking as great a chance as I would. I haven't any ranch or any cattle, or anything
at all but myself and two trunks full of clothes and some things in my life I want to forget.
And I have sixty cents in my purse. I can't cook anything except to toast marshmallows--"

"I've got a cook," put in young Tom quickly.

"And the clothes I've got would be a joke out here. And the things I came out here to forget
I shall never tell you--"

"I ain't interested enough to ask, or to listen if you told me," said Tom.

"And myself can sing to you and dance to you, and I'm twenty years old by the family Bible--"

"I'm twenty-two--makes it about right," said Tom.

"And if you should count fifty and ask me again--"

"Ten, twenty, thirty, forty-fifty, will you marry me?" obeyed Tom with much alacrity.

"You might call me Belle. Belle Delavan. Well, I came to Jumpoff because--I meant to jump.
Yes, I'll marry you--and the Lord have mercy on you, Tom Lorrigan, if I live to regret it."

"Amen. Same to you," grinned Tom. "It's an even break, anyway. They don't claim I'm sprouting
wings. They say I've got split hoofs in my boots instead of feet, and wear my ears pointed
at the top. But--but no girl has got any loop on me. I've been straight, as far as women goes.
That's my record up to the present. If you can stand for a little drinkin' and gamblin' and
shootin'--"

Belle waved aside his self-depreciation. Young Tom was a handsome devil, and his eyes were
keen and clear and looked right into her own, which was sufficient evidence of good faith for
any woman with warm blood in her body.

"Tom Lorrigan, I've eaten just three soda crackers, six marshmallows and one orange since yesterday
noon," said she irrelevantly. "I can't be emotional when I'm half starved. Is there any place
where I can get a piece of bread or something?"

"My Lord! Think of me standing here and not thinkin' whether you'd had dinner or not! Sure,
you can have something to eat."

He took her by the arm, too penitent to be diffident over the unaccustomed gallantry, and hustled
her toward the section house. His mind registered the fact that the bartender, the fireman,
the brakeman and the conductor would shortly apologize abjectly for standing outside the saloon
gawping at a lady, or they would need the immediate ministrations of a doctor. He hoped the
girl had not noticed them.

"They'll throw some grub together quick, over here," he explained to the girl. "Everybody eats
at the section house. It ain't much of a place, but there ain't any other place. And while
you're having dinner I'll have the operator wire down to Lava for a marriage license to be
sent up on the next train. The saloon man is a justice of the peace, and he'll marry us right
away, soon as you eat. And--"

"Without a license? I know it's always done that way on the stage, but--but this isn't going
to be any stage marriage."

"Well, but the license will be all made out and on the way, and he'll take my word for it and
go ahead with the ceremony. If I tell him to, he will. It will be all right; I'll make it all
right. And then I can get a team from a ranch back here a ways, and take you right out to Devil's
Tooth. It's the best way. This ain't any place for a lady to stay. You'll be comfortable out
at the Devil's Tooth--it's clean, anyway." He looked at her honest-eyed, and smiled again.
"Yuh needn't be afraid uh me. We're rough enough and tough enough, and we maybe shoot up each
other now and again, but we ain't like city folks; we don't double-cross women. Not ever."

She said nothing, and when they had walked four steps farther he added with a sincere wish
to set her at ease: "I could take you to some ranch and leave you till the license comes, if
you think it wouldn't be all right to get married now. But the womenfolks would talk your arm
off, and you wouldn't like it. And they'd talk about you when your back was turned. But if
Scotty goes ahead and married us, I don't see why--"

"Oh, I'm not worrying about that. It's just cutting a corner instead of walking around. I was
thinking," said Belle Delavan, while she dabbed at her lashes as though they were beaded with
paint instead of tears and she must be careful not to smear them, "I was just thinking how--how
good you are. My God, I never knew they grew men like you, outside of plays and poetry."

"Good!" echoed young Tom Lorrigan, feared of his kind for his badness. His tone was hushed
with amazement, all aglow with pleasure. "Good!--my Lord!"

CHAPTER TWO

THE LORRIGAN TREE GROWS THRIFTILY

Young Tom Lorrigan had found his mate. Had he known more about life in the big world beyond
the Rim, he must have been amazed at his luck. Once a man dropped dead in a poker game when
he had staked his last blue chip and drawn a royal flush. In the great game of hearts Tom had
drawn a royal flush, but he did not drop dead. Instead, he went right on living, more determined
than ever to own a million dollars' worth of cattle and horses before he died, considerably
before he died, because he wanted to enjoy that million with Belle. And because of her he wanted
that million to be honest money.

Everything he did now, he did for Belle more than for himself. As a matter of course she became
his real reason for living. She was like the sun. He took her for granted, never questioning
the blessed warmth of her presence, never stopping to wonder what life would be like if he
lost her. She was beautiful, with a beauty that never palled and never paled. She laughed a
great deal, and he never could keep laughter from his own lips while he listened. When she
sang she put the meadow larks to shame, and afterwards when he rode the range alone Tom would
whistle strange, new melodies that the Black Rim country never had heard before,--melodies
which Belle had taught him unconsciously with her singing. He did not know that it would have
astonished a city dweller to hear the bad man of Black Rim Country whistling Schubert's "Serenade"
while he rode after cattle, or Wagner's "Prize Song," or "Creole Sue," perhaps, since Belle,
with absolute impartiality, sang everything that she had ever heard sung. On billboards before
eastern theatres Belle Delavan had been called "The Girl with a Thousand Songs." Audiences
had been invited by the stage manager to name any selection they might choose, assured that
Belle would sing it from memory. No wonder that her singing never grew stale to Tom Lorrigan!

But mostly she busied herself with little domesticities that somehow never included cooking,
and with driving helter-skelter over the range with two horses hitched to a buckboard, following
Tom when he rode after cattle. Do you think she should logically have learned to ride? She
did try it once on the gentlest horse that Tom owned, which was not too gentle to run away
with Belle. She rode that horse just two hundred yards before she jolted so far from the saddle
that she could not find it again until some time after, when they had caught the horse and
led him to the corral.

"Not any more for me, Tom Lorrigan!" she gasped, flapping her two pretty hands in eloquent
disgust when Tom rode up to her. "I wouldn't get on a horse's back again to star for the Queen
of England! I'll take that team of he-devils you've been breaking to drive, and I'll drive
'em or break every bone in their bodies. I'm willing to get behind any horse you've got; but
to get on their backs--excuse me!" She limped painfully to the house with her yellow hair blowing
around her shoulders and across her lips that would smile in spite of her mishap.

After that Belle drove the "he-devils" and others quite as devilish, and risked her bones with
perfect equanimity. She drove horses that had to be thrown before the collar could be buckled
on, and "forefooted" before they would submit to the harness. Indeed, Belle seemed to prefer
that kind of horses. She wanted a team that could keep pace with Tom,--and she had it. Her
buckboard lasted a year, with luck. She strewed the Devil's Tooth range with wheels and doubletrees
and splinters and hairpins, and scattered sunshiny smiles and cuss-words and snatches of song
wherever she went. And since she went wherever eight bronco feet could take her, Black Rim
country came to know Belle Lorrigan as it knew Tom. Came to fear Belle Lorrigan's wrath, which
bettered the lightning for searing, lashing sword-thrusts of venom; came to know her songs
well enough to hum snatches of them; came to laugh when she laughed,--and to hope that the
next laugh would not be aimed at them; came to recognize her as a better shot than any one
save Tom, who taught her.

At the country dances on the various ranches, Belle never missed quadrille, two-step, waltz
or schottische, and she danced by herself or sang songs during the intervals, while the women
of the range sat stiffly along the walls on benches, stared at Belle and whispered behind their
weather-reddened hands, and tittered. She taught big-jointed, bashful boys how to waltz, and
she slapped a half-drunken miner who squeezed her too tightly in a square dance. Slapped Tom
also when he came hurrying up to kill the miner, and told him to keep to his own quarrels and
save his powder for something worth while. She didn't need help to step on a worm, she added,
and took a youth by the arm and led him off to dance. The miner, I may say to the curious,
was next seen in Hailey, heading south. He left a very good prospect up in the hills and never
went back to work out his assessments.

As you have probably guessed, Belle Lorrigan and the women of the Black Rim country did not
get on very well together. Black Rim women thought that a woman who wore her hair in curls
down her back--yellow hair at that!--could not be any too good if the truth were known. They
declared to one another that a woman who did not talk about her past life, who never so much
as mentioned past illnesses, even, must have a great deal to cover up. How did Tom Lorrigan
get acquainted with her, anyway? Through some marriage agency, they were willing to bet. And
how did a decent woman happen to have all the fancy clothes which Belle Lorrigan possessed?
And jewelry enough to stock a store with! Three rings on one finger at one time and the same
time was going it pretty strong, in the opinion of the Black Rim ladies. They also believed
that she used paint and powder, which damned her beyond all hope of redemption.

Poor Belle Lorrigan (Black Rim country spoke of her always as Belle Lorrigan without in the
least understanding why she remained an individual personality to them instead of becoming
merely Mrs. Lorrigan--Mrs. Tom, even, since many of the Black Rim women were designated by
the nicknames of their husbands)! She would have been glad to be friendly, simply because friendliness
was in her blood and would out. She would have been glad to receive them at the Devil's Tooth
ranch for one of those all-day visits which were the custom of the country. But for a long
while they did not come. Sometimes she would meet a family bundled to the eyes against the
chill winds of Idaho, bumping over the rough roads on their way to visit some near neighbor
who lived only ten or fifteen miles away. She would flash them a smile while she pulled up
her bronco team out of the trail to make a generous room for their passing, and she would shout
something pleasant as they went by. And after they had gone on she would shrug her fine, broad
shoulders and call them cats, going out to a scratching, with all the kittens mewing along.
She would flap a hand--providing the bronco team left her a hand free to flap--and shake her
head, and say, "Not for mine, thank you!" And would be hurt down deep in her heart where it
did not show, because they never stopped at her door.

But when the boys began to come, then came the neighbor women, making formal two-hour calls
upon the new mother, eager to see and to hear and to go away and compare notes afterward. They
talked much of the names that Belle Lorrigan called her children. The first one she named for
the hero in her first play; wanting, I suppose, a souvenir of the time when she was fifteen
and had her first speaking part on the stage. She called her first-born Algernon Adelbert.
Algernon Adelbert Lorrigan, grandson of old Tom Lorrigan! Think of that!

But Algernon Adelbert no sooner outgrew his cradle than he was known to all and sundry as Al
Lorrigan, so that no harm was done him in giving him such a name. He grew up lusty and arrogant,
a good deal of a bully, six feet tall, a good rider--though, not so good a rider as his dad--a
good shot, willing to help gather that million together on the chance that he might have a
share in the spending.

Al was a youth who hunted trouble for the thrill of meeting it more than half-way, but since
Tom Lorrigan happened to be his father, Al rode off the Devil's Tooth ranch before he became
the rampant young trouble-hunter. Belle had some anxious hours during the time Al was gone,
but she never once betrayed her anxiety; which is doing pretty well for a mother.

The second was Marmaduke LeRoy, and the third and last she recklessly christened Lancelot Montgomery.
Marmaduke never learned to spell his name correctly, and sometimes complained that Belle had
gone and named him after a mess of preserves,--meaning marmalade, I suppose. But as he grew
older he forgot his grievance. Belle was the only person who could remember offhand his full
name, and she never called him by it except when she was very angry; when she usually attached
so many adjectives that Marmaduke LeRoy was quite submerged. Commonly he was called Duke, which
did well enough.

Tom used to study Duke through half-closed lids and the smoke of a cigarette, and wonder which
side of the family had a yellow streak; not the Lorrigan side, so far as Tom could judge. Nor
the Delavan side either, if Belle lived true to type. To be sure, Belle refused to ride a horse;
but then Belle was a woman and women had whims. There was no yellow about Belle, except her
hair which was pure golden.

Duke would invariably lie to dodge punishment. According to his own theory, Duke was always
blameless, always the injured party, the boy who does right and never is given credit for his
virtues. Even Belle, who would fight for her boys as a tigress fights for its young, looked
askance at Duke while she tried, motherlike, to cover his faults from the keen eyes of Tom.

"I'd just like to know how you come by it," she once exclaimed exasperatedly, when Duke was
ten and Lance eight. "I'd sure chop one limb off the family tree, if I knew which one gave
you the gall to lie to me and Tom. Duke, for heaven's sake take a licking just once without
trying to lay the blame on Al or Lance--and see how proud you'll feel afterwards!"

"Aw--lickins hur-rt!" Duke had protested, rubbing the arm Belle had gripped none too gently,
and sidled away from her.

With her hands to her hips--gracefully posed there, as became an actress--Belle regarded him
fixedly. "My Gawd!" she whispered, owning defeat before that invulnerable selfishness of Duke's.

Her tone stung even his young crocodile-hided sensibility. "You're always blamin' me. You'n
Tom think I do everything mean on this ranch! You think Lance is an angel! He's your pet and
you let him pick on me an' you never say a word. Lance can do any darn thing he pleases, an'
so can Al. I'm goin' to run away, first thing you know. You can have your sweet little angel
pet of a doggone ole cowardly-calf Lance!" Then he whined, "Aw--you lemme go! I never done
it, I tell yuh! It was Lance!"

Belle gritted her teeth while she shook him. "You yellow-hearted little whelp. I saw you chasing
that colt around the corral till he broke the fence! If Tom was to know about it he'd lick
you good! Duke, why can't you be a man and take the blame yourself, just once? I'd be--I'd
be so proud o' you if you only told the truth about things. Don't you know--it's only a coward
that will lie to save his own skin?"

"Lance is a bigger coward than I am, an' you never say a word to him. You think Lance is perfect."

"I guess you're hopeless all right," Belle retorted. "It's just a yellow streak in you somewhere.
Living with the Lorrigans, I'm hoping you'll outgrow it. The Lorrigans sure ain't yellow!"

"I chased Blackie some, Belle," Lance volunteered, peering down over the stable eave at his
irate mother. "Duke started in and got him going good, and when he come fogging over to this
side I flopped my arms at him. Gee, but he did stop quick! I guess if you're going to lick
Duke, you better give me about four good licks for that, Belle. And take 'em off Duke's licking.
No use licking us both for the same thing."

Belle tilted her yellow head and looked up at her beloved youngest, grinning down at her cheerfully
from the hay roof where he sprawled head downward, flat on his stomach.

"Well, thank the Lord one Lorrigan has got the nerve to own up to a thing. Come on down and
get your four licks, then. I can be as square as the next one. But Duke's got it coming to
him for lying to me. Tell me, Lance, did Duke chase Blackie through the fence?"

"Aw go on, Belle! What's matter with you, asking me what Duke done? He's the feller to ask
about that. I chased Blackie about four licks' worth. Hurry up and let's get it over with.
You know it ain't pleasant for either of us!"

"Smarty!" yelled Duke, quick to read in Belle's face what softening effect Lance had on her
temper. "Tryin' to be smart--tryin' to be George Wash'nton! You little liar, you know you chased
Blackie more'n what I done. Sneak out of it--yeah, that's you, every time. Own up just enough
to make Belle think you're an angel. Doggone the whole doggone outfit!"

"Now what?" Tom's voice broke in upon Duke's shrill tirade. From the back of his horse Tom
looked down quizzically upon them. "Duke, what you been up to?"

"Aw, you always think it's me! Why don't you ask Lance what he's been up to? Why don't you
lick Lance for being on the stable? If I was to get up there and tromp around in the hay and
make it leak, I know what I'd git!"

Tom sent a glance up to where Lance was hastily scrambling down a corner. "You'd better!" he
commented sternly. Then he looked at Belle, his eyes twinkling under his scowl.

"If you can't handle these young devils, Belle, turn 'em over to me. I'll mighty quick settle
their hash for 'em."

Belle gripped tighter the squirming Duke. "I'm not a cripple yet, Tom Lorrigan. They've both
got a licking coming to 'em, and if you'll kindly walk off stage R. C. I'll go on with the
scene. You weren't cued to come on here."

"It's your show, Belle," Tom assented, and very obligingly rode to the other side of the stable
to unsaddle his horse, and grinned to himself when the sound of wailing and pleading and promises
of the "I'll-never-do-it-again" variety came to his ears. Belle's lickings were distinguished
chiefly by their uproar.

"Belle wallops 'em like brandin' calves," Tom used to chuckle. "They beller a plenty while
it's going on, and kick up their heels when it's all over. I wish't my dad had licked me like
that when I was a kid. You can gamble, when I was thrashed, I knowed it!"

Duke grew up to be a very good cowpuncher, however. He knew every draw and dry wash, every
creek bottom and every canyon on the Black Rim range; knew almost as well as the owner how
many cattle carried every brand. In the Devil's Tooth round-ups Duke held his place alongside
Al as a top hand,--disputing now and then the right of young Lance to compete with him, but
never quite daring to bring his dispute to the point where action would take the place of words.

"Duke's sure enough a bad man--with his face," Tom once snarled to Belle. "Make it a talking
match, and Duke could lick any old woman, in the Black Rim country."

"There's been enough fighting Lorrigans, don't you think?" Belle smiled back at him. "Duke's
dad can fight hard enough for the whole family. I didn't think you wanted your boys to be fighters."

"I don't. But I sure do want 'em to have the fightin' stuff in 'em, whether it ever comes out
or not. Take Lance, there. Lance ain't a fighter, either; but by the Lord John, it's there!
Once get Lance started, and I'd back him against any three men in the Black Rim. It's in him,
if the play ever come up. And it's in Al. The Lorrigan is strong in Al. But that Duke--"

"Honey, I think maybe it's the Delavan in Duke. I remember an old maid aunt of mine that used
to bolt the door and quarrel with my mother through the keyhole. I guess maybe Duke has got
a little touch of Aunt Jane."

"Oh, sure! First I ever heard of Aunt Jane, Belle. Takes you to think up a reason."

"And the Lorrigan will come out, honey. He's got the look, now and then. It's in him, you'll see."

So that is how the Lorrigan boys grew up. They thought Belle the most beautiful, the most wonderful
woman in the world,--though they never called her mother. Belle would not have it. She refused
to become a motherly, middle-aged person, and her boys were growing altogether too big and
too masterful to look upon a golden-curled, pink-cheeked, honey-throated Amazon as other Black
Rim sons looked upon their faded, too often shrewish maternal parent. She was just Belle. They
knew no other like her, no one with whom they might compare her. We do not compare the sun
and the moon with other suns and moons. Like Tom, they worshipped her in their hearts, and
chummed with her even before they had outgrown her stormy chastisements. They mended her buckboards
and her harness; they galloped alongside while she drove careening across the range, her hair
flying in the wind, her mouth smiling and showing her white teeth. They danced with her,--and
having Belle for a teacher from the time they could toddle, you may guess how the Lorrigan
boys could dance. They sang the songs she taught them; they tried to better her record at target
practice and never did it; they quarreled with her when her temper was up and dodged her when
it became too cyclonic.

They grew up without ever having ridden on the cars, save once or twice to Lava. Black Rim
was the rim of the world to them, and their world held all that they yearned for. Belle sheltered
them from too much knowledge of that other world, which held the past she hated and tried to
forget. Much she taught them of city manners and the little courtesies of life. She would box
the ears of the boy who neglected to rise and offer her a chair when she entered a room, and
would smoke a cigarette with him afterward. Once she whipped her six-shooter out of its holster
and shot a hole through the crown of Al's hat, as a tactful reminder that gentlemen always
remove their hats when they come into a house. Al remembered, after that. At fourteen even
the hardiest youth feels a slight shock when a bullet jars through his hat crown two inches
above his hair.

CHAPTER THREE

MARY HOPE DOUGLAS APPEARS

Devil's Tooth ridge, which gave the Lorrigan ranch its name, was really a narrow hogback with
a huge rock spire at one end. Crudely it resembled a lower jaw bone with one lone tooth remaining.
Three hundred feet and more the ridge upthrust its barren crest, and the wagon road from the
ranch crawled up over it in many switchbacks and sharp turns, using a mile and a half in the
climbing. They called it the "dug road." Which meant that teams and scrapers and dynamite and
much toil had been necessary in the making, distinguishing it from most Black Rim roads, which
followed the line of least resistance until many passings had worn a definite trail; whereupon
that trail became an established thoroughfare legalized by custom and not to be lightly changed
for another.

Over in the next valley, beyond Devil's Tooth ridge, Alexander Douglas had made a ranch for
himself and his family. Aleck Douglas was as Scotch as his name. He shaved his long upper lip,
so that it looked longer and more uncompromising than was necessary even to match the Aleck
Douglas disposition. His hair was wiry and stood up from a forehead that might be called beetling.
His eyebrows were heavy and came so near to meeting that Mary Hope used to wish that she dared
lay one small finger between father's eyebrows, just to see if there would be room. His eyes
were as close together as his thin beak of a nose would permit, and his ears were long and
narrow and set flat against his head. He was tall and he was lank and he was honest to his
last bristling hair. He did not swear--though he could wither one with vituperative epithets--and
he did not smoke and he did not drink--er--save a wee nip of Scotch "whusky" to break up a
cold, which frequently threatened his hardy frame. He was harshly religious, and had there
been a church in the Black Rim country you would have seen Aleck Douglas drive early to its
door every Sunday morn, and sit straight-backed in a front pew and stare hard at the minister
through the longest of sermons,--providing, of course, that church and minister were good Presbyterian.

He loved the dollars, how he did love his dollars! He loved his cattle, because they represented
dollars. He nursed them, dollars and animals alike, and to lose one wrung the heart of him.

His wife was a meek little thing in his presence, as the wives of such men as Aleck Douglas
usually are. She also was rigidly honest, dogmatically religious and frugal and hard-working
and intolerant of the sins of others.

Early she taught Mary Hope that beyond Devil's Tooth ridge lived those wicked Lorrigans, whose
souls were bartered to the devil and whose evil ways were a stench in the nostrils of God.
Mary Hope used to wonder if God turned up his nose when there was a stench in his nostrils,--for
instance, when Belle Lorrigan hurtled past with her bronks and her buckboard and her yellow
hair flying. Mary Hope wondered, too, what the Lorrigan boys had got from the devil in exchange
for their souls. Some magic, perhaps, that would protect them from death and accident. Yet
that seemed not true, for Al Lorrigan broke his leg, one spring round-up. The devil ought to
have saved his horse from falling down with him, if the devil had Al Lorrigan's soul.

That had happened when Mary Hope was twelve and Al Lorrigan was eighteen. She heard her father
tell her mother about it; and her father had set his whiskered lip against his long, shaven
upper lip almost with a smack.

"They'll come to a bad end, all of them," he declared sententiously. "Violent deaths had all
the Lorrigans before them--all save Tom, and the Lord but stays his hand for a time from that
man. The wicked shall flourish as a green bay tree."

"Father, how can a tree be green and then bay too!" Mary Hope ventured to inquire. "Is it just
a Bible tree, or does it flourish somewhere really?"

Aleck Douglas hid his month behind his palm and coughed. "'Tis not bay like a horse, child.
'Tis not the color that I'm speaking of."

"That painted Jezebel, Belle Lorrigan, drove past the house to-day within a stone's throw,"
Mrs. Douglas informed her husband. "I wush, Aleck, that ye would fence me a yard to keep the
huzzy from driving over my very doorstep. She had that youngest brat of hers in the seat with
her--that Lance. And as they went past on the keen gallop--and the horses both in a lather
of sweat--the boy impudently shook his fist at me where I was glancing from my window. And
his mother lookit and laughed, the Jezebel!"

"Mother, Lance only waved his hand."

"And why should Lance be waving his hand when he should pass the house? Did he think that a
Douglas would come so low as to wave at a Lorrigan?"

Mary Hope ducked her sleek little pig-tailed head outside the door and shooed vehemently at
a dingy black hen that happened to be passing. Mary Hope knew that a Douglas had stooped so
low as to wave back at Lance Lorrigan, but it seemed unwise to tell her mother so.

When Mary Hope was permitted to have a gentle old cow-pony of her own, she rode as often as
she dared to Devil's Tooth ridge. By short cuts down certain washes which the trail avoided
with many winding detours, she could lope to the foot of the ridge in forty minutes by the
old alarm clock which she carried one day in her arms to time the trip. She could climb by
another shortcut trail, to the Devil's Tooth in twenty minutes. She could come down in fifteen,
she discovered. In a three-hour ride she could reach the-Devil's Tooth, spend a whole hour
looking down upon the ranch house of the wicked Lorrigans, and ride home again. And by choosing
the short cuts she practically eliminated the chance of being observed.

If she could see Belle go tearing down the trail with her bronks and her buckboard she would
be horrifiedly happy. The painted Jezebel fascinated Mary Hope, who had read all about that
wicked woman in the Bible, and had shivered in secret at her terrible fate. Belle Lorrigan
might never be eaten by dogs, since dogs are few in cattleland and are kept strictly at home,
but if Mary Hope's mother was any true prophetess, the painted Jezebel's final doom would be
quite as horrible.

At the infrequent parties which the Douglas household countenanced,--such as Christmas trees
and Fourth of July picnics, Mary Hope would sit and stare fixedly at Belle Lorrigan and wonder
if all painted Jezebels were beautiful and happy and smiling. If so, why was unadorned virtue
to be commended? Mary tried not to wish that her hair was yellow and hung in curls, and that
she had even white teeth and could sing and dance so wonderfully that everything stopped and
every one looked and listened from the minute she began until she stopped.

More than anything else in her starved young life, Mary Hope wanted to see the inside of the
Lorrigan house. The painted Jezebel had a real piano, and she could play it, people said. She
played ungodly songs, but Mary Hope had a venturesome spirit. She wanted to see an instrument
of the devil, hear the painted Jezebel play on it and sing her ungodly songs.

One day when she had ridden to the top of the Devil's Tooth a great, daring plan came to her.
She wanted to ride down there--a half mile down the bluff, a mile and a half by the road--but
she would never dare take that trail deliberately. Her father might hear of it, or her mother.
Nor could she ask the Lorrigans not to tell of her visit. But if her horse ran away with her
and took her down the ridge, she could ask them to please not tell her father, because if he
knew that her horse ran away he would not let her ride again. It seemed to Mary Hope that all
the Lorrigans would sympathize with her dilemma. They would probably ask her into the house.
She would see the piano, and she could ask the painted Jezebel to play on it. That would be
only polite. It did seem a shame that a girl thirteen years old, going on fourteen, should
never have seen or heard a piano. Mary Hope looked at the sun and made breathless calculation.
Having just arrived at the Devil's Tooth, she had an hour to spend. And if she took the steep,
winding trail that the Lorrigans rode, the trail where old man Lorrigan's horse had fallen
down with him, she could be at the house in a very few minutes.

"Ye look little enough like a runaway horse, ye wind-broken, spavined old crow-bait, you!"
she criticized Rab as he stood half asleep in the sun. "I shall have to tell a lee about you,
and for that God may wither the tongue of me. I shall say that a rattler buzzed beneath your
nose--though perhaps I should say it was behind ye, Rab, else they will wonder that ye didna
run away home. If ye could but lift an ear and roll the eye of you, wild-like, perhaps they
will believe me. But I dinna ken--I wouldna believe it mesel!"

Rab waggled an ear when she mounted, switched his tail pettishly when she struck him with the
quirt, reluctantly obeyed the rein, and set his feet on the first steep pitch of the Devil's
Tooth trail. Old as he was, Rab had never gone down that trail and he chose his footing circumspectly.
It was no place for a runaway, as Mary Hope speedily discovered when she had descended the
first dip and entered the cleft which the Lorrigans called the Slide.

A slide it was, and down it Rab slid on his rump. An old watercourse, with sheer rock walls
that formed the base of the Tooth itself. Had there been room Mary Hope would have turned back.
But the cleft was so narrow that a pack horse must be adept at squeezing past protuberances
and gauging the width of its pack if it would travel the trail. A sharp turn presently showed
her the end of the cleft, and they emerged thankfully upon a sage-grown shelf along which the
trail proceeded more gently.

Then came another cleft, with great boulders at the end, which a horse must negotiate carefully
if he would not break a leg or two. It was here that old Tom Lorrigan had died under his horse
before help came that way. But Rab had covered many rough trails, and he picked his way over
the boulders safely,--though not as a runaway horse should have traveled.

After that there came a treacherous bit of shale, across which Mary Hope thought it best to
lead her runaway steed which refused for a time to venture farther. Being a Douglas she was
obstinate. Being obstinate, she would not turn back, especially since the trail would be even
worse in the climbing than it was in the descent. Rab, she realized worriedly, could not slide
up that narrow, rock-bottomed cleft down which he had coasted so readily.

"They must be devil horses that ride this way, Rab," she sighed when she had remounted on the
lower margin of the shale. "And the Lorrigans na doot have magic. But I dinna think that even
they could run away down it."

She struck Rab sharply with the quirt and dug in her heels. If Rab was to run it must be immediately,
for the level valley lay just below and the Lorrigan house was around the next point of the hill.

Rab would not run. He stopped abruptly and kicked with both feet. Mary Hope struck him again,
a little harder, and Rab kicked again, more viciously. The trail was much better for kicking
than for running, but Mary Hope would not accept the compromise, and at last Rab yielded to
the extent of loping cautiously down the last steep declivity. When he reached level ground
he laid back his ears and galloped as fast as his stiffened shoulders would let him. So Mary
Hope very nearly achieved a dashing pace as she neared the corrals of the wicked Lorrigans.

"Well! Yuh traveling, or just goin' somewhere?" A young voice yelled at her as she went past
the stable.

"My horse--is--he rinned away wi' me!" screamed Mary Hope, her pigtails snapping as Rab slowed
up and stopped.

"He rinned away wi' you? When? You musta been purty young for riding when that horse rinned
away!" Lance came toward her, grinning and slapping his hat against his fringed chaps before
he set it upon his head; an uncommonly handsome head, by the way, with the Lorrigan's dark
eyes and hair and his mother's provocative mouth. "Well, seeing your horse ain't going to rin
no further, you might as well git down and stay awhile."

"I will not. I didna come to visit, if you please."

Mary Hope's cheeks were hot but confusion could not break her Scotch spirit.

"Want to borrow something?" Lance stood looking at her with much enjoyment. A girl in short
skirts was fair game for any one's teasing, especially when she blushed as easily as did Mary
Hope. "Want to borrow a horse that will rin away wi' you."

"Lance, you devil, get out and leave the girl alone. I'm ashamed of you! Haven't you got any
manners at all?--after all the willows and the good powder I've wasted on you! Get back to
that pasture fence before I take a club to you for such acting!"

Before Belle's wrath Lance retreated, and Mary Hope found the courage to wrinkle her nose at
him when he glanced her way. "He rinned away to save himself a whupping," she commented, and
made sure that he heard it, and hoped that he would realize that she spoke "Scotchy" just for
his special benefit.

"All right for you, Belle Lorrigan!" Lance called back, retaliating for Mary Hope's grimace
by a kiss thrown brazenly in the expectation of seeing her face grow redder; which it did immediately.
"Careful of that horse--he might rinned away again!"

"That'll do for you, young man!" Whereupon Belle picked up a small stone and threw it with
such accurate aim that Lance's hat went off. "Good thing for you that I haven't got a gun on
me, or I'd dust your heels for you!" Then she turned to Mary Hope, who was listening with titillating
horror to the painted Jezebel's unorthodox method of reproving her offspring. "Get right down,
honey, and come in and rest. And don't mind Lance; he's an awful tease, especially when he
likes a person. Tie your horse to the fence--or turn him in the corral, if he'll let you catch
him again."

"I--I don't believe I could stop. I--I only came by because I--my horse--" Mary Hope stammered
and blushed so red that her freckles were invisible. After all, it was very hard to tell a
lie, she discovered.

"There's something I like about this horse," said Belle, running her plump white hand down
the nose of Rab. "He's neighborly, anyway. He brought you here against your will, I can see
that. And now he's here he sort of takes it for granted you'll be friendly and stop a while.
Don't you think you ought to be as friendly as your horse, honey?"

"I--I am friendly. I--I always wished I could come and see you. But mother--mother doesna visit
much among the neighbors; she--she's always busy."

"I don't visit much, myself," said Belle dryly. "But that ain't saying I can't be friendly.
Come on in, and we'll have some lemonade."

Sheer astonishment brought Mary Hope down from her horse. All her life she had taken it for
granted that lemonade was sacred to the Fourth of July picnics, just as oranges grew for Christmas
trees only. She followed Belle dumbly into the house, and once inside she remained dumb with
awe at what seemed to her to be the highest pinnacle of grandeur.

There was the piano with a fringed scarf draped upon its top, and pictures in frames standing
upon the scarf in orderly rows. There were many sheets of music,--and never a hymn book. There
were great chairs with deep upholstery which Mary observed with amazement was not red plush,
nor even blue plush, yet which appealed to her instincts for beauty. There was no center table
with fringed spread and family album and a Bible and a conch shell. Instead there was a long
table before a window--a table littered with all sorts of things: a box of revolver cartridges,
a rifle laid down in the middle of scattered newspapers, a bottle of oil, more music, a banjo,
a fruit jar that did duty as a vase for wild flowers, a half-finished, braided quirt and four
silver dollars lying where they had been carelessly flung down. To Mary Hope, reared in a household
where dollars were precious things, that last item was the most amazing of all. The Lorrigans
must be rich,--as rich as they were wicked. She thrilled anew at her own daring.

Belle brought lemonade, wonderful lemonade, with an egg beaten to yellow froth and added the
last minute. Mary Hope sipped and marveled. After that, Belle played on the piano and sang
songs which Mary Hope had never heard before and which she thought must be the songs the angels
sang in Heaven, although there was nothing to suggest harps or hallelujahs. Love songs they
were, mostly. The sun slipped around and shone through a window on Belle's head, so that her
yellow hair glistened like fine threads of gold. Mary Hope watched it dreamily and wondered
how a Jezebel could be so beautiful and so good.

"You'd better run along home now, honey," Belle said at last when she had finished her eighth
song. "I'd love to have you stay all night--but I reckon there'd be trouble. Your dad ain't
any too mild, I've heard. But I hope you won't wait until your horse runs away with you again.
I want you to come real soon. And come early so you can stay longer. I'll teach you to play
the piano, honey. You ought to learn, seeing you love it so."

That night Mary Hope dreamed of playing strange, complex compositions on a piano which Lance
Lorrigan had given her. The next morning and for many days after she still dreamed of playing
entrancing strains upon a piano, and of Lance Lorrigan who had thrown her a kiss. Belle had
said that Lance always teased a person he liked, and in that one remark lay the stuff of many
dreams.

CHAPTER FOUR

A MATTER OF BRANDS

On the grassy expanse known locally as Injun Creek, fifteen hundred head of cattle were milling
restlessly in a close-held herd over which gray dust hovered and settled and rose again. Toward
it other cattle came lowing, trotting now and then when the riders pressed close, essaying
a retreat when the way seemed clear. From Devil's Tooth they came, and from Lava Bed way, and
from the rough sandstone ridges of Mill Creek. Two by two the riders, mere moving dots at first
against a monotone of the rangeland, took form as they neared the common center. Red cattle,
black cattle, spotted and dingy white, with bandy-legged, flat-bodied calves keeping close
to their mothers, kicking up their heels in sheer joy of their new life when the pace slowed
a little, seeking a light lunch whenever the cows stopped to cast a wary glance back at their
pursuer. A dozen brands were represented in that foregathering: The NL brand of Tom Lorrigan
on most, with its various amendments which differentiated the property of other members of
the family, since all of the Lorrigans owned cattle. There was the NL Block of Belle Lorrigan,
the ANL which was Al's brand, the DNL of Duke and the LNL which belonged to Lance; monograms
all of them, deftly constructed with the fewest possible lines. There was that invitation to
the unlawful artistry of brand-working, the Eleven which Sleek Douglas thought quite sufficient
to mark his cattle. It was merciful to the calves, he maintained, and as to thieves, the dishonest
would be punished by law and the Douglas wrath. The Miller brand, a plain Block, showed now
and then upon the rump of some animal. The AJ fled occasionally before a rider, and there were
brands alien to the Black Rim; brands on cattle that had drifted down from the Snake through
the Lava Creek pass, or over the sage-grown ridges farther north.

His rifle sheathed in a saddle holster under his thigh, his black eyes roving here and there
and letting no small movement of men or animals escape their seeing glances, Tom Lorrigan rode
to the round-up, lord of the range, steadfast upon the trail of his "million on the hoof" of
which he dreamed. Beside him rode Al, and the two of them were talking while they rode.

"He ain't safe, I tell you," Al was saying in the tone of reiteration. "And you needn't ask
me how I know. I know it, that's all. Maybe he's too damn' agreeable or something. Anyway,
I know I don't like the way his eyes set in his head."

"A man that wasn't safe wouldn't dare come into the Black Rim and make the play he's makin',"
Tom contended. "I've had my eye on him ever since he come. I've checked up what he says at
different times--they tally like the truth. I can't find nothing wrong."

"I've got him set down for a spotter," said Al.

"If he ain't on the level it'll show up sooner or later," Tom contended. "I've got my eye on
him. I dunno what you pin your argument on, Al, I'll be darned if I do."

"Well, watch out for Cheyenne. That's all. You're pretty keen, all right, but all a man's got
to do to get on your blind side is to blow in here with his chin on his shoulder and his horse
rode to a whisper and claim to you he's hidin' out. Cheyenne ain't right, I tell yuh. You take
a tip from me and watch him."

"Takes a kid to tell his dad where to head in at!" growled Tom. "How do you reckon I ever got
along before your time. Ever figure that out, Al?"

"Now, what's eatin' on old Scotty Douglas, do yuh reckon? That's him, all right. I could tell
him on horseback ten mile off. He rides like a Mormon."

Tom grunted. His boys, he had long ago discovered, were very apt to find some excuse for changing
the subject whenever he mentioned the past which had not held their arrogant young selves.
Tom resented the attitude of superior wisdom which they were prone to assume. They were pretty
smart kids, but if they thought they were smarter than their dad they sure had a change of
heart coming to them.

"Supposin' it is old Scotty. Do you reckon, Al, I've got you along for a guide, to point out
what my eyes is getting too poor to see? As for Cheyenne," he reverted angrily to the argument,
"as for Cheyenne, when you've growed to be a man, you'll find it's just as much the mark of
a fool to go along suspecting everybody as it is to bank on everybody. You think now it's funny
to put the Judas brand on every man you don't know. It ain't. It's a kid's trick. Boys git
that way when they begin to sprout hair under their noses. I been pretty patient with yuh,
Al. You're growing up fast, and you're feeling your oats. I make allowances, all kinds. But
by the humpin' hyenas, don't you start in telling me where to head in at with my own outfit!
If you do, I'll jest about wear out a willer switch on yuh!"

This to a youth almost old enough to vote was dire insult. Al pulled up his horse. "Run your
own outfit and be darned to yuh!" he cried hotly, and spurred off in the direction of the ranch.

Tom laughed shortly and rolled a cigarette. "Thinks now it'll bust up the round-up if he goes,"
he opined. "Lucky for my kids I ain't as strict as my old dad was; they wouldn't have any hide
left, I reckon."

Up loped Aleck Douglas then, riding stiff-legged, his bony elbows jerking awkwardly with the
motion of his horse, a rusty black vest dangling open under his coat which flapped in the wind.
That the Douglas wrath rode with him Tom saw from the corner of his eye and gave no sign.

"Hello," said Tom casually and drew a match along the stamped fork of his saddle. "You're quite
a stranger." He lighted his cigarette, holding his reins lightly in one hand while he did so;
gave the reins a gentle flip to one side and sent his horse after a cow and calf that showed
symptoms of "breaking back."

"Mister Lorrigan, 'tis aboot a spotted yearlin' that I've come to speak with ye. I've found
the hide of her in the brush beneath yon hill, and the brand is cut from it. But I wad swear
to the hide wi'out the brand. 'Twas a yearlin' I ken weel, Mister Lorrigan." He rode alongside,
and his close-set little eyes regarded keenly Tom's face.

"A spotted yearling with the brand cut out, hey? That looks kinda bad. Have you got the hide
with you?"

"I have no got the hide wi' me, but I ken weel whaur it lies, Mister Lorrigan, and I thinkit
so do you."

"Hm-m. You'd ought to of brought it along." Tom's glance went out toward the herd and the cattle
lumbering toward it far and near. "The range is plumb lousy with spotted yearlings, Scotty.
What do you expect me to do about it?"

The Douglas face worked spasmodically before he spoke. "I expect ye, Mr. Lorrigan, to pay for
yon beastie. I ken weel ye could name the mon that stickit the knife in her throat. An' she
made fine eatin', I have na doot. But 'tis the law, Mister Lorrigan, that a mon should pay
for the meat he consumes."

"Meaning, of course, that you think I'm feeding Douglas meat to my outfit. Don't you think
you're kinda hasty? I kill a beef about every three or four days in round-up time. The boys
work hard and they eat hard. And they eat NL beef, Scotty; don't overlook that fact. Hides
ain't worth anything much, but salt's cheap, too. I ain't throwin' away a dollar when it's
no trouble to save it. If you're any curious at all, you ride over to ranch and count all the
green hides you can find. Belle, she'll show 'em to you. Take a look at the brands, and figure
it out yourself, I don't know how many you'll find, but I'll gamble you a dozen cows against
one that you'll wonder what went with all the beef that was in them hides. Humpin' hyenas!
Ain't I got cattle enough of my own, without rustlin' off my neighbors?"

"Aye. Ye ha' cattle, Mister Lorrigan; I ken weel ye should no' be put to it for a wee bit meat--but
I ken weel yon spotty yearlin' was mine. I ken ye've been campin' thereabout--and it wad seem,
Mister Lorrigan, that the salt was no sa plentifu' when the spotty yearlin' was kilt."

The downright foolhardiness of the Douglas wrath held Tom's hand,--though of a truth that hand
trembled and crept backward. Nor was Aleck Douglas nearsighted; he saw the movement and his
bearded underlip met his shaven underlip in a straight line.

"Ye do weel to be reachin' for the gun, Mister Lorrigan. I dinna carry aye weapon save the truth."

Tom flushed. "Blame your oatmeal soul, if I reached for my gun, you wouldn't be telling me
about it!" he exploded. "Carry the truth, do yuh? You've got to show me where you keep it,
then. If you wasn't an old man--and a darn fool on top of that."

"'Tis no brave to cover shame wi' bitter words, Tam Lorrigan. 'Tis the way of ye to bluster
and bully until the neighbors all are affrighted to face ye and yere ill deeds."

Toward them clattered two riders hotly pursuing a lean, long-legged steer with a wide spread
of horns and a gift of speed that carried him forging past the disputants. Tom wheeled mechanically
and gave chase, leaving the Douglas wrath to wax hotter or to cool if it would. It was a harsh
accusation that Aleck Douglas had made, and that he did make it seemed to prove that he had
what he considered very good evidence that he was right. Tom was well schooled in troubles
of that kind. He did not take the matter so indifferently as Douglas believed.

Duke and Mel Wilson, riding hard, came upon Tom just as he had roped and thrown the steer in
a shallow draw that hid them from the level where Aleck Douglas waited.

"Hey!" Tom beckoned them close. "Old Douglas says there's a hide in the willows this side of
Squaw Butte, with the brand cut out; a spotted yearling, and he claims it's his and he can
swear to it without the brand. I don't know a darn thing about it. Nobody does in this outfit;
I'll stake all I've got on that. But he's on the fight--and a mule's a sheep alongside him
when he's got his back up. He left the hide where he found it. Haze this steer and ride over
there and see what there is to his talk. If you find a hide cachéd in the willows, put it outa
sight. We don't want any rustling scraps started on this range; that's bad medicine always.
If he can't produce any hide, he can't start anything but talk--and talk's cheap."

A few moments later they came tearing up out of the draw, the steer running strong, the three
riders still hotly pursuing. Duke and Mel rushed it on to the herd, and Tom dropped out of
the race and came along across to where Douglas wrath had not cooled but had smoldered and
waited for the wind of opposition to fan it to flame again.

"Well, you still mournin' over your spotty yearlin'?" Tom called. "You must have more time
than you know what to do with to-day. Us, we have to work."

"If it's to the round-up ye're going, then I'll ride wi' ye, Tom Lorrigan. I've seen
Bareges devotees, and I myself had the courage to upset the boiling mud teeming do Acqui sulphurous
water, acting for itself with strange beats that only notice between living beings.

The baths is a matter of life or death, his action is critical. Many patients had been consumed
slowly and thanks to them quickly passed to the afterlife! Often these mighty waters temporarily
restore the health of the patient, making a terrible call to the cause of evil passions. Then they
become violent to occur, to great strife, boiling springs as the wake. Smoke, sulphurous, intoxicating
air of the region, all resemble the aura that swelled, the mob and forced to Sybil talk. Is an eruption
of our body that makes you go outside what had been harder had to hide. Nothing is hidden in
the babel where under the pretext of health, you live outside the laws of this world, taking
the liberties of others. Half-dead and semidead Vesela in game tables, pale and haggard, engulfed
in wild pleasures, of which often do not wake up.

* * *

The breath of the sea is another thing, since purifies itself.

That should also air purity, and especially the rapid change that is made of a the other, the mutual
transformation of the two oceans. Nothing rest, languishing anywhere life nor slumbers. The sea
makes, deshácela and remakes. At each moment passes, wild and vivacious through the crucible
of death. The air even more violent, and again lashed by wind, driven by the whirlwinds, waterspouts
concentrated burst into electricity, is continuously revolution.

Living on earth is the rest at sea, an eternal struggle, but fight
for life-giving you can bear.

* * *

Men of the Middle Ages had a great aversion and hatred to the sea, "the kingdom of Prince of
the winds. "appointees to the devil. The seventeenth century noble to live among the rugged
disgustábale seamanship. The drab-looking castle, with a rough garden, was almost always located
away, as far as possible from the sea, somewhere without air, deprived of sight, surrounded
by moist forests.

Also, the English village, lost in the shadow of trees copudos and between the heavy fog, often reflected
his silhouette in the mud of some unhealthy swamp. What today is striking in England, numerous
villas sea, hobby to live in the sea, the bathrooms even in the depths of winter, this is something
modern, premeditated and desired.

Coastal populations that sustains the sea, were more sympathetic to the English. His instinct presagiábale
them a great power of life, taking first place in your favor, your purgative virtue. Those
people had not stopped watching that helped purge to neutralize the evils of the time, and
scrofula sores that are its consequence, the step that the bitterness he seemed an excellent
antidote to worms that plague children. They also ate unscrupulous algae and certain polyps (Haleyonia),
guessing iodine-containing and constraining power to heal and strengthen
the tissues.

These popular recipes came to notice and were collected by Russell, paving the way and greatly
helping to answer the serious question that led the Duke of Newcastle.

In its response, made an important and interesting book entitled: Tabe Glandularia, seu aquæ
USU marinae, 1750.

It is the next witty statement: "This is not to cure but to remake and create. "

Russell proposes a miracle but a miracle practicable: to make meat, to create tissues. Of so
that works mainly on the creature, who, although committed in the
womb his mother, can still be rebuilt.

It was the moment that Bakewell had just invented the meat. The thing that until then applies
only served to produce milk, they were going to give more generous hereinafter food. The tasteless
milk scheme, should be abandoned by those who were thrown into action every day.

Russell by his side, with great timing, invented the sea through his book, I mean I came into
vogue.

The whole is summed up in four words, but those words are at once a medical and Education:
1. No. You drink the sea water, bathing in it and eat as much produce that has concentrated its virtue:
2. No child should not be very warm, and have them always in touch
with air .-- Air, water, and nothing else.

The last tip is well daring. Keep the creature almost naked, under a humid climate and variable,
was resigned in advance to the sacrifice of the weak. Survived strong, and perpetuated the
race only for these rehízose more and better.

Add to this that the business, movement, navigation, uprooting the child from school and emancipatory
early education saved me from sedentary and ruined lives that Britain
reserved only for the children of their lords, nobles for students
of Oxford and Cambridge.

* * *

In his ingenious book, which shines the popular instinct, Russell was far from guessing that
within a century all the sciences mancomunarían to give the reason, and that revealing each a
new phase of the case, find out in the sea a complete treatise of therapy.

The most precious elements of terrestrial animal are superabundant in sea, and invariable whole,
healthy, alive, in trust to rebuild their lives.

So, science has been able to say to everyone: "Come quickly, people, come, overwhelmed workers,
come, depleted forces young women, creatures punished by the vices of your fathers; forth, emaciated
humanity, and tell me frankly, to the presence of the sea, you need to reanimarte. This principle
of reparation, whatever the sea you have. "

The universal base of life, the embryonic mucus, the living animal gelatin birthplace and reborn
man, where he took and constantly takes the juicy consistency of his being, that treasure
sea ​​enclose it so much that is his life. With it produces, it saturates your vegetables, their
animals, lavishing widely. Your generosity makes a mockery to the meanness of the earth. Since
we are in such abundance, you know if you want to pick their gifts.

His wealth food going to amamantaros by torrents.

"More - say those, - precisely what we lack is the support and as
the frame of man.

Our bones are bent, bent, compressed, due to sick weak that only serves food to fill their bellies.
It gets soft, hesitant. "Perfectly: they lack the limestone abounds in such a way at sea, which
covers all their shells and stony corals construction, to form continents. Your fish, make travel
and fleet bank immense, so immense, that sprawled along the coast that rich food, serves as
fertilizer.

And you, young sickly no mood to complain, is headed for the grave (who do not see it?) melting,
leaving sunk by its own steps, then you have (at sea) the triple power tonic, the healthy tone
that says all living tissue.

Thenthe Disseminated iodine in its waters to the surface, is found in varech that endlessly
it is impregnated, the animalised is at its most prolific tribe, the gades (haddock, etc.).. Pollock
and their millions of eggs would be sufficient in themselves to iodize all the earth.

Did you miss it to heat?

The sea has, and the most perfect of all, that insensible heat bodies
bouncing crass, latent, but so powerful that if it was divided, balanced,
balanced, all the ice melt, making the pole in Ecuador.

The precious blood red, warm blood, is the triumph of the sea. For she has encouraged and reinforced
incomparable to his giant strength, so far above all earthly creation. And if manufactured that element,
it may, in his gift, new factories, to buy you a pink tinge, revive her, poor faded flower,
faded. She is full, overflowing of the much needed to you.

Children of the sea in the blood itself is another sea, which, at first drive runs and smokes, and
purple at a great distance the ocean.

Here is revealed the mystery. All the principles that you are united, that great person has
divided impersonal.

She holds your bones, your blood, your sap and your warmth represented each of these elements
by this or that of their children.

And she has what you lack, too much fullness and excessive force. His breath produces not know
what joy, activity, creativity, what we might call physical heroism. And in spite of its violence,
the great generator shed no less so in the wild joy, gaiety and productive lives, the wild flame
of love that beats within it.

II

Choice of beach.

The earth is your doctor every clime a remedy. The medicine will be more and more each day
emigration.

But emigration sighted. Will work for the future, not remain inert, sheltering incurable diseases,
but will prevent them through education, hygiene and particularly travel - not fast and foolish, perverse,
like those made today, but cleverly calculated to take advantage of the aid, the quickening power
that all party has preserved nature.

The fountain of youth of the future to find you on these two things: the science of emigration
and the art of acclimatization. To date, the man is a captive like
an oyster on its rock.

If you migrate a few steps beyond the temperate zone, only find death.

Will not free man in every sense of the word, until that special art what constitutes in true
inhabitant of the planet.

Small number of diseases are cured in circumstances and places where
they were born and acquired development, depending on certain habits
that perpetuate those sites and makes them invincible.

No reform (physical or moral) for that which remains stubbornly in their original sin.

Medicine, illuminated by all the auxiliary sciences, methods succeed
us, directions to drive safely to this new route.

Matters above all, saving transitions. Can one, not prepared, without altering somewhat the habit,
the scheme of life, move from a central climate (Paris, Lyon, Dijon, Strasbourg) to a maritime
climate?

Is given without having breathed the air long the coast, begin to bathe in the sea? "Puédese,
without having a habit of prudent hydrotherapy, starting on the inside, go to challenge outdoor
nerve constriction, the horripilation of cold water takes on top his return and he often in
the midst of a strong wind?

These preliminary questions, call more and more each day the attention
of the initiated in the science of healing.

The extreme speed rail travel is something antimedical. Go, as is done in twenty hours of Paris
to the Mediterranean, crossing a climate as diverse as every sixty minutes, is the height of recklessness
for a nervous person.

Drunk it comes to Marseilles, disquietude, owned Vertigo .-- When Madame de Sevigne used a
month in Britain to go to Provence, saved step by step and by degrees, the violent opposition
of these two climates, passing insensibly of the maritime area of ​​the West to the East, the only
terrestrial climate of Burgundy. Then, walking slowly through the hills of the Rhone in the Dauphine,
faced with less work in the region of strong winds, Valence and Avignon. Finally, resting
in Aix (Provence interior), away from the Rhone and the coast, he used his chest and his breathing
climate of Provence: and then, only then, approached the sea.

* * *

France has the wonderful advantage of being bathed by two seas. Hence the ease of alternate with the
seasons, tempers, the degrees of the disease, tone Mediterranean salt and tone wetter, softer
(save the storms), which offers us the ocean.

In each of these two seas is a graduated scale of seasons, more or less soft more or less invigorating. It's
very interesting to note that double range, and often followed, tone going from weakest to
strongest.

The Ocean, part of the strong waters and invigorating, windy, stormy, de la Mancha, softens
in the end at Noon Britain, humanizing even more in the Gironde, and is very gentle on the closed
shell Basin.

The Mediterranean, circular almost, has its highest note in the dry climate and pervasive Provence
and Genoa, softened to Pisa, is balanced in Sicily, while in Algiers gets a remarkable degree of
fixity. In return, much smoother Valencia and Mallorca, and the small doors in the Roussillon,
as well sheltered from the north.

* * *

Two characters are pleasant Mediterranean on all things so harmonious plan and liveliness,
transparency of the atmosphere and light. Blue sea is one very bitter, saladísimo, losing by evaporation
three times more water than the rivers that bring. It would just be salt and become as pungent
as the Dead Sea, where lower currents, such like Gibraltar, not constantly
tempered by the waters of the ocean.

What I have seen the beaches were gorgeous, but somewhat rough. Nothing vulgar. Tracing underground
fires that are found everywhere, their dark Plutonian rocks, never fatigue, which occurs with
the endless sand dunes or aqueous sediment shores bravas. And if the famous orange groves seem somewhat
monotonous, however the warm recesses do African vegetation dominates, aloes and cactus hedges
exquisite fields planted myrtle and jasmine, finally, the wild moors fragrant odor, cause
your admiration. Truth is that most of the time hanging over your head bald and barren Mountains:
their long feet, their vast roots that are continuing into the sea, in refléjanse the bottom of
the water. "It seemed to my basket - says a traveler, - swimming in two atmospheres, as if impelled
by the air up and down. "and goes on to describe the world changed of plants and animals that
looked under the glass on the shores of Sicily. Less fortunate I want him, pacing through the sea
of ​​Genoa over water so transparent as described I only saw the
desert.

The spandrels volcanic rocks of the beach, black or white marble even more grim, I represented at
the bottom of mirror bright natural monuments sort of ancient tombs, ruined churches. Sometimes
figurábame distinguish certain reproductions on the cathedrals of Florence or Pisa, others seemed
to see monsters or silent sphinxes unnamed, did whales?

"Elephants?

I do not know: chimeras of my fantasy, yes, and dreams strangers. Nothing realities.

The sea, as is, with its powerful climates, admirably tempered man, giving dry strength, the
strongest, and forming the stronger races. Our North Hercules are perhaps stronger, however
certainly not as robust as the ocean or acclimate Provencal, Catalan, Genoa, Calabria, against
Greece. These tanned and bronzed, pass, the state of metal: rich color that is by no means an
accident of the epidermis, but a profound inhibition of sunshine and life. A discreet doctor, my friend, sent to their
customers discolored, Paris, Lyon, to these shores to sunbathe, and he was challenging hour after
hour on a rock, no more guarding the head, the rest of your body Africa acquired a beautiful hue.

Dirigíanse
really sick to Sicily, Algiers, Madeira and the Canary, however regeneration of the weak, the weary,
the faded urban dwellers may be even better in mixed climates. Be expected in the first term of
the countries the universe have the highest examples of energy -
the steel of mankind, Greece, - and Flint race, fine, exercised, indestructible,
of Columbus and Doria, the Massena and the Garibaldi.

* * *

Our ports of the Far North, Dunkerque, Boulogne, Dieppe, windswept and Channel currents are also a
factory of men that makes and remakes. That great breath and that great sea, in their eternal
battle, enough to raise the dead, and in fact unexpected rebirths operating there. He who has no serious
injury is restored in an instant. All the human machine works with the force of good or bad grade,
digest, breathe. Nature is demanding and know the half of it walking.

The robust plants which form a sheet vegetables under the influence of the strong sea winds make
us poke shame to face when compared with our languor. Each door, make sure Norman is a hole brava
coast that is introduced by the indefatigable Northwest (the Norouais in good Norman) whistling
and making us relive. Of course, that does not blow so violently at the mouth the Seine, under
the shade of the apple forests of Honfleur and Trouville. The breaking of the meek river glides
gently to the left, bringing the influence of his character and quiet.

Hase described elsewhere in this work the sea vehement, with horrifying frequency, of Granville,
Saint-Malo, Cancale. That is the best school for young people. There is the challenge of sea
​​man, the struggle in which strong conviértense at Fortis. The great naval gymnastics must
be verified in the vicinity, between Normandy and Brittany.

* * *

If, however, there were a worn, brittle, weak and sickly child, or
a woman dead in the struggles of love, try to find a softer place
to shelter this treasure.

An entirely quiet beach with water so cold, without much embayed
Noon, are qualities of islands and peninsulas of Morbihan: all those
islands form a labyrinth more intricate than that in which a king
hid his Rosmunda.

Trust therefore you that sea to his discretion.

Nobody knows, except the old stones Druid that, with some fishermen, are the only inhabitants
of place so wild and Bonanca .-- "But - question our lady - what are we living here? - Above all,
fishing, ma'am .-- And what else? --- of fishing. " Not far from Saint-Gildas, the abbey where
they say the Britons, was to meet Heloise with Abelard. Soon they simply had to live at the
famous lovers: the sober and solitary adopted Robinson regime, lunch
on Friday.

In the direction of the south are some places more civilized, friendly and delicious, such as
Pornic, Royan and St Georges Basin, etc.

I've meant in another time Saint-Georges, the beach smells sweet bitter.

Basin is also very peaceful in the midst of resinous pine perfumes which gives it life. Without
the worldly invasion of the populous and rich Bordeaux, without the crowds pouring in and run over
at certain times, many of us like to hide there, our beloved sick, tender and delicate objects
for those who fear the hustle and bustle. While the site contained in the shell interior, offered
the contrast of a calm sea and deep, absolute, to two steps of a terrible sea. Beyond the
lighthouse, the raging Gulf of Gascony, in the sleepy water and the languor of a wave moves,
which causes no more noise than it can produce a little foot elastic pillow on the marine algae
which states a layer of sand is softened.

In an intermediate climate that is neither North nor South, nor Britain,
nor Vendée, I have seen and returned with joy to see the beautiful
and serious Pornic coat, excellent sailors, their graceful girls,
charming with their pointy hats. Lugarcillo is a rest, that having
across the vast island (peninsula rather) of Noirmutiers, sea llegal
obliquely in an indirect manner and with restraint, and has just entered,
humanized, spinning through his curly wave linen, apparently, or death.
In this shell of some leagues in extent, the sea has made some small,
gently sloping narrow Lighters for women, or bathtubs for children.
Those pretty sanded beaches, apart, hidden from sight respectable
intrusive rocks have their little mysteries to entertain that bathe
them. Vese any marine life, but much poorer than once: the coat is
useless and harmful. The world of water in the shell does not get
tired quiet rich diet, therefore, abandoned. This sea is disposed
of every day the big wave Ocean, becoming deaf to their cries are
heard only very weak. Semi-silence it has great charm. In no other
place I have found more freedom to dream sweet awake, or the charm
of the dying seas.

III

The room.

Allows an ignorant, however, has
some experience at his expense, to some tips on points not quote the
book, which so far have concerned very little to the men of the medical
faculty. For these tips are not so widespread, the I give to a sick
person who calls me reporting. Is it to be fictitious? No. The person
to whom I'm going, I actually found ice cream, and more than once
in my lifetime.

Here was a young lady, weak, sick or very close to
be, and a weaker child still the mother. The winter has been so, well,
spring harder. No But there is no serious injury. Weakness, anemia,
that is all: only hard to live. Is prescribed to spend the summer
sea.

Exorbitant expenditure for a person of moderate income and little
wealthy. Arduous journey to a homemaker. Ruda separation, especially
in the case of two husbands who are wanted. Enter in negotiations:
it would soften the sentence. Is it not quite a month? But the very
knowledgeable doctor insists. Cree too short a stay does more harm
than good. Printing sudden, violent, restrooms, without preparation
of any kind, is rather own health to upset even the most robust. Reasonable
people, to reach seaport, the first thing to do is acclimate, breathe:
June is excellent for that matter - in July and August to take the
baths, - September and sometimes October, seeking Rest of the intense
heat, sweeten the excitement of the acrimony saline consolidate the
results, even with fresh gales are accustomed to the cold winters.
But father is that angry--"

"Well, say! Let me tell you something, Hope. If there's any talk of stealing and prison for
the Lorrigans, your dad had better keep outa my Tom's sight. And outa mine," she added grimly.
"There'll be no searching for anything on this ranch when my Tom's not here to see what goes
on. You better go back and tell your dad I said it. If you don't and he brings the sheriff
on here, don't blame me if somebody gets hurt."

"Oh, but it's the law they're bringing on ye! Ye canna go contrary to the law!" Mary Hope's
voice quavered with fear.

"Oh, can't I!" Belle gave her head a tilt. "You beat it, while the going's good. I hear voices
up on the road. If you don't want your dad to come and catch you here--"

That settled it. Terror drove Mary Hope into the Devil's Tooth trail at Rab's best pace, which
was a stiff-legged lope. Her last glance backward showed her Belle Lorrigan taking her six-shooter
belt off the buckboard seat and buckling it around her waist so that the gun hung well forward.
Mary Hope shuddered and struck Rab with the quirt.

Belle had led Rosa from the stable and was cautiously fastening the neck yoke in place when
the sheriff and Aleck Douglas rode around the corner of the stable. Rosa shied and snorted
and reared, and Belle used the rein-ends for a whiplash until Rosa decided that she would better
submit to authority and keep her hide whole. She stood fairly quiet after that, with little
nipping dance-steps in one spot, while Belle fastened buckles and snaps and trace chains. Subrosa,
having had his tantrum, contented himself with sundry head-shakings and snorts. When the team
was "hooked up" to Belle's satisfaction, she tied them both firmly to the corral with short
ropes, and finally turned her attention to her visitors.

"Howdy, Mr. Douglas? Fine day we're having," she greeted the dour Scotchman amiably.

The sheriff coughed behind his hand, looked sidelong at his companion, rode a step or two nearer
to Belle, swung a leg over the cantle of his saddle. Perhaps he expected Aleck Douglas to introduce
him, but he did not wait for the formality.

"Mrs. Lorrigan, I'm sheriff of the county," he began ingratiatingly, when his two feet were
on the ground.

"You are?" Belle flashed a row of very white teeth. "You sure don't look it. I'd have taken
you for a regular human being."

"Mr. Douglas, here, would like to take a look at some hides Mr. Lorrigan has got curing. He
thinks possibly--"

"'Tis useless to cover the truth wi' saft words, shuriff," Douglas interrupted glumly. "'Tis
stolen cattle we are tracing, and 'tis here we wad look for the hides of them. I hae guid reason--"

"You'll find my husband at the round-up. Before you do any searching, you had better go and
have a talk with him. When he's gone strangers don't go prowling around this ranch."

"We'll have our talk with him after we've taken a look around," the sheriff amended, grinning
a little. "It's just a matter of form--nothing you need to object to, one way or the other.
I don't suppose we'll find anything--"

"No, I don't suppose you will. Not unless you find it on the road back. I hate to seem unfriendly,
but I'll just have to ask you to crawl on your horse and go see Tom about it."

"Now, we don't want any unpleasantness at all, Mrs. Lorrigan. But this man has swore out a
warrant--"

"Shucks! What he does never did interest me one way or the other, and does not now. I'm telling
you there'll be no snooping around here while Tom's away."

"Oh, well, now!" The sheriff rather prided himself on his ability to "handle folks peaceable,"
as he expressed it. He injected a little more of the oil of persuasiveness into his voice.
It was his standard recipe for avoiding trouble with a woman. "You don't think for a minute
I'd take advantage of his absence, Mrs. Lorrigan? Nothing like that at all. We just want to
see if a certain cowhide is here. If it isn't, then we won't need to bother Tom at all, maybe.
Get down, Mr. Douglas, and we'll just have a look around. Mrs. Lorrigan ain't going to make
no objections to that."

Belle smiled. "Oh, yes, she is. She's going to do quite a lot of objecting. You better stay
right where you are, Scotty. You're a heap safer."

The sheriff began to lose patience. "Now, look here, Mrs. Lorrigan! You're dealing with the
law, you know. We can't have any nonsense."

"We won't have," Belle assured him placidly. "That's what I've been trying to beat into your
head. Why, good Lord! Can't you take the hint and see I'm trying not to have any trouble with
yuh? I don't want to have to run you off the ranch--but as you say, there's not going to be
any nonsense. I said, go. I'm waiting to see if you've got sense enough to do it."

"Sa-ay! Just look here now! Do you know it's a State's prison offense to resist an officer!"
The sheriff's face was growing red.

Belle laughed. "Sure. But I'm not. You--you're irresistible! And I don't know you're an officer."

This went over the sheriff's head and was wasted, though Aleck Douglas pulled down his mouth
at the corners as though he was afraid he might smile if he were not careful.

The sheriff took up his bridle reins, preparing to lead his horse over to a post and tie him.
He glanced at Belle and saw that she had a six-shooter in her hand and a glitter in her eyes.
Quite naturally he hesitated. Then, at a perfectly plain signal from the gun, he turned his
palms toward her at a level with his shoulders.

"You needn't tie up. Crawl into the saddle and drift."

"I've got a search warrant--"

"You can keep it and show it to Tom. And get off this ranch just as quick as that horse can
take you. I'll have you both arrested for trespassing. I'm not taking your word for anything,
you see. I don't know anything about your warrant--hey, Riley!" This to the cook, who came,
taking steps as long as his legs would let him, and swinging a damp dishcloth in one moist
red hand.

"Riley, here's a man claims he's the sheriff and that he's got a warrant to search the ranch.
I don't believe a word of it, and I've ordered him off the place. I wouldn't for the world
resist an officer of the law--put your hands up a little higher, Mr. Man!--but when Tom ain't
home no stranger is going to come snooping around here if I can stop him. Ain't that right, Riley?"

"That's right, Belle," Riley acquiesced, working his oversized Adam's apple convulsively. (Riley,
by the way, would just as readily have approved of murder if Belle had asked for his approval.)

"Well, you're a witness that I'm from Missouri. I've told this man to go tell his troubles
to Tom. If he's honest he'll do it. If he don't go in about ten seconds, I'm going to throw
a bullet through his hat. Then if he hangs around, I shall shoot him in his left leg just about
six inches above the knee. I can do it, can't I, Riley?"

"Well, now, you shore can, Belle!" Riley nodded his head emphatically. "If you say six, I'd
shore gamble a year's wages it won't be five, or seven. Six inches above his knee goes, if
you say six."

"All right. I'm just defending the ranch when Tom's gone. You hear me, Mr. Man. Now, you git!"

The sheriff turned and opened his mouth to protest, and Belle shot the promised bullet through
his hat crown. The sheriff ducked and made a wild scramble for the stirrup.

"Open your mouth again and I'll be awfully tempted to shoot that crooked tooth out of it,"
Belle observed. "And in ten seconds, remember, you're going to get--"

The sheriff still had two of the ten seconds to spare when he left, Aleck Douglas following
him glumly.

"It's him, all right. It's the sheriff, Belle," Riley informed her, while they watched the
two clatter up the road to where the real grade began. "What's eatin' on 'em? Likely he did
have a search warrant."

"He can use it, after I'm through. Old Scotty is trailing some rustled stock, they claim. They
came here looking for hides. You keep an eye out, Riley, and see if they keep going. I guess
they will--they'll go after Tom. I'm going to have a look at those cowhides in the old shed."

"Better let me," Riley offered. "It ain't any job for a woman nohow. You watch the trail and
I'll look."

Belle would not even consider the proposition. The Lorrigan reputation never had troubled her
much,--but it sent her now to the shed where hides were kept stored until the hide buyer made
his next annual visit through the country. She did not believe that she would find any brand
save the various combinations of the NL monogram, but she meant to make sure before any stranger
was given access to the place.

The job was neither easy nor pleasant, but she did it thoroughly. Riley, roosting meditatively
on the top rail of the corral where he could watch the road down the bluff, craned his long
neck inquiringly toward her when she returned.

"Nothing but NL stuff, just as I thought," said Belle, holding her hands as far away from her
face as possible. "I knew Tom wouldn't have any stolen hides on the place--but it was best
to make sure."

"No ma'am, he wouldn't. I'm shore surprised they'd come and try to find any. Looks bad to me,
Belle. Looks to me like somebody is shore tryin' to start somethin'. There's plenty in the
Black Rim would like to see Tom railroaded to the pen--plenty. Looks to me like they're aimin'
to pin something on him. No, sir, I don't like it. Uh course," he went on, letting himself
loose-jointedly to the ground, "they couldn't get nothing on Tom--not unless they framed something.
But I wouldn't put it a-past 'em to do it. No, ma'am, I wouldn't."

"Your bread's burning, Riley. I can smell it. Don't you never think they'll frame on Tom. They
may try it--but that's as far as they'll get. They don't want to start anything with the Lorrigans!"

"Well, I left the oven door open. She ain't burning to hurt. Yuh see, Scotty Douglas, he's
religious and he don't never pack a gun. Them kind's bad to tangle up with; awful bad. There
ain't nothing much a man can do with them religious birds. Them not being armed, you can't
shoot--it's murder. And that kinda ties a man's hands, as yuh might say. They always take advantage
of it, invariable. No, ma'am, it looks bad."

"It'll look worse--for them that tries any funny business with this outfit," Belle assured
him. "Go along and 'tend to your baking. You know I hate burnt bread. I'm going to drive over
and see what they're up to."

She untied Rosa and Subrosa, and because she was in a hurry she permitted Riley to hold them
by the bits while she climbed in, got the lines firmly in one hand and her blacksnake in the
other. Not often did she deign to accept assistance, and Riley was all aquiver with gratified
vanity at this mark of her favor.

"Turn 'em loose--and get to that bread!" she cried, and circled the pintos into the road. "You,
Sub! Cut that out, now--settle down! Rosa! Stead-dy, I ain't any Ben Hur pulling off a chariot
race, remember!"

At a gallop they took the first sandy slope of the climb, and Belle let them go. They were
tough--many's the time they had hit the level on top of the ridge without slowing to a walk
on the way up. They had no great load to pull, and if it pleased them to lope instead of trot,
Belle would never object.

As she sat jouncing on the seat of a buckboard with rattly spokes in all of the four wheels
and a splintered dashboard where Subrosa landed his heels one day when he had backed before
he kicked, one felt that she would have made a magnificent charioteer. Before she had gone
half a mile her hair was down and whipping behind her like a golden pennant. Her big range
hat would have gone sailing had it not been tied under her chin with buckskin strings. Usually
she sang as she hurtled through space, but to-day the pintos missed her voice.

Five miles out on the range she overtook the sheriff and Aleck Douglas riding to the round-up.
Aleck Douglas seldom rode faster than a jogging trot, and the sheriff was not particularly
eager for his encounter with Tom Lorrigan. For that matter, no sheriff had ever been eager
to encounter a Lorrigan. The Lorrigan family had always been counted a hazard in the office
of the sheriff, though of a truth the present generation had remained quiescent so far and
the law had not heretofore reached its arm toward them.

The two men looked back, saw Belle coming and parted to let her pass. Belle yelled to her team
and went by with never a glance toward either, and the two stared after her without a word
until she had jounced down into a shallow draw and up the other side, the pintos never slowing
their lope.

"Well, I'm darned!" ejaculated the sheriff. His name, by the way, was Perry. "I've heard tell
of Belle Lorrigan drivin' hell-whoopin' over the country with a team of bronks, but I kinda
thought they was stretching the truth. I guess not, though, if that's a sample."

"The woman hersel' is no so bad. 'Tis the men folk that are black wi' sin. Drinkin', swearin',
gamblin' thieves they be, and 'tis well they should be taught a lesson." The Douglas head wagged
self-righteously.

"Maybe it would be a good idea to go back and search the ranch now, while she's gone." The
sheriff pulled up, considering. "I didn't want any trouble with her; I never do quarrel with
a woman if I can get around it any way. She's a holy terror. I guess I'll just ride back and
take a look at them hides."

Aleck Douglas eyed him sardonically, thinking perhaps of the black-edged bullet hole that showed
plainly in the sheriff's hat-crown.

"'Tis a deal safer wi' the woman oot of the way," he agreed drily.

The sheriff nodded and turned back.

CHAPTER SEVEN

THE NAME

Tom Lorrigan may have seen bigger fusses made over smaller matters than the hide of a spotty
yearlin', but his boys never had.

No country is so isolated that gossip cannot find it out. The story of the spotted yearling
went speeding through the country. Men made thin excuses to ride miles out of their way that
they might air their opinions and hear some fresh bit of news, some conjecture that grew to
a rumor and was finally repeated broadcast as truth. Children cringed and wept while necks
were scrubbed relentlessly, for a fever of "visiting" attacked the women of the range. Miles
they would travel to visit a neighbor. And there they talked and talked and talked, while the
guest in neighborly fashion dried the dinner dishes for the hostess in hot, fly-infested kitchens.

Aleck Douglas, infuriated by the contemptuous attitude which Tom had taken toward him and his
spotty yearling, and by his failure to find any incriminating evidence on the Devil's Tooth
ranch, swore to a good many suspicions which he called facts, and had Tom arrested. The sheriff
had taken two deputies along with him, because he fully expected that the Lorrigans would "go
on the warpath" as Belle had done. He was vastly astonished and somewhat chagrined when Tom
gave a snort, handed over his gun, and turned to one of his boys.

"Al," said Tom, "you go ahead with the round-up while I go in and fix this up. May take a few
days--depends on the gait I can get 'em to travel. I'll have to rustle me a lawyer, too. But
you know what to do; keep 'er moving till I get back."

Black Rim country talked and chortled and surmised, and wondered what made Tom so darned meek
about it. They did not accuse him of any lack of nerve; being a Lorrigan, his nerve could scarcely
be questioned. Opinion was about evenly divided. A few declared that Tom had something up his
sleeve, and there would be a killing yet. Others insisted that Tom knew when he was backed
into a corner. Old Scotty Douglas had him dead to rights, they said, and Tom knew better than
to run on the rope. Men and women assumed the gift of prophecy, and all prophesied alike. Tom
Lorrigan would go "over the road"; for how long they could only guess according to their secret
hopes. Some predicted a fifteen-year term for Tom. Others thought that he might get off lightly--say
with five or six years. They based their opinion on the fact that men have been sent to the
penitentiary for fifteen years, there to repent of stealing a calf not yet past the age of
prime veal. And it is not so long since men were hanged for stealing a horse; witness Tom's
brother, who would surely have been lynched had he not been shot. Witness also divers other
Lorrigans whose careers had been shortened by their misdeeds.

Much of the talk was peddled to Tom and the boys under the guise of friendship. Having lived
all of his life in the Black Rim country, Tom knew how much the friendship was worth, knew
that the Black Rim folk had drawn together like a wolf pack, and were waiting only until he
was down before they rushed in to rend him and his family. Old grudges were brought out and
aired secretly. It would go hard with the Lorrigan family if Tom were found guilty. Although
he sensed the covert malice behind the smiles men gave him, he would not yield one inch from
his mocking disparagement of the whole affair. He laid down a law or two to his boys, and bade
them hold their tongues and go their way and give no heed to the clacking.

"The show ain't over till the curtain's down for good," he said, borrowing a phrase from Belle.
"We got a long time yet to live in the Black Rim. We'll be right here when the smoke lifts.
Hang and rattle now, and keep your mouths shut. This here's the law-sharp's job. I'm payin'
him darn good money for it, too. When he's through, then we'll play. But mark this down in
yore little red book, boys: The less yuh say right now, the stronger we can play the game when
we're ready."

"If they do railroad yuh, dad, leave it to us. They'll be a sorry looking bunch when we're
through," said Lance, and meant every word of it.

"They won't railroad me." Tom snorted and laughed his contempt of the whole affair. "I ain't
ever used the law to fight with before--but shucks! When a scrap gets outside of gun range,
one club's about the same as another to me."

Optimism is a good thing, but it does not altogether serve, as Tom discovered at the trial.

Evidence was produced which astonished him. For instance, an AJ man had seen him riding over
by Squaw Butte, on the night after Douglas had accused him of stealing the spotted yearling.
The AJ man seemed embarrassed at his sudden prominence in the case, and kept turning his big
range hat round and round on one knee as he sat in the chair sacred to those who bore witness
to the guilt or innocence of their fellow men in Black Rim country. He did not often look up,
and when he did he swallowed convulsively, as though something stuck in his throat. But his
story sounded matter-of-fact and honest.

He had ridden past Squaw Butte the night after Tom Lorrigan was accused by Douglas. Yes, he
knew it was that night, because next day he heard about the fuss over at Devil's Tooth. He
had been on his way from Jumpoff and had cut across country because he was late. There was
a moon, and he had seen a man riding across an open space between the creek and the willows.
The man had gone in among the willows. The AJ man had not thought much about it, though he
did wonder a little, too. It was late for a man to be riding around on the range.

When he reached the place, he saw a man ride out of the brush farther along, into clear moonlight.
It was Tom Lorrigan; yes, he was sure of that. He knew the horse that Tom was riding. It was
a big, shiny black that always carried its head up; a high-stepping horse that a man could
recognize anywhere. No, he didn't know of any other horse in the country just like it. He admitted
that if he hadn't been sure of the horse he would not have been sure it was Tom. He did not
think Tom saw him at all. He was riding along next the bank, in the shadow. He had gone on
home, and the next day he heard that Scotty Douglas claimed the Lorrigans had rustled a yearling
from him.

Later, Tom's lawyer asked him why he had not spoken to Tom. The AJ man replied that he didn't
know--he wasn't very close; not close enough for talking unless he hollered.

That was all very well, and Black Rim perked its ears, thinking that the case looked bad for
Tom. Very bad indeed.

But Tom's lawyer proved very adroitly that the AJ man had not been in Jumpoff at the time he
claimed. He had been with his own outfit, and if he had ridden past Squaw Butte that night
he must have gone out from the ranch and come back again. Which led very naturally to the question,
Why?

On the other hand, why had Tom Lorrigan ridden to Squaw Butte that night? He himself explained
that later on. He said that he had gone over to see if there was any hide in the willows as
Douglas had claimed. He had not found any.

Thus two men admitted having been in the neighborhood of the stolen hide on that night. Tom's
lawyer was quick to seize the coincidence, and make the most of it. Why, he asked mildly, might
not the AJ outfit have stolen the yearling? What was the AJ man doing there? Why not suspect
him of having placed the hide in the crevice where it had later been found? That night the
hide had been removed from the willows where Douglas had first discovered it. Douglas had gone
back the next day after it, and it had been missing. It was not until several days later that
he had found it in the crevice. Why assume that Tom Lorrigan had removed it?

"If I'd set out to caché that hide," Tom here interposed, "I'd have buried it. Only a darn
fool would leave evidence like that laying around in sight."

For this the court reprimanded him, but he had seen several of the jury nod their heads, unconsciously
agreeing with him. And although his remark was never put on record, it stuck deep in the minds
of the jury and had its influence later on. They remembered that the Lorrigans were no fools,
and they considered the attempt at concealing the hide a foolish one--not to say childish.

Tom's lawyer did not argue openly that a conspiracy had been hatched against Tom Lorrigan,
but he so presented the case in his closing argument to the jury that each man believed he
saw an angle to the affair which the defense had overlooked. It appeared to the jury to be
a "frame-up." For instance, why had Cheyenne, a Lorrigan man, ridden over to the Douglas ranch
and remained outside by the corral for a long time, talking with Aleck Douglas, before he went
inside to call on the Douglas girl? Sam Pretty Cow impassively testified to that. He had been
riding over to see a halfbreed girl that worked for the Blacks, and he had cut through the
Douglas ranch to save time. He saw Cheyenne's horse at the corral.

"Me, I dunno what she's doin' on that place. Cheyenne, he's in camp when I'm go. I'm stop by
the haystack. I'm see Cheyenne talk to Scotty. That don't look good, you bet."

A full week the trial lasted, while the lawyers wrangled over evidence and technicalities,
and the judge ruled out evidence and later ruled it in again. A full week Tom slept in the
county jail,--and for all their bad reputation, it was the first time a Lorrigan had lain down
behind a bolted door to sleep, had opened his eyes to see the dawn light painting the wall
with the shadow of bars.

There were nights when his optimism failed him, when Tom lay awake trying to adjust himself
to the harrying thought that long, caged years might be his portion. Nights when he doubted
the skill of his "law-sharp" to free him from the deadweight of the Lorrigan reputation and
the malice of his neighbors. Of course, he would fight--to the last dollar; but there were
nights when he doubted the power of his dollars to save him.

It was during those nights that the lawless blood of the Lorrigans ran swiftly through the
veins of Tom, who had set himself to win a million honestly. It was then that he remembered
his quiet, law-abiding years regretfully, as time wasted; a thankless struggle toward the regard
of his fellow men. Of what avail to plod along the path of uprightness when no man would point
to him and say, "There is an honest man."

"They've give me the name, and I ain't got the game," cried Tom bitterly, in the quiet of his
cell. "Whether I go to the pen or whether I don't, they better stand from under. They'll sure
know a Lorrigan's livin' in the Black Rim before I'm done."

CHAPTER EIGHT

THE GAME

At the long table in the living room of the Devil's Tooth ranch Tom Lorrigan sat and sharpened
an indelible pencil with the razor-edged small blade of his jackknife. On the open space which
Tom had cleared with the sweep of his arm, a large-sized tablet of glazed and ruled paper,
with George Washington pictured in red and blue and buff on the cover, received the wood parings
from the pencil. It may have been significant that Tom was careful in his work and made the
pencil very sharp.

Across the room, Belle swung around on the piano stool and looked at him. "Honey, if you're
going to make out the order to Montgomery, Ward, I'd like to send on for some more music. I've
been going over that new list--"

"I ain't," said Tom, removing his cigarette from the corner of his mouth and blowing the tiny,
blue-painted shavings off George Washington's face. "You go ahead and make out the order yourself."

Belle eyed the pencil-sharpening and sent a keen glance at Tom's face. "Well, honey, from the
way you're squaring up to that tablet, I thought you was going to send on for a new buckboard
and mower."

Tom bent his head and blew again, gave George a sardonic grin and turned him face-down on the
table, so that the ruled paper lay ready to his hand.

"Right now I'm going to figure up what that dang spotty yearlin' of old Scotty's cost me,"
he stated grimly. "And there's some other Black Rimmers I've got a bill against."

"Hope you don't try holding your breath till you collect," Belle retorted. "Honey, you'd best
leave the Black Rimmers alone. I feel as if we'd had enough excitement enough for a while.
I wouldn't start anything more right now, if I was you. Every last one of them is ready to
jump on your neck--and the Lord only knows why, unless it's because you didn't steal that darned
spotted yearling! Some folks sure do love to see the other fellow up to his eyebrows in trouble.
They were sitting there in that courtroom just wishing you would be sent up. I saw it in their
faces, Tom. And that old rock-hearted Scotchman looked as if he's just lost two bits when the
jury said 'Not guilty.'"

"Mh-m--hm-m--that's what I'm figuring on now," said Tom, and bent to his problem. "My old dad
woulda gone out and shot up a few, but times are changed and we're all getting so damn civilized
we've got to stack the cards or quit the game. Belle, what do you reckon it's worth to a man
to be hauled into court and called a cow thief?"

Belle's lips pressed together. "I don't know, Tom--but I know what it would have cost 'em if
they had sent you over the road. I had a gun on me, and when that jury foreman stood up to
give the verdict, it was looking him in the eye through a buttonhole in my coat. Him and Cheyenne
and old Scotty and two or three more would sure have got theirs, if he hadn't said, 'Not guilty.'"

"Lord bless yuh, I knew it all the time. Next time we go to court you'll leave the artillery
at home, old girl. I like to got heart failure there for a minute, till I seen you ease down
and lay your hand in your lap." He looked at her and laughed a little. "I've got a bill of
damages against several of the folks around here, but I ain't fool enough to try and collect
with a six-gun."

He settled himself to his task, writing at the top of the page the name of Aleck Douglas and
after that "Dr." A full page he covered with items set against the names of various neighbors.
When he had finished he folded the paper neatly and put it away with other important memoranda,
picked up his big gray Stetson and went over to kiss Belle full on her red lips, and to smooth
her hair, with a reassuring pat on her plump shoulder as a final caress.

"Don't you worry none about the Black Rimmers," he said, "and don't you worry about me. I've
got to ride high, wide and handsome now to make up the time and money I lost on account of
the spotty yearlin', and maybe I won't be home so much. But I ain't quarreling with my neighbors,
nor getting into any kind of ruckus whatever."

With the stilted, slightly stiff-legged gait born of long hours in the saddle and of high-heeled
riding boots, he walked unhurriedly to the corral where the boys were just driving in a herd
of horses.

Few of them showed saddle marks, all of them snorted and tossed untrimmed manes and tails as
they clattered against the stout poles, circling the big corral in a cloud of dust and a thunder
of hoof beats. Pulling his hat down over his black brows to secure it against the wind, Tom
climbed the corral fence and straddled the top rail that he might scan the herd.

"Pretty good-looking bunch, dad," said Al, reining up beside Tom. "We had to ride some to get
'em in--they're sure snuffy. What you going to do with 'em? Break out a few?"

"Some. Did yuh take notice, Al, that Coaley come within an ace of sending me over the road?
That there AJ man swore to the horse when he wouldn't never have swore to me, but they all
took it as a cinch it was me he saw, because nobody else ever rides Coaley. And by the Lord
John, Al, that's the last time any man's going to swear to me in the dark by the horse I'm
ridin'. The Devil's Tooth outfit is going to have a lot more saddle horses broke gentle than
what they've got now. And just between me and you, Al, any more night-ridin' that's done in
this outfit ain't going to be done on cayuses that can be told a mile off on a dark night!"

"You're durn tootin', dad." Al grinned while he moistened the edge of his rolled cigarette.
"I thought at the time that Coaley was liable to be a damn expensive horse for you to be ridin'."
His eyes traveled over the restless herd, singling out this horse and that for brief study.
"There's some right speedy stuff in that bunch," he said. "They've got the look of stayers,
some of 'em. Take that there bay over there by the post: He's got a chest on him like a lion--and
look at them legs! There'd be a good horse for you, dad."

"One, maybe." Tom spat into the dust and, impelled by Al's example, drew his own cigarette
papers from his shirt pocket. "I'm thinkin' of breakin' all we've got time for this summer.
Darn this here makin' one horse your trademark!"

Up at the house, Riley appeared in the kitchen doorway and gave a long halloo while he wiped
his big freckled hand on his flour-sack apron. "Hoo-ee! Come an' git it!" He waited a moment,
until he saw riders dismounting and leading their horses into the little corral. Then he turned
back to pour the coffee into the big, thick, white cups standing in single file around the
long oil-cloth-covered table in the end of the kitchen nearest the side door where the boys
would presently come trooping in to slide loose-jointedly into their places on the long, shiny
benches.

Tom pinched out the blaze of his match and threw one long leg back over the corral fence. His
glance went to the riders beyond the big corral.

"Where's Lance at!" he called to Al, who was riding around to the little corral.

"You can search me. He quit us when we got the horses into the corral, and rode off up the
Slide trail. If I was to make a guess, I would say that he went to meet Mary Hope. They been
doing that right frequent ever since she quit coming here. 'Tain't no skin off my nose--but
Lance, he's buildin' himself a mess uh trouble with old Scotty, sure as you're a foot high."

"Darn fool kid--let the old folks git to scrappin' amongst themselves, and the young ones start
the lovemakin'! I never knowed it to fail; but you can skin me for a coyote if I know what
makes 'em do it." Grumbling to himself, Tom climbed down and followed Al. "You can tell Riley
I'll be late to dinner," he said, when he had come up to where Al was pulling the saddle off
his horse. "I ain't much on buttin' into other folks' love affairs, but I reckon it maybe might
be a good idea to throw a scare into them two. I'm plumb sick of Scotch--wouldn't take it in
a highball right now if you was to shove one under my nose!"

Al laughed, looking over his shoulder at Tom while he loosened the latigo. "If you can throw
a scare into Lance, you sure are a dinger," he bantered. "That youth is some heady."

"Looks to me like it runs in the family," Tom retorted. "You're some heady yourself, if you
ever took notice. And I don't give a damn how heady any of you kids are; you can't run any
rannies on your dad, and you want to put that down in your little red book so you won't forgit it!"

He led Coaley from the stable, mounted and rode away up the Slide trail, more than half ashamed
of his errand. To interfere in a love affair went against the grain, but to let a Lorrigan
make love to a Douglas on the heels of the trial was a pill so bitter that he refused to swallow
it.

He urged Coaley up the trail, his eyes somber with resentment whenever he saw the fresh hoofprints
of Lance's horse in the sandy places. Of the three boys, Lance was his favorite, and it hurt
him to think that Lance had so little of the Lorrigan pride that he would ride a foot out of
his way to speak to any one of the Douglas blood.

Up the Slide went Coaley, his head held proudly erect upon his high, arched neck, his feet
choosing daintily the little rough places in the rock where long experience had taught him
he would not slip. Big as Tom was, Coaley carried him easily and reached the top without so
much as a flutter in the flanks to show that the climb had cost him an effort.

"It's a dang darn shame I got to straddle strange horses just because there ain't another in
the country like you, Coaley," he muttered, leaning forward to smooth the silky hide under
the crinkly mane. "It's going to set hard, now I'm tellin' yuh, to throw my saddle on some
plain, ordinary cayuse. But it's a bet I can't afford to overlook; they made that plain enough."

Coaley pricked up his ears and looked, his big, bright eyes taking in the shadow of a horse
beside a clump of wild currant bushes that grew in the very base of the Devil's Tooth. Tom
grunted and rode over that way, Coaley walking slowly, his knees bending springily like a dancer
feeling out his muscles.

Lance stood with his back toward them. His hat was pushed far back on his head, and he was
looking at Mary Hope, who leaned against the rock and stared down into the valley below. Her
hair, Tom observed, was not "slicked back" to-day. It had been curled a little, probably on
rags twisted in after she had gone to bed and taken out before she arose in the morning, lest
her mother discover her frivolity and lecture her long,--and, worse still, make her wet a comb
and take all of the curl out. A loose strand blew across her tanned cheek, so that she reached
up absently and tucked it behind her ear, where it would not stay for longer than a minute.

"I am sure I didna know you would be here," she said, without taking her eyes off the valley.
"It is a view I like better than most, and I have a right to ride where I please. And I have
no wish to ride out of my way to be friends with any one that tried to make my father out a
liar and an unjust man. He may be hard, but he is honest. And that is more than some--"

"More than some can say--us Lorrigans, for instance!"

"I didna say that, but if the coat fits, you can put it on."

Mary Hope bit her lip and lashed a weed with her quirt. "All of this is none of my doing,"
she added, with a dullness in her voice that may have meant either regret or resentment. "You
hate my father, and you are mad because I canna side with you and hate him too. I am sorry
the trouble came up, but I canna see how you expect me to go on coming to see your mither when
you know my father would never permit it."

"You say that like you were speaking a piece. How long did you lay awake last night, making
it up? You can't make me swallow that, anyway. Your father never permitted you to come in the
first place, and you know it. You made believe that old skate ran away with you down the trail,
and that you couldn't stop him. You've been coming over to our place ever since, and you never
asked old Scotty whether he would permit it or not. I'm not saying anything about myself, but
it hurts Belle to have you throw her down right now. Under the circumstances it makes her feel
as if you thought we were thieves and stole your dad's yearling."

"I'm not saying anything like that."

"Maybe you're not, but you sure are acting it. If you don't think that, why don't you go on
taking music lessons from Belle? What made you stop, all of a sudden?"

"That," said Mary Hope stiffly, "is my own affair, Lance Lorrigan."

"It's mine, let me tell you. It's mine, because it hits Belle; and what hits her hits me. If
you think she isn't good enough for you to visit, why in thunder have you been coming all this
while? She isn't any worse than she was two months ago, is she?"

"I'm not saying that she is."

"Well, you're acting it, and that's a darn sight worse."

"You ought to know that with all this trouble between your father and my father--"

"Well, can you tell me when they ever did have any truck together? Your father doesn't hate
our outfit a darn bit worse than he ever did. He found a chance to knife us, that's all. It
isn't that he never wanted to before."

"I'll thank you, Lance Lorrigan, not to accuse my father of knifing anybody. He's my father and--"

"And that isn't anything to brag about, if you ask me. I'd rather have my father doing time
for stealing, than have him a darned, hide-bound old hypocrite that will lie a man into the
pen, and then go around and pull a long face and call himself a Christian!"

"My father doesna lie! And he is not a hypocrite either. If your father was half as--" She
stopped abruptly, her face going red when she saw Tom sitting on his horse beyond the shoulder
of rock, regarding her with that inscrutable smile which never had failed to make her squirm
mentally and wonder what he thought of her. She stood up, trembling a little.

Lance turned slowly and met Tom's eyes without flinching. "Hello," he said, on guard against
the two of them, wondering what had brought his dad to this particular point at this particular
time.

"Hello. How d'yuh do, Miss Douglas? Lance, dinner's getting cold waiting for you." Tom lifted
his hat to Mary Hope, turned, and rode back whence he had come, never glancing over his shoulder
but nevertheless keenly alert for the sound of voices.

He was not quite through the Slide when he heard the hoof beats of Lance's horse come clicking
down over the rocks. Tom smiled to himself as he rode on, never looking back.

CHAPTER NINE

A LITTLE SCOTCH

In the Black Rim country March is a month of raw winds and cold rains, with sleet and snow
and storm clouds tumbling high in the West and spreading to the East, where they hang lowering
at the earth and then return to empty their burden of moisture upon the shrinking live things
below.

In the thinly settled places March is also the time when children go shivering to school, harried
by weather that has lost a little of its deadliness. In January and February their lives would
not be safe from sudden blizzards, but by the middle of March they may venture forth upon the
quest of learning.

Black Rim country was at best but scantily supplied with schools, and on the Devil's Tooth
range seven young Americans--three of them adopted from Sweden--were in danger of growing up
in deplorable ignorance of what learning lies hidden in books. A twelve-mile stretch of country
had neither schoolhouse, teacher nor school officers empowered to establish a school. Until
the Swedish family moved into a shack on the AJ ranch there had not been children enough to
make a teacher worth while. But the Swedish family thirsted for knowledge of the English language,
and their lamenting awoke the father of four purely range-bred products to a sense of duty
toward his offspring.

Wherefore Mary Hope Douglas, home from two winters in Pocatello, where she had lived with a
cousin twice removed and had gone to school and had learned much, was one day invited to teach
a school in the Devil's Tooth neighborhood.

True, there was no schoolhouse, but there was a deserted old shack on the road to Jumpoff.
A few benches and a stove and table would transform it into a seat of learning, and there were
an old shed and corral where the pupils might keep their saddle horses during school hours.
She would be paid five dollars a month per head, Jim Boyle of the AJ further explained. Seven
"heads" at five dollars each would amount to thirty-five dollars a month, and Mary Hope felt
her heart jump at the prospect of earning so much money of her own. Moreover, to teach school
had long been her secret ambition, the solid foundation of many an air castle. She forthwith
consented to become the very first school-teacher in the Devil's Tooth neighborhood, which
hoped some day to become a real school district.

She would have to ride five miles every morning and evening, and her morning ride would carry
her five miles nearer the Lorrigan ranch, two of them along their direct trail to Jumpoff.
Mary Hope would never admit to herself that this small detail interested her, but she thought
of it the moment Jim Boyle suggested the old Whipple shack as a schoolhouse.

Tom Lorrigan, riding home from Jumpoff after two days spent in Lava, pulled his horse down
to a walk and then stopped him in the trail while he stared hard at the Whipple shack. Five
horses walked uneasily around inside the corral, manes and tails whipping in the gale that
blew cold from out the north. From the bent stovepipe of the shack a wisp of smoke was caught
and bandied here and there above the pole-and-dirt roof. It seemed incredible to Tom that squatters
could have come in and taken possession of the place in his short absence, but there was no
other explanation that seemed at all reasonable.

Squatters were not welcome on the Devil's Tooth range. Tom rode up to the shack, dismounted
and let Coaley's reins drop to the ground. He hesitated a minute before the door, in doubt
as to the necessity for knocking. Then his knuckles struck the loose panel twice, and he heard
the sound of footsteps. Tom pulled his hat down tighter on his forehead and waited.

When Mary Hope Douglas pulled open the door, astonishment held them both dumb. He had not seen
the girl for more than a year,--he was not certain at first that it was she. But there was
no mistaking those eyes of hers, Scotch blue and uncompromisingly direct in their gaze. Tom
pulled loose and lifted the hat that he had just tightened, and as she backed from the doorway
he entered the shack without quite knowing why he should do so. Comprehensively he surveyed
the mean little room, bare of everything save three benches with crude shelves before them,
a kitchen table and a yellow-painted chair with two-thirds of the paint worn off under the
incessant scrubbing of mother Douglas. The three Swedes, their rusty overcoats buttoned to
their necks, goggled at him round-eyed over the tops of their new spelling books, then ducked
and grinned at one another. The four Boyle children, also bundled in wraps, exchanged sidelong
glances and pulled themselves up alert and expectant in their seats.

"School, eh?" Tom observed, turning as Mary Hope pushed the door shut against the wind that
rattled the small shack and came toward him shivering and pulling her sweater collar closer
about her neck. "When did this happen?"

"When I started teaching here, Mr. Lorrigan." Then, mindful of her manners, she tempered the
pertness with a smile. "And that was yesterday. Will you sit down?"

"No, thanks--I just stopped to see who was livin' here, and--" He broke off to look up at the
dirt roof. A clod the size of his fist had been loosened by the shaking of the wind, and plumped
down in the middle of the teacher's desk. With the edge of his palm he swept clod and surrounding
small particles of dirt into his hat crown, and carried them to the door.

"There's an empty calf shed over at the ranch that would make a better schoolhouse than this,"
he observed. "It's got a shingle roof."

Mary Hope was picking small lumps of dirt out of her hair, which she wore in a pompadour that
disclosed a very nice forehead. "I just love a roof with shingles on it," she smiled.

"H'm." Tom looked up at the sagging poles with the caked mud showing in the cracks between
where the poles had shrunken and warped under the weight. A fresh gust of wind rattled dust
into his eyes, and the oldest Swede chortled an abrupt "Ka-hugh!" that set the other six tittering.

"Silence! Shame on you!" Mary Hope reproved them sternly, rapping on the kitchen table with
a foot rule of some soft wood that blazoned along its length the name of a Pocatello hardware
store. "Get to work this instant or I shall be compelled to keep you all in at recess."

"You better haze 'em all home at recess, and get where it's warm before you catch your death
of cold," Tom advised, giving first aid to his eye with a corner of his white-dotted blue handkerchief.
"This ain't fit for cattle, such a day as this."

"A north wind like this would blow through anything," Mary Hope loyally defended the shack.
"It was quite comfortable yesterday."

"I wouldn't send a dog here to school," said Tom. "Can't they dig up any better place than
this for you to teach in?"

"The parents of these children are paying out of their own pockets to have them taught, as it is."

"They'll be paying out of their own pockets to have them planted, if they ain't careful," Tom
predicted dryly. "How're you fixed for firewood? Got enough to keep warm on a hot day?"

Mary Hope smiled faintly. "Mr. Boyle hauled us a load of sage brush, and the boys chop wood
mornings and noons--it's a punishment when they don't behave, or if they miss their lessons.
But--the stove doesn't seem to draw very well, in this wind. It smokes more than it throws
out heat." She added hastily, "It drew all right yesterday. It's this wind."

"What you going to do if this wind keeps up? It's liable to blow for a week or two, this time
of year."

"Why--we'll manage to get along all right. They'd probably be out playing in it anyway, if
they weren't in school."

"Oh. And what about you?" Tom looked at her, blinking rapidly with his left eye that was growing
bloodshot and watery.

"I? Why, I've lived here all my life, and I ought to be used to a little bad weather."

"Hunh." Tom shivered in the draught. "So have I lived here all my life; but I'll be darned
if I would want to sit in this shack all day, the way the wind whistles through it."

"You might do it, though--if it was your only way of earning money," Mary Hope suggested shrewdly.

"Well, I might," Tom admitted, "but I sure would stop up a few cracks."

"We've hardly got settled yet," said Mary Hope. "I intend to stuff the cracks with rags just
as soon as possible. Is your eye still paining? That dirt is miserable stuff to stick in a
person's eye. Shall I try and get it out? Yesterday I got some in mine, and I had an awful time."

She dismissed the children primly, with a self-conscious dignity and some chagrin at their
boorish clatter, their absolute ignorance of discipline. "I shall ring the bell in ten minutes,"
she told them while they scuffled to the door. "I shall give you two minutes after the bell
rings to get into your seats and be prepared for duty. Every minute after that must be made
up after school."

"Ay skoll go home now, sen you skoll not keep me by school from tan minootes," the oldest of
the Swedes stopped long enough to bellow at her from the doorway. "Ole og Helge skoll go med.
Ve got long way from school, og ve don't be by dark ven ve come by home!"

He seized the square tobacco boxes, originally made to hold a pound of "plug cut," and afterwards
dedicated to whatever use a ranch man might choose to put them. Where schools flourished, the
tobacco boxes were used for lunch. The Swedes carried three tied in flour sacks and fastened
to the saddles. The wind carried them at a run to the corral. The two smaller boys, Ole and
Helge, rode, one behind the other, on one horse, a flea-bitten gray with an enlarged knee and
a habit of traveling with its neck craned to the left. Christian, the leader of the revolt,
considered himself well-mounted on a pot-bellied bay that could still be used to round up cattle,
if the drive was not more than a couple of miles. Looking after them from the window that faced
the corral, Tom could not wonder that they were anxious to start early.

"You better let the rest go, too," he advised the perturbed teacher, looking out at the four
Boyle children huddled in the shelter of the shack, the skirts of the girl whipping in the
wind like a pillowslip on a clothesline in a gale. "There ain't any sense trying to teach school
in a place like this, in such weather. Don't you know them kids have got all of twelve miles
to ride, facing this wind most of the way? And you've got to ride five miles; and when the
sun drops it's going to be raw enough to put icicles on your ribs under the skin. Tell 'em
to go home. We are so sure have at hand
the mystery of the world, invariably having fixed laws of life! A touch of nature to obey. When
a hundred years ago, it was observed that the female to Reaumur silkworm could produce without
the help of the male, it refused, replying: "Nothing, nothing produced. "The fact is constantly
denied and continually tested, just be straight and is admitted, not only for the silkworm,
but for some bee and butterfly and even to other animals.

* * *

At any time and in any nation, as among educated people than
among the mob of people, it said: "Death gives life." implied in that
particular life the imperceptible arose immediately from the spoils
that death lay.

The same Harvey, who was the first to formulate the law of generation, did not dare to deny
such rooted belief. Saying: Everything comes from egg, added or of the dissolved elements
previous life.

This is precisely the theory that has been reborn with such a glow, thanks to experiments M.
Pouchet, who states that the remains of Infusoria and other beings
are created Glitter fertile, the "membrane prolific," of which they
are born, not new things, but the germs, eggs from which they may
be born later.

We are in the age of miracles, we must agree on this, but, it has nothing surprising.

Formerly Reid habríanse beard which had claimed that unruly animals to the established laws,
are allowed to breathe through the leg.

The beautiful work of Milne Edwards shed light on this issue. Cuvier also said to have had Blainville
noticed that other beings who have no regular organs of movement, made up for by of the intestines,
but, those great naturalists found the case so enormous, not dared to divulge it. Today has
been the domain of res judicata because the same Milne Edwards, M. of Quatrefages, etc.

* * *

Whatever the opinion that it has made from his birth, the truth is
that after born our atoms offer an infinite world and admirably varied.

All forms of life are represented them honorably. As if to know each other, would argue that
make up a complete harmony to which very little is to envy.

And there are scattered species, created separate: they are visibly
a realm where genres many have organized a major division of vital
work.

They like our collective beings and our coral polyps, still stuck, suffer the restraints of a common
life, have also small mollusks and dress with beautiful shells, are agile and bulldozers fish insects,
crustaceans arrogant, miniature crabs future, as they are armed to teeth, hardened atoms that
are dedicated to hunting harmless atoms.

All this in the midst of enormous wealth and excessive poverty humiliates
the visible world.

Not to mention the rhizopods that have helped with their capes to the constitution of the Apennines,
A raised ridges, only foraminifera, that numerous tribe of atoms shelly, count to two thousand
species (Carlos d'Orbigny). Some are contemporary of all ages land, appearing always at different
depths in the thirty crisis that has experienced the universal world, varying forms somewhat,
but persist as gender, and leaving which identical testimonies of life on the planet. At present, the current
cold pole southern tip of America the divide between his two great beaches, impartially sends
forty species to the Silver and forty, to Chile. But the, big manufacturing The establishment
and organization seems to be the warm sea river that emerges from the West Indies. North flows
kill, dragging the great flood killed parental direction to Newfoundland and into our oceans,
the bottom up.

* * *

When the illustrious father of atoms (ie, his godfather), Ehrenberg, baptized, sponsors, introducing
them to science, was accused of weakness to them, and said she was too importance to these little
ones. Ehrenberg found them complicated, an organization very high, reaching to the point of his
liberality towards them, gave them one hundred and twenty stomachs every man. The visible world
was angry, and by a backlash, the Dujardin reduced to the ultimate expression of simplicity.
According to him, the alleged bodies are only appearance. Unable to deny, however, absorption
strength, grants them the gift of improvise at every moment, stomachs to the case and about
the size of the particles to swallow. This view has failed to captivate M. Pouchet, who is inclined
to that of Ehrenberg.

* * *

The undeniable and admirable about them is the vigor of his movements. Several have all Early appearance
of individuality, not much time remaining enslaved to life polyphenos communist creep do his
immediate superiors, the true polyps. Many of those invisible, jumped become individuals, that
is, beings capable of running back and forth alone, to his whim,
free world citizens who just depends of them with regard to the direction
of their movements.

As you can imagine of locomotion different, ways of walking in the upper world is equaled, surpassed
in advance by the infusoria. The impetuous whirlwind of a powerful star, a sun that draws as
to the planets few weaklings in his career, more irregular course that crosses the comet's hair or
scattering worlds vague in his way, the graceful undulation of the slender snake that is the water or
anything on the ground, rocking the boat who knows how to turn time, of course decline to go further,
in short, slow and cautious tracking our tardigrades, which are based, they cling to anything,
all these various air observed between the imperceptible. But what a wonderful simplicity to
media! There are not being more than a thread to advance soar like a corkscrew elastic, others
rely on their tails waving their little brows or vibrant way of paddle and rudder; Vorticella's
beautiful, like a vase of flowers, cling together on an island (Plantec
or crab), and then isolated by lifting his delicate stem.

* * *

What is most striking even the organs of movement, is what we could name expressions, attitude,
original signs of mood and character.

There are people apathetic other very active and fantastic, others agitated for war with no
apparent cause other diligent and possessed of a vain agitation.

Sometimes, through a mass of people quiet and peaceful, a daze, deaf and blind, he ruins everything
rolling.

Prodigious comedy! It seems like they're rehearsing drama including representing our world,
the noble and serious world of big animals visible.

At the head of the infusoria we place with some respect the majestic giants, the two Heads of
order, the high rate of motion and strength (slowly, but frightening)
armed.

Take a bit of moss from a roof either, leave a few days in water, and then observing under a
microscope. A powerful animal, the elephant, the whale of Diatomaceous muévese with a vigor and
a panache of life that do not always like colossi.

Respect it.

Is King of the atoms, the rotifer, so named because on both sides of the head has two wheeled
locomotion organs that assimilate the steamboat, or perhaps hunting weapons that help to take over
the weak.

All flee, cejan before him, and one resists, fearing nothing, confident in their weapons. Is
This monster, however provided higher senses, which has two big eyes with purple. Shortly tardigrade
movable and real, and sees instead is armed, it holds in its strong
very sharp claws legs, which serve to grab if necessary and no doubt
to fight.

* * *

Prelude Mighty Nature, in this economy of substance and matter, with nothing begins to create
so majestically! Sublime opening! These (so what size?) Have colossal power absorption and movement,
they will be very far from having the huge rated much higher beings in the animal series.

The
oyster stuck to his rock, the limaza that crawls on its belly, are
for the rotifer what I would side of the Alps, the mountain ranges
that make them as disproportionate can be measured by sight, and only
by calculation and imagination.

However, what has been made between those mountains animals readiness and zeal of life who worked
on the rotifer? What fall ours to climb the ladder! ... My atoms were full of life, moved rapidly,
and these giant beasts are attacked by paralysis.

What would happen if the rotifer could conceive to be an infinite group which slumbers by example,
the magnificent, colossal sponge the stars we see at the Museum of
Paris?

This, by its magnitude, is at an equal level of rotifer that man with the globe, nine Thousand
Leagues Under the ring. And yet, I'm convencidísimo that, far from being humiliated by comparison,
the atom will overflow with pride, exclaiming: "I'm big."

* * *

Ah, rotifer!, Rotifer! Should not underestimate anything.

I know well your strengths and your superiority, but do we know perhaps whether that life in captivity
moves you to laughter is not progress? Your unrhythmicity and dizzying freedom, is, perhaps,
the end of things? To make his point of departure for higher destinations, Nature prefer experience
a removable charm, penetrating the dark tomb that sad Communism in which each element plays
an insignificant role, and taught to dominate the concerns individual,
to concentrate the substance for the benefit of higher life.

Sleeps there for some time, as the sleeper of the jungle Linda, however, sleep or captivity,
spell or whatever, this state is not death. The rough material of the sponge silica-filled lives:
not moving, not breathing, without organs of movement, without any device of the senses, lives.
How do you know that?

The sponge stops twice a year, has its peculiar affair with more exuberance than others beings.
Spherules in a given day emerge from the mother sponge, fins, weak
armed that seek a few moments of entertainment and freedom.

Once fixed, conviértense in delicate sponges, which will gradually increase in size.

Thus, amid the apparent lack of senses and body, all wrapped in mystery enigma, on the threshold
of life uncertain, the generation reveals and shows us the prelude
the visible world as we scale to go.

Only you can see nothing, and that no longer appears motherhood. Like the gods of Egypt (Isis
and Osiris) that breed before birth, born here before being Love.

IV

Blood flower.

In the axis of the globe, amid the warm waters of the line and its
shallow reef, the Tues superabundant life to the point of no power,
it would seem, to balance their creations; outbidding and plant life,
all of a sudden, his life births occur animated.

But these animals are wearing a strange botanical class, with a splendid book eccentric and lush
flora. Divisáis far as the eye can see flowers, plants and shrubs;
at least, such I look for shapes and colors.

And those are moving plants, shrubs irritable, trembling with rising flowers sensitivity do
is to settle the will.

Oscillation charming, funny mistake! Limit of the two kingdoms, and under those floating looks
so fantastic, the spirit bears witness to its early beginnings. It is the dawn morning dawn. With
its dazzling colors, pearlescent agents and coatings, says the dream
Night and day the idea that appears.

Idea! Do we dare to pronounce this word? No: it is a dream, dream no more, but little by little
it becomes clear as morning dreams.

* * *

North of Africa, or beyond the Cape, the plant that reigned as sovereign in the temperate zone
sees rivals arise encouraged by his side languishing also flourish, and they soon will match
in excel.

The great charm begins, always growing and advancing to Ecuador.

Shrubs strange, stylish, the Gorgons, the isis, extend its rich variety,
the coral becomes your red beneath the waves.

Next to the bright iridescent all grasslands plant start-colored stone the stony corals, whose
branches (shall we say his hands and fingers?) pink flower in cream flakes, similar to those of
peaches and apples. For about seven hundred leagues from Ecuador and seven hundred other side
continues beyond the magical illusion.

Beings are uncertain, such as coral, that the three kingdoms vie. Itself contain some animal, some mineral,
and lately have just been classified in the nomenclature vegetables. Maybe it's the real point
that life obscurely sleep wake stone, without letting even his rough starting point, to warn
us, to us so proud and we look from so high, the ternary fraternity,
the right of the dark mineral has to rise and cheer, and the deep
aspiration that exists within nature.

* * *

"Our prairies, our forests - Darwin says - seem deserted and empty
when compared with the sea.

"And indeed, few have come to the clear seas of the Indies has called attention to the phantasmagoria
that provides its background, is surprising in the first term for the strange change that takes place
in plants and animals in their natural badges, in appearance.

Plants soft and gelatinous, with round bodies that are neither stems and leaves, affecting
fat, the gentle curves animals, would seem to want trick that looks and pretend to be creatures
of the animal kingdom, while animals true it seems like they manage to be likened to plants and vegetables,
as imitate all the characters of another realm. Some have the strength, the near-eternity of
the tree; descogen others and then fade, like flowers. So opens the sea anemone which pale pink daisy,
aster garnet or as adorned with azure eyes, but from the time that has broken off a trickle
of its corolla, or is a new anemone, dissolved veisla and disappear.

Much more variable proteo still water, the kingfisher, making all sorts of shapes and colors playing
the role of plant, fruit, deployment in a fan shape becomes hedge full of thickets or in graceful
basket. But all this is a fugitive, ephemeral, life as shy that the slightest movement disappears,
and nothing remains: in an instant has become all the breast of our common mother. The sensitive
will find one of these light forms, the cornularia, the touch turns
back upon itself, closed her womb as sensitive to the cool night flower.

When you asomáis the edge of the reef, the coral reefs, you observe the bottom of underwater wallpaper,
green and tubíporas astreas, served molded into snowballs, meandrina laberintito and stories in your
valleys and hills which are indicated with colors alive. The Avens (or carnations) green velvet shade
of orange at the end of limestone industry, food fish in the water gently shaking her beautiful
golden estambrillas.

Above the world below, and to protect it from the sun, which billowing
willows and reeds, or swaying like palm trees, the majestic Gorgons
several feet high, are a forest of dwarf trees isis.

From one to another tree, the feather entangles its spiral earwigs very similar to the vineyards
and makes correspond to each other through their Thin and light foliage, tinged with bright reflections.

This
show love, disturbs the imagination is dizzy and like a dream.

The fairy add water to these colors of a prism of fugitive inks, outstanding mobility, inconstancy
capricious, hesitation, doubt.

Have I been good? No, not that ... Was it a being or a rellejo? ... However, things are thus
I see a real world that lives there and play. Mollusks live confident, dragging its pearly shell,
the crabs also wary, and run and hunt. Strange fish, bellied and stocky, dressed in gold and
a hundred different colors, are walking their laziness. Annelida purple and violet, wind and
wave off the delicate star (brittle stars) that under the influence
of the sun, stretch, shrink, and develops its elegant coils arms.

Amid the phantasmagoria and more seriously, the tree bears its not madrepora so uploaded colors.
Its beauty is in the form.

And the beauty of this world is all in the noble aspect of the city common: the individual is modest,
but the republic imposes. Here is the strength of aloes and cactus, and beyond is the head of the deer,
his splendid harness, to a greater distance from the vigorous expansion
branches of a cedar After extending his arms horizontally, you have
to tiptoe more and more.

These forms, stripped now of thousands of live flowers that encouraged the covering, have perhaps
in its severe state more attractive to the spirits. As for myself, I am pleased in seeing the
trees in winter when bare branches elegant luxury overwhelming leaves, tell us what they are by themselves,
gently revealing the hidden personality. The same applies to the stony corals. In this nakedness,
converted from paintings sculptures more abstracted, as it were, seems to try to reveal the secret
of those little towns which are ornamental.

Several of them, would seem to speak through strange characters:
are linked, scrolls visibly indicate something complicated.

Is there someone who can interpret? How those words translate into our language?

Presiéntese well that today there is still an idea in there. One can
not discard easily from the spot, and even if you leave, there is
again. Spell, he understood it; then escapes you that ray of light
and I golpeáis forehead.

Swarms of bees, with its cool geometry,
there are not nearly so significant. These are a product of life,
but, what is life itself. The stone was not simply base coat of the
people, but an earlier people, the primitive generation, suppressed
gradually over by young people has taken such consistency. Then, all
the past movement, the tint of the original city, there are visible
and striking, with a truth flagrant, I live Herculanum detail or Pompeii.
But here everything is manufactured without violence or the smallest
disaster, a natural progression, the most serene peace reigns that
site, which has a singular appeal of sweetness.

The sculptor admire
the wonderful art forms in the same matter has been able to produce
infinite variations, which would be enough to change and renew all
our decorative arts.

But another thing we must consider more than
the form. The rich arborescence where descoge the laborious work of
those tribes, the ingenious mazes seem to find a thread that deep
symbolic play of plant life and all life, is the effort of an idea,
Freedom captivates, his timid groping toward the promised light, lightning
lovely soul youth involved in community life, but gently, without
violence, with grace, is emancipated it.

I own two of these seedlings,
species similar, yet different. No plant can be compared. Has a spotless
white, like alabaster dull, and its wealth loving each branch holds
buds, buttons, flowers, and never says, Enough. The other not as white
but more dense in every branch contains a world. Both are agradabilísimos
by their similarity and dissimilarity, their innocence, their fraternity.
Oh! Who can reveal the mystery child's soul that made this charming
fairy toy! Even that soul circular Vesela free and captive at once,
but in captivity love, and dreams of freedom without love it entirely.

*
* *

So far the arts have failed to seize these wonders that both
had attended. The magnificent statue of nature that rises to the gate
of the Jardin des Plantes, Paris should be surrounded by such attributes.
 But the fact
remains there are degrees and differences in badness. I've a notion that the Black Rim, taken
by and large, is a damn sight worse than the Devil's Tooth outfit. I'd like to try the experiment
of making the AJ and old Scotty ashamed of themselves. I'd like to try a schoolhouse on 'em,
and see if they're human enough to appreciate it."

Duke, turning his head slowly, glanced at Al, and from him to Tom. Without moving a muscle
of their faces the two returned his look. Al slid his cigarette stub thoughtfully into his
coffee cup and let his breath out carefully in a long sigh that was scarcely audible. Tom took
a corner of his lower lip between his teeth, matching Lance, who had the same trick.

"Honey, that's fine of you! There aren't many that realize what a lot of satisfaction there
is in doing something big and generous and making the other fellow ashamed of himself. And
it would be a God's mercy to Mary Hope, poor child. Leave it to the AJ and whatever other outfit
there is to send pupils, and Mary Hope could teach in the Whipple shack till it rattled down
on top of them. I know what the place is. I put up there once in a hailstorm. It isn't fit
for cattle, as Tom says, unless they've fixed it a lot. I'll donate the furniture; I'll make
out the order right this evening for seats and blackboard and a globe and everything, and make
it a rush order!" Belle pushed back her chair and came around to Lance, slipped her arms around
his neck and tousled his wavy mop of hair with her chin. "If the rest won't come through you
and I'll do it, honey--"

"Who said we wouldn't?" Tom got up, stretching his arms high above his head,--which was very
bad manners, but showed how supple he still was, and how well-muscled. "No one ever called
me a piker--and let me hear about it. Sure, we'll build a schoolhouse for 'em, seeing they're
too cussed stingy to build one themselves. There's the lumber I had hauled out for a new chicken
house; to-morrow I'll have it hauled up to some good building spot, and we'll have it done
before the AJ wakes up to the fact that anything's going on."

"I'll chip in enough to make her big enough for dances," volunteered Duke. "Darn this riding
fifteen or twenty miles to a dance!"

"I'll paint 'er, if you let me pick out the color," said Al. "Where are you going to set 'er?"

"What's the matter with doing the thing in style, and giving a house-warming dance, and turning
it over to the neighborhood with a speech?" bantered Lance, as they adjourned to the big living
room, taking the idea with them and letting it grow swiftly in enthusiasm. "That would celebrate
my visit, and I'd get a chance to size up the Rim folks and see how they react to kindness.
Lordy, folks, let's do it!"

"We might," Belle considered the suggestion, while she thumbed the latest mail-order catalogue,
the size of a family bible and much more assiduously studied. "They'd come, all right!" she
added, with a scornful laugh. "Even old Scotty would come, if he thought it wouldn't cost him
anything."

"Well, by heck, we won't let it cost him anything!" Lance stood leaning against the wall by
the stove, his arms folded, the fingers of his left hand tapping his right forearm. He did
not know that this was a Lorrigan habit, born of an old necessity of having the right hand
convenient to a revolver butt, and matched by the habit of carrying a six-shooter hooked inside
the trousers band on the left side.

Tom, studying Lance, thought how much he resembled his grandfather on the night Buck Sanderson
was killed in a saloon in Salmon City. Old Tom had leaned against the wall at the end of the
bar, with his arms folded and his fingers tapping his right forearm, just as Lance was doing
now. He had lifted one eyebrow and pulled a corner of his lip between his teeth when Buck came
blustering in. Just as Lance smiled at Duke's chaffing, Tom's father had smiled when Buck came
swaggering up to him with bold eyes full of fight and his right thumb hooked in his chap belt.
Old Tom had not moved; he had remained leaning negligently against the wall with his arms folded.
But the strike of a snake was not so quick as the drop of his hand to his gun.

Tom was not much given to reminiscence; but to-night, seeing Lance with two years of man-growth
and the poise of town life upon him, he slipped into a swift review of changing conditions
and a vague speculation upon the value of environment in the shaping of character. Lance was
all Lorrigan. He had turned Lorrigan in the two years of his absence, which had somehow painted
out his resemblance to Belle. His hair had darkened to a brown that was almost black. His eyes
had darkened, his mouth had the Lorrigan twist. He had grown taller, leaner, surer in his movements,--due
to his enthusiasm for athletics and the gym, though Tom had no means of knowing what had given
him that catlike quickness, the grace of perfect muscular coordination. Tom thought it was
the Lorrigan blood building Lance true to his forbears as he passed naturally from youth to
maturity. He wondered if Lance, given the environment which had shaped his grandfather, would
have been a "killer," hated by many, feared by all.

Even now, if it came to the point of fighting, would not Lance fight true to the blood, true
to that Lorrigan trick of the folded arms and the tapping fingers? Would not Lance--? Tom pulled
his thoughts away from following that last conjecture to its logical end. There were matters
in which it might be best not to include Lance, just as he had been careful not to include
Belle. For Lance might still be a good deal like Belle, in spite of his Lorrigan looks and
mannerisms. And there were certain Lorrigan traits which would not bear any mixture of Belle
in the fiber.

"Well, now, that's all made out. I'll send to Salt Lake and get the stuff quicker. Wake up,
Tom, and tell us how long it will take to put up the schoolhouse? Lance is going to give the
dance--and there won't be so much as a soggy chocolate cake accepted from the Rimmers. What
will you do, Lance? Put up a notice in Jumpoff?"

"Surely! A mysteriously worded affair, telling little and saying much. Music and refresh--no,
by heck, that sounds too wet and not solid enough. Music and supper furnished free. Everybody
welcome. Can't Riley drive the chuck-wagon over and have the supper served by a camp-fire?
Golly, but I've been hungry for that old chuck-wagon! That would keep all the mess of coffee
and sandwiches out of the nice, new schoolhouse."

"Who's going to hold their hat in front of the nice, new schoolhouse till it's done and ready?
And how're you going to let 'em know where to come to, without giving away the secret?" Al,
the practical, stretched his long legs to the stove and thrust his hands deep into his trousers
pockets while he propounded these two conundrums. "Go on, Lance. This is yore party."

Lance unfolded his arms and disposed his big body on a bearskin covered lounge where he could
take Belle's hand and pat it and playfully pinch a finger now and then.

"To look at your hand, Belle, a fellow would swear that a blonde manicure girl comes here twice
a week," he said idly. "Where is the schoolhouse going to be built? Why not put it just at
the foot of the ridge, at Cottonwood Spring? That's out of sight of the road, and if the notice
said 'Cottonwood Spring', folks would know where to head for. It's close to the line of your
land, isn't it, dad? A yard--corral-size--fenced around the place would keep the cattle off
the doorstep, and they could water there just the same. If we're going to do it, why not do
it right?"

"I guess we could get down there with a load," Tom assented easily. "I'd ruther have it on
my land anyways."

"Don't think, Tom Lorrigan, that we'd ever take it back from Mary Hope. No matter how Scotty
acts up. But if they ever gave her the double-cross and got some one else to teach--why it
might be nice to know it's our schoolhouse, on our land." Belle pulled her hand away from Lance
and went over to the piano. "It's all done but the shingling," she said cheerfully. "Come on,
Lance, see if you can sing 'Asleep in the Deep.' And then show me what you mean by saying you
can yodel now better than when I licked you the time you and Duke chased the colt through the
corral fence!"

"All done but the shingling--and I ain't got 'em bought yet!" grumbled Tom, but was utterly
disregarded in the sonorous chords of Belle's prelude to the song.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

LANCE RIDES AHEAD

At fifteen minutes to four on a certain Tuesday afternoon, the first really pleasant day after
the day of tearing, whooping wind that had blown Tom into the role of school bully, Lance loped
out upon the trail that led past the Whipple shack a mile and a quarter farther on. Ostensibly
his destination was the town of Jumpoff, although it was not the time of day when one usually
started from the Devil's Tooth ranch to the post-office, with three unimportant letters as
an excuse for the trip.

As he rode Lance sang lustily a love song, but he was not thinking especially of Mary Hope.
In two years more than one California girl had briefly held his fancy, and memory of Mary Hope
had slightly dimmed. In his pocket were two letters, addressed to two California towns. One
letter had Miss Helene Somebody inscribed upon it, and on the other was Miss Mildred Somebody
Else. The love song, therefore, had no special significance, save that Lance was young and
perfectly normal and liked the idea of love, without being hampered by any definite form of
it concentrated upon one girl.

For all that he had timed his trip so as to arrive at the Whipple shack just about the time
when Mary Hope would be starting home. He was curious to see just how much or how little she
had changed; to know whether she still had that funny little Scotch accent that manifested
itself in certain phrasings, certain vowel sounds at variance with good English pronunciation.
He wanted to know just how much Pocatello had done to spoil her. Beneath all was the primal
instinct of the young male dimly seeking the female whom his destiny had ordained to be his mate.

As a young fellow shut in behind the Rim, with the outside world a vast area over which his
imagination wandered vaguely, Mary Hope had appealed to him. She was the one girl in the Black
Rim country whom he would ride out of his way to meet, whose face, whose voice, lingered with
him pleasantly for days after he had seen her and talked with her. He reflected, between snatches
of song, that he might have thought himself in love with Mary Hope, might even have married
her, had Belle not suddenly decided that he should go beyond the Rim and learn the things she
could not teach him. Belle must have wanted him, her youngest, to be different from the rest.
He wondered with a sudden whimsical smile, whether she was satisfied with the result of his
two years of exile. Tom, he suspected, was not,--nor were Duke and Al. The three seemed to
hold themselves apart from him, to look upon him as a guest rather than as one of the family
returned after an absence. They did not include him in their talk of range matters and the
business of the ranch. He had once observed in them a secret embarrassment when he appeared
unexpectedly, had detected a swift change of tone and manner and subject.

Surely they could not think he had changed sufficiently to make him an outsider, he meditated.
Aside from his teasing of Belle, he had dropped deliberately into the range vernacular, refraining
only from certain crudities of speech which grated on his ears. He had put on his old clothes,
he had tried to take his old place in the ranch work. He had driven a four-horse team up the
Ridge trail with lumber for the schoolhouse, and had negotiated the rock descent to Cottonwood
Spring with a skill that pleased him mightily because it proved to him--and to Tom and the
boys--that his range efficiency had not lessened during his absence. He had done everything
the boys had done, except ride out with them on certain long trips over the range. He had not
gone simply because they had made it quite plain that they did not want him.

Nor did the hired cowboys want him with them,--ten of them in the bunk house with a cook of
their own, and this only the middle of March! In two years the personnel of the bunk house
had changed almost completely. They were men whom he did not know, men who struck him as "hard-boiled,"
though he could not have explained just wherein they differed from the others. Sam Pretty Cow
and Shorty he could hobnob with as of yore,--Sam in particular giving him much pleasure with
his unbroken reserve, his unreadable Indian eyes and his wide-lipped grin. The others were
like Duke, Tom and Al,--slightly aloof, a bit guarded in their manner.

"And I suppose Mary Hope will be absolutely spoiled, with small-town dignity laid a foot deep
over her Scotch primness. Still, a girl that has the nerve to lift a club and threaten to brain
Tom Lorrigan--"

He had forgotten the love song he was singing, and before he reached farther in his musings
he met the Swedes, who stared at him round-eyed and did not answer his careless hello. A little
farther, the Boyle children rode up out of a dry wash, grinned bashfully at him and hurried on.

A saddlehorse was tied to a post near the Whipple shack. With long legs swinging slightly with
the stride of his horse, reins held high and loose in one hand, his big hat tilted over his
forehead, Lance rode up and dismounted as if his errand, though important, was not especially
urgent. The door stood open. He walked up, tapped twice with his knuckles on the unpainted
casing, and entered, pulling off his hat and turning it round and round in his gloved fingers
while he ducked his head, pressed his lips together with a humorous quirk, shuffled his spurred
feet on the dirty floor and bowed again as awkwardly as he could. In this manner he hoped to
draw some little spark of individuality from Mary Hope, who sat behind her yellow-painted table
and stared at him over her folded arms. But Mary Hope, he observed, had been crying, and compunction
seized him suddenly.

"Well, what is it?" she asked him curtly, rubbing a palm down over one cheek, with the motion
obliterating a small rivulet of tears.

"If you please, ma'am, I was sent to mend a lock on a door."

"What lock? On what door?" Mary Hope passed a palm down her other cheek, thus obliterating
another rivulet that had ceased to flow tears and was merely wet and itchy.

"If you please, ma'am, you can search me." Lance looked at her innocently. "I didn't bring
any lock with me, and I didn't bring any door with me. But I've got some screws and three nails
and--lots of good intentions."

"Good intentions are very rare in this country," said Mary Hope, and made meaningless marks
on the bare tabletop with a blunt pencil.

Lance heard a twang of Scotch in the "very rare" which pleased him. But he kept his position
by the doorway, and he continued bashfully turning his big hat round and round against his
chest,--though the action went oddly with the Lorrigan look and the athletic poise of him.
"Yes, ma'am. Quite rare," he agreed.

"In fact, I don't believe there is such a thing in the whole Black Rim country," stated Mary
Hope, plainly nonplussed at his presence and behavior.

"Could I show you mine?" Lance advanced a step. He was not sure, at that moment, whether he
wanted to go with the play. Mary Hope was better looking than when he had seen her last. She
had lost a good deal of the rusticity he remembered her to have possessed, but she was either
too antagonistic to carry on the farce, or she was waiting for him to show his hand, to betray
some self-consciousness. But the fact that she looked at him straight in the eyes and neither
frowned nor giggled, set her apart from the ordinary range-bred girl.

"You talk like a country peddler. I'm willing to accept a sample, and see if they are durable.
Though I can't for the life of me see why you'd be coming here with good intentions."

"I'd be mending a lock on a door. Is this the door, ma'am? And is this the lock?"

Since the door behind him was the only door within five miles of them, and since the lock dangled
from a splintered casing, Mary Hope almost smiled. "It is a door," she informed him. "And it
is a lock that has been broken by a Lorrigan."

She was baiting him, tempting him to quarrel with her over the old grudge. Because she expected
a reply, Lance made no answer whatever. He happened to have a dozen or so of nails in his coat
pocket, left-overs from his assiduous carpentry on the house being builded for her comfort.
The screws he possessed were too large, and he had no hammer. But no man worries over a missing
hammer where rocks are plentiful, and Lance was presently pounding the lock into place, his
back to Mary Hope, his thoughts swinging from his prospective party to the possible religious
scruples of the Douglas family.

Mary Hope used to dance--a very little--he remembered, though she had not attended many dances.
He recalled suddenly that a Christmas tree or a Fourth of July picnic had usually been the
occasions when Mary Hope, with her skirts just hitting her shoe tops in front and sagging in
an ungainly fashion behind, had teetered solemnly through a "square" dance with him. Mother
Douglas herself had always sat very straight and prim on a bench, her hands folded in her lap
and her eyes blinking disapprovingly at the ungodly ones who let out an exultant little yip
now and then when they started exuberantly through the mazes of the "gran'-right-n-left."

Would Mary Hope attend the party? Should he tell her about it and ask her to come? Naturally,
he could not peacefully escort her partyward,--the feud was still too rancorous for that. Or
was it? At the Devil's Tooth they spoke of old Scotty as an enemy, but they had cited no particular
act of hostility as evidence of his enmity. At the Devil's Tooth they spoke of the whole Black
Rim country as enemy's country. Lance began to wonder if it were possible that the Lorrigans
had adopted unconsciously the role of black sheep, without the full knowledge or concurrence
of the Black Rimmers.

He did what he could to make a workable lock of one that had been ready to fall to pieces before
his father heaved against it; hammered in the loosened screws in the hinges, tossed the rock
out into the scuffed sod before the shack, and picked up his hat. He had not once looked toward
Mary Hope, but he turned now as if he were going to say good-by and take himself off; as if
mending the lock had really been his errand, and no further interest held him there.

He surprised a strange, wistful look in Mary Hope's eyes, a trembling of her lips. She seemed
to be waiting, fearing that he meant to go without any further overtures toward friendship.

The Whipple shack was not large. Ten feet spanned the distance between them. Impulsively Lance
covered that distance in three steps. At the table he stopped, leaned toward her with his palms
braced upon the table, and stared full into Mary Hope's disturbed eyes.

"Girl," he said, drawing the word softly along a vibrant note in his voice that sent a tremor
through her, "Girl, you're more lonesome than Scotch, and you're more Scotch than the heather
that grows in your front yard to make your mother cry for the Highlands she sees when her eyes
blur with homesickness. You were crying when I came--crying because you're lonely. It's a big,
wild country--the Black Rim. It's a country for men to ride hell-whooping through the sage
and camas grass, with guns slung at their hips, but it's no country for a little person like
you to try and carry on a feud because her father made one. You're--too little!"

He did not touch her, his face did not come near her face. But in his eyes, in his voice, in
the tender, one-sided little smile, there was something,--Mary Hope caught her breath, feeling
as if she had been kissed.

"You little, lonesome girl! There's going to be a party at Cottonwood Spring, a week from Friday
night. It's a secret--a secret for you. And you won't tell a soul that you were the first to
know--and you'll come, you girl, because it's your party. And not a soul will know it's your
party. If your father's Scotch is too hard for dancing--you'll come just the same. You'll come,
because the secret is for you. And--" He thought that he read something in her eyes and hastened
to forestall her intention "--and you won't go near Cottonwood Spring before the time of the
party, because that wouldn't be playing fair.

"Don't be lonely, girl. The world is full of pleasant things, just waiting to pop out at you
from behind every bush. If you're good and kind and honest with life, the Fates are going to
give you the best they've got. Don't be lonely! Just wait for the pleasant things in to-morrow
and to-morrow--in all the to-morrows. And one of them, girl, is going to show you the sweetest
thing in life. That's love, you girl with the tears back of your Scotch blue eyes. But wait
for it--and take the little pleasant things that minutes have hidden away in the to-morrows.
And one of the pleasant times will be hidden at Cottonwood Spring, a week from Friday night.
Wonder what it will be, girl. And if any one tries to tell it, put your hands over your ears,
so that you won't hear it. Wait--and keep wondering, and come to Cottonwood Spring next Friday
night. Adios, girl."

He looked into her eyes, smiling a little. Then, turning suddenly, he left her without a backward
glance. Left her with nothing to spoil the haunting cadence of his voice, nothing to lift the
spell of tender prophecy his words had laid upon her soul. When he was quite gone, when she
heard the clatter of his horse's hoofs upon the arid soil that surrounded the Whipple shack,
Mary Hope still stared out through the open doorway, seeing nothing of the March barrenness,
seeing only the tender, inscrutable, tantalizing face of Lance Lorrigan,--tantalizing because
she could not plumb the depths of his eyes, could not say how much of the tenderness was meant
for her, how much was born of the deep music of his voice, the whimsical, one-sided smile.

And Lance, when he had ridden a furlong from the place, had dipped into a shallow draw and
climbed the other side, turned half around in the saddle and looked back.

"Now, why did I go off and leave her like that? Like an actor walking off the stage to make
room for the other fellow to come on and say his lines. There's no other fellow--thank heck!
And here are two miles we might be riding together--and me preaching to her about taking the
little, pleasant things that come unexpectedly!" He swung his horse around in the trail, meaning
to ride back; retraced his steps as far as the hollow, and turned again, shaking his head.

"Anybody could stop at the schoolhouse just as school's out, and ride a couple of miles down
the road with the schoolma'am--if she let him do it! Anybody could do that. But that isn't
the reason, why I'm riding on ahead. What the hell is the reason?"

He stopped again on the high level where he could look back and see the Whipple shack squatted
forlornly in the gray stretch of sage with wide, brown patches of dead grass between the bushes.

"Lonesome," he named the wild expanse of unpeopled range land. "She's terribly lonely--and
sweet. Too lonely and sweet for me to play with, to ride a few miles with--and leave her lonelier
than I found her. I couldn't. There's enough sadness now in those Scotch blue eyes. Damned
if I'll add more!"

He saw Mary Hope come from the shack, pause a minute on the doorstep, then walk out to where
her horse was tied to the post. He lifted the reins, pricked his horse gently with the spurs
and galloped away to Jumpoff, singing no more.

CHAPTER TWELVE

SHE WILL, AND SHE WON'T

Cottonwood Spring was a dished-out oasis just under the easy slope of Devil's Tooth Ridge.
From no part of the Jumpoff trail could it be seen, and the surrounding slope did not offer
much inducement to cattle in March, when water was plentiful; wherefore riders would scarcely
wander into the saucer-like hollow that contained the cottonwoods and the spring. A picnic
had once been held there, but the festivities had been marred by a severe thunderstorm that
came just as a wordy quarrel between two drunken cowpunchers was fast nearing the gun-pulling
stage. Lightning had struck the side hill just beyond the grove, and the shock of it had knocked
down and stunned the two disputants, and three saddle horses standing in the muddy overflow
from the spring. For this reason, perhaps, and because it was on Lorrigan land, the place had
never thereafter been frequented save by the stock that watered there.

But from the head of the little basin a wide view was had of the broken land beyond Devil's
Tooth. The spring was clear and cold and never affected by drouth. By following the easy slope
around the point of the main trail from Jumpoff to the Lorrigan ranch, no road-building was
necessary, and in summer the cottonwoods looked very cool and inviting--though at certain times
they harbored buffalo gnats and many red ants that would bite, which rendered the shade less
grateful than it looked. But to the Lorrigans it seemed an ideal site for a schoolhouse.

Ten days after they had planned the deed, the schoolhouse stood ready for the dance. In the
lean-to shed, twelve shiny yellow desks that smelled strongly of varnish were stacked in their
heavy paper swaddlings, waiting to be set in place when the dance was done. Belle herself had
hemmed scrim curtains for the windows, which Riley had washed copiously. The blackboard, with
the names of various Devil's Tooth men and a "motto" or two scrawled upon it was in place;
the globe was on the teacher's desk, and the water bucket on its shelf in the corner, with
a shiny new tin dipper hanging on a nail above it.

If you were to believe the frequent declarations, every puncher on the ranch had done his durnedest
to put 'er up, and put 'er up right. Sam Pretty Cow had nailed a three-foot American flag to
the front gable, and had landed on a nail when he jumped from the eaves. On the night of the
dance he was hobbling around the chuck-wagon with half a pound of salt pork bound to his foot,
helping Riley, who had driven over to the spring early, burdened with the importance of his
share in the entertainment.

A dance in the Black Rim country has all the effect of a dog fight in a small village with
empty streets. No sooner does it start than one wonders where all the people came from.

At eight o'clock toiling horses drawing full loads of humanity began to appear over the rim
of the hollow, to pick their way carefully down toward the lighted windows, urged by their
drivers. Men on horseback made the descent more swiftly, with a clatter of small rocks kicked
loose as they came. They encountered a four-wire fence, circled it to where a lantern, hung
on a post, revealed a gate that lay flat on the ground to leave a welcoming space for teams
and saddle horses to pass through.

Beside the schoolhouse, with two lanterns shedding a yellow glow on his thin, sandy hair, Riley,
at the chuck-wagon, arranged doughnuts, sandwiches, pies and cakes to his liking, wiped his
red hands frequently on his clean flour-sack apron, and held carefully unprofane conversation
with the women who came fluttering over to him, their arms burdened.

"No, mom, sorry! I know I'm turnin' down something that's better than anything I got here,
but this here party's on the Lorrigans. No, mom, I got orders not to take in s'much as a sour
pickle from nobody. You jest put it back in the rig, whatever you got there, and consider't
you got some Sat'day bakin' did up ahead.

"Yes, mom, it's Lance's party. He's home for a visit, an' he kinda wanted to have a dance an'
meet the folks, seein' he's been away quite a spell and kain't stay long.

"Yes, mom, he's goin' back to college first the week.

"Hey! I wisht you'd tie up yore cayuses other side the shack. Folks'll be comin' around here
for their supper, and they don't wanta git their faces kicked off whilst they're huntin' grub
to fill 'em.

"No, mom, we ain't takin' any cakes or nothin' off nobody. Lance, he wanted to give this dance
an' give it right. Ain't goin' to cost nobody a thing but sore corns, t'night!"

Lance had hired an Italian violinist and his boy who played a harp much taller than himself
and people coming from Jumpoff had brought them out. The Millers had come, with all their outfit.
The AJ outfit was there to a man. The Swedes were present, sitting together in the corner by
the water bucket, and the Conleys, who lived over by Camas Creek beyond the AJ, had come. The
Conleys had sheep, and were not firmly settled in the Black Rim, sheepmen being looked at askance.
There were families from nearer Jumpoff,--one really did wonder where they all came from, when
the country seemed so wide and unpeopled.

Lance was surprised to see how many were there who were total strangers. Until the dancing
began the men stood outside and smoked, leaving the women and children to arrange themselves
on benches along the wall inside. Lance knew the custom well enough, and he did not go in.
But he tried to see who came with every load that was deposited within the circle of light
on the narrow platform that embellished the front.

At nine o'clock, when the musicians were trying their instruments tentatively and even the
most reluctant male was being drawn irresistibly to the humming interior, Lance frankly admitted
to himself that he was not happy, and that his condition was the direct result of not having
seen Mary Hope enter the door.

He sought out Tom, who was over at the chuck-wagon, taking an early cup of coffee. Tom blew
away the steam that rose on the chill night air and eyed Lance. "Well, when do we make the
speech? Or don't we?" he demanded, taking a gulp and finding the coffee still too hot for comfort.
"Don't ask me to; I done my share when I built 'er. You can tell the bunch what she's for."

"Oh, what the heck do we want with a speech?" Lance remonstrated. "They know it's a schoolhouse,
unless they're blind. And I thought maybe some one--you, probably, since you're the one who
hazed her out of the other place--would just tell Mary Hope to bring her books over here and
teach. And I thought, to cinch it, you could tell Jim Boyle that you felt you ought to do something
toward a school, and since you couldn't furnish any kids, you thought you'd furnish the house.
That ought to be easy. It's up to you, I should say. But I wouldn't make any speech."

Tom grunted, finished his coffee and proceeded to remove all traces of it from his lips with
his best white handkerchief. "Where's Jim Boyle at?" he asked, moving into the wide bar of
dusk that lay between the lights of the chuck-wagon and the glow from the two windows facing
that way.

"I believe I'd speak about it first to Mary Hope," Lance suggested, coming behind him. "But
she hasn't come yet--"

As if she heard and deliberately moved to contradict him, Mary Hope danced past the window,
the hand of a strange young man with a crisp white handkerchief pressed firmly between her
shoulder blades. Mary Hope was dancing almost as solemnly as in the days of short skirts and
sleek hair, her eyes apparently fixed upon the shoulder of her partner who gazed straight out
over her head, his whole mind centered upon taking the brunt of collisions upon the point of
his upraised elbow.

"I'll ketch her when she's through dancing," promised Tom. But Lance had another thought.

"Let me tell Mary Hope, dad. I'm going to dance with her, and it will be easy."

In the darkness Tom grinned and went on to find Jim Boyle standing in a group of older men
on the platform that served as a porch. Jim Boyle was smoking a cheap cigar brought out from
Jumpoff by the section boss. He listened reflectively, looked at the glowing tip of the evil-smelling
cigar, threw the thing from him and reached for his cigarette papers with an oath.

"Now, that's damn white of yuh, Tom," he said. "I leave it to the boys if it ain't damn white.
Not having no school district I'm puttin' up the money outa my own pocket to pay the teacher.
And havin' four kids to feed and buy clothes for, I couldn't afford to build no schoolhouse,
I tell yuh those. And uh course, I didn't like to go round askin' fer help; but it's damn white
of yuh to step in an' do yore share towards making the Rim look like it was civilized. Sederson,
he'll feel the same way about it. And I'm gitting a foreman that's got a kid, school age; we
sure'n hell do need a schoolhouse. Rim's settlin' up fast. I always said, Tom, that you was
white. I leave it to the boys here."

Inside, Lance was not finding it so easy to make the announcement. Last Tuesday, Mary Hope
had not understood just why he had ridden on ahead of her for two miles--she could see the
small dust cloud kicked up by his horse on the Jumpoff trail, so there could be no mistake--when
he knew perfectly well that she must ride that way, when he could not have failed to see her
horse saddled and waiting at the door. It seemed to Mary Hope an obscure form of mockery to
tell her not to be lonely--to tell her in a caressing tone that left with her all the effect
of kisses--and then to ride away without one backward glance, one word of excuse. Until she
had mounted and had seen him on the trail ahead, she had not realized how he had mocked her.

For days--until Friday, to be explicit--she had been quite determined not to go near Cottonwood
Spring. Then she had suddenly changed her mind, dismissed school half an hour early, put old
Rab in a lather on the way home, dressed herself and announced to her mother that she must
ride into Jumpoff for school supplies, and that she would stay all night with the Kennedys.
It had taken two years and the dignity of school-teacher to give Mary Hope the courage to announce
things to her mother. As it was, she permitted her mother to explain as best she might to Hugh
Douglas. Her courage did not reach to that long, uncompromising upper lip of her father's.

She had folded her prettiest dress carefully into a flat bundle, had thrown it out of her window
and left the house in her riding clothes. There was a saddle horse, Jamie, a Roman-nosed bay
of uncertain temper and a high, rocking gait, which she sometimes used for long trips. She
saddled him now and hurried away, thankful to be gone with her package and her guilty conscience
before her father arrived. She was very good friends with the Kennedys, at the section house.
If there was a dance within forty miles, the Kennedys might be counted upon to attend; and
that is how Mary Hope arrived at the schoolhouse with a load from Jumpoff. She had seen Lance
standing near the door, and Lance had paid no attention to her, but had left an AJ man to claim
the first two-step. Wherefore Lance walked straight into trouble when he went to Mary Hope
and asked for the next dance with her.

"So sorry--it's promised already," said Mary Hope, in her primmest tone.

"There's a dance after the next one," he hinted, looking down from his more-than-six feet at
her where she sat wedged between Mrs. Boyle and Jennie Miller.

"So sorry--but I think that one is promised also," said Mary Hope.

Lance drew a corner of his lip between his teeth, let it go and lifted his eyebrows whimsically
at Jennie Miller, whom he had once heard playing on her organ, and whom he had detested ever
since with an unreasoning animosity born solely of her musical inability and her long neck
that had on its side a brown mole with three coarse hairs in it.

"If Miss Douglas has two dances engaged in advance, it's quite hopeless to hope for a dance
with Miss Miller," he said, maliciously drawing the sentence through certain vibrant tones
which experience had taught him had a certain pleasing effect upon persons. "Or is it hopeless?
Are you engaged for every dance to-night, Miss Miller? And if you are, please may I stand beside
you while you eat a sandwich at midnight?"

Jennie Miller giggled. "I ain't as popular as all that," she retorted, glancing at Mary Hope,
sitting very straight and pretty beside her. "And if I was, I don't go and promise everybody
that asks. I might want to change my mind afterwards if some other fellow comes along I liked
better--and I've saw too many fights start over a girl forgetting who she's promised to dance
with."

"You don't want to see a fight start now, do you?" Lance smiled down at her without in the
least degree betraying to Mary Hope that he would like to pull Jennie Miller by force from
that seat and occupy it himself.

"I never can see why men fight over things. I hate fights," Miss Miller stammered, agitated
by a wild feeling that perhaps she was going to be made love to.

"Then don't forget that you are going to dance with me." The music just then started again,
and he offered her his arm with a certain import that made Mary Hope clench her hands.

Mary Hope was punished for her lie. She had not promised that dance, and so she sat on the
plank bench and saw Lance and Jennie Miller sway past her four times before a gawky youth who
worked for her father caught sight of her and came over from the water-bucket corner to ask
her for the dance. That was not the worst. On the fourth round of Lance and Jennie, and just
as the gawky one was bowing stiffly before her, Lance looked at her over Jennie Miller's shoulder,
and smiled that tantalizing, Lorrigan smile that always left her uneasily doubtful of its meaning.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

A WAY HE HAD WITH HIM

It was at the chuck-wagon at midnight, while Riley and Sam Pretty Cow were serving tin cups
of black coffee to a shuffling, too-hilarious crowd, that Lance next approached Mary Hope.
She was standing on the outskirts of a group composed mostly of women, quite alone so far as
cavaliers were concerned, for the gawky youth had gone after coffee. She was looking toward
the sagebrush camp-fire around which a crowd of men had gathered with much horseplay at which
they were laughing loudly, and she was wondering how best she could make Lance Lorrigan aware
of her absolute indifference to him, when his voice drawled disconcertingly close to her ear:

"You're not lonely now, you girl--and you did find a secret at Cottonwood Spring. A pleasant
little secret, wasn't it?"

Mary Hope's hands became fists at her side, held close against her best frock. "I think the
fellows over by the fire have discovered your pleasant secret," she said, and did not turn
her face toward him.

With his arms folded and his eyebrows pulled together and his lip between his teeth, Lance
stared down at her face, studying it in the flicker of the distant firelight and the two lanterns.
If her combativeness roused in him any resentment, he did not permit it to show in his voice.

"Some of the fellows from Jumpoff brought a bottle or two. That's no secret, except that I
don't know where they have it cachéd. The schoolhouse is your--"

"I heard it was included in the Lorrigan refreshments."

"The schoolhouse is ready for your pleasure Monday morning," Lance spoke with that perfect
impersonal courtesy that is so exasperating to a person who listens for something to resent.
"I knew of it, of course--dad wanted it kept for a surprise. And he wanted me to tell you.
It's the Lorrigan expression of their appreciation of the need of a school."

The gawky youth came stumbling up, his outstretched hands carefully holding two tin cups filled
with coffee close to the boiling point. Being a youth of good intentions, he tried very hard
not to spill a drop. Being gawky, he stubbed his toe as he was rounding the group of women,
and Mrs. Miller shrieked and swung back her hand, cuffing the gawky one straight into the thickest
of the crowd. Other women screamed.

Lance reached a long arm and plucked the youth out by the slack of his coat, shook him and
propelled him into the darkness, where he collided violently with Sam Pretty Cow. Some one
had been over-generous with Sam Pretty Cow. A drunken Indian is never quite safe. Sam Pretty
Cow struck out blindly, yelling Piegan curses hoarsely as he fought. The crowd of men around
the camp-fire came running. For a short space there was confusion, shouting, the shrill voices
of scalded women denouncing the accident as a deliberate outrage.

Mrs. Miller whirled on Lance. "You pushed him on me! If that ain't a Lorrigan trick!--"

"Yeah--what yuh mean? Throwin' bilin' hot coffee on--"

"Who says it's a Lorrigan trick?"

"Might 'a' known what to expect--"

"Get back here, away from the crowd. There may be shooting," Lance muttered to Mary Hope, and
pulled her to the rear of the wagon and around upon the farther side. She could not resist.
His strength was beyond any hope of combating it with her small strength. Mrs. Miller, whose
scalded shoulder led her to wild utterances without thought of their effect upon others, shouted
at him as he hustled Mary Hope away:

"Yeah--run! You're the one that done it--now run! That's like a Lorrigan--do your dirty work
and then crawl out and let somebody else take the blame! That kid never--"

"Aw, come back and fight, you big sneak!" A drunken voice bellowed hoarsely, and a gunshot
punctuated the command.

"Go on--get on the other side of the schoolhouse. Run! The fools will all start to shooting now!"

Mary Hope stopped stubbornly. "I will not!" she defied him; and Lance without more argument
lifted her from the ground, stooped and tossed her under the wagon, much as he would have heaved
a bag of oats out of the rain.

"Don't you move until I tell you to," he commanded her harshly, and ran back, diving into the
thick of the crowd as though he were charging into a football scrimmage.

"Who was it called me back to fight? Put up your guns,--or keep them if you like. It's all
one to me!"

In the dim light he saw the gleam of a weapon raised before him, reached out and wrenched it
away from the owner, and threw it far over his shoulder into the weeds. "Who said a Lorrigan
run? I want that man!"

"I said it," bellowed a whisky-flushed man whose face was strange to him. "I said it, and I
say it agin. I say--a Lorrigan!"

He lifted his gun above the pressure of excited men and women. Lance sprung upward and forward,
landed on some one's foot, lunged again and got a grip on the hand that held the gun. With
his left hand he wrenched the gun away. With his right he pulled the man free of the crowd
and out where there was room. The crowd--men, now, for the women had fled shrieking--surged
that way.

"Stand back there! I'll settle with this fellow alone." He held the other fast, his arms as
merciless as the grip of a grizzly, and called aloud:

"This is a Lorrigan dance, and the Lorrigans are going to have order. Those of you who brought
chips on your shoulders, and whisky to soak the chips in, can drink your whisky and do your
fighting among yourselves, off the Lorrigan ranch. We all came here to have fun. There's music
and room to dance, and plenty of chuck and plenty of coffee, and the dance is going right on
without any fuss whatever.

"This poor boob here who thinks he wants to fight me just because I'm a Lorrigan, I never saw
before. It wouldn't be a fair fight, because he's too drunk to do anything but make a fool
of himself. There's nothing to fight about, anyway. A fellow was carrying two cups of boiling
hot coffee, and he stubbed his toe, and some one got scalded a little. That's nothing to break
up a dance over. The rest of you heard the noise and jumped at the conclusion there was trouble
afoot. There isn't. I think you all want to go on with the dance and have a good time, except
perhaps a few who are drunk. They are at liberty to go off somewhere and beat each other up
to their hearts' content. Come on, now, folks--get your partners for a square dance--and everybody
dance!"

His voice had held them listening. His words were not the words of a coward, yet they were
a plea for peace, they seemed reasonable even to the half-drunken ones who had been the readiest
to fight. The old-time range slogan, "Everybody dance!" sent three or four hurrying to find
the girls they wanted. The trouble, it would appear, had ended as suddenly as it had begun
and for a moment the tension relaxed.

The drunken one was still cursing, struggling unavailingly to tear himself away from Lance
so that he could land a blow. Lance, looking out across the crowd, caught Belle's glance and
nodded toward the schoolhouse. Belle hurried away to find the musicians and set them playing,
and a few couples strayed after her. But there were men who stayed, pushing, elbowing to see
what would happen when Lance Lorrigan loosened his hold on the Jumpoff man.

Lance did not loosen his hold, however. He saw Tom, Al, three or four Devil's Tooth men edging
up, and sent them a warning shake of his head.

"Who knows this fellow? Where does he belong? I think his friends had better take care of him
until he sobers up."

"We'll take care of him," said another stranger, easing up to Lance. "He won't hurt yuh; he
was only foolin', anyway. Bill Kennedy, he always gits kinda happy when he's had one or two."

There was laughter in the crowd. Two or three voices were heard muttering together, and other
laughs followed. Some one produced a bottle and offered the pugnacious one a drink. Lance let
him go with a contemptuous laugh and went to where the Devil's Tooth men now stood bunched
close together, their backs to the chuck-wagon.

"We'll have to clean up this crowd, before it's over," Al was saying to his father. "Might
as well start right in and git 'er over with."

"And have it said the Lorrigans can't give a dance without having it end in rough-house!" Lance
interrupted. "Cut out the idea of fighting that bunch. Keep them out of the house and away
from the women, and let them have their booze down in the grove. That's where I've seen a lot
of them heading. Come on, boys; it takes just as much nerve not to fight as it does to kill
off a dozen men. Isn't that right, dad?"

"More," said Tom laconically. "No, boys, we don't want no trouble here. Come on in and dance.
That's yore job--to keep 'er moving peaceable. I'll fire any man I ketch drinking Jumpoff booze.
We've got better at the ranch. Come on!"

He led the way and his men followed him,--not as though they were particularly anxious to avoid
trouble, but more like men who are trained to obey implicitly a leader who has some definite
purpose and refuses to be turned from it. Lance, walking a few steps in the rear, wondered
at the discipline his father seemed to maintain without any apparent effort.

"And they say the Lorrigans are a tough outfit!" he laughed, when he had overtaken Tom. "Dad,
you've got the bunch trained like soldiers. I was more afraid our boys would rough things up
than I was worried over the stews."

"Shucks! When we rough things up, it's when we want it rough. Al, he was kinda excited. But
at that, we may have to hogtie a few of them smart Alecks from town, before we can dance peaceable."

Mary Hope, Lance discovered, was already in the schoolhouse. Also, several of the intoxicated
were there, and the quadrille was being danced with so much zest that the whole building shook.
That in itself was not unusual--Black Rim dances usually did become rather boisterous after
supper--but just outside the door a bottle was being circulated freely, and two or three men
had started toward the cottonwood grove for more. Duke, coming up to Lance where he stood in
the doorway, pulled him to one side, where they could not be overheard.

"There's going to be trouble here, sure's you're knee-high to a duck. Dad won't let our bunch
light into 'em, but they'll be fighting amongst themselves inside an hour. You better slip
it to the women that the dance breaks up early. 

Served on a table had a lemonade for refreshment, and they had taken it, Cervantes Margarita
and placed themselves one on one side and the other on Dona Guiomar, and a voice that caneada
both languid, continued their relationship in this way. And with that, that night the lieutenant,
with his friend, Don Balthazar with another, to a secluded spot left, and there don Baltasar,
with more wealth, or more valuable, or more skill Valcárcel, matole, giving Scope of the fight
first a thrust such that the heart cut it, and the miserable who its bad language, or rather
the misfortune of being in the same effort that Don Balthazar killed, could not even say God
help me!

Contomelo the other day one that everything had been witness, or serve, or perhaps to serve
Don Baltasar, who wanted me to know much about me had done, and what trance for me had been
honored. You know, because, Margarita, to what evil end came, for bad steps, that your lover,
and now, if you like, you can continue your story I do not interrupted
but to tell you what the lieutenant had been Valcárcel.

- I did not
know, - said Daisy, - such was the man with whom my parents my wedding
tried, and I do not know if I loved, because now I know that love
is very different from what I had thought.

And at these words, even if he wanted disguise, it were candy eyes to Margarita Cervantes,
had much to do in order not to Dona Guiomar signs of hostility and even hatred at that same
point it was born to Margarita.

Concealed, however, and said:

- Well, the story of your history are outstanding, follow it, that you see with what attention
and good will you listen.

- It should not be without you acabéis your story, - Madam, - Margarita
said that what the mine is, even very painful, is quite short.

-
I do not take much to my story, - said Dona Guiomar, - and I'm in
it to please you and because it runs out of contention.

And ye shall know that killing a villain Don Baltasar defamer my honor, I do not favored by
this, but the worse was about my fame, that all said, not that I was an honest woman, but Don Baltasar
love had blinded me, propuéstose 'd marry me, and tried to stem a slander, that when he was my
husband had to reach you, and if the deceased was formerly the sole Valcárcel vomited slander against
me, once he died, fanned the fire of slander by the motive of jealousy, given in I say such
things about the music and as Don Baltasar rondaduras I grieved, now abandoned in Mexico of all, which
I fled as if he had been plague-stricken, I decided to escape that hell does not deserved as
I was, and sold the substantial property of my husband, who mounted shields many tales, love
of gold and silverware that in our house was, embarqueme for Spain and in Seville, where in the hands
of Genoese I put my money to gain, and home of the Contracting bars of gold and silver Truje India,
and Head Inn acogime Rey Don Pedro, while the house was where they live with the decency that
my family and the memory of my husband belonged, and not always at the Inn of the Head of King Pedro
I state that I have spent long periods on a farm that my parents were, and so had a good two
years and become hubiérame on the farm with my widowhood and my reluctance of the world, away
from the noise of the busy Seville unless Porges, discovered my retreat by the eternal enemy
of my family and myself, of such I was surrounded by snares, which live in the wilderness I fear
that even my servants were many and brave, and faithful, have been able to gather Baltasar
an army of bandits, and fight and steal farm, which is not easy in Seville, where so many
people of war and justice, and all the king's service for the safety of his good subjects.
Vineman therefore back to Head Inn King Don Pedro, without leave of the hand, sent for home,
and found this, and visit and agradome and buy it, and it was repaired and bejeweled, her Vineman,
sick persons to believe that the house elf had, and that is why the Inquisition was to visit, and
aparecérseme duende disturbed me and put me on occasion that I even now I I've seen, or thought
myself, and if not for this blessed medal family left me that came to me, not even dare think
of me as might have been.

And at the end of his story Dona Guiomar her out of the medal within beautiful night earlier
had given Mr. Gines de Sepulveda, Cervantes felt a something of despondency and jealous rage,
it was necessary a great effort to make it to the face does not leave
evidence, that the whim seized (and even libelous idle whim of love)
Dona Guiomar was not just as honest lady, if not immaculate virgin,
as he had believed, but is pleased to seem so rare in regard to the
condition it was, as was rare beauty, and maybe whatever it was that
in Mexico, and had lieutenant claimed the life of Gaspar de Valcárcel,
and that she had no qualms in referring, was but too true, and that
perhaps he did not seek husband's lover, but poor husband suffered
that in exchange for his great wealth and even the abandonment of
her beauty, all will suffer and silent, and his objection and the
name of their children before the world was.

And I thought that Miguel de Cervantes, though his noble soul, because there is suspicion that A woman
with no evidence, that villains do not give, and in this sin are those who either love, good
they are, and for the same power of his love, the sad and desperate suspicion leads.

Innocent had been to have such smoothness Dona Guiomar history, and had clear signs because of not
knowing the world that you slandered the slander that he is a victim speaks is one more than to
slander him sacrificing support. And wait at least a Dona Guiomar that as a woman of Cervantes, this
could not doubt the whole hitherto chastity yours, and better made, and safe and secure what could
tell, not having reached those terms, was caused to the fears that
it could not but be, in our Michael, who was a man of great experience,
rushed.

Dona Guiomar was unwise to rely on her innocence, and even more in the love of his soldiers; and
if his heart had been when she took from his breast the medal of
Mr. Gines de Sepulveda, arrepentídose had his recklessness, that Cervantes
believed that if the family had not prisoner was because of some priceless
favor with the righteousness of envoy Dona Guiomar Inquisition had
twisted, and did not have the medal within their beautiful Dona Guiomar
had taken, but as a token of remembrance and love for the family she
left.

Y had not been another Dona Guiomar intended to frighten the Margarita, which was a Upon receipt
dared not take to the street so that she will be his motu proprio, frightened knowing that
the house had duende, and that evil was necessary to defend a medal of the Holy Inquisition,
she did not. Dona Guiomar walked jealous because little coy Cervantes, attracted by these two
opposite poles between which she was, and although Dona Guiomar closer, not far from Margarita,
looked more than once this with hard power, and had given Margaret Hart said, but without thinking,
love that Cervantes was kindled in his chest, all of which had clouded
and blackened the restless spirits of Dona Guiomar, and therefore,
as said, had spoken goblins and had taken the medal to her, and by
his own will, besides those his dark enemy.

And being in this Florela entered the arbor, and in its natural response and proper dress maid, and
Dona Guiomar arrimose and wanted to speak it in secret, but she said

- Say aloud what we had to tell me that there is no need for these, my good friends I believe
I have something hidden, and more than is discourtesy.

- Well, Madam, - said Florela, - there it is, and asks you, sir family that came last night,
and says that serious issues need to speak it.

- Well, here I say, - said Dona Guiomar.

And Florela to leave, continued:

- Thing is the Inquisition can not close the door or forcing out. And you, my friends, forgive
me if I leave to go see what the Inquisition of me wants.

Dona Guiomar, rising with no startle small samples, the arbor went out full zealous care, because
left alone with Michael Margarita, and more cuidosa It seemed Dona Guiomar sense if the soul
of Cervantes might have read, that he believed that Mrs. Guiomar
was on the narrow, hard hand of a lady of more or less, being its
next to a lover, a visit from another lover with whom he has great
respect, and stop attending which can not announce it.

As Margarita, free of witnesses to be found alone with Cervantes in that arbor gloomy where beauty,
silence and love the freshness of the uninvited, not realizing that
those who are surrounded by dense foliage can not be sure of not being
stalked, as were them, and closely, because Dona Guiomar was jealous
of his faithful deputy to Florela looked, the eyes lifted her without
fear and looked at Cervantes in a way so clear that felt loved him
to the bowels, and sore against her doña Guiomar and irritated his
eyes fixed on Margarita Island with no less vehemence and fire that
he fixed her own; and fuésele she sighed, and he replied with another
sigh, and so remained for some time undecided, without speaking, and
looking tenderly, and flirting with the eyes, the devil walked out
there and loose and wove a web that no misfortune would not unravel,
and when the remedy was worse than the disease.

- Truly, truly, madam,
- said Cervantes, - that neither I know what I get, or where I am,
or served, or what I want, or what thread I avail myself through the
maze where I am lost.

Oíalo all Florela, which was walking distance, the foliage of a beautiful jasmine hidden and also
heard that Margaret said, his voice weak and distressed, and so passionate,
but wanted hide, as if his voice had come out from among his aching
gut:

- Ay, sir, that I too am appalled at myself, because it must
have no heart no soul rather than misfortune, I'll never cry enough,
the death of my mother unhappy in so far I think things are on my
mother and my fortune!

And as for what you say that you need to thread through the maze in which you meet lost, I tell
you that it can Valero golden thread that you have in your hands, and he will bring you to
fruition.

- But do not know, beautiful lady, - said Cervantes, - the golden thread, the more rich is not
having any mixture of metal, is more brittle?

Do not give me gold to me guide that serves me, that gold has never been the imam of the needle
of my wishes, that if out, I had not been a poet, which is the same as perpetual vow of poverty,
incurable and perpetual desire and irremediable insanity.

- Of poets is, - said Daisy, - to become what we most love the sun shines and it shines.

- But sometimes, lady, the poet looks at best, is when the scent of the humble aims lily hiding
in the grass, and agreed placid voice and sings harmony.

Coloráronse Margarita suddenly her cheeks, and a sudden tremor rushed to Cervantes, that Margaret's
eyes saw something that, going beyond the human, divine seemed, and
that attracted him with a force unknown, and in such a way that the
one he gave in the arms of another and their lips met, and she was
swooning over the shoulder of Cervantes, leaned her beautiful head,
and sighing said:

- My husband you are, you already do this with
your lips and hug you gave me your testimony; and see what you do,
sir, my soul, here's jealousy and fear I die I die; Dona Guiomar that
you are in love, and goblins in this house, and I have like her Medal
of the Inquisition of the elves to defend me.

Sealed again and again Margarita Cervantes lips, sipping the ambrosia
of his breath, and compensate out and thinking that his forgetfulness
and rapture that could have hidden careful witness the thick, sweet
spread their arms to Margarita, and said:

- Your husband I am, it
can not have doubt, if not you put my nobility doubt Christians and
my thoughts, and since this has no remedy, nor I want have it, I regretted
not having reached the point to which I have invited my prosperous
fortune for you, hidden, that your honor and mine should dissimulation,
that there is no use to you you talk or tell me I have not had the
courage to hold this violent impulses my heart, so soon, so for ever,
you have done yours.

- God be praised! - Exclaimed Margarita, raising
her beautiful eyes filled with tears, to heaven, - that the black
and bitter day for me to judge and close doors of hope, happiness
encounter, not attaching the pain I feel because my unhappy mother
lives, and witness and share my happiness.

- Cesemos this, lady of
my soul - Cervantes said, - and try to regain composure the face,
lest they come back and suspected Dona Guiomar, and jealous insults
you, and me in a trance place to do what he did not want or meet my
honor, and speak to me of your events tell you life is missing, and
more than husbands in love, good friends until we appear get out of
this house, and having gone through the church, the poor me take you
away.

And as events that Cervantes was coming around to this disorder of
his senses, what for him had he not been jealous and upset, had not
arrived, was shocked, because clearly not known for having committed
his honor him, taking her, had fallen by one iota their worship by
Dona Guiomar, but rather, with the new difficulty had further reinforced,
and aquejábale to raise in his chest a raging storm, the view that
the visit the family with the beautiful widow continued, and she did
not return, and while this put a Cervantes in a storm of confusion,
Florela peeping, haggard and pale, because his lady loved, hidden
among the jasmine, and suggested all relative as she had seen Dona
Guiomar and heard, so that more time was not deceived and misled,
and the mockery and avenge deception.

Cervantes was wary, suspecting what was happening, that is, that witnesses had been his sudden
and inevitable delusion, and not suspecting any of this because of their innocence Margarita and
he could dominate the tracks on his face were the frenzy of love that she had gone, sweet and loving
voice said:

- Well, what of my misfortunes have left is so short, lord of my soul that very soon I have done,
long before that Dona Guiomar may come, for God knows how long can be matters for the search
of the Inquisition.

With these words Margaret had fanned the flames of jealous rage of
Cervantes, which regretted more and more of his past, but irreparable
weakness and lightness.

 There was not more than a half teaspoon in the glass,
but the intent was plain enough.

Lance walked up and knocked that young man staggering half across the room, slapped with the
flat of his hand another who leered at him, whirled to meet some one who struck him a glancing
blow on the ear, and flung him after the first.

"You're all of you drunk--it's a one-sided fight all the way through," he cried, parrying a
blow from Kennedy, who had gotten to his feet and came at him again mouthing obscenity. "But
I'll lick you, if you insist."

His coat had hampered him until it obligingly slit up the back. He wriggled out of the two
halves, tore off his cuffs, and went after the crowd with his bare fists. Some one lifted a
chair threateningly, and Lance seized it and sent it crashing through a window. Some one else
threw a beer mug, but he ducked in time and broke a knuckle on the front teeth of the thrower.
He saw a gap in the teeth, saw the man edge out of the fray spitting blood while he made for
the door, and felt that the blow was worth a broken knuckle.

It was not a pretty fight. Such fights never are pretty. Lance himself was not a pretty sight,
when he had finished. There had been shooting--but even in Jumpoff one hesitated to shoot down
an unarmed man, so that the bar fixtures suffered most. Lance came out of it with a fragment
of shirt hanging down his chest like a baby's bib, a cut lip that bled all over his chin, a
cheek skinned and swelling rapidly, the bad knuckle and the full flavor of victory.

The saloon looked as though cattle had been driven through it. Bill Kennedy lay sprawled over
a card table, whimpering inarticulately because he had lost his gun at the dance. The flushed
youth who had rashly claimed Mary Hope as his girl was outside with a washbasin trying to stop
his nose from bleeding. Others were ministering to their hurts as best they might, muttering
the thoughts that they dared not express aloud.

Lance looked up from examination of his knuckle, caressed his cut lip with the tip of his tongue,
pulled the fragment of shirt down as far as possible, gently rubbed his swelling cheek, and
turned to the bartender.

"I never licked a man yet and sent him home thirsty," he said. "Set it out for the boys--and
give me another highball. Then if you'll lend me a coat and a pair of gloves, I'll go home."

Peace was ratified in whisky drunk solemnly. Lance paid, and turned to go. One of the vanquished
wabbled up to him and held out his hand to shake.

"You damn Lorrigans, you got us comin' and goin'," he complained, "but shake, anyway. I'm Irish
meself, and I know a rale fight when I see it. What we didn't git at the dance before we left,
by heavins you give us when we got into town--so I'm one that's game to say it was a fine dance
and not a dull momint anywhere!"

"That's something," Lance grinned wryly and wriggled into the fur overcoat which the bartender
generously lent him. He rejected the gloves when he found that his hands were puffed and painful,
and went out to find breakfast.

Over a thick white cup of dubious coffee and a plate of sticky hot-cakes he meditated glumly
on the general unappreciativeness of the world in general, and of the Black Rim in particular.
What had happened at the schoolhouse he could only surmise, but from certain fragmentary remarks
he had overheard he guessed that the schoolhouse probably had suffered as much as the saloon.
Black Rim, it would seem, was determined that the Lorrigans should go on living up to their
reputations, however peacefully inclined the Lorrigans might be.

Two disquieting thoughts he took with him to the stable when he went after the pinto team:
Mary Hope would say that it was not a pleasant surprise which he had given her at Cottonwood
Spring. And Belle,--he was not at all sure whether he was too big for Belle's quirt to find
the tender places on his legs, but he was very sure that the Irishman spoke the truth. There
would still be no dull moments for Lance when he confronted the owner of that pinto team.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

HE TACKLES ANOTHER

Much to the disgust of Rosa and Subrosa, their new driver turned them from the main trail just
as they were beginning to climb joyously the first grade of Devil's Tooth Ridge. Rosa and Subrosa
were subdued, plainly resentful of their subjection, and fretting to be in their own stalls.
Belle they could and did bully to a certain extent. They loved to fight things out with Belle,
they never missed an opportunity for "acting up"--yet this morning they had been afraid to
do more than nag at each other with bared teeth; afraid to lope when this big man said, "Hey--settle
down, there!" with a grating kind of calm that carried with it a new and unknown menace.

Some one had exuberantly fired the Whipple shack, and the pintos wanted to whirl short around
in their tracks when they saw the smoking embers. They had wanted to bolt straight out across
the rocky upland and splinter the doubletree, and perhaps smash a wheel or two, and then stand
and kick gleefully at the wreck. If head-shakings and flattened ears meant anything, Rosa and
Subrosa were two disgruntled pintos that morning. They had not dared do more than cut a small
half-circle out of the trail when they passed the blackened spot that had been the Whipple shack.

Now they turned down the rocky, half-formed trail to Cottonwood Spring, reluctantly but with
no more than a half-hearted kick from Subrosa to register their disgust. And to that Lance
gave no heed whatever. He did not so much as twitch a rein or yell a threat. He drove surely--with
one hand mostly because of the broken knuckle, which was painful in the extreme--ignoring the
pintos for the most part.

He was meditating rather gloomily upon the innate cussedness of human nature as it was developed
in Black Rim Country. He was thinking of Mary Hope--a little; of her eyes, that were so obstinately
blue, so antagonistically blue, and then, quite unexpectedly, so wistfully blue; of her voice,
that dropped quite as unexpectedly into pure Scottish melody; of her primness, that sometimes
was not prim at all, but quaintly humorous, or wistfully shy.

He was thinking more often of the dance that had started out so well and had ended--Lord knew
how, except that it ended in a fight. He remembered striking, in that saloon, faces that had
been pummeled before ever he sent a jab their way. There had been eyes already closed behind
purple, puffy curtains of bruised flesh. He had fought animosity that was none of his creating.

Thinking of the fight, he thought of the wrecked saloon when the fight was over. Thinking of
the wrecked saloon led him to think of the probable condition of the nice new schoolhouse.
Thinking of that brought him back to Mary Hope,--to her face as it looked when she rode up
to the place on Monday morning. Ride up to it she must, if she meant to go on teaching, for
there was no more Whipple shack.

"Rotten bunch of rough-necks," he summed up the men of Black Rim and of Jumpoff. "And they'll
blame the Devil's Tooth outfit--they'll say the Lorrigans did it. Oh, well--heck!"

So he drove down into the hollow, tied the pintos to the post where they stood the night before,
crawled through the wire fence where Mary Hope had left a small three-cornered fragment of
the coat that "wasna" hers at all, and went over to the schoolhouse, standing forlorn in the
trampled yard with broken sandwiches and bits of orange peel and empty whisky flasks accentuating
the unsightliness and disorder.

The door swung half open. The floor was scored, grimy with dirt tracked in on heedless feet
and ground into the wax that had been liberally scattered over it to make the boards smooth
for dancing. A window was broken,--by some one's elbow or by a pistol shot, Lance guessed.
The planks placed along the wall on boxes to form seats were pulled askew, the stovepipe had
been knocked down and lay disjointed and battered in a corner. It was not, in Lance's opinion,
a pleasant little surprise for the girl with the Scotch blue eyes.

He pulled the door shut, picked up the empty whisky flasks and threw them, one after the other,
as far as he could send them into a rocky gulch where Mary Hope would not be likely to go.
Then he recrossed the enclosure, crawled through the fence, untied the pintos and drove home.

The bunk house emanated a pronounced odor of whisky and bad air, and much snoring, just as
Lance expected. The horses dozed in the corral or tossed listlessly their trampled hay; the
house was quiet, deserted looking, with the doors all closed and the blinds down in the windows
of the room that had been the birthplace of Belle's three boys.

Lance knew that every one would be asleep to-day. The Devil's Tooth ranch had always slept
through the day after a dance, with certain yawning intermissions at mealtimes.

He unhitched the pintos, turned them loose in the corral, caught his own horse, which one of
the boys must have led home, and tied it to a post. From the chuck-wagon, standing just where
Riley had driven it to a vacant spot beside the woodpile, Lance purloined a can of pork and
beans, a loaf of bread, and some butter. These things he put in a bag.

For a minute he stood scowling at the silent house, undecided, wondering just how soundly Belle
was sleeping. He was not afraid of Belle; no real Lorrigan was ever afraid of anything, as
fear is usually defined. But he wanted to postpone for a time her reckoning with him. He wanted
to face her when he had a free mind, when she had slept well, when her temper was not so edgy.
He wanted other things, however, and he proceeded to get those things with the least effort
and delay.

He wanted soft cloths. On the clothesline dangled three undershirts, three pair of drawers
and several mismated socks. The shirts and drawers were of the kind known as fleece-lined--which
means that they are fuzzy on the inside. They were Riley's complete wardrobe so far as underwear
went, but Lance did not trouble himself with unimportant details. He took them all, because
he had a swift mental picture of the schoolhouse floor which would need much scrubbing before
it would be clean.

He was ready to mount and ride away when he remembered something else that he would need. "Lye!"
he muttered, and retraced his steps to the house. Now he must go into the kitchen shed for
what he wanted, and Riley slept in a little room next the shed. But Riley was snoring with
a perfect rhythm that bespoke a body sunk deep in slumber, so Lance searched until he found
what he wanted, and added a full box of a much-advertised washing powder for good measure.
He was fairly well burdened when he finally started up the trail again, but he believed that
he had everything that he would need, even a lump of putty, and a pane of glass which he had
carefully removed from a window of the chicken house, and which he hoped would fit.

You may think that he rode gladly upon his errand; that the thought of Mary Hope turned the
work before him into a labor of love. It did not. Lance Lorrigan was the glummest young man
in the whole Black Rim, and there was much glumness amongst the Rim folk that day, let me tell
you. He ached from fighting, from dancing, from sleeping on the pool table, from hanging for
hours to those darned pintos. His left hand was swollen, and pains from the knuckle streaked
like hot wires to his elbow and beyond. His lips were sore--so sore he could not even swear
with any comfort--and even the pulling together of his black eyebrows hurt his puffed cheek.
And he never had scrubbed a floor in his life, and knew that he was going to hate the work
even worse than he hated the men who had made the scrubbing necessary.

While he went up the Slide trail he wished that he had never thought of giving a dance. He
wished he had gone down to Los Angeles for his Easter holiday, as one of his pals had implored
him to do. He wished Mary Hope would quit teaching school; what did she want to stay in the
Black Rim for, anyway? Why didn't she get out where she could amount to something?

If there were any caressing cadences in the voice of Lance Lorrigan, any provocative tilt to
his eyebrows, any tenderness in his smile, anything enigmatical in his personality, none of
these things were apparent when he set the first bucket of water on the stove to heat. He had
added to his charms a broad streak of soot across his forehead and a scratch on his neck, acquired
while putting up the stovepipe. He had set his lip to bleeding because he forgot that it was
cut, and drew it sharply between his teeth when the stovepipe fell apart just when he was sure
it was up to stay. He had invented two new cuss-words. What he had not done was weaken in his
determination to make that small schoolhouse a pleasant surprise for Mary Hope.

He did the work thoroughly, though a woman might have pointed out wet corners and certain muddy
splashes on the wall. He lost all count of the buckets of water that he carried from the spring,
and it occurred to him that Mary Hope would need a new broom, for the one Belle had provided
was worn down to a one-sided wisp that reminded him of the beard of a billy goat. He used two
cans of condensed lye and all of the washing powder, and sneezed himself too weak too swear
over the fine cloud of acrid dust that filled his nostrils when he sprinkled the powder on
the floor. But the floor was clean when he finished, and so was the platform outside.

Of Riley's underwear there was left the leg of one pair of drawers, which Lance reserved for
dusting the desks and the globe that had by some miracle escaped. While the floor was drying
he took out the broken windowpane, discovered that the one from the chicken house was too short,
and cut his thumb while he chipped off a piece of glass from the other to fill the space. He
did not make a very good job of it. To hold the glass in place, he used shingle nails, which
he had to hunt for on the ground where they had dropped from the roof during shingling, and
when they had been driven into the frame--with the handle of the screwdriver--they showed very
plainly from the inside. Then the putty did not seem to want to stick anywhere, but kept crumbling
off in little lumps. So Lance threw the putty at a gopher that was standing up nibbling one
of Riley's sandwiches, and went after the desks.

These took some time to unwrap and carry into place. There were only twelve, but Lance would
have sworn before a jury that he carried at least fifty single desks into the schoolhouse that
afternoon, and screwed them to the floor, and unscrewed them because the darned things did
not line up straight when viewed from the teacher's desk, and he had a vivid impression that
blue, blue eyes can be very critical over such things as a crooked line of desks!

Perhaps it was because his head ached splittingly and his injured hand throbbed until it was
practically useless; at any rate the cleaning of the schoolhouse, especially the placing of
the desks, became fixed afterward in his memory as the biggest, the most disagreeable incident
in his whole vacation.

At four-thirty however the task was accomplished. At the spring, Lance scrubbed the water bucket
clean, washed the dipper, placed them behind the door. He got wearily into the borrowed fur
coat, took a last comprehensive survey of the room from the doorway, went back to erase certain
sentences scrawled on the blackboard by some would-be humorist, took another look at the work
of his aching hands, and went away with the coffeepot in his hand and the screwdriver showing
its battered wooden handle from the top of his pocket. He was too tired to feel any glow of
accomplishment, any great joy in the thought of Mary Hope's pleasure. He was not even sure
that she would feel any pleasure.

His chief emotion was a gloomy satisfaction in knowing that the place was once more presentable,
that it was ready for Mary Hope to hang up her hat and ring her little bell and start right
in teaching. That what the Lorrigans had set out to do, the Lorrigans had done.

At the ranch he found Riley at the bunk house wrangling with the boys over his lost wardrobe.
In Riley's opinion it was a darned poor idea of a darned poor joke, and it took a darned poor
man to perpetrate it. Lance's arrival scarcely interrupted the jangle of voices. The boys had
bruises of their own to nurse, and they had scant sympathy for Riley, and they told him so.

Lance went into the house. He supposed he would have to replace Riley's clothes, which he did,
very matter-of-factly and without any comment whatever, restitution being in this case a mere
matter of sorting out three suits of his own underwear, which were much better than Riley's,
and placing them on the cook's bed.

"That you, Lance? Where in the world have you been all this while? I came mighty near going
gunning after the man that stole my team, let me tell you--and I would have, if Tom hadn't
found your horse tied up to the fence and guessed you'd gone to take Mary Hope home. But I
must say, honey, you never followed any short cut!"

This was much easier than Lance had expected, so he made shift to laugh, though it hurt his
lip cruelly. "Had to take her to Jumpoff, Belle. Then I had to clean up that crowd of toughs
that--"

"You cleaned up Tom's leavin's, then!" Belle made grim comment through Lance's closed door.
"I didn't think there was enough left of 'em to lick, by the time our boys got through. Haven't
you been to bed yet, for heaven's sake!"

"I'm going to bed," mumbled Lance, "when I've had a bath and a meal. And to-morrow, Belle,
I think I'll hit the trail for 'Frisco. Hope you don't mind if I leave a few days early. I've
got to stop off anyway to see a fellow in Reno I promised--any hot water handy?"

There was a perceptible pause before Belle answered, and then it was not about the bath water.
She would not have been Belle Lorrigan if she had permitted a quiver in her voice, yet it made
Lance thoughtful.

"Honey, I don't blame you for going. I expect we are awful rough--and you'd notice it, coming
from civilized folks. But--you know, don't you, that the Lorrigans never spoiled your party
for you? It--it just happened that the Jumpoff crowd brought whisky out from town. We tried
to make it pleasant--and it won't happen again--"

"Bless your heart!" Clad with superb simplicity in a bathrobe, Lance appeared unexpectedly
and gathered her into his arms. "If you think I'm getting so darn civilized I can't stay at
home, take a look at me! By heck, Belle, I'll bet there isn't a man in the whole Black Rim
that got as much fun out of that scrap as I did! But I've got to go." He patted her reassuringly
on the head, laid his good cheek against hers for a minute and turned abruptly away into his
own room. He closed the door and stood absent-mindedly feeling his swollen hand. "I've got
to go," he repeated under his breath. "I might get foolish if I stayed. Darned if I'll make
a fool of myself over any girl!"

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

ABOUT A PIANO

In the lazy hour just after a satisfying dinner, Lance stood leaning over an end of the piano,
watching Belle while she played--he listened and smoked a cigarette and looked as though he
hadn't a thing on his mind.

"I remember you used to sing that a lot for the little Douglas girl," he observed idly. "She
used to sit and look at you--my word, but her eyes were the bluest, the lonesomest eyes I ever
saw! She seemed to think you were next to angels when you sang. I saw it in her face, but I
was too much of a kid then to know what it was." He lighted a fresh cigarette, placed it between
Belle's lips so that she need not stop playing while she smoked, and laughed as if he were
remembering something funny.

"She always looked so horrified when she saw you smoking," he said. "And so adoring when you
sang, and so lonesome when she had to ride away. She was a queer kid--and she's just as unexpected
now--just as Scotch. Didn't you find her that way, dad?"

"She was Scotch enough," Tom mumbled from his chair by the fire. "Humpin' hyenas! She was like
handlin' a wildcat!"

"The poor kid never did have a chance to be human," said Belle, and ceased playing for a moment.
"Good heavens, how she did enjoy the two hours I gave her at the piano! She's got the makings
of a musician, if she could keep at it."

"We-ell--" Having artfully led Belle to this point, Lance quite as artfully edged away from
it. "You gave her all the chance you could. And she ought to be able to go on, if she wants
to. I suppose old Scotty's human enough to get her something to play on."

"Him? Human!" Tom shifted in his chair. "If pianos could breed and increase into a herd, and
he could ship a carload every fall, Scotty might spend a few dollars on one."

"It's a darned shame," Belle exclaimed, dropping her fingers to the keys again. "Mary Hope
just starves for everything that makes life worth living. And that old devil--"

"Say--don't make me feel like a great, overgrown money-hog," Lance protested. "A girl starving
for music, because she hasn't a piano to play on. And a piano costs, say, three or four hundred
dollars. Of course, we've got the money to buy one--I suppose I could dig up the price myself.
I was thinking I'd stake our schoolhouse to a library. That's something it really needs. But
a piano--I wish you hadn't said anything about starving. I know I'd hate to go hungry for music,
but--"

"Well, humpin' hyenas! I'll buy the girl a piano. I guess it won't break the outfit to pay
out a few more dollars, now we've started. We're outlaws, anyway--might as well add one more
crime to the list. Only, it don't go to the Douglas shack--it goes into the schoolhouse. Lance,
you go ahead and pick out some books and ship 'em on to the ranch, and I'll see they get over
there. Long as we've started fixin' up a school, we may as well finish the job up right. By
Henry, I'll show the Black Rim that there ain't anything small about the Lorrigans, anyway!"

"Dad, I think you're showin' yourself a real sport," Lance laughed. "We-ell, if you're game
to buy a piano, I'm game to buy books. We staked Black Rim to a school, so we'll do the job
right. And by the way, Belle, if you're going to get me to Jumpoff in time for that evening
train, don't you think it's about time you started?"

That is how it happened that Mary Hope walked into the schoolhouse one Monday and found a very
shiny new piano standing across one corner of the room where the light was best. On the top
was a pile of music. In another corner of the room stood a bookcase and fifty volumes; she
counted them in her prim, frugal way that she had learned from her mother. They were books
evidently approved by some Board of Education for school libraries, and did not interest her
very much. Not when a piano stood in the other corner.

She was early, so she opened it and ran her fingers over the keys. She knew well enough who
had brought it there, and her mouth was pressed into a straight line, her eyes were troubled.

The Lorrigans--always the Lorrigans! Why did they do these things when no one expected goodness
or generosity from them? Why had they built the schoolhouse--and then given a dance where every
one got drunk and the whole thing ended in a fight? Every one said it was the Lorrigans who
had brought the whisky. Some one told her they had a five-gallon keg of it in the shed behind
the schoolhouse, and she thought it must be true, the way all the men had acted. And why had
they burned the Whipple shack and all the school books, so that she could not have school until
more books were bought?--an expense which the Swedes, at least, could ill afford.

Why had Lance taken her to Jumpoff, away from the fighting, and then gone straight to the saloon
and gotten so drunk that he fought every one in town before he left in the morning? Why had
he never come near her again? And now that he was back in California, why did he ignore her
completely, and never send so much as a picture postal to show that he gave her a thought now
and then?

Mary Hope would not play the piano that day. She was more stern than usual with her pupils,
and would not so much as answer them when they asked her where the piano and all the books
had come from. Which was a foolish thing to do, since the four Boyle children were keen enough
to guess, and sure to carry the news home, and to embellish the truth in true range-gossip style.

Mary Hope fully decided that she would have the piano hauled back to the Lorrigans. Later,
she was distressed because she could think of no one who would take the time or the trouble
to perform the duty, and a piano she had to admit is not a thing you can tie behind the cantle
of your saddle, or carry under your arm. The books were a different matter. They were for the
school. But the piano--well, the piano was for Mary Hope Douglas, and Mary Hope Douglas did
not mean to be patronized in this manner by Lance Lorrigan or any of his kin.

But she was a music-hungry little soul, and that night after she was sure that the children
had ridden up over the basin's brim and were out of hearing, Mary Hope sat down and began to
play. When she began to play she began to cry, though she was hardly conscious of her tears.
She seemed to hear Lance Lorrigan again, saying, "Don't be lonely, you girl. Take the little
pleasant things that come--" She wondered, in a whispery, heart-achey way, if he had meant
the piano when he said that. If he had meant--just a piano, and a lot of books for school!

The next thing that she realized was that the light was growing dim, and that her throat was
aching, and that she was playing over and over a lovesong that had the refrain:

         "Come back to me, sweetheart, and love me as before--
         Come back to me, sweetheart, and leave me nevermore!"

Which was perfectly imbecile, a song she had always hated because of its sickly sentimentality.
She had no sweetheart, and having none, she certainly did not want him back. But she admitted
that there was a certain melodious swing to the tune, and that her fingers had probably strayed
into the rhythm of it while she was thinking of something totally different.

The next day she played a little at noontime for the children, and when school was over she
played for two hours. And the next day after that slipped away--she really had meant to ride
over to the AJ, or send a note by the children, asking Jim Boyle if he could please remove
the piano and saying that she felt it was too expensive a gift for the school to accept from
the Lorrigans.

On the third day she really did send a prim little note to Jim Boyle, and she received a laconic
reply, wholly characteristic of the Black Rim's attitude toward the Devil's Tooth outfit.

  "Take all you can git and git all you can without going to jale.
  That's what the Lorrigans are doing, Yrs truly,

                                                      "J. A. Boyle."

It was useless to ask her father. She had known that all along. When Alexander Douglas slipped
the collars up on the necks of his horses, he must see where money would be gained from the
labor. And there was no money for the Douglas pocket in hauling a piano down the Devil's Tooth
Ridge.

But the whole Black Rim was talking about it. Mary Hope felt sure that they were saying ill-natured
things behind her back. Never did she meet man or woman but the piano was mentioned. Sometimes
she was asked, with meaning smiles, how she had come to stand in so well with the Devil's Tooth.
She knew that they were all gossiping of how Lance Lorrigan had taken her home from the dance,
with Belle Lorrigan's bronco team. She had been obliged to return a torn coat to Mrs. Miller,
and to receive her own and a long lecture on the wisdom of choosing one's company with some
care. She had been obliged to beg Mrs. Miller not to mention the matter to her parents, and
the word had gone round, and had reached Mother Douglas--and you can imagine how pleasant that
made home for Mary Hope.

Because she was lonely, and no one seemed willing to take it away, she kept the piano. She
played it, and while she played she wept because the Rim folk simply would not understand how
little she wanted the Lorrigans to do things for her. And then, one day, she hit upon a plan
of redeeming herself, for regaining the self-respect she felt was slipping from her with every
day that the piano stood in the schoolhouse.

She would give a series of dances--they would be orderly, well-behaved dances, with no refreshments
stronger than coffee and lemonade!--and she would sell tickets, and invite every one she knew,
and beg them to come and help to pay for the school piano.

Even her mother approved that plan, though she did not approve dances. "But the folk are that
sinfu' they canna bide wi' any pleasure save the hoppin' aboot wi' their arms around the waist
of a woman," she sighed. "A church social wad be far more tae my liking, Hope--if we had only
a church!"

"Well, since there isn't any church, and people won't go to anything but a dance, I shall have
to get the money with dances," Mary Hope replied with some asperity. The subject was beginning
to wear her nerves. "Pay for it I shall, if it takes all my teacher's salary for five years!
I wish the Lorrigans had minded their own business. I've heard nothing but piano ever since
it came there. I hate the Lorrigans! Sometimes I almost hate the piano."

"Ye shud hae thought on all that before ye accepit a ride home wi' young Lance, wi' a coat
ye didna own on your back, and disobedience in your heart. 'Tis the worst of them a' ye chose
to escort ye, Hope, and if he thought he could safely presume to gi' ye a present like yon
piano, ye hae but yersel' tae blame for it."

"He didn't give it!" cried Mary Hope, her eyes ablaze with resentment. "He wasna here when
it came. I havena heard from him and I dinna want to hear from him. It was Belle Lorrigan gave
the piano, as I've said a million times. And I shall pay for it--"

"Not from your ain pocket will ye pay. Ye can give the dance--and if ye make it the Fourth
of July, with a picnic in the grove, and a dance in the schoolhouse afterwards, 'tis possible
Jeanie may come up from Pocatello wi' friends--and twa dollars wad no be too much to ask for
a day and a night of entertainment."

"Well, mother! When you do--" Mary Hope bit her tongue upon the remainder of the sentence.
She had very nearly told her mother that when she did choose to be human she had a great head
for business.

It was a fine, practical idea, and Mary Hope went energetically about its development. She
consulted Mrs. Kennedy. Mrs. Kennedy also had friends in Pocatello, and she obligingly gave
the names of them all. She strongly advised written invitations, with a ticket enclosed and
the price marked plainly. She said it was a crying shame the way the Lorrigans had conducted
their dance, and that Mary Hope ought to be very careful and not include any of that rough
bunch in this dance.

"Look how that young devil, Lance Lorrigan, abused my Bill, right before everybody!" she cited,
shifting her youngest child, who was teething, to her hip that she might gesticulate more freely.
"And look how they all piled into our crowd and beat 'em up! Great way to do--give a dance
and then beat up the folks that come to it! And look at what Lance done right here in town--as
if it wasn't enough, what they done out there! Bill's got a crick in his back yet, where Lance
knocked him over the edge of a card table. You pay 'em for the piano, Hope; I'll help yuh scare
up a crowd. But don't you have none of the Lorrigans, or there'll be trouble sure!"

Mary Hope flushed. "I could hardly ask the Lorrigans to come and help pay for their own present,"
she pointed out in her prim tone. "I had never intended to ask the Lorrigans."

"Well, maybe not. But if you did ask them, I know lots of folks that wouldn't go a step--and
my Bill's one," said Mrs. Kennedy.

So much depends upon one's point of view. Black Rim gossip, which persisted in linking Mary
Hope's name with Lance Lorrigan, grinned among themselves while they mentioned the piano, the
schoolhouse, and the library as evidence of Lance's being "stuck on her." The Boyle children
had frequently tattled to Mary Hope what they heard at home. Lance had done it all because
he was in love with her.

Denial did not mend matters, even if Mary Hope's pride had not rebelled against protesting
that the gossip was not true. Lance Lorrigan was not in love with her. Over and over she told
herself so, fiercely and with much attention to evidence which she considered convincing. Only
twice she had seen him in the two weeks of his visit. Once he had come to mend the lock his
father had broken, and he had taken her home from the dance because of the fighting. Never
had he made love to her.... Here she would draw a long breath and wonder a little, and afterwards
shake her head and say to herself that he thought no more of her than of Jennie Miller. He--he
just had a way with him.

Mary Hope's point of view was, I think, justifiable. Leaving out the intolerable implication
that Lance had showered benefits upon her, she felt that the Lorrigans had been over-generous.
The schoolhouse and the books might be accepted as a public-spirited effort to do their part.
But the piano, since it had not been returned, must be paid for. And it seemed to Mary Hope
that the Lorrigans themselves would deeply resent being invited to a dance openly given for
the purpose of raising money to repay them. It would never do; she could not ask them to come.

Moreover, if the Lorrigans came there would be trouble, whether there was whisky or not. At
the house-warming dance the Lorrigans had practically cleaned out the crowd and sent them home
long before daylight. There had been no serious shooting--the Lorrigans had fought with their
fists and had somehow held the crowd back from the danger-line of gun-play. But Mary Hope feared
there would be a killing the next time that the Jumpoff crowd and the Lorrigans came together.

She tried to be just, but she had heard only one side of the affair,--which was not the Lorrigan
side. Whispers had long been going round among the Black Rim folk; sinister whispers that had
to do with cattle and horses that had disappeared mysteriously from the Rim range. Mary Hope
could not help hearing the whispers, could not help wondering if underneath them there was
a basis of truth. Her father still believed, in spite of Tom's exoneration, that his spotty
yearling had gone down the gullets of Devil's Tooth men. She did not know, but it seemed to
her that where every one hinted at the same thing, there must be some truth in their hints.

All of which proves, I think, that Mary Hope's point of view was the only one that she could
logically hold, living as she did in the camp of the enemy; having, as she had, a delicate
sense of propriety, and wanting above all things to do nothing crude and common. As she saw
it, she simply could not ask any of the Lorrigans to her picnic and dance on the Fourth of July.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

THE LORRIGAN VIEWPOINT

I have said that much depends upon one's point of view. Mary Hope's viewpoint was not shared
by the Devil's Tooth. They had one of their own, and to them it seemed perfectly logical, absolutely
justifiable.

They heard all about the Fourth of July picnic and dance, to be held at Cottonwood Spring and
in the schoolhouse of their own building. Immediately they remembered that Cottonwood Spring
was on Lorrigan land, that Lorrigan money had paid for the material that went into the schoolhouse,
that Lorrigan labor had built it, Lorrigan generosity had given it over to the public as represented
by Mary Hope Douglas and the children who came to her to be taught. In their minds loomed the
fact that Lorrigan money had bought books for the school, and that Tom Lorrigan himself had
paid close to four hundred dollars for the piano.

They heard that invitations were being sent broadcast, that a crowd was coming from Pocatello,
from Lava, from Jumpoff--invited to come and spend a day and night in merry-making. Yet no
invitation came to the Devil's Tooth ranch, not a word was said to them by Mary Hope, not a
hint that they were expected, or would be welcome.

Belle met Mary Hope in the trail one day, just a week before the Fourth. Mary Hope was riding
home from school; Belle was driving out from Jumpoff. It is the custom of the outland places
for acquaintances to stop for a bit of friendly conversation when they meet, since meetings
are so far between. But, though Belle slowed the pintos to a walk, Mary Hope only nodded, said,
"How do you do," and rode on.

"She looked guilty," Belle reported wrathfully to Tom and the boys at the supper table. "Guilty
as sin. She seemed to be afraid I was going to ask her if I couldn't come to her dance. The
little fool! Does she think for a minute I'd go? She hasn't so much as thanked you for that
piano, Tom. She hasn't said one word."

"Well, I didn't put my name and ad-dress on it," Tom palliated the ingratitude while he buttered
a hot biscuit generously. "And there wasn't any name on the books to show who bought 'em. Maybe
she thinks--"

"I don't care what she thinks! It's the way she acts that counts. Everybody in Jumpoff has
got invitations to her picnic and dance. They say it's to pay us for the piano--and they think
she's doing some wonderful stunt. And we're left out in the cold!"

"We never was in where it was right warm, since I can remember," said Al. "Except when we made
it warm ourselves."

"Sam Pretty Cow was saying yesterday--" and Duke repeated a bit of gossip that had a gibe at
the Lorrigans for its point. "He got it over to Hitchcocks. It come from the Douglases. I guess
Mary Hope don't want nothing of us--except what she can get out of us. We been a good thing,
all right--easy marks."

Duke had done the least for her and therefore felt qualified to say the most. His last sentence
did its work. Tom pulled his eyebrows together, drew his lip between his teeth and leaned back
in his chair, thinking deeply, his eyes glittering between his half-closed lids.

"Easy marks, ay?" he snorted. "The Lorrigans have been called plenty of things, fur back as
I can remember, but by the humpin' hyenas, they never was called easy marks before!"

That was Tom's last comment on the subject. Belle, not liking the look on his face, because
she knew quite well what it portended, passed him two kinds of preserves and changed the subject.
Al and Duke presently left for the bunk house. Mary Hope's party and her evident intention
to slight the Lorrigans was not mentioned again for days.

But Tom's wrath was smoldering. He was not hasty. He waited. He himself met Mary Hope in the
trail one day, lifted his hat to her without a word and rode on. Mary Hope let him go with
a chilly nod and a murmured greeting which was no more than an empty form. Certainly she did
not read Tom's mind, did not dream that he was thinking of the piano,--and from an angle that
had never once presented itself to her.

So, now that you see how both were justified in their opinions, as formed from different points
of view, let me tell you what happened.

Mary Hope had her picnic, with never a thunderstorm to mar the day. Which is unusual, since
a picnic nearly always gets itself rained upon. She had sent out more than a hundred invitations--tickets
two dollars, please--and there were more who invited themselves and had to be supplied with
tickets cut hastily out of pasteboard boxes that had held sandwiches.

Mary Hope was jubilant. Mother Douglas, as official hostess, moved here and there among the
women who fussed over the baskets and placated with broken pieces of cake their persistent
offspring. Mother Douglas actually smiled, though her face plainly showed that it was quite
unaccustomed to the expression, and tilted the smile downward at the corners. Mother Douglas
was a good woman, but she had had little in her life to bring smiles, and her habitual expression
was one of mournful endurance.

It was sultry, and toward evening the mosquitoes swarmed out of the lush grass around the spring
and set the horses stamping and moving about uneasily. But it was a very successful picnic,
with all the chatter, all the gourmandizing, all the gossip, all the childish romping in starched
white frocks, all the innocuous pastimes that one expects to find at picnics.

Mary Hope wondered how in the world they were all going to find room inside the schoolhouse
to dance. She had been frugal in the matter of music, dreading to spend any money in hiring
professional musicians, lest she might not have enough people to justify the expense. Now she
wished nervously that she had done as Lance Lorrigan had done, and brought musicians from Lava.
Of course, there had been no piano when Lance gave his party, which was different. She herself
meant to play, and Art Miller had brought his fiddle, and Jennie had volunteered to "chord"
with him. But, Mary Hope felt much nervous apprehension lest these Pocatello and Lava people
should think it was just Scotch stinginess on her part.

Late in the afternoon a few of the ranchers rode hastily homeward to "do the chores," but the
Lava and Pocatello crowd remained, and began to drift up to the schoolhouse and drum on the
piano that was actually going to pay for itself and free Mary Hope's pride from its burden.

By sundown a dozen energetic couples were waltzing while a Pocatello dentist with a stiff,
sandy pompadour chewed gum and played loudly, with much arm movement and very little rhythm;
so very little rhythm that the shuffling feet frequently ceased shuffling, and expostulations
rose high above his thunderous chords.

By dusk the overworked ranch women had fed the last hungry mouth and put away the fragments
of home-baked cakes and thick sandwiches, and were forming a solid line of light shirtwaists
and dark skirts along the wall. The dance was really beginning.

As before, groups of men stood around outside and smoked and slapped at mosquitoes--except
that at Lance's party there had been no mosquitoes to slap--and talked in undertones the gossip
of the ranges. If now and then the name of Lorrigan was mentioned, there was no Lorrigan present
to hear. At intervals the "floor manager" would come to the door and call out numbers: "Number
one, and up to and including sixteen, git your pardners fer a two-step!" Whereupon certain
men would pinch out the glow of their cigarettes and grind the stubs into the sod under their
heels, and go in to find partners. With that crowd, not all could dance at once; Mary Hope
remembered pridefully that there had been no dancing by numbers at the party Lance Lorrigan gave.

What a terrible dance that had been! A regular rowdy affair. And this crowd, big as it was,
had as yet shown no disposition to rowdyism. It surely did make a difference, thought Mary
Hope, what kind of people sponsored an entertainment. With the Devil's Tooth outfit as the
leaders, who could expect anything but trouble?

Then she caught herself thinking, with a vague heaviness in her heart, how Lance had taken
her away from that other dance; of that long, wonderful, silent ride through the starlight;
how careful he had been of her--how tender! But it was only the way he had with him, she later
reminded herself impatiently, and smiled over her shoulder at the whirling couples who danced
to the music she made; and thought of the money that made her purse heavy as lead, the money
that would wipe out her debt to the Lorrigans,--to Lance, if it really were Lance who had bought
the piano.

A faint sound came to her through the open window, the rattle of a wagon coming down the hill
in the dark. More people were coming to the dance, which meant more money to give to the Lorrigans.
Mary Hope smiled again and played faster; so fast that more than one young man shook his head
at her as he circled past, and puffed ostentatiously, laughing at the pace she set. She had
a wild vision of other dances which she would give--Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New
Year's--and pay the Lorrigans for everything they had done; for the books, for the schoolhouse,
everything. She felt that then, and then only, could she face Lance Lorrigan level-eyed, cool,
calm, feeling herself a match for him.

The rattle of the wagon sounded nearer, circled the yard, came in at the gate. Mary Hope was
giving the dancers the fastest two-step she could play, and she laughed aloud. More people
were coming to the dance, and there might not be coffee and sandwiches enough at midnight,--she
had over three hundred dollars already.

The dancers whirled past, parted to right and left, stopped all at once. Mary Hope, still playing,
looked over her shoulder--into the dark, impenetrable gaze of Tom Lorrigan, standing there
in his working clothes, with his big, black Stetson on his head and his six-shooter in its
holster on his hip. Behind him Mary Hope saw Al and Duke and Belle, and behind them other Devil's
Tooth men, cowboys whom she only knew slightly from meeting them sometimes in the trail as
she rode to and from school. The cowboys seemed to be facing the other way, holding back the
crowd near the door.

Mary Hope looked again into Tom's face, looked at Belle. Her fingers strayed uncertainly over
the keys, making discords. She half rose, then sat down again. The room, all at once, seemed
very still.

"I'm sorry to disturb yuh," Tom said, touching his hat brim and lifting his eyebrows at her,
half smiling with his lips pulled to one side, like Lance--oh, maddeningly like Lance!--"but
I've come after the piano."

Mary Hope gasped. Her arms went out instinctively across the keyboard, as if she would protect
the instrument from his defaming touch.

"I'll have to ask yuh to move," said Tom. "Sorry to disturb yuh."

"I--I'm going to pay for it," said Mary Hope, finding her voice faint and husky. She had an
odd sensation that this was a nightmare. She had dreamed so often of the dance and of the Lorrigans.

"I paid for it long ago. I bought the piano--I've come after it."

Mary Hope slid off the stool, stood facing him, her eyes very blue. After all, he was not Lance.
"You can't have it!" she said. "I won't let you take it. I'm raising money to pay you for it,
and I intend to keep it." She reached for her purse, but Tom restrained her with a gesture.

"It ain't for sale," he said, with that hateful smile that always made her wonder just what
lay behind it. "I own it, and I ain't thinking of selling. Here's the shipping bill and the
guarantee and all; I brought 'em along to show you, in case you got curious about whose piano
it is. You see the number on the bill--86945. You'll find it tallies with the number in the
case, if you want to look. Pete, Ed, John, take it and load it in the wagon."

"Well, now, see here! This is an outrage! How much is the darn thing worth, anyway? This crowd
is not going to stand by and see a raw deal like this pulled off." It was the Pocatello dentist,
and he was very much excited.

"You saw a raw deal, and stood for it, when you saw the Lorrigans cold-shouldered out of the
dance," Belle flashed at him. "We've stood for a lot, but this went a little beyond our limit."

"We're not going to stand for anything like this, you know!" Another man--also from Lava--shouldered
his way up to them.

"Git outa the way, or you'll git tromped on!" cried Pete over his shoulder as he backed, embracing
the piano and groping for handholds.

The Lava man gripped Pete, trying to pull him away. Pete kicked back viciously with a spurred
heel. The Lava man yelled and retreated, limping.

Just how it happened, no two men or women afterward agreed in the telling. But somehow the
merrymakers, who were merry no longer, went back and back until they were packed solidly at
the sides and near the door, a few squeezing through it when they were lucky enough to find
room. Behind them came four of the Devil's Tooth men with six-shooters, looking the crowd coldly
in the eyes. Behind these came the piano, propelled by those whom Tom had named with the tone
of authority.

The crowd squeezed closer against the wall as the piano went past them. There was not so much
noise and confusion as one would expect. Then, at the last, slim, overworked, round-shouldered
Mother Douglas, who had done little save pray and weep and work and scold all her life, walked
up and slapped Belle full on the cheek.

"Ye painted Jezebel!" she cried, her eyes burning. "Long have I wanted to smack ye for your
wickedness and the brazen ways of ye--ye painted Jezebel!"

Blind, dazed with anger, Belle struck back.

"Don't you touch my mother! Shame on you! Shame on you all! I didna ask you for your favors,
for any gifts--and you gave them and then you come and take them--" This was the voice of Mary
Hope, shrill with rage.

"You gave a dance in a house built for you by the Lorrigans, on Lorrigan land, and you danced
to the music of a Lorrigan piano--and the Lorrigans were not good enough to be asked to come!
Get outa my way, Hope Douglas--and take your mother with you. Call me a painted Jezebel, will she?"

The piano was outside, being loaded into the wagon, where Riley sat on the seat, chewing tobacco
grimly and expectorating copiously, without regard for those who came close. Outside there
was also much clamor of voices. A lantern held high by a Devil's Tooth man who had a gun in
the other, lighted the platform and the wagon beside it.

At the last, Tom Lorrigan himself went back after the stool, and the room silenced so that
his footsteps sounded loud on the empty floor. He looked at Mary Hope, looked at her mother,
looked at the huddled, whispering women, the gaping children. He swung out of his course and
slipped one arm around Belle and so led her outside, the stool swinging by one leg in the other
hand.

"A painted Jezebel!" Belle said under her breath when they were outside the ring of light.
"My God, Tom, think of that!"

Mary Hope had never in her life suffered such humiliation. It seemed to her that she stood
disgraced before the whole world, that there was no spot wherein she might hide her shame.
Her mother was weeping hysterically because she had been "slappit by the painted Jezebel" and
because Aleck was not there to avenge her. The Pocatello and Lava crowd seemed on the point
of leaving, and were talking very fast in undertones that made Mary Hope feel that they were
talking about her. The rattle of the Lorrigan wagon hauling the piano away, the click of the
horses' feet as the Devil's Tooth riders convoyed the instrument, made her wince, and want
to put her palms over her ears to shut out the sound of it.

But she was Scotch, and a Douglas. There was no weak fiber that would let her slump before
this emergency. She went back to the little platform, stood beside the desk that held the globe
and the dictionary and a can of flowers, and rapped loudly with the ruler from the Pocatello
hardware store. By degrees the room ceased buzzing with excited talk, the shuffling feet stood
still.

"I am very sorry," said Mary Hope clearly, "that your pleasure has--has been interrupted. It
seems there has been a misunderstanding about the piano. I thought that I could buy it for
the school, and for that reason I gave this dance. But it seems--that--I'm terribly sorry the
dance has been spoiled for you, and if the gentlemen who bought tickets will please step this
way, I will return your money."

She had to clench her teeth to keep her lips from trembling. Her hands shook so that she could
scarcely open her handbag. But her purpose never faltered, her eyes were blue and sparkling
when she looked out over the crowd. She waited. Feet scuffled the bare floor, voices whispered,
but no man came toward her.

"I want to return your money," she said sharply, "because without the piano I suppose you will
not want to dance, and--"

"Aw, the dickens!" cried a big, good-natured cowpuncher with a sun-peeled nose and twinkly
gray eyes. "I guess we all have danced plenty without no piano music. There's mouth harps in
this crowd, and there's a fiddle. Git yore pardners for a square dance!" And under his breath,
to his immediate masculine neighbors he added: "To hell with the Lorrigans and their piano!"

Mary Hope could have hugged that cowpuncher who hastily seized her hand and swung her into
place as the first couple in the first set.

When the three sets were formed he called the dance figures in a sonorous tone that swept out
through the open windows and reached the ears of the Lorrigans as they rode away.

          "Honor yore pardner--and the lady on your left!
            Join eight hands, an' a-circle to the left!
      Break an Indian trail home in the Indian style, with the
                              lady in the lead!
             Swing the lady behind you once in a while!--
                The lady behind you once in a while!--
                Now your pardner, and go hog wild!"

The fiddle and two mouth harps were scarcely heard above the rhythmic stamping of feet, the
loud chant of the caller, who swung Mary Hope clear of the floor whenever he put his arm around
her.

             "A--second couple out, and a-cir-cle four!
                           Lay-dees do ce do!
                 You swing me, an' I'll swing you--
             And we'll all dance in the same ole shoe!

        "Same four on to the next!--dance the ocean wave!
               The same ole boys, the same ole trail,
                  Watch that possum walk the rail!
                    Cir-cle six, and a-do ce do!
          Swing, every one swing, and a--promenade home!"

"Who wants a piano? Couldn't hear it if yuh' had it!" he cried, while the twelve couples paused
breathless. Then he wiped his face frankly and thoroughly with his handkerchief, caught Mary
Hope's hand in his, lifted his voice again in his contagious sing-song:

                "Cir-cle eight, till you get straight!
            Swing them ladies, like swingin' on a gate!
               Left foot up, and-a-right foot down--
                 Make that big foot jar the ground!
                               Prom-e-nade!
             Swing yore corner, if you ain't too slow!
                Now yore pardner, and around you go!
               For the--last time--and a-long time--
                You know where, and a-I don't care!"

The dance was saved by the big cowpuncher with the peeling nose and the twinkly gray eyes.
Mary Hope had never seen him before that day, but whenever she looked at him a lump came in
her throat, a warm rush of sheer gratitude thrilled her. She did not learn his name--two or
three men called him Burt, but he seemed to be a stranger in the country. Burt saved her dance
and kept things moving until the sky was streaked with red and birds were twittering outside
in the cottonwoods.

She wanted to thank him, to tell him a little of her gratitude. But when she went to look for
him afterwards he was gone, and no one seemed to know just where he belonged. Which was strange,
when you consider that in the Black Rim country every one knows everybody.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

PEDDLED RUMORS

In the smoking compartment of a Pullman car that rocked westward from Pocatello two days after
the Fourth, Lance sprawled his big body on a long seat, his head joggling against the dusty
window, his mind sleepily recalling, round by round, a certain prize fight that had held him
in Reno over the Fourth and had cost him some money and much disgust. The clicking of the car
trucks directly underneath, the whirring of the electric fan over his head, the reek of tobacco
smoke seemed to him to last for hours, seemed likely to go on forever. Above it all, rising
stridently now and then in a disagreeable monotone, the harsh, faintly snarling voice of a
man on the opposite seat blended unpleasantly with his dozing discomfort. For a long time the
man had been talking, and Lance had been aware of a grating quality of the voice, that yet
seemed humorous in its utterances, since his two listeners laughed frequently and made brief,
profane comment that encouraged the talker to go on. Finally, as he slowly returned from the
hazy borderland of slumber, Lance became indifferently aware of the man's words.

From under the peak of his plaid traveling cap Lance lifted his eyelids the length of his black
lashes, measured the men with a half-minute survey and closed his eyes again. The face matched
the voice. A harsh face, with bold blue eyes, black eyebrows that met over his nose, a mouth
slightly prominent, hard and tilted downward at the corners. Over the harshness like a veil
was spread a sardonic kind of humor that gave attraction to the man's personality. In the monotone
of his voice was threaded a certain dry wit that gave point to his observations. He was an
automobile salesman, it appeared, and his headquarters were in Ogden, and he was going through
to Shoshone on business connected with a delayed shipment of cars. But he was talking, when
Lance first awoke to his monologue, of the sagebrush country through which the fast mail was
reeling drunkenly, making up time that had been lost because of a washout that had held the
train for an hour while two section crews sweated over a broken culvert.

"--And by gosh! the funniest thing I ever saw happened right up here in a stretch of country
they call the Black Rim. If I was a story writer, I sure would write it up. Talk about the
West being tame!--why, I can take you right now, within a few hours' ride, to where men ride
with guns on 'em just as much as they wear their pants. Only reason they ain't all killed off,
I reckon, is because they all pack guns.

"Hard-boiled? Say, there's a bunch up there that's never been curried below the knees--and
never will be. They pulled off a stunt the Fourth that I'll bet ain't ever been duplicated
anywhere on earth, and never will be. I was in Pocatello, and I went on up with the crowd from
there, and got in on the show. And sa-ay, it was some show!

"They've got a feud up there that's rock-bottomed as any feud you ever heard of in Kentucky.
It's been going on for years, and it'll keep going on till the old folks all die off or move
away--or land in the pen. Hasn't been a killing in there for years, but that's because they're
all so damn tough they know if one starts shooting it'll spread like a prairie fire through
dry grass.

"There's an outfit in there--the Devil's Tooth outfit. Far back as the country was settled--well,
they say the first Lorrigan went up in there to get away from the draft in the Civil War, and
headed a gang of outlaws that shot and hung more white men and Injuns than any outfit in the
State--and that's going some.

"They were killers from the first draw. Other settlers went in, and had to knuckle under. The
Devil's Tooth gang had the Black Rim in its fist. Father to son--they handed down the disposition--I
could tell yuh from here to Boise yarns about that outfit.

"Now, of course, things have tamed down. As I say, there hasn't been a Devil's Tooth killing
for years. But it's there, you know--it's in the blood. It's all under the surface. They're
a good-hearted bunch, but it'll take about four generations to live down the reputation they've
got, if they all turned Methodist preachers. And," the grating voice paused for a minute, so
that one caught the full significance of his hint, "if all yuh hear is true, religion ain't
struck the Devil's Tooth yet. It ain't my business to peddle rumors, and the time's past when
you can hang a man on suspicion--but if you read about the Devil's Tooth outfit some time in
the paper, remember I said it's brewing. The present Tom Lorrigan ain't spending all his time
driving his cows to water. He was hauled up a few years ago, on a charge of rustling. An old
Scotchman had him arrested. Tom was cleared--he had the best lawyer in the West--brought him
from Boise, where they need good lawyers!--and got off clear. And since then he's been laying
low. That's the one mistake he's made, in my opinion. He never did a damn thing, never tried
to kill the Scotchman, never acted up at all. And when you think of the breed of cats he is
you'll see yourself that the Black Rim is setting on a volcano.

"Tom Lorrigan has got more men working for him than any outfit in that country. He runs his
own round-up and won't have a rep--that's a representative--from any other outfit in his camp.
His own men haze outside stock off his range. He's getting rich. He ships more cattle, more
horses than anybody in the country. He don't have any truck with any of his neighbors, and
his men don't. They're outside men, mostly. There ain't a thing anybody can swear to--there
ain't a thing said out loud about the Devil's Tooth. But it's hinted and it's whispered.

"So all this preamble prepares you for the funniest thing I ever saw pulled. But I guess I'm
about the only one who saw how funny it was. I know the Black Rim don't seem to see the joke,
and I know the Devil's Tooth don't.

"You see, it's so big and neighbors are so far apart that there ain't any school district,
and a few kids were getting school age, and no place to send 'em. So a couple of families got
together and hired the daughter of this old Scotchman to teach school. I ain't calling her
by name--she's a nice kid, and a nervy kid, and I can see where she thought she was doing the
right thing.

"Well, she taught in a tumble-down little shack for a while, and one day this Tom Lorrigan
come along, and saw how the girl and the kids were sitting there half froze, and he hazed 'em
all home. Broke up the school. Being a Lorrigan, all he'd have to do would be to tell 'em to
git--but it made a little stir, all right. The schoolma'am, she went right back the next morning
and started in again. Like shooing a setting hen off her nest, it was.

"Well, next thing they knew, the Devil's Tooth had built a schoolhouse and said nothing about
it. Tom's a big-hearted cuss--I know Tom--tried to sell him a car, last fall. Darn near made
it stick, too. I figured that Tom Lorrigan was maybe ashamed of busting up the school and making
talk, so he put up a regular schoolhouse. Then one of his boys had been away to college--only
one of the outfit that ever went beyond the Rim, as far as I know--and he gave a dance; a regular
house-warming.

"Well, I wasn't at that dance. I wish I had been. They packed in whisky by the barrel. Everybody
got drunk, and everybody got to fighting. This young rooster from college licked a dozen or
so, and then took the schoolma'am and drove clear to Jumpoff with her, and licked everybody
in town before he left. Sa-ay, it musta been some dance, all right!

"Then--here comes the funny part. Everybody was all stirred up over the Lorrigans' dance, and
right in the middle of the powwow, blest if the Lorrigans didn't buy a brand new piano and
haul it to the schoolhouse. They say it was the college youth, that was stuck on the schoolma'am.
Well, everybody out that way got to talking and gossiping--you know how it goes--until the
schoolma'am, just to settle the talk, goes and gives a dance to raise money to pay for the
piano. She's all right--I don't think for a minute she's anything but right--and it might have
been old Tom himself that bought the piano. Anyway, she went and sent invitations all around,
two dollars per invite, and got a big crowd. Had a picnic in the grove, and everything was lovely.

"But sa-ay! She forgot to invite the Lorrigans! Everybody in the country there, except the
Devil's Tooth outfit. I figure that she was afraid they might rough things up a little--and
maybe she didn't like to ask them to pay for something they'd already paid for--but anyway,
just when the dance was going good, here came the whole Devil's Tooth outfit with a four-horse
team, and I'm darned if they didn't walk right in there, in the middle of a dance, take the
piano stool right out from under the schoolma'am, and haul the piano home! They--"

A loud guffaw from his friends halted the narrative there. Before the teller of the tale went
on, Lance pulled his cap down over his eyes, got up and walked out and stood on the platform.

"They hauled the piano home!" He scowled out at the reeling line of telegraph posts. "They--hauled--that
piano--home!"

He lighted a cigar, took two puffs and threw the thing out over the rail. "She didn't ask the
Lorrigans--to her party. And dad--"

He whirled and went back into the smoking compartment. He wanted to hear more. The seat he
had occupied was still empty and he settled into it, his cap pulled over his eyes, a magazine
before his face. The others paid no attention. The harsh-voiced man was still talking.

"Well, they can't go on forever. They're bound to slip up, soon or late. And now, of course,
there's a line-up against them. It's in the blood and I don't reckon they can change--but the
country's changing. I know of one man that's in there now, working in the dark, trying to get
the goods--but of course, it's not my business to peddle that kind of stuff. I was tickled
about the piano, though. The schoolma'am was game. She offered to give us back our two dollars
per, but of course nobody was piker enough to take her up on it. We went ahead and had the
dance with harmonicas and a fiddle, and made out all right. Looks to me like the schoolma'am's
all to the good. She's got the dance money--"

It was of no use. Lance found he could not listen to that man talking about Mary Hope. To strike
the man on his fish-like, hard-lipped mouth would only make matters worse, so he once more
left the compartment and stood in the open doorway of the vestibule just beyond. The train,
slowing to a stop at a tank station, jarred to a standstill. In the compartment behind him
the man's voice sounded loud and raucous now that the mechanical noises had ceased.

"Well, I never knew it to fail--what's in the blood will come out. They've lived there for
three generations now. They're killers, thieves at heart--human birds of prey, and it don't
matter if it is all under the surface. I say it's there."

At that moment, Lance had the hunger to kill, to stop forever the harsh voice that talked on
and on of the Lorrigans and their ingrained badness. He stepped outside, slamming the door
shut behind him. The voice, fainter now, could still be heard. He swung down to the cinders,
stood there staring ahead at the long train, counting the cars, watching the fireman run with
his oil can and climb into the engine cab. He could no longer hear the voice, but he felt that
he must forget it or go back and kill the man who owned it.

In the car ahead a little girl leaned out of the window, her curls whipping across her face.
Jubilantly she waved her hand at him, shrilled a sweet, "Hello-oh. Where you goin'? I'm goin'
to my grandma's house!"

The rigor left Lance's jaw. He smiled, showing his teeth, saw that a brakeman was down inspecting
a hot box on the forward truck of that car, and walked along to the window where the little
girl leaned and waited, waving two sticky hands at him to hurry.

"Hello, baby. I know a grandma that's going to be mighty happy, before long," he said, standing
just under the window and looking up at her.

"D'you know my gran'ma? S'e lives in a green house an' s'e's got five--hundred baby kittens
for me to see! An' I'm goin' to bring one home wis me--but I do'no which one. D'you like yellow
kittens, or litty gray kittens, or black ones?"

Gravely Lance studied the matter, his eyebrows pulled together, his mouth wearing the expression
which had disturbed Mary Hope when he came to mend the lock on her door.

"I'd take--now, if your grandma has one that's all spotted, you might take that, couldn't you?
Then some days you'd love the yellow spots, and some days you'd love the black spots, and some
days--"

"Ooh! And I could call it all the nice names I want to call it!" The little girl pressed her
hands together rapturously. "When my kitty's got its yellow-spotty day, I'll call him Goldy,
and when--"

The engine bell clanged warning, the wheels began slowly to turn.

"Ooh! You'll get left and have to walk!" cried the little girl, in big-eyed alarm.

"All right, baby--you take the spotted one!" Lance called over his shoulder as he ran. He was
smiling when he swung up the steps. No longer did he feel that he must kill the harsh-voiced man.

He went forward to his own section, sat down and stared out of the window. As the memory of
the little girl faded he drifted into gloomily reviewing the things he had heard said of his
family. Were they really pariahs among their kind? Outlawed because of the blood that flowed
in their veins?

Away in the back of his mind, pushed there because the thought was not pleasant, and because
thinking could not make it pleasant, had been the knowledge that he was returning to a life
with which he no longer seemed to be quite in tune. Two weeks had served to show him that he
had somehow drifted away from his father and Duke and Al, that he had somehow come to look
at life differently. He did not believe in the harsh man's theory of their outlawry; yet he
felt a reluctance toward meeting again their silent measurement of himself, their intangible
aloofness.

The harsh-voiced man had dragged it all to the surface, roughly sketching for the delectation
of his friends the very things which Lance had been deliberately covering from his own eyes.
He had done more. He had told things that made Lance wince. To humiliate Mary Hope before the
whole Black Rim, as they had done, to take away the piano which he had wanted her to have--for
that Lance could have throttled his dad. It was like Tom to do it. Lance could not doubt that
he had done it. He could picture the whole wretchedly cheap retaliation for the slight which
Mary Hope had given them, and the picture tormented him, made him writhe mentally. But he could
picture also Mary Hope's prim disapproval of them all, her deliberate omission of the Lorrigans
from her list of invited guests, and toward that picture he felt a keen resentment.

The whole thing maddened him. The more, because he was in a sense responsible for it all. Just
because he had not wanted that lonely look to cloud the blue eyes of her, just because he had
not wanted her to be unhappy in her isolation, he had somehow brought to the surface all those
boorish qualities which he had begun to hate in his family.

"Cheap--cheap as dirt!" he gritted once, and he included them all in the denunciation.

Furiously he wished that he had gone straight home, had not stopped in Reno for the fight.
But on the heels of that he knew that he would have made the trouble worse, had he been at
the Devil's Tooth on the day of the Fourth. He would have quarreled with Tom, but there was
scant hope that he could have prevented the piano-moving. Tom Lorrigan, as Lance had plenty
of memories to testify, was not the man whom one could prevent from doing what he set out to do.

At a little junction Lance changed to the branch line, still dwelling fiercely upon his heritage,
upon the lawless environment in which that heritage of violence had flourished. He was in the
mood to live up to the Lorrigan reputation when he swung off the train at Jumpoff, but no man
crossed his trail.

So Lance carried with him the full measure of his rage against Mary Hope and the Devil's Tooth,
when he rode out of Jumpoff on a lean-flanked black horse that rolled a wicked eye back at
the rider and carried his head high, looking for trouble along the trail.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

MARY HOPE HAS MUCH TROUBLE

Mary Hope, still taking her own point of view, had troubles in plenty to bear. In her own way
she was quite as furious as was Lance, felt quite as injured as did the Devil's Tooth outfit,
had all the humiliation of knowing that the Black Rim talked of nothing but her quarrel with
the Lorrigans, and in addition had certain domestic worries of her own.

Her mother harped continually on the piano quarrel and the indignity of having been "slappit"
by the painted Jezebel. But that was not what worried Mary Hope most, for she was long accustomed
to her mother's habit of dwelling tearfully on some particular wrong that had been done her.
Mary Hope was worried over her father.

On the day of the Fourth he had stayed at home, tinkering up his machinery, making ready for
haying that was soon to occupy all his waking hours,--and they would be as many as daylight
would give him. He had been doing something to an old mower that should have gone to the junk
heap long ago, and with the rusty sickle he had managed to cut his hand very deeply, just under
the ball of the thumb. He had not taken the trouble to cleanse the cut thoroughly, but had
wrapped his handkerchief around the hand and gone glumly on with his work. Now, on the third
day, Mary Hope had become frightened at the discoloration of the wound and the way in which
his arm was swelling, and had begged him to let her drive him to Jumpoff where he could take
the train to Lava and a doctor. As might be expected, he had refused to do anything of the
kind. He would not spend the time, and he would not spend the money, and he thought that a
poultice would draw out the swelling well enough. Mary Hope had no faith in poultices, and
she was on the point of riding to Jumpoff and telegraphing for a doctor when her father cannily
read her mind and forbade her so sternly that she quailed before him.

There was another thing, which she must do. She must take the money she had gotten from the
dance and with it pay Tom Lorrigan for the schoolhouse, or stop the school altogether. Jim
Boyle, when she had ridden over to the AJ to tell him, had said that she could do as she pleased
about paying for the schoolhouse; but if she refused to teach his kids, he would get some one
else who would. Jim Boyle seemed to feel no compunctions whatever about accepting favors from
the Devil's Tooth. As to Sederson, the Swede, he was working for Boyle, and did what his boss
said. So the matter was flung back upon Mary Hope for adjustment according to the dictates
of her pride or conscience, call it which you will.

Her mother advised her to keep the money and buy another piano. But Mary Hope declared that
she would not use the schoolhouse while it was a Lorrigan gift; whereupon Mother Douglas yielded
the point grudgingly and told her to send Hugh, the gawky youth, to the Devil's Tooth with
the three hundred dollars and a note saying what the money was for. But her father would not
permit Hugh to go, reiterating feverishly that he needed Hugh on the ranch. And with the pain
racking him and making his temper something fearful to face, Mary Hope dared not argue with him.

So she herself set out with her money and her hurt pride and all her troubles, to pay the Devil's
Tooth outfit for the schoolhouse--approximately, since she had only a vague idea of the cost
of the building--and then be quit of the Lorrigan patronage forever.

It happened that she found Tom at home and evidently in a temper not much milder than her father's.
Two of the Devil's Tooth men were at the stable door when she rode up, and to them Tom was
talking in a voice that sent shivers over Mary Hope when she heard it. Not loud and declamatory,
like her father's, but with a certain implacable calm that was harder to face than stormy vituperation.

But she faced it, now that she was there and Tom had been warned of her coming by Coaley, who
pointed his ears forward inquiringly when she neared the stable. The two cowpunchers gave Tom
slanting glances and left, muttering under their breaths to each other as they led their sweaty
horses into a farther corral.

Tom lifted his hand to his hat brim in mute recognition of her presence, gave her a swift inquiring
look and turned Coaley into the stable with the saddle on. Mary Hope took one deep breath and,
fumbling at a heavy little bag tied beside the fork of her saddle, plunged straight into her
subject.

"I've brought the money I raised at the dance, Mr. Lorrigan," she said. "Since you refused
to take it for the piano, I have brought it to pay you for the schoolhouse--with Mr. Boyle's
approval. I have three hundred and twelve dollars. If that is not enough, I will pay you the
balance later." She felt secretly rather well satisfied with the speech, which went even better
than her rehearsals of it on the way over.

Then, having untied the bag, she looked up, and her satisfaction slumped abruptly into perturbation.
Tom was leaning back against the corral rails, with his arms folded--and just why must he lift
his eyebrows and smile like Lance? She was going to hand him the bag, but her fingers bungled
and she dropped it in the six-inch dust of the trail.

Tom unfolded his arms, moved forward a pace, picked up the bag and offered it to her. "You've
got the buying fever, looks like to me," he observed coldly. "I haven't got any schoolhouse
to sell."

"But you have! You built it, and--"

"I did build a shack up on the hill, awhile back," Tom admitted in the same deliberate tone,
"but I turned it over to Jim Boyle and the Swede and whoever else wanted to send their kids
there to school." Since Mary Hope refused to put out her hand for the bag, Tom began very calmly
to retie it on her saddle. But she struck his hand away.

"I shall not take the money. I shall pay for the schoolhouse, Mr. Lorrigan. Unless I can pay
for it I shall never teach school there another day!" Her voice shook with nervous tension.
One did not lightly and unthinkingly measure wills with Tom Lorrigan.

"That's your business, whether you teach school or not," said Tom, holding the bag as though
he still meant to tie it on the saddle.

"But if I don't they will hire another teacher, and that will drive me away from home to earn
money--" Mary Hope had not in the least intended to say that, which might be interpreted as
a bid for sympathy.

"Well, Belle, she says no strange woman can use that schoolhouse. They might not find anything
to teach school in, if they tried that."

"You've got to keep that money." Mary Hope turned the Roman-nosed horse half away, meaning
to leave Tom there with the money in his hand.

Tom reached calmly out and caught the horse by the bridle.

"I want to tell you something," he drawled, in the voice which she had heard when she came
up. "I haven't 'got' to do anything. But I tell you what I will do. If you don't take this
money back and go ahead with your school-teaching as if nothing had happened, I'll burn that
schoolhouse to the last chip in the yard. And this money I'll take and throw down that crevice
under the Tooth, up there. The money won't do nobody any good, and the schoolhouse won't be
nothing at all but a black spot. You can suit yourself--it's up to you."

Mary Hope looked at him, opened her lips to defy him, and instead gave a small sob. Her Scotch
blood chilled at the threat of such wanton destruction of property and money, but it was not
that which made her afraid at that moment of Tom Lorrigan,--held her silent, glaring impotently.

She trembled while he tied the money to the saddle fork again, using a knot she had never seen
tied before. She wanted to tell him how much she hated him, how much she hated the whole Lorrigan
family, how she would die before she ever entered the door of that schoolhouse again unless
it was paid for and she could be free of obligation to him.

But when his head was bent, hiding all of his face but the chin, she had a wild fleeting notion
that he was Lance, and that he would lift his head and smile at her. Yet when he lifted his
head he was just Tom Lorrigan, with a hardness in his face which Lance did not have, and a
glint in his eye that told her his will was inexorable, that he would do exactly what he said
he would do, and perhaps more, if she opposed him.

Without a word she turned back, crushed under the sense of defeat. Useless destruction of property
and money did not seem to mean anything at all to a Lorrigan, but to her the thought was horrible.
She could not endure the thought of what he would do if she refused to use the schoolhouse.
Much less could she endure the thought of entering the place again while it remained a Lorrigan
gift.

Blindly fighting an hysterical impulse to cry aloud like a child over her hurt, she reined
Jamie into the shortcut trail of the Slide. Coming down she had followed the wagon road, partly
because the longer trail postponed a dreaded meeting, and partly because Jamie, being uncertain
in his temper and inclined to panicky spells when things did not go just right with him, could
not safely be trusted on the Slide trail, which was strange to him.

Until she reached the narrow place along the shale side hill she did not realize what trail
she was taking. Then, because she could not leave the trail and take the road without retracing
her steps almost to the stable, she went on, giving Jamie an impatient kick with her heel and
sending him snorting over the treacherous stuff in a high canter.

"Go on and break your neck and mine too, if ye like," she sobbed. "Ye needn't think I'll give
an inch to you; it's bad enough." When Jamie, still snorting, still reckless with his feet,
somehow managed to pass over the boulder-strewn stretch without breaking a leg, Mary Hope choked
back the obstreperous lump in her throat and spoke again in a quiet fury of resentment. "Burn
it he may if he likes; I shall not put my foot again inside a house of the Lorrigans!"

Whereat Jamie threw up his head, shied at a white rock on the steep slope beneath, loped through
the sagebrush where the trail was almost level, scrambled up a steep, deep-worn bit of trail,
turned the sharp corner of the switch-back and entered that rift in the cap-rock known as the
Slide.

Mary Hope had traveled that trail many times on Rab, a few years ago. She had always entered
the Slide with a little thrill along her spine, knowing it for a place where Adventure might
meet her face to face--where Danger lurked and might one day spring out at her. To-day she
thought nothing about it until Jamie squatted and tried to whirl back. Then she looked up and
saw Adventure, Danger and Lance Lorrigan just ahead, where the Slide was steepest.

Lance pulled up his hired horse, his thoughts coming back with a jerk from the same disagreeable
subject that had engrossed Mary Hope. The hired horse jumped, tried his best not to sit down,
lunged forward to save himself, found himself held back with a strength that did not yield
an inch, and paused wild-eyed, his hind feet slipping and scraping the rock.

Jamie in that moment was behaving much worse. Jamie, finding that he could not turn around,
was backing down the Slide, every step threatening to land him in a heap. Mary Hope turned
white, her eyes staring up at Lance a little above her. In that instant they both remembered
the short turn of the switch-back, and the twelve-foot bank with the scrambling trail down
which no horse could walk backwards and keep his legs under him.

"Loosen the reins and spur him!" Lance's voice sounded hollow, pent within that rock-walled
slit. In the narrow space he was crowding his own horse against the right wall so that he might
dismount.

Mary Hope leaned obediently forward, the reins hanging loose. "He always backs up when he's
scared," she panted, when Jamie paid no attention. His wife was his tyrant, and their whims haunted
love, carnal, sick, corrupted by himself, without knowing it was a concubine, an odalisque crazy,
and what was worst of all: the child was missing. And Serafina's house in house of passion
... there was no sanctity of the home, or even the hope of a long union of souls. The singers
would have to leave the best day. Jews were wandering; it was a miracle that between credits
spliced, thunder companies, weeks of strike extensions hopes, loan aid, accommodations of bad pay
and abuse of credit, could have Mochi and Gorgheggi stay for months in the village. When you least
expect Bonis be found Serafina's room with bags packed. "The one let's go ', say Mochi, and he would
not right to object. I had a room, could not provide material resources to continue in the village,
art and need as the wind blew, and they got there, around the world Later, his passion, the only
refuge of his soul in pain, in need of affection, caresses castes (as they had ended up being
the Serafina), personal dignity, that it lacked Emma next to her, which only humiliated at times
as the beast female for once, even love, the despot of all, that caresses seasoned with absurd
they were bewildered remorse for her husband. Solo, only again to be retained Emma, ​​held
by the looks cold, incisive Nepomuceno, the accounts in order Sebastian's cousin, and all other Valcárcel
who wanted to make him a force jigote of contempt!

Gorgheggi awoke smiling, no toothache, thanked his Bonis to ensure his dream like a child, and the
sweetness of feeling good, her mouth fresh, tired of sleeping, became
tender, sentimental, and finally led to touch.

Most were mild, mixed long dialogues, reasonable, no burning resembled prisons who became your
hugs in the past. "So, I thought Reyes, should be the touch of my wife." Serafina had become
accustomed to their innocent Reyes and bourgeois provincial life of sedentary that he leaned
forward, and giving occasion his long stay in this poor city and prolonged strike. Was dimming
the last hopes to shine in the art, and Serafina I thought of another kind of happiness. The lack
of rehearsals and performances, the absence of the theater, emancipation knew him, very nearly
to moral regeneration, as the courtesans who reach a certain age and become rich aspire to honesty
as a ultimate luxury, Serafina also dreamed with independence, to run away from the public, forget
the solfa and into a small town to vegetate and become influential lady, respected and sheen.
And got to know the life of that City, who despised at first, and was interested in talk of the
gossip, did boasts about the life and times of this and the other lady, and one day he got
very upset because Bonis failed to be invited to sit on Holy Thursday in any parish request on
the table. He sang one night with Mochi and Minghetti, in the Cathedral, and felt proud immense.
We wandered around the head a project of great benefit concert for the Hospital or Hospice. A Mochi
not lost on the idea, but it turned the tide. A great concert yes, but not for the benefit of
the poor but for the benefit of the singers, wreck company. It gave Minghetti, baritone, news
of the project, and it seemed great. He suggested the wording the occurrence of take that concert
to revive the instinct Philharmonic the neighbors were tired of opera, good, but it was a season
that was theater closed, the Gorgheggi, appearing in full dress in the halls of a society and
singing, not operating and no walks in the scene, pieces of music chosen, again to awaken the
musical appetite of many fans, this would facilitate the idea of ​​opening a payment conditional
on the basis of the trio, had tenor, soprano and baritone, it would alto, bass and vocals, and you could
arrange another campaign sufficient to pay traps, and expected with less haste and desire a
contract elsewhere. For the implementation of the project, had to have some Indian to take the lead.
Nobody like Bonis. Serafina undertook to ask him to take it on their own. Said and done. That
afternoon, between the strokes a peaceful and intimate love serene, begged his lover Gorgheggi
you sponsor zeal and enthusiasm with his idea, which is responsible for preparing the concert,
overcoming obstacles that may arise. What less could do Bonifacio for this woman, who could
not and money, and that they so obviously needed? Proposed the draft of the comic to the Board
of Casino, which formed as a company added to the coffee company La Oliva, on the floor were
the main ballroom, game rooms and reading pleasure that circle, stake and sometimes random. The
Board, having the consciousness of their duties promised to study the issue. There were repeated
deliberations, they voted, and by a narrow majority, approved the draft of the concert, ending in
dance, but ambiguous.

Bonifacio hid his wife who was in those deals, he was the soul of the proposed party, but she
knew that the concert was being prepared, and that the factor was the feast Bonis, thing was going
to be rich. If other things he knew well, and made time, he had not spoken but without insisting
indirect, now I take notice clearly desirable, and thus, he said one day to the table, desserts,
in the presence of Nepomuceno:

- Let's see, man, why so quiet I have what I prepare? Do you want to surprise?

- Did you prepare?

- Yes, sir, about the concert: I know that you and others want to
take a sneak glove for those poor comedians who have remained in the
village and should not have fun.

Perfectly; very well done.

It's a great idea and a charity. We will do charity and have fun. Magnificent. Right, uncle
who is a good idea?

- Excellent - Nepomuceno nodded, wiping his lips with a napkin and
looking down.

- Count me and Miss Martha, with Martha Körner, the
engineer, you know, my girlfriend, to go with me.

The guy with me, right? And perhaps the cousin Sebastian, who will
the fairs.

You'll have to fix things over there, if we know, man, do not play the little one, we know
that you are the director of the festival. So what? Better. Thank God do something useful. What
angers me is that I've never said you were a friend of the comic, so friendly. Did you think
that would upset me? Why? I'm not proud, I do not think dishonor my name because my husband is
concerned about artists, on the contrary, if I were man would do the same. Is not the famous
Tiplona married a gentleman from here? Right, uncle, we not been happy to know that the comic
is Bonis much, much? We knew by Miss Körner, eh, uncle? And I even got me hollow. You see.

Bonifacio looked at his wife with his eyes, fought by two opposing trends: an instinct blind
man said: Saves, Paul! Do not trust, do not sing, no catch!

Another powerful trend did you see the heavens opened and he pushed the emotion. If his wife would
be able understand him, understand his love of art and artists? He came not to expect excuse
his love for Serafina, was, however, indispensable, that he did not know them, but everything
else, why not? That is, what debt and borrowing money, either. Emma looked, then looked at the
guy: o there was honesty and openness and fairness in the world or were painted on the face,
particularly in the eyes of uncle and niece.

He confessed everything you thought fit to admit.

He appreciated the frankness, and uncle and niece expressed genuine admiration contemplating
the prospect of ideal and hours of revelry and Bonis honest joy they brought to the imagination
with moving eloquence. Although Nepomuceno and Emma went to second, each for different reason, in
part they were sincere enthusiasm and support for the projects Reyes. As to excuse her husband's
artistic hobbies and dealing with the singers, it's easy. Was not he a musician too? What was
of particular that, in leaving home, employed his leisure in cultivating the friendship of those excellent
gentlemen who knew so much music, were of such fine treatment and did not seem to envy the
people, limited minds, very narrow, monotonous, unbearable?

Nepomuceno spoke more than he used, he was also a painter, that is, a musician, yes: in Society
Economic had contributed to creating the kind of music and piano.

- Oh, music!, I think, is a great thing.

Tames the wild beasts.

- Certainly - Bonis said delighted.

And referred to her as the fable of Orpheus, which Emma took her completely
new, and it seemed very interesting.

- Speaking of piano ... if CAFTA
is old to make pipes, I would like to know type, so ... a little ...
if only one finger to play with those operas you play the flute.

A Bonis seemed very laudable purpose.

He thought, though without hope, as of "domestic music beasts" and said:

- Look, if you decide, Minghetti, baritone, is an excellent teacher ....

Emma, ​​lit, could not stand up, and without thinking about restraint, began to beat palms.

- Oh, yes, yes, sublime, sublime, what an idea!, Baritone ... and
pay you well, will be a work charity.

But what a pity! Are you leaving soon?

- Oh, that ... depending on the circumstances ... if you renew the
subscription, if the quartet back together ... if it helps ....

-
Go if you will help!

Right, uncle?

Uncle again nodded. The plans I had inside of her! Her eyes shone fixed on the tablecloth, talking
to your peer a hundred ideas that did not explain, but revealing and present.

Came the night of the concert.

Rooms were opened at the Casino, coffee branch Oliva there was even
the little buffet, despite the agreement of the Board, and the best
of the population went to make sorbets and watch closely, and dressed
in costume of society, singers famous people who had so often applauded
by seeing them in the tables full of beads and braids gold.

Bonis solemn Night! Emma solemn Night! Nepomuceno solemn Night!

-XII-

Burned in the crystal chandeliers many dozens of plugs sperm there, the end of the hall, on a
makeshift platform, the venerable orchestra of musicians settled in the indigenous teachers,
opened the festival with a symphony of ancient repertoire: there The tube was refractory to Italian
and pitch; there Secades violinist spiritual, I had dreamed of being a second Paganini, who had
spent nights and nights, days and days looking at the strings, caressed by the arc, sometimes
sublime lament of love, sometimes imitations exact natural sounds; v. gr.: the braying of
an ass. Sarcasm of luck! Bray had dominated, and his bow had come to talk like Balaam's ass, but Riff
ineffable love, the cries of passion sublime, the reserving those strings for another bow lover,
not for the Secades. Which, now mature and disillusioned, he would prefer zurupeto his other
profession, and most attended and to the banks and their perks that art swaying their childhood
dreams. Playing and for winning the pittance, half asleep, and his colleagues, without faith,
without emulation, just keeping a little love and respect superstitious melancholy to good music,
to the former, disregarding the news that some companies brought years that part. There was
also the former Figl, Don Romualdo, bald, dignified, big belly, in the cathedral shawm, in
any profane Figl, almost a provincial glory. All the people, to the deaf, acknowledged that
it was wonderful what he did with his strange instrument man, I did mourn, laugh, almost almost
coughing. Well, despite all fame, the force of time, wear and tear of admiration, had driven
about celebrity Don Romualdo a thick layer of public indifference, he knew well that his countrymen,
without a moment to question their greatness, they were tired of admiring him, he bore these
inevitable disappointments with a philosophical melancholy and morose, was playing with usual
care, although in vain. In short, I was sad, disappointed, or more nor less than his partner
Secades he, without illusions, back and of glory, lay in the same row of resignation and bitter cold
that had been lying Secades, road celebrity. Everything was the same: not to have climbed to the
temple of Fame and to be back. Despite be among those respectable teachers these and other notables,
the orchestra screws sounded like a machine without oil, the strings
were asthmatic sounded like wood, as you know the barrel of cider,
the bronze was pitilessly strident; one of those serpents enough to
demolish all the fortifications of five Jericho.

Fortunately the public philharmonic orchestra as he heard the duck's back.

Emma entered the room after having committed the first number of the program, attracting attention
for two things, for his expensive and gaudy dress, and to come on his arm of German Körner
engineer, a fat man, tall, red-eyed from crying child, blue, clear, very deep. He looked like a fat
pig very well bred, good for the killing, and was a man very spiritual, love of Mozart and the
destinies of Prussia. Spoke Spanish as if invent a language with words and turns quasi quasi
Castilian Germans. He was a dreamer, but capable of carrying a factory at the tip of each finger, and
as an accountant, as he said, No one set foot before.

I knew all, despised the Spanish dissimulating, idolized his daughter Marta, and came to get
rich.

Behind the couple came in, also the arm, Martha Körner and Bonis, I followed closely alone, D.
Juan Nepomuceno, who seemed to have quicksilver sideburns that looked like pure silver. Marta
Körner was a blonde of twenty-eight, very fresh, full fat morbidity varnished and smoothness,
its chief merit was his physical flesh, but she wanted above all the grace expression and
the depth and distinctness of ideas and feelings. Always spoke heart, raising his hand, he was
a prodigy, the beating heart, which was quite an masonry pure nacre.

Attributed to the subsoil of that rugged nature the true treasures of his person, but the smart,
Nepomuceno including estimated over the surface right.

Martin disagreed with his father in his musical love, was by Beethoven, in what they were agreement
was on the imperative of making a fortune, or half, as could be. Körner came straight from Saxon
to run a foundry, established by an industrialist at the foot of iron mines in the mountainous
region of the province beyond, to where they had their haunts the poor and haggard Valcárcel.
Sebastian's cousin, something more communicative, coming and going from the city to the mountain,
was the one who introduced Mr. Körner to Nepomuceno. At first the German and his daughter lived
in the maze, without thinking that a few miles there was a city that could remind you, remotely,
civilization and culture they left on their land. Although surrounded, as Sebastian said, all
the amenities could be washed away almost with a crane, to the heights where they lived, the
Germans lived to the village, so it's up to their social relations. Began to learn Spanish dialect
of the country, dark and corrupted his whole spiritualism was blunted, and more who sought to
maintain the sacred fire of idealism to force classical sonatas, played by Marta on a grand
piano, and by dint of books and illustrated magazines that his father did brought from Germany,
it was that the environment invaded and transformed them, the disdain looked at first and
tried to rough people, amid which they had to live it was changing imperceptibly into curiosity
became interested, imitation, emulation, and pride and was not in contempt, but dazzling.
Körner wanted to show off between rugged mountain, and as there skills earned him several arts
dilettante sentimental reader, had to take advantage of other qualities, the more significant
in that land, like, v. gr., the great strength and capacity of its stomach. He was not having
started as as he wanted, until either he ran for council the news quiet, true, of in a bet with
a mine foreman had left German to Spanish in the dozen fried egg and a half, while he, Körner, came
to swallow the two dozen very loosely, and shot put at the feat gobbling two bream. This was something
else, and those who remained indifferent to the glorious wars of the Great Frederick, that
was her pet vanity as Körner if the grandson of the illustrious monarch, who heard talk about
Goethe and Heine, and Hegel as one who listens to the rain, came to recognize the glorious
future of the race that raised so good stomachs. Add to this that the engineer was playing
bowling with singular skill and a strength of many horses, or at least two or three of those
villagers. With this and other similar qualities, managed to win the sympathy and even admiration
for that had come to yearn for real. But this kind of glory finally get tired, and especially
After he was disgusted by the danger that was evident at last, to become a bear metaphysical and
philharmonic, but bear in Ata Troll in the flesh. Gained weight too, forgetting their ... transcendental
meditation, and simple tastes, easily satisfied with life mountain, he departed from the elaborate
plans to thrive and had brought great life of their country. In addition, the factory of the
mountain, although well paid, considered and satisfied point to material comforts, they had a
good home, perks and hospitality, in the end did not prosper, I could not get rich. Tested the draft
become the industrial partner, but then fell the difficulties that the owner was putting overlap.
This mood is sour, and began to wish very hard to leave that life troglodyte, be worth more
and make available to demand the honest charms offer increasingly exuberant his daughter Marta,
which were also the years passed, but to no avail, back in the mountains. Without leaving the
factory, under the pretext of service, retail Körner visits to capital, in pursuit of a business
that seemed to him that the most promising up there, and one of these trips was when he was
the cousin Sebastian Nepomuceno acquaintance. The German, who was shrewd and worldly man,
soon realized what was the role of financier at her niece became clear that there was no money,
and that this money was for post, and that the current direction of that river of money was, or
he did not understand current Nepomuceno Pocket way, albeit with great losses and leads, in
a delta of waste, they would enhance the flow of dressmakers, traders of fabrics, hats, jewelry, not
to mention grocery stores, coffee shops, hunting and fishing markets, ETC. etc. Körner Nepomuceno
started to stun first persuading him, Nepomuceno, had a real talent for accounting, was a Necker
... dark, idle, with another horizon, shine like a star of first magnitude in the sky of the Administration
and Finance. In all conscience, as Körner, Nepomuceno was obliged to give such powers employment
more worthy of them than just catering to that, in short, was limited. More was, in the interest
Valcárcel the ruined house, which apparently was less because of the wastage of Emma and her husband's
secret spending, Nepomuceno was still healthy to put that capital to give birth, produce more
than the paltry percentage of territorial income. Both forum, so hunting atomic thing was ridiculous.
Sursum corda! All right! Desenmoheceos! Come the stock industry, and talk. This kind of argument
were added, by ornaments, aperitif and complement, other general-see gr.: it was late Spain,
despite the richness of the soil and subsoil, in respect of the Körner, were to blame the Inquisition
and the Bourbons, and then the bad exercise of the constitutional regime, which in itself was
not good.
 She
thanked him for the use of the horse and for attending to the schoolhouse matter for her. She
was so extremely thankful that Lance exploded in one two-word oath when he rode away. Whereupon
the doctor, who knew nothing of Lance's thoughts, looked at him in astonishment.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

LANCE TRAILS A MYSTERY

Lance, rising at what he considered an early hour--five in the morning may well be considered
early,--went whistling down to the corral to see what plans were on for the day. It was the
day of Aleck Douglas's funeral, but the Devil's Tooth outfit would be represented only by a
wreath of white carnations which Belle had ordered sent up from Pocatello. White carnations
and Aleck Douglas did not seem to harmonize, but neither did the Devil's Tooth and Aleck Douglas,
and the white wreath would be much less conspicuous and far more acceptable than the Lorrigans,
Lance was thinking.

He paused at the bunk-house and looked in. The place was deserted. He walked through it to
the kitchen where the boys ate--the chuck-house, they called it--and found nothing to indicate
that a meal had been eaten there lately. He went out and down to the stable, where Sam Pretty
Cow was just finishing his stall cleaning. Shorty, who now had a permanently lame leg from
falling under his horse up in the Lava Beds a year ago, was limping across the first corral
with two full milk buckets in his hands.

"Say, what time does this ranch get up, for heck sake?" Lance inquired of Sam Pretty Cow, stepping
aside so that Sam might carry in a forkful of fresh hay.

"I dunno--long time ago." Sam Pretty Cow turned the hay sidewise and went in to stuff his fragrant
burden into the manger.

"I was going out with the boys, if they went anywhere. Where have they all headed for, Sam?
I could overtake them, maybe."

Sam Pretty Cow, returning to the doorway, shifted a quid of tobacco from one cheek to the other
and grinned.

"I dunno, me," he responded amiably.

"You don't know? Didn't dad say anything? Didn't the boys?" And then, with faint exasperation,
"Doesn't any one ever talk any more on this ranch?"

Sam Pretty Cow gave him a swift, oblique glance and spat accurately at a great horsefly that
had lighted on a board end.

"Not much, you bet. Nh-hn."

Lance called to Shorty, who had set his milk buckets down that he might open the little gate
that swung inward,--the gate which horses were not supposed to know anything about.

"Oh-h, Shorty! Where did dad and the boys go this morning?"

Shorty turned slowly, pulling the gate open and propping it with a stick until he had set the
buckets through. Deliberation was in his manner, deliberation was in his speech.

"Las' night, you mean. They hit out right after midnight."

"Well, where did they go?" Lance ground his cigarette under his heel.

"You might ask 'em when they git back," Shorty suggested cryptically, and closed the gate just
as carefully as if forty freedom-hungry horses were milling inside the corral.

Lance watched him go and turned to Sam Pretty Cow who, having thrust his hay fork behind a
brace in the stable wall, was preparing to vary his tobacco-chewing with a smoke.

"What's the mystery, Sam? Where did they go? I'm here to stay, and I'm one of the family--I
think--and you may as well tell me."

Sam Pretty Cow lipped the edge of his cigarette paper, folded it down smoothly on the tiny
roll of tobacco, leaned his body backward and painstakingly drew a match from the small pocket
of his grimy blue overalls.

"I'm don' know nothing," he vouchsafed equably. "I'm don' ask nothing. I'm don' hear nothing.
You bet. Nh-hn--yore damn right."

From under his lashes Lance watched Sam Pretty Cow. "I was over helping hold old Scotty in
his bed, the other day," he said irrelevantly. "He was crazy--out of his head. He kept yelling
that the Lorrigans were stealing his stock. He kept saying that a few more marks with a straight
branding iron would turn his Eleven into an NL, ANL, DNL, LNL--any one of the Devil's Tooth
brands. Crazy with fever, he was."

Sam Pretty Cow studied the match, decided which was the head of it, and drew it sharply along
his boot sole.

"Yeah--yo're damn right. Crazy, you bet yore life. Uh-huh."

"He said the Miller's Block brand could easily be turned into the N Block--Belle's brand. He
said horses had been run off the range--"

"He's dead," Sam observed unemotionally. "You bet. He's gettin' fun'ral to-day."

"How long will the boys be out?" Lance pulled a splinter off the rail beside him and began
separating the fibers with his finger nails that were too well cared for to belong to the Black
Rim folk.

"I dunno, me."

"Scotty sure was crazy, Sam. He tried twice to kill me. Once he jumped up and ran into the
kitchen and grabbed a butcher knife off the table and came at me. He thought I was there to
rob him. He called me Tom."

"Yeah," said Sam Pretty Cow, blowing smoke. "He's damn lucky you ain't Tom. Uh-huh--you bet."

Lance lifted his eyebrows, was silent while he watched Shorty limping down from the house,
this time with table scraps for the chickens.

"Scotty was certainly crazy," Lance turned again to Sam. "Over and over he kept saying, while
he looked up at the ceiling, 'The Lorrigan days are numbered. Though the wicked flourish like
a green bay tree, they shall perish as dry grass. The days are numbered--their evil days are
numbered.'"

Sam Pretty Cow smoked, flicked the ash from his cigarette with a coppery forefinger, looked
suddenly full at Lance and grinned widely.

"Uh-huh. So's them stars numbered, all right. I dunno, me. Tom Lorrigan's damn smart man."
He reached down for an old bridle and grinned again. "Scotty, I guess he don' say how many
numbers them days is, you bet." He started off, trailing his bridle reins carelessly in the dust.

"If you're going to catch up a horse, Sam, I wish you'd haze in the best one on the ranch for me."

Sam Pretty Cow paused, half turned, spat meditatively into the dust and jerked a thumb toward
the stable.

"Me, I dunno. Bes' horse on the ranch is in them box stall. Them's Coaley. I guess you don'
want Coaley, huh?"

Lance bit his lip, looking at Sam Pretty Cow intently.

"You needn't catch up a horse for me, Sam. I'll ride Coaley," he said smoothly. Which brought
a surprised grunt from Sam Pretty Cow, Indian though he was, accustomed though he was to the
ways of the Lorrigans.

But it was not his affair if Lance and his father quarreled when Tom returned. Indeed, Tom
might not return very soon, in which case he would not hear anything about Lance's audacity
unless Lance himself told it. Sam Pretty Cow would never mention it, and Shorty would not say
a word. Shorty never did say anything if he could by any means keep silence.

Lance returned to the house, taking long strides that, without seeming hurried, yet suggested
haste. He presently came down the path again, this time with a blanket roll and a sack with
lumpy things tied in the bottom. He wore chaps, his spurs, carried a yellow slicker over his
arm. On his head was a black Stetson, one of Tom's discarded old hats.

He led Coaley from the box stall where he had never before seen him stand, saddled him, tied
his bundles compactly behind the cantle, mounted and rode down the trail, following the hoof
prints that showed freshest in the loose, gravelly sand. Coaley, plainly glad to be out of
his prison, stepped daintily along in a rocking half trot that would carry him more miles in
a day than any other horse in the country could cover, and bring him to the journey's end with
springy gait and head held proudly, ears twitching, ready for more miles if his rider wanted more.

The tracks led up the road to the Ridge, turned sharply off where the brush grew scanty among
the flat rocks that just showed their faces above the surface of the arid soil. Lance frowned
and followed. For a long way he skirted the rim rock that edged the sheer bluff. A scant furlong
away, on his right, a trail ran west to the broken land of Indian Creek. But since the horsemen
had chosen to keep to the rocky ground along the rim, Lance followed.

He had gone perhaps a mile along the bluff when Coaley began to toss up his head and perk his
ears backward, turning now and then to look. Lance was sunk too deep in bitter introspection
to observe these first warning movements which every horseman knows. He was thinking of Mary
Hope, who would be waking now to a day of sorrowful excitement. Thinking, too, of old Aleck
Douglas and the things that he had said in his raving.

What Douglas had shouted hoarsely was not true, of course. He did not believe,--and yet, there
was Shorty's enigmatical answer to a simple question; there was Sam Pretty Cow, implying much
while he actually said very little; there was this unheralded departure of all the Devil's
Tooth riders in the night, in the season between round-ups. There was Coaley feeling fit for
anything, shut up in the box stall while Tom rode another horse; and here was Lance himself
taking the trail of the Devil's Tooth outfit at a little after sunrise on a horse tacitly forbidden
to all riders save Tom.

Coaley, in a place where he must pick his way between boulders, paused and lifted his head,
staring back the way they had come. Lance roused himself from gloomy speculations and looked
back also, but he could not see anything behind them save a circling hawk and the gray monotone
of the barren plateau, so he urged Coaley in among the boulders.

There must be something back there, of course. Coaley was too intelligent a horse to make a
mistake. But it might be some drifting range stock, or perhaps a stray horse. Certainly it
was no one from the Devil's Tooth, for Sam Pretty Cow had set off to mend a fence in the lower
pasture, and Shorty never rode a horse nowadays for more than a half mile or so; and six o'clock
in the morning would be rather early for chance riders from any other ranch. With a shrug,
Lance dismissed the matter from his mind.

Where a faint, little-used trail went obliquely down the bluff to the creek bottom, Lance saw
again the hoofprints which the rocky ground had failed to reveal. He could see no reason for
taking this roundabout course to go up the creek, but he sent Coaley down the trail, reached
the bottom and discovered that the tracks once more struck off into rocky ground. His face
hardened until his resemblance to Tom became more marked than usual, but where the tracks led
he followed. Too often had he trailed stray horses in the past to be puzzled now, whether he
could see the hoofprints or not.

They must have made for the other side of the creek, gone up Wild Horse gulch or the Little
Squaw. There was just one place where they could cross the creek without bogging in the tricky
mud that was almost as bad as quicksand. He therefore pulled out of the rocky patch and made
straight for the crossing. He would soon know if they had crossed there. If they had not, then
they would have turned again up Squaw Creek, and it would be short work cutting straight across
to the only possible trail to the higher country.

He had covered half of the distance to the creek when Coaley again called his attention to
something behind him. This time Lance glimpsed what looked very much like the crown of a hat
moving in a dry wash that he had crossed not more than five minutes before. He pulled up, studied
the contour of the ground behind him, looked ahead, saw the mark of a shod hoof between two
rocks. The hoof mark pointed toward the crossing. Lance, however, turned down another small
depression where the soil lay bare and Coaley left clean imprints, trotted along it until a
welter of rocks made bad footing for the horse, climbed out and went on level. Farther up the
valley an abrupt curve in Squaw Creek barred his way with scraggly, thin willow growth that
had winding cow trails running through it. Into one of these Lance turned, rode deep into the
sparse growth, stopped where the trail swung round a huge, detached boulder, dismounted and
dropped Coaley's reins to the ground and retraced his steps some distance from the trail, stepping
on rocks here and there and keeping off damp spots.

He reached the thin edge of the grove, stood behind a stocky bush and waited. In two or three
minutes--they seemed ten to Lance--he saw the head and shoulders of a rider just emerging from
the gully he himself had so lately followed.

Back on Coaley, following the winding trail, Lance pondered the matter. The way he had come
was no highway--no trail that any rider would follow on any business save one. But just why
should he be followed? He had thought at first that some one was trailing the Devil's Tooth
outfit, as he had been doing, but now it seemed plain that he himself was the quarry.

He flicked the reins on Coaley's satiny neck, and the horse broke at once into a springy, swift
trot, following the purposeless winding of the cow path. When they emerged upon the other side
where the creek gurgled over a patch of rocks like cobblestones, Lance stopped and let him
take a sip or two of water, then struck off toward the bluff, letting Coaley choose his own
pace, taking care that he kept to low ground where he could not be seen.

For an hour he rode and came to the junction of Mill Creek and the Squaw. Then, climbing through
chokecherry thickets up a draw that led by winding ways to higher ground, Lance stopped and
scrutinized the bottomland over which he had passed. Coaley stood alert, watching also that
back trail, his ears turned forward, listening. After a moment, he began to take little mincing
steps sidewise, pulling impatiently at the reins. As plainly as a horse could tell it, Coaley
implored Lance to go on. But Lance waited until, crossing an open space, he saw a rider coming
along at a shambling trot on the trail he had himself lately followed.

He frowned thoughtfully, turned Coaley toward home and rode swiftly in a long, distance-devouring
lope.

He reached the ranch somewhere near ten o'clock, surprising Belle in the act of harnessing
her pintos to a new buckboard at which they shied hypocritically. Belle stared at him round-eyed
over the backs of her team.

"My good Lord, Lance! You--you could be Tom's twin, in that hat and on that horse! What you
been doing--doubling for him in a lead?"

Lance swung down and came toward her. "Belle, where did dad and the boys go?"

"Oh--fussing with the stock," said Belle vaguely, her eyes clouding a little. "We're getting
so many cattle it keeps Tom on the go day and night, seems to me. And he will keep buying more
all the while. Did--did you want to go with them, honey? I guess Tom never thought you might.
You've been away so long. You'd better not ride Coaley, Lance. Tom would just about murder
you if he caught you at it. And where did you get hold of that hat?"

Lance laughed queerly. "I just picked it off the table as I came out. Mine is too new and stiff
yet. This seemed to fit. And Coaley's better off under the saddle than he is in the stable,
Belle. He's a peach--I always did want to ride Coaley, but I never had the nerve till I got
big enough to lick dad."

He caught Belle in a quick, breath-taking hug, kissed her swiftly on the cheek and turned Coaley
into the corral with the saddle still on.

"Are you going over--to the funeral?" he asked as he closed the gate.

"I'm going to town, and I've got the letters you left on the table to be mailed. No, I'm not
going to the funeral. I don't enjoy having my face slapped--and being called a painted Jezebel,"
she added dryly.

Under his breath Lance muttered something and went into the house, not looking at Belle or
making her any reply.

"Lance," said Belle to the pintos, "thinks we're rough and tough and just about half civilized.
Lord, when you take a Lorrigan and educate him and polish him, you sure have got a combination
that's hard to go up against. Two years--and my heavens, I don't know Lance any more! I never
thought any Lorrigan could feaze me--but there's something about Lance--"

In the house Lance was not showing any of the polish which Belle had mentioned rather regretfully.
He was kneeling before a trunk, throwing books and pipes and socks and soft-toned silk shirts
over his shoulder, looking for something which he seemed in a great haste to find. When his
fingers, prying deep among his belongings, closed upon the thing he sought, he brought it up,
frowning abstractedly.

A black leather case, small and curved, opened when he unbuckled the confining strap. A binocular,
small but extremely efficient in its magnifying power he withdrew, dusting the lenses with
the sleeve of his shirt. He had bought the glasses because some one had advised him to take
a pair along when he went with a party of friends to the top of Mount Tamalpais one Sunday.
And because he had an instinctive dislike for anything but the best obtainable, he had bought
the highest-priced glasses he could find in San Francisco,--and perhaps the smallest. He buckled
them back into their case, slapped them into his pocket and closed the trunk lid with a bang.
From the mantel in the living room he gleaned a box of cartridges for an extra six-shooter,
which he cleaned and loaded carefully and tucked inside the waistband of his trousers, on the
left side, following an instinct that brought him close to his grandfather, that old killer
whom all men feared to anger.

"The horse and the hat; he thought it was dad he was trailing!" he said to himself, with his
teeth clamped tight together. "Oh, well, when it comes to that kind of a game--"

He went out and down to the corral, watered Coaley and mounted again, taking the trail across
pastures to Squaw Creek.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

LANCE RIDES ANOTHER TRAIL

With a two-days' growth of beard on his chin and jaws, a new, hard look in his eyes and the
general appearance of a man who has been riding long and has slept in all his clothes, Lance
rode quietly up to the corral gate and dismounted. A certain stiffness was in his walk when
he led Coaley inside and turned a stirrup up over the saddle horn, his gloved fingers dropping
to the latigo. Lance was tired--any one could see that at a glance. That he was preoccupied,
and that his preoccupation was not pleasant, was also evident to the least observing eye.

Tom, coming out of the bunk house, studied him with narrowed lids as he came walking leisurely
down to the corral. Tom's movements also betrayed a slight stiffness of the muscles, as though
he had ridden hard and long. He did not hurry. Lance had pulled off the saddle and the sweaty
blanket and the bridle, and had turned Coaley into the corral before he knew that some one
was coming. Even then he did not turn to look. He was staring hard at a half-dozen horses grouped
in the farther corner of the corral,--horses with gaunt flanks and the wet imprint of saddles.
They were hungrily nosing fresh piles of hay, and scarcely looked up when Coaley trotted eagerly
up to join them. Six of them--a little more than half of the outfit that had ridden away the
other night.

"Well! I see you helped yourself to a new saddle horse," Tom observed significantly, coming
up behind Lance.

"Yes. Coaley acted lonesome, shut up in the box stall. Thought a little riding would do him
good." Lance's eyes met Tom's calmly, almost as if the two were mere acquaintances.

"You give him a plenty, looks like. Where yuh been?"

"I? Oh--just riding around." Lance stooped indifferently to untie his slicker and blanket from
the saddle.

"Thought I'd like to use him myself. Thinking some of riding into town this afternoon," Tom
said, still studying Lance.

"Well, if you want to ride Coaley, he's good for it. I'd say he has more miles in him yet than
any of that bunch over there." With slicker and blanket roll Lance started for the house.

Tom did not say anything. He was scowling thoughtfully after Lance when Belle, coming from
the chicken house with a late hatching of fluffy little chicks in her hat, looked at him inquiringly.
To her Tom turned with more harshness than he had shown for many a long day.

"Schoolin' don't seem to set good on a Lorrigan," he said. "How long's he goin' to stay this time?"

"Why, honey, don't you want Lance home? He rode Coaley--but that's no crime. Lance wouldn't
hurt him, he's too good a rider and he never was hard on horses. And Coaley just goes wild
when he has to stand shut up all day--"

"Oh, it ain't riding Coaley, altogether. He can ride Coaley and be darned. It's the new airs
he's putting on that don't set good with me, Belle. You wanted to make something of Lance,
and now, by Henry, you'll have to name the job you've made of him--I'd hate to!"

Belle put a hand into the cheeping huddle in her hat, lifted out a chick and held it to her
cheek. "Why, you're just imagining that Lance is different," she contended, stifling her own
recognition of the change. "He'll settle right down amongst the boys--"

"The boys ain't cryin' to have him, Belle. Black Rimmers had ought to stay Black Rimmers, or
get out and stay out. Lance ain't either one thing or the other."

"Why, Tom Lorrigan!" Belle dropped the chick into her hat and tucked the hat under her arm.
Her eyes began to sparkle a little. "I don't think Lance liked it about the piano, but he's
the same Lance he always was. I've watched him, and he hasn't said a thing or done a thing
outa the way--he's just the dearest great big fellow! And I can't for the life of me see why
you and the whole outfit hang back from him like he was a stranger. Education ain't catching,
Tom. And Lance don't put on any airs at all, so why in the name of heaven you all--"

"Well, well, don't get all excited, Belle. But if education was ketching, a lot of the boys
would be rollin' their beds. I'm going to town. Anything yuh want brought out?"

Belle did not answer. She went away to the house with her hatful of chicks, and put them into
a box close to the stove until the mother hen made sure whether the four other eggs were anything
more than just stale eggs. It would have been hard for Belle to explain just what the heaviness
in her heart portended. Certainly it was not in her nature to worry over trifles,--yet these
were apparent trifles that worried her. On the surface of the Devil's Tooth life only faint
ripples stirred, but Belle felt somehow as though she were floating in a frail boat over a
quiet pool from whose depths some unspeakable monster might presently thrust an ominous head
and drag her under.

In the crude yet wholly adequate bathroom she heard a great splashing, and guessed that it
was Lance, refreshing himself after his trip. That, she supposed, was another point that set
him apart from the other boys. From June to September, whenever any of the male inhabitants
of the Devil's Tooth felt the need of ablutions beyond the scope of a blue enamel wash basin,
he took a limp towel and rode down across the pasture to the creek, and swam for half an hour
or so in a certain deep pool. Sometimes all of the boys went, at sundown, and filled the pool
with their splashings. Only Lance availed himself of tub and soap and clean towels, and shaved
every morning before breakfast.

She heard him moving about in his room, heard him go into the kitchen and ask Riley what the
chances were for something to eat. She did not follow him, but she waited, expecting that he
would come into the living room afterwards. She went to the piano and drummed a few bars of
a new dance hit Lance had brought home for her, and with her head turned sidewise listened
to the sound of his footsteps in the next room, his occasional, pleasantly throaty tones answering
Riley's high-pitched, nasal twang.

Her eyes blurred with unreasoning tears. He was her youngest. He was so big, so handsome, so
like Tom,--yet so different! She did not believe that Tom could really see anything to cavil
at in Lance's presence, in his changed personality. Tom, she thought, was secretly as proud
of Lance as she was, and only pretended to sneer at him to hide that pride. The constraint
would soon wear off, and Lance would be one of the boys again.

The screen door slammed. With a lump in her throat, Belle went to a window and looked out.
Lance, in his new Stetson and a fresh shirt and gray trousers tucked into his riding boots,
was on his way to the stable again. She watched him pick up a rope and go into the far corral
where a few extra saddle horses dozed through the hot afternoon. She saw him return, leading
a chunky little roan. Saw him throw his saddle on the horse. Saw him ride off--the handsomest
young fellow in all the Black Rim--but with apparently never a thought that his mother might
like a word with him, since he had been gone for two days without any explanation or any excuse.
Which was not like Lance, who had always before remembered to be nice to Belle.

Up the Slide trail Lance rode, perhaps two hours behind Tom. The marks of Coaley's hoofs were
still fresh in the trail, but Lance did not appear to see them at all. He let the roan scramble
over the shale as he would, let him take his own pace among the boulders and up through the
Slide. At the top he put him into an easy lope which did not slacken until he reached the descent
on the other side of the Ridge.

Presently, because the roan was an ambitious young horse and eager to reach the end of the
trail, and Lance was too preoccupied to care what pace he traveled, they arrived at Cottonwood
Spring, circled the wire fence and whipped in through the open gate at a gallop.

The little schoolhouse was deserted. Lance dismounted and looked in, saw it still dismal with
the disorder of the last unfortunate dance. It was evident that there had been no school since
the Fourth of July.

Then he remembered that Mary Hope's father had been sick all of the week, and it was now only
two days since the funeral. She would not be teaching school so soon after his death.

He closed the door and remounted, his face somber. He had wanted to see Mary Hope. Since the
morning after Scotty died he had fought a vague, disquieting sense of her need of him. There
had been times when it seemed almost as though she had called to him across the distance; that
she wished to see him. To-day he had obeyed the wordless call. He still felt her need of him,
but since she was not at the school he hesitated. The schoolhouse was in a measure neutral
ground. Riding over to the Douglas ranch was another matter entirely. Too keenly had he felt
the cold animosity of Mother Douglas, the wild, impotent hate of old Scotty mouthing threats
and accusations and vague prophecies of future disaster to the Lorrigans. He rode slowly out
through the gate and took the trail made by the Devil's Tooth team when they hauled down the
materials for the schoolhouse. The chunky roan climbed briskly, contentedly rolling the cricket
in his bit. The little burring sound of it fitted itself somehow to the thought reiterating
through Lance's tired brain. "She wouldn't want me--to come. She wouldn't--want me--to come."

The roan squatted and ducked sidewise, and Lance raised his head. Down the rough trail rode
a big cowpuncher with sun-reddened face and an air of great weariness. His horse plodded wearily,
thin-flanked, his black hair sweat-roughened and dingy. The rider looked at Lance with red-veined
eyes, the inflamed lids showing sleepless nights.

"How'r yuh?" he greeted perfunctorily, as they passed each other.

"Howdy," said Lance imperturbably, and rode on.

Lance's eyebrows pulled together. He had no need of looking back; he had seen a great deal
in the one glance he had given the stranger. He scrutinized the trail, measured with his eyes
the size and the shape of the horse's footprints.

After a little he left the wagon road and put the roan to the steep climb up the trail to the
great Tooth of the ridge. He still frowned, still rode with bent head, his eyes on the trail.
But now he was alert, conscious of his surroundings, thinking of every yard of ground they covered.

At a little distance from the base of the Tooth he dismounted, tying the restive roan to a
bush to prevent him from wandering around, nibbling investigatingly at weeds, bushes, all the
things that interest a young horse.

Slowly, walking carefully on rocks, Lance approached the Tooth. A new look was in his face
now,--a look half tender, half angry because of the tenderness. Several times he had met Mary
Hope here at the Tooth, when he was just a long-legged youth with a fondness for teasing, and
she was a slim, wide-eyed little thing in short skirts and sunbonnet. Always the meetings had
pretended to be accidental, and always Mary Hope had seemed very much interested in the magnificent
outlook and very slightly interested in him.

From the signs, some one else was much interested in the view. Lance came upon a place where
a man had slipped with one foot and left the deep mark of his boot in the loose, gravelly soil.
Sitting on a boulder, he made a leisurely survey of the place and counted three cigarette stubs
that had fallen short of the crevice toward which they had evidently been flung. How many had
gone into the crevice he could not tell. He slid off the boulder and, walking on a rock shelf
that jutted out from the huge upthrust rock, examined the place very thoroughly.

At a certain spot where Mary Hope had been fond of sitting on the rock shelf with her straight
little back against the Tooth's smooth side, a splendid view of the Devil's Tooth ranch was
to be had. The house itself was hidden in a cottonwood grove that Belle had planted when she
was a bride, but the corrals, the pastures, the road up the Ridge was plainly visible. And
in the shallow crack in the rock was another cigarette end, economically smoked down to a three-quarter-inch
stub.

Lance returned by way of the shelf to the outcropping of rocks that would leave no trace of
his passing. He untied and mounted the roan and circled the vicinity cautiously. Two hundred
yards away, down the slope and on a small level place where the brush grew thick, he found
where a horse had stood for hours. He looked at the hoofprints, turned back and rode down the
schoolhouse trail again, following the tracks of the fagged black horse.

When another fifty yards would bring the basin in sight, Lance turned off the trail and dismounted,
tied the roan again and went forward slowly, his eyes intent on the tops of the trees around
Cottonwood Spring. A rattler buzzed suddenly, and he stopped, looked to see where the snake
was coiled, saw it withdraw its mottled gray body from under a rabbit weed and drag sinuously
away, its ugly head lifted a little, eyes watching him venomously. An unwritten law of the
West he broke by letting the snake go. Again he moved forward, from bush to bush, from boulder
to boulder. When all of the basin and the grove were revealed to him, he stopped, removed his
gray range hat and hung it on a near-by bush. He took his small field glasses from his pocket,
dusted the lenses deliberately and, leaning forward across a rock with his elbows steadied
on the stone and the glasses to his eyes, he swept foot by foot the grove.

He was some minutes in discovering a black horse well within the outer fringe of the cottonwoods,
switching mechanically at the flies and mosquitoes that infested the place, and throwing his
head impatiently to his side now and then when the sting was too sharp to ignore. With the
glasses he could see the sweat-roughened hide ripple convulsively to dislodge the pestering
insects, could see the flaring nostrils as the horse blew out the dust gathered from his hungry
nosing amongst the coarse grass and weeds. The man Lance did not at once discover, but after
a little he saw him rolled in canvas to protect himself from the mosquitoes. He seemed already
fast asleep.

"He needs it," said Lance grimly, with his twisted smile, and went back to the roan.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

LANCE PLAYS THE GAME

That night Lance sauntered into the bunk house, placidly ignoring the fact that Tom was there,
and that some sort of intermittent conference was taking place. Cool and clean and silk-shirted
and freshly shaved, the contrast was sharp between him and the men sprawled on their beds or
sitting listlessly around the table playing keno. Tom lifted an eyebrow at him; Lance sent
him a look to match and went over to the card players.

They did not want him in the bunk house. He who had spent nearly all of his life on the Devil's
Tooth ranch knew that he was not wanted. They did not want him to know that he was not wanted,
and by their very effort to hide it did they betray themselves.

"Didn't go to Jumpoff after all, dad," Lance remarked idly, a rising inflection turning the
phrase into a question.

Tom grunted and got up to go. His men cast furtive glances at one another, looked at Lance
from under their brows, noted the silk shirt and the low, tan Oxfords, and the texture and
cut of his gray trousers with the tan leather belt that had a small silver buckle. Plain as
it was they knew that buckle was silver. They saw how clean-cut was the hairline at the back
of his head and over his ears--sure sign that he was "citified." And toward the man who is
citified your purely range-bred product cherishes a distinct if secret grudge. His immaculate
presence made them all feel frowsy and unwashed and ill-clad. And to hide how conscious he
was of his own deficiencies, the man who sat nearest Lance lifted his hat and rumpled his hair
still more.

"Duke and Al didn't get in yet, eh?" Lance picked up an extra deck of cards and began to shuffle
them absent-mindedly but nevertheless dexterously.

"Nope--they stayed out," replied a blond man named Winters. They called him "Chilly."

"Hot weather for working cattle," Lance observed indifferently.

"Yeah--sure is," responded Ed Moran, who was low-browed and dark and had an ugly jaw.

"Yeah--damn hot," testified Jim Bloom. "How's Californy for weather?"

"Oh-h--it has all kinds, same as here." Lance did not want to talk about California just then,
but he followed the lead easily enough. "You can get anything you want in California. In two
hours you can go from twenty-five feet of snow to orange groves. You can have it all green,
fruit trees and roses blooming in midwinter, or you can hit into desert worse than anything
Idaho can show."

"Yep--that's right, all right. Great place, Californy," Chilly tried to make his voice sound
enthusiastic, and failed. "Great place."

"Speaking about climate--" Lance sat down on a corner of the table, eased his trousers over
his knees, crossed his tan Oxfords and began a story. It was a long story, and for some time
it was not at all apparent that he was getting anywhere with it. He shuffled the deck of cards
while he talked, and the keno game, interrupted when he began, trailed off into "Who's play
is it?" and finally ceased altogether. That was when Lance's Jewish dialect began to be funny
enough to make even Chilly Winters laugh. At the end there was a general cachinnation.

"But that's only a sample of the stuff they pull out there, on tourists," said Lance, when
the laughter had subsided to a few belated chuckles. "There's another one. It isn't funny--but
I'm going to make it funny. You'll think it's funny--but it isn't, really."

He told that one and made them think it was funny. At least they laughed, and laughed again
when he had finished.

"Now here's another. This one really is funny--but you won't feel like laughing at it. I'll
tell it so you won't."

He told that story and saw it fall flat. "You see?" He flipped the cards, tossed them on the
table with a whimsical gesture. "It isn't what you do in this world--it's how you do it that
counts. I'm sitting on your keno game, am I? All right, I'll get off."

He went out as abruptly as he had entered, and he paused long enough outside to know that a
silence marked his going. Then he heard Ed Koran's voice depreciating him. Frankly he listened,
lighting a cigarette.

"Aw--his mother was an actress, wasn't she? That guy ain't going to cut no ice around here
whatever."

"Looks an awful darn lot like Tom," ventured Chilly. "I dunno--you take a Lorrigan--"

"Him? Lorrigan? Why, say! He may look like a Lorrigan, but he ain't one. Tom's damn right.
He don't set in. Why, like as not he'd--"

"Aw, cut out the gabbling!" Ed's voice growled again. "It's yore play, Bob."

Stepping softly, Lance went on to the house. "I just--look like one!" he repeated under his
breath. "Fine! At any rate," he added dryly, "I've proved that I can go into the bunk house
now and then."

He went up and sang songs with Belle then, until after ten o'clock. He would have sung longer,
but it happened that in the middle of a particularly pleasing "Ah-ee, oh-ee, hush-a-bye-ba-by"
yodel, Tom put his head out of the bedroom and implored Lance to for-the-Lord-sake go up on
the Ridge to howl. So Lance forbore to finish the "ah-ee, oh-ee," much to Belle's disappointment.

"But you know Tom's been out riding hard and not getting much sleep, so I guess maybe we better
cut out the concert, honey," she told Lance, getting up and laying her plump, brown arms across
his shoulders. "My heavens, Lance, you kinda make me think the clock's set back thirty years,
when I look at you. You're Tom, all over--and I did think you were going to be like me."

Lance scowled just a little. "No, I'm not Tom all over--I'm Lance all over."

"You're Lorrigan all over," Belle persisted. "And you're just like Tom when he was your age.
Good Lord, how time does slip away! Tom used to be so full of fun and say such funny things--and
now it's just ride and ride and work, and eat and sleep. Honey, I want you to know that I'm
glad you learned something a little different. What's the use of having a million, if you work
yourself to death getting it? Look at the boys--look at Al and Duke. They're like old men,
the last year or two. We used to have such good times on the ranch, but we don't any more--nobody
ever thinks of anything but work."

She lowered her voice to a whisper, her arms still lying on Lance's shoulders, her clouded
blue eyes looking up into his. "That trouble with Scotty Douglas kind of--changed Tom and the
boys. You went away. You've changed too, but in a different way. It soured them, just a little.
Tom wants to make his million quick and get outa here. I was glad when you stirred things up
a little, last spring, and gave that dance. Or I was glad, till it ended up the way it did.
It was the first dance we'd been to since you left, Lance! And I thought it would kind of patch
up a little more friendliness with the folks around here. But it didn't. It just made a lot
of talk and trouble--and, Lance, honey, I'm awfully darn sorry about that piano. It's down
in the chicken house this minute. Tom wouldn't even have it in the house. And now, I don't
suppose there ever will be any chance to make friends with any one. Tom--well, all of us were
so darn mad to think she never even asked us--"

"Don't care any more about that, Belle. Please don't. And by the way, I took the money Mary
Hope wanted to give dad for the schoolhouse. Perhaps he didn't tell you, but he threatened
to burn the house down if she left the money, so I took it and gave her a bill of sale in his
name. I wish you'd keep the money. And some day, maybe dad will take it."

"Tom never told me a word about it," Belle whispered pitifully, dropping her forehead on Lance's
broad chest. "Honey, it never used to be this way. He used to tell me things. But now, he doesn't--much.
Last spring, when he built the schoolhouse and all, I was so glad! It was more like old times,
and I thought--but the fight turned him and the boys again, and now they're just as far off
as ever. Lance, I don't whine. You never heard Belle whine in your life, did you, honey? But
I'll tell you this: The only things that haven't changed, on the Devil's Tooth, are Riley and
the pintos. And even they let you drive 'em to Jumpoff and back last spring without busting
things up. They're getting old, I guess. Maybe we're all getting old. Still, Rosa and Subrosa
are only ten past, and I haven't had a birthday for years--

"It's--Lance, do you mind if Belle lets go and tells you things, just this once? You've changed,
some, but not like the rest. Please, Lance, I want to lean against you and--and feel how strong
you are--"

A great tenderness, a great, overwhelming desire to comfort his mother, who had never let him
call her mother, seized Lance. His arms closed around her and he backed to an armchair and
sat down on it, holding her close.

"Don't care, Belle--it's all right. It's going to be all right. I'm just Lance, but I'm a man--and
men were made to take care of their women. Talk to me--tell me what's been eating your heart
out, lately. It's in your eyes. I saw it when I came home last spring, and I see it now every
time I look at you."

"You've seen it, honey?" Belle's whisper was against his ear. She did not look at his face.
"There's nothing to see, but--one feels it. Tom's good to me--but he isn't close to me, any
more. The boys are good to me--but they're like strangers. They don't talk about things, the
way they used to do. They come and go."

Lance's big, well-kept hand went up to smooth her hair with a comforting, caressing movement
infinitely sweet to Belle. "I know," he said quietly.

"And it isn't anything, of course. But the old boys have gone, and these new ones--Lance, what
is the matter with the Devil's Tooth ranch? Tell me, for heaven's sake, if I'm getting to be
an old woman with notions!"

"You'll never be an old woman," said Lance in the tone Mary Hope built her day-dreams around.
"Age has nothing to do with you--you just are. But as to notions--well, you may have. Women
do have them, I believe." He kissed her hair and added, "What do you think is the matter with
the ranch?"

"I don't know. When I try to pin it to one thing, there's nothing to put a pin in. Not a thing.
You remember Cheyenne? I was afraid Tom would kill him, after the trial. You know it was practically
proven that he was a spy, and was working to get something on the outfit. I was on the warpath
myself, over that trial. I would a shot up a few in that courtroom if Tom had been convicted.
You know and I know that Tom didn't have a thing to do with that darned, spotted yearling of
Scotty's.

"But Cheyenne just--just faded out of existence. Tom's never mentioned him from the day of
the trial to this. And I know he hates the whole Rim, and won't have anything much to do with
anybody--but he acts just as if nothing had happened, as if nobody had ever tried to make him
out a cow thief. He won't talk about it. He won't talk about anything much. When we're alone
he just sits and thinks. And honey, the Lorrigans have always been men that did things.

"He and the boys woke up, and the ranch acted human about the schoolhouse, but it's other times,
when there's no excitement around, that I feel as if--I don't know what. It's something underneath.
Something that never comes to the top. Something that's liable to reach up and grab." She put
a hand up and patted Lance's lean, hard jaw. "I'd shoot any one that said Belle Lorrigan's
afraid--but that's about what it amounts to," she finished with a little mirthless laugh.

"Belle Lorrigan's not afraid. There's nothing to be afraid of. You've lived in the Rim too
long, Belle, and you've been watching dad and the boys chasing that million. I've seen other
men working at it, and it always gets hold of them until they don't seem to care for anything
else. Now, I know an ageless lady who's going to bed and forget all about her nerves and her
notions. Or if she doesn't forget, she'll remember too that she has somebody around who knows--and
who cares a heap for his mother." Lance pulled her close and kissed her comfortingly.

"That helps," whispered Belle. "You've changed, too--but not like the rest, thank God. And
I thought maybe you had noticed things--"

"I have noticed that the Devil's Tooth is mighty busy chasing dollars on the hoof," soothed
Lance. "It has left our Belle alone too much, and it has gotten on her nerves. Go to bed, woman--and
dream of pleasant things."

He took her by the shoulders and pushed her playfully to the very door of her bedroom, gave
her another kiss and turned the knob for her, and watched her go in with a smile on her face.
His own smile lasted only until the door was closed. He went to the lamp, blew it out and entered
his own room, removed his shoes and dropped them on the floor with more noise than was considerate
of his father's slumber, lighted his lamp and moved aimlessly about the room for a time.

He sat down on the edge of the bed while he smoked a cigarette, his elbows on his knees, his
thoughts traveling far trails. Abruptly he rose, put on a pair of well-worn tennis shoes, opened
a door leading outside and went quietly down to the corrals.

The first corral he crossed and found it empty of any horses save the pintos and Coaley. The
second corral held three horses, one of them the chunky roan he had ridden that afternoon.
The third and largest corral was empty, the gate swinging open.

"All right--no horses caught up for night-riding--yet," he said to himself, and returned to
the house, leaving the straighter path to pass close to the bunk house. He listened there for
a full two minutes, decided that it would take at least five men to do all of that snoring,
and went to bed thankful for the comfort of a felt mattress under his tired body.

The next day passed without any incidents save trivial ones that did not count. Lance rode
to the creek with his trout-rod and reel--more citified innovations which the ranch eyed askance--and
spent four hours loitering along the bank, his fly floating uselessly over shallow pools where
was never a fish. It was not the right time of day for fishing, but Lance seemed to have forgotten
the lore he had learned along that same creek and others farther away.

Sometimes he could be seen from the ranch buildings, more often he could not. When he could
not be seen was when he was crouched among the rocks, studying the Devil's Tooth Ridge with
his powerful glasses.

"Hope he's comfortable," he said once, when, satisfied that his guess was correct, he put the
glasses away and settled down seriously to fishing.

He rode home with four trout, and Riley fried them for supper. During supper Lance criticized
Squaw Creek, and hinted that Mill Creek and Lava Creek were better fishing waters, and that
he meant to try them.

That night at eleven o'clock he made another silent tour of the corrals and went to bed feeling
pretty sure that the ranch would show its present complement of men in the morning.

On the second day, four of the hired cowboys rode in at sundown, and with them came Al. Their
horses were fagged. They themselves were dirty, hungry, tired. Their faces were glum--and the
glumness remained even after they had washed and eaten ravenously. Al did not come to the house
at all, but stayed down in the bunk house, whither Tom presently went. Lance did not follow.

Belle looked worried and asked Lance constrainedly if he knew why Duke had not come with the
others. Lance laughed.

"Duke? Oh--he's on the trail of another dollar. By heck, Belle, I'm afraid you've raised one
son to be a shirk. I don't seem to need all of that dollar chasing to make me happy."

Tom came in then, glanced swiftly from one to the other, said something unimportant, rolled
a cigarette with elaborate care, and observed that Duke would find it hot, riding all the way
to Shoshone, and that he'd be darned if he'd go that far for any girl. He sat down and disposed
himself comfortably, got up, muttered something about forgetting to turn Coaley out, and left
the house.

Belle turned and looked at Lance. "Honey, it's that kind of thing--"

"I used to think, Belle, that you had the bluest eyes in the whole world," Lance drawled quizzically.
"They're blue enough, in all conscience--by heck, Belle! Does a Lorrigan always love blue eyes?"

"I was going to say that--"

"You were going to say that you were not going to say a darned thing, madam. You need a vacation,
a trip somewhere. Why don't you beat it, and get your nerves smoothed down a little?"

"Lance, you don't believe Duke--"

"Belle, your boys are old enough to think of girls a little bit, now and then. Even your baby
thinks of girls--a little bit. Now and then. I'm going fishing, Belle. I'm going to fish where
there are fish. And if I'm not back by the clock, for heck's sake don't get yourself excited
and call me a mystery."

She called after him. "Lance, come back here and tell me the truth! You don't believe--"

"Belle, I'll tell you the truth. Sure, I'll tell you the truth. I tell you to cut out this
worrying over nothing. Why, don't you know the world is plumb full of real things to worry
about?" He came close, patting her on the shoulder as one pats a child who feels abused for
slight cause. "This notion of yours--it's all damned nonsense. Cut it out."

He went off whistling, and Belle gazed after him dubiously, yet reassured in spite of herself.
After all, there was nothing.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

WHEN A LORRIGAN LOVES

Followed a day of sweltering heat, when the horses in the corral switched flies and sweated
doing nothing; when all of the chickens crawled under the coolest shelter they could find,
and panted with their wings spread away from their bodies; when the wind was like a blast from
an open furnace, and no man of his own choice remained in the sun.

In the shade of the biggest haystack, Tom and Al squatted on their boot heels with their faces
toward the corral and the houses beyond, and talked for two hours in low monotones while they
broke spears of fragrant hay into tiny bits and snapped the bits from them with thumb and finger.
From the house porch Lance saw them there and wondered what they were talking about so long.
He even meditated committing the crime of eavesdropping, but he decided against it. Even if
there had been any point from which he could approach the two unseen, his soul rebelled against
such tactics employed in cold blood.

Devil's Tooth Ranch dragged somehow through its third day of inaction, and that night prepared
itself to sleep if possible, though the hot wind still blew half a gale and the sky was too
murky to show any stars.

Daylight found Lance awake and brooding as he had done ever since his return. He heard no sound
in the house, and after a while he dressed and went down to the bunk house. It was empty. No
extra horses had been corralled the night before, of that he was sure. Yet the boys were gone
again, and with them had gone Tom and Al. He looked and saw Coaley in the box stall.

On this morning Lance asked no questions of Sam Pretty Cow or Shorty, who presently appeared
and went listlessly about their tasks. He returned to the house, heard Riley grinding coffee,
and dressed for riding while he waited for breakfast. He was drinking his first cup of coffee
when Belle appeared in a thin blue kimono and a lacey breakfast cap which Lance knew had been
ordered from the big, dog-eared catalogue on the living room table. He roused himself from
scowling meditation and gave her a smile.

"Sleep any?"

"Not much," sighed Belle. "Tom--" she stopped and looked at Lance hesitatingly. "Tom had to
push the cattle back from Lava Bed way--he says this weather's drying up Lava Creek and the
stock'll suffer if they're left drifting up and down the mud-holes where they've watered all
summer. He took the boys and started about two in the morning--to get out of the heat. I--I
didn't think you'd want to go, honey--"

"You thought right. I didn't want to go; it's too hot," Lance assured her, and refrained from
looking at her face and the pathetic cheerfulness she was trying so hard to make real.

"It's sultry. I thought yesterday I couldn't stand another hour of that wind--but now I wish
it would blow. It's going to storm--"

"Yes. It's going to storm." Lance set down his empty cup. "I may go fishing, Belle. Don't look
for me back--I may ride over and see how the AJ is making out. The little Boyle girl is not
married yet, I hope?"

"Oh--no. No, she isn't. Lance, honey--"

Lance waited beside her chair, but Belle seemed to forget that she had anything to say. She
sat leaning her head on one hand, the other stirring her coffee absent-mindedly. "Don't get
caught out," she said apathetically.

"I won't." Lance lifted the lace frill of the cap and kissed her temple lightly. "Go back to
bed. It's too early for you to be up."

At the stable Sam Pretty Cow looked a question, grunted and went on with his stall cleaning.
Lance saddled Coaley, tied on an emergency ration of grub.

"Fishin's good t'day. Storm's coming. Uh-huh--you bet," Sam Pretty Cow observed as Lance mounted.

"Maybe," Lance assented non-committally and rode away.

There were no horse tracks in the trail, yet Lance followed it doggedly, the new-risen sun
burning his back through two thin shirts. He seemed in no doubt this morning as to the course
he should take. He scarcely gave a glance at the trail. His eyes were staring straight before
him at a sullen row of blue-black "thunder heads" that showed above the gray skyline. Yet he
did not see them, did not give a thought to their meaning.

He was thinking poignantly of Mary Hope, fighting the vivid impression which a dream last night
had left with him. In his dream Mary Hope had stood at her door, with her hands held out to
him beseechingly, and called and called: "Lance! Oh, Lance! I dinna hate you because you're
a Lorrigan--Oh, Lance!"

It had been a curious dream from start to finish. Curious because, in various forms, this was
the third time he had seen her stand with hands outstretched, calling to him. He did not believe
in dreams. He had neither patience for presentiments nor faith in anything that bordered on
the occult.

It had been against much inner protest that he had ridden to the schoolhouse in obedience to
the persistent idea that she needed him. That he had not found her there seemed to him conclusive
proof that there was nothing in telepathy. The dreams, he felt sure, were merely a continuation
of that persistent idea--and the persistent idea, he was beginning to believe, was but a perverse
twist given to his own longing for her.

"--And I can't go to her--not yet. Not while the Lorrigan name--" What came before, what came
after those incomplete phrases he would not permit his mind to formulate in words. But he could
not shake off the effect of the dream, could not stifle altogether the impulse that plucked
at his resolve.

For more than an hour he rode and tried to fix his mind upon the thing he had set out to do.
He knew perfectly well where he was going--and it was not to see Mary Hope. Neither was his
destination Lava Creek nor the drying range on either side. His first two days of hard riding
had been not altogether fruitless, and he had enough to think of without thinking of Mary Hope.
Certain cold facts stared at him, and gibbered their sinister meaning, and dared him to ride
on and discover other facts, blood-brothers of these that haunted him o' nights.

Coaley, feeling his rider's mood, sensing also the portent of the heavy, heat-saturated atmosphere
and the rolling thunder heads, slowed his springy trot to a walk and tossed his head uneasily
from side to side. Then, quite without warning, Lance wheeled the horse short around and touched
the reeking flanks with his heels.

"I'm seventeen kinds of a damn fool--but I can't stand any more of this!" he muttered savagely,
and rode at a sharp trot with his back to the slow-gathering storm.

He found Mary Hope half a mile from the Douglas house, at the edge of the meadow round which
Hugh was driving a mower, the steady, metallic clicking of the shuttle-like sickle sounding
distinct from the farther side of the motionless green expanse. Mary Hope was standing leaning
against one lone little poplar tree, her hat in her hand, and her eyes staring dully into the
world of sorrowful thoughts. Relief and a great, hungry tenderness flooded the soul of Lance
when he saw her. He pulled up and swung off beside her.

"Girl--thank the good God you're all right," he said, and took her in his arms, the veins on
his temples beating full with his hot blood. "I had to come. I had to see you. You've haunted
me. Your voice has called me--I was afraid--I had to come--and now I'm not going to let you
go. Oh, girl, you're mine! By all the powers of heaven and earth, you're mine! The Lorrigan
name--what does it matter? You're mine--I love you. You'll love me. I'll make you love me.
You'll love me till you won't care who I am or who you are, or whether there are any other
people in the world--you'll love me so! And I'll love you always, always,--to death and beyond,
and beyond what lies after that. Girl, girl--you do need me! You need my love. You need it
because it's the biggest thing in the world--and your love is going to match it. We'll get
married--we'll make a world of our own, just you and I. We won't care where we make it--it
will be our world, the world of our love. Are you game? Are you game to love Lance the way
Lance loves you? Oh, girl, tell me!"

A chill breath swept them like the memory of her father's hate. A deep, basso rumble drowned
whatever reply she stammered. He sheltered her in his arms, kissed her lips, her eyes, her
hair, went back to her lips again.

"Oh, girl--when a Lorrigan loves--!" He cried softly, exultantly. "I tried not to--but I had
to love you. It's Fate. Are you afraid to love me back? Are you afraid?"

"No Lorrigan can cry coward to a Douglas," Mary Hope panted. "But--but my mother will be that--"

"My mother will be that--all of that, and more," Lance stopped her, still exulting in her love.
"All the Lorrigans--what does it matter? Life's for you and me to live, you girl with the bluest
eyes in the world. When will you marry me? To-day? Tell me to-day!"

"Oh!" gasped Mary Hope, breathless still from the suddenness of it all. "Oh, not to-day--oh,
but the headlong way you have! I--I canna think. I--"

"I don't want you to think. I didn't ask you to think. Just love me--that's all. And marry
me soon, Girl-with-the-blue-eyes. Soon. It must be soon--sooner than to-morrow--"

Splittingly the thunder crashed close behind them, a vivid white line cleaving sharply the
snarling clouds. Like a sleeper Lance opened the eyes he had closed against her hair and lifted
his head. "I must take you home," he said more calmly. "It's going to storm--hard. But let
me tell you, sweetheart,--it can't storm as hard as I can love. I'll take you home, and then
you'll marry me."

Mary Hope's face was pale and radiant. She did not say that she would marry him--nor did she
say that she would not. Her eyes were misty with tears until she winked hard, when they shone
softly. Lance had never seen them so blue. She stood still, her hands clasped together tightly
while he gathered up the reins and mounted. He pulled his foot from the left stirrup, reached
down to her and smiled. Never had she seen him smile like that. Never had she seen that look
in his eyes. She breathed deep, reached up and caught the saddle horn, put her foot in the
stirrup and let him lift her beside him.

Against Coaley's nervous pull at the bit Lance held a steadying hand and laughed. In this case were rangers rangers furniture and clothing. Other
subtle outlining reasons for not going out, not who claims lacked merit revolutionary to be a
tenant of the Nation, as he had been of the monarchy. All brought letters recommendation of different
characters or fallen down, or lifted up, asking with them, or perpetual property, or extension to
move. The widow of García Grande trájome a dreadful load of cards and letters that I let him read
no deal your room all the time I wanted.

I knew I wanted to leave immediately Bringas. But his wife came to me to beg to enable them to
be a month in the Palace, as they searched house to which he responded very willingly. Speaking
of those extraordinary and unprecedented events, he said to me the distinguished lady that she
did not look with eyes revolution as ruthless as her husband was confident in the return of the
Queen, because the Spanish could not do without it, and that therefore events had to wait to
try them. Surely come at different times, other way of being, other customs, wealth would
go from one place to another, would have major disruptions, sudden falls and rises, surprises and wonders
and the messy and thoughtless movement of any society that has lived long wait for a transformation.
So the Brinker said, was in these terms or other I do not remember, I came to understand that
imagination of the distinguished lady left fooled by the unknown.

Bringas wanted to have with consideration of up to personally notify you could stay in the house all
the time I wanted. But he, thanking me, said he did not want favors for duty entitled Nation and
that he saw the holy hours of leave. Fish was this, and we talked all the events of those days
and the Board and Interim Government that had just formed. A Bringas infuriated him that was not so
outraged Fish as was expected from his background. But this, with regard rested and judicious
language, Honoring the theory is defended of the fait accompli, which are the key policy and History.
"What, we spill rivers of blood? - He said -. What happened? What I was saying, what I had been
prophesied, what I had been announcing. Must bend your head to the facts, and waiting, waiting
to see what these men give of themselves. "
 Good God, girl, where's your nerve?"

His severity steadied her. Mary Hope stopped screaming, both hands held tightly over her mouth.
Lance was already on his way to the house, carrying Mother Douglas like a sleeping child in
his arms. And the rain came, a white curtain of water that drenched them to the skin in the
first ten seconds.

On the bed where Aleck Douglas had stared at the ceiling, and raved, and died, Lance laid her
carefully as though he feared to waken her. He tore open the faded calico dress at the throat,
laid his ear upon her heart.

"She's alive, sweetheart," he said hearteningly. "It's only a shock. Bring a basin of water.
We'll have her all right in no time."

He worked over the old woman, using all the means he could remember or invent, while the house
shook with the fury of the wind, and the lightning dazzled them and the rain drummed incessantly
on the roof. Mary Hope watched him, her eyes wide, her lips refusing to form any words. For
her own sake he sent her on many little errands, kept her busy at useless little tasks. After
what seemed an interminable time he stood looking down at the gently heaving breast.

"How game is my girl?" he asked, taking Mary Hope in his arms. "Is she game enough to stay
here while Lance goes for a doctor? It won't be long--" He paused while he made a rapid mental
calculation of the distance, and of what a horse may endure. "Three hours. Will my girl be
brave enough to stay here three hours? I'll call the man who was mowing--if I can find him.
But that will take minutes. Three hours--and you won't weaken, will you, dear?"

Mary Hope leaned against him, clutched him, shivered at the crashing thunder. "It's awful,"
she moaned. "I'm afraid you might be hit--"

"Afraid? A Douglas not as game as a Lorrigan?" He shook her, lifted his eyebrows at her, pursed
his lips at her, shook her again and kissed her. "I can't love a girl who's afraid of thunder.
Your mother's all right, you know. We saw where that bolt struck--fifty yards, almost, from
where she was. She got a shock, that's all. But we'll have a doctor here and make him take
the responsibility. And I'll be back in three hours, and you're going to be game--just as game
as you've always been."

He pulled his hat down over his eyes, buttoned his wet coat to the chin, laid his hand for
a minute over the faintly pulsating heart of Mother Douglas, swept Mary Hope up in his arms
and kissed her again, pulled open the door and was gone.

Through a rain-blurred window Mary Hope saw him run to the stable, lead out Coaley who had
taken refuge there, vault into the saddle without troubling about the stirrup, and come thundering
back past the house and out of the gate, his head bent to the storm.

She looked at the clock. Three hours? He could never do it in three hours! She went back and
knelt beside the bed, and prayed as her mother had taught her to pray. And not all of her petition
was for her mother. Every lightning flash, every crack, every distant boom of the thunder made
her cringe. Lance--Lance was out in the storm, at the mercy of its terrible sword-thrusts that
seemed to smite even the innocent. Her mother--even her own mother, who had held unswervingly
to her faith--even she had been struck down!

A mile down the road Lance was leaning forward, encouraging Coaley to more speed, because there
the trail ran level and fairly free from rocks. Later, he pulled the horse down to a walk,
breathing him up a hill; let him trot down the slope beyond, picked him into a swift gallop
when they again struck the level. He gauged, with coldblooded attention to certain rough miles
in the journey, just how swiftly Coaley could cover ground and live. He knew horses. He knew
Coaley, and he knew that never yet had Coaley been pushed to the actual limit of his endurance.
But the girl Lance loved--ah, it was a Lorrigan who loved!--was back there alone, and she would
be counting the minutes. It might be that he might return to find her weeping over her dead.
So Lance counted miles and a horse's strength, and bent to the storm and rode.

Ten minutes past the hour, and he was snapping orders to the telegraph operator. The storm,
happily, had swept on down the canyon and had given Jumpoff little more than a wetting and
a few lightning flashes.

"And order out a special engine and coach,--what do I care what it will cost? I'll pay. Wire
your Lava chief that the money is here. Send the doctor on ahead of the regular train--can't
wait for that."

He had the Lorrigan habit of carrying a good deal of money on his person, and he counted out
banknotes until the operator lifted his hand and said it was enough. He slammed out, then,
mounted and rode to a livery stable and gave orders there.

"--And I'll buy the damn team, so kill 'em if you have to. Only get the doctor out there."
He was in the saddle and gone again before the stableman had recovered from his sag-jawed astonishment.

"Guess there's something in that talk of him and the Douglas girl," the stableman gossiped
to a friend while he harnessed his swiftest team.

In ten minutes under the three hours Lance stopped at the house, went in and saw that Mary
Hope was still being game, and was very glad to be in his arms, and that Mother Douglas was
alive and staring up at the ceiling, her face set in a deadly kind of calm.

"She moves her eyes to me, sometimes--she's been awake for almost an hour. But she hasn't moved--"
Her voice broke.

"It's all right--the doctor is on his way. And I'm here, sweetheart--you won't be alone again.
Where's that man of yours? I'll send him over with a note to Belle. She'll come--she's a wonder
with sick folks."

"Mother--I'm afraid mother wouldn't let her--she's that set!"

Lance looked at the corpse-like figure with the wide-open eyes and a flicker of the lids now
and then to show that she was alive, and swallowed a lump in his throat. Mother Douglas would
probably not know who was with her, he thought.

Coaley, the proud-spirited, shambled slowly to the stable, his head drooping, his eyes dulled
with exhaustion. He had done his part. Lance rubbed him down, blanketed him, working swiftly,
his thoughts with Mary Hope and her love and her fresh grief. He found Hugh, scribbled a note
to Belle and got him started on Jamie.

Mother Douglas moved her eyes, stared at him sharply when he went to her. But she did not speak,
did not move a muscle of her face. The heart of Lance went heavy, but he could smile still
at Mary Hope and tell her that it was all right, and that the doctor ought to be there in an
hour or so, and that Belle would come, and that he loved her, loved her, loved her.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

BELLE LORRIGAN WINS

In the second-best suit of Aleck Douglas, with his wrists showing strong and shapely below
the coat sleeves, and wrinkles across his back, Lance turned his own steaming apparel before
the kitchen fire and waited to hear what the doctor had to say.

In his mind was a great wonder at the inscrutable operations of Fate, that had twice brought
tragedy into the Douglas house while he himself was permitted to bring all his love, which
without the tragedies might have been rejected; which had sent him hurrying to Mary Hope on
this day of all the days when he had longed to come. He could not believe that blind Chance
had irresponsibly twisted the threads of Mary Hope's life so that these things had come upon
her. He was abashed, humbled, filled with awe of the tremendous forces that rule our destinies.
For perhaps the first time in his life he stood face to face with something beyond his understanding,
something against which his arrogant young strength was powerless. Only England
sent his killing twenty or thirty thousand sailors. And how many American ships, and France,
and Holland, and the world? Pollack has created its own colonies, founded factories and cities. The
preparation is an art and that art has a language, technical language USIT among the cod fishermen.

But
what can you do man?

Nature knows that our small efforts, our and our fishing fleets, nothing would be for their purpose
and that cod would win the man. So do not trust him, but calls for help from death forces much
stronger. From the bottom of the river reaches the sea one of the most active, the more determined
eaters: sturgeon. Heading to the rivers to breed, there leaves thin and rough, and possessed a
huge appetite, introdúcese back into the sea to treat yourself. What this for those hungry
to find the big pollock that has assimilated the legions of herring! There is concentrated
all the substance and may bite to its flavor. This brave high cod although not as prolific, has,
however, one million five hundred thousand eggs. A thousand sturgeon four hundred pounds, contains
a hundred pounds of seed, or four hundred fifty eggs. The danger does not stop. Herring has threatened
with terrible fertility; the same is true cod, and sturgeon threat yet.

Is that nature must invent a supreme eater, dining and producer admirable
poor digestion generation great and greedy.

Beneficial and terrible monster that plague reaper resurgent fertility invincible with a great
deal of absorption, which swallows it all either: dead, alive, what do I say? everything in
their path. The magnificent dining Nature, dining privileged shark.

But, as terrible destroyers are due in advance: in spite of his rage
devouring produce very little.

Hase seen that the sturgeon is not as fruitful as cod, and shark is sterile compared to the
other inhabitants of the liquid element. Not as they poured in torrents across the seas: viviparous,
develops in its bosom the tiburoncito, his heir feudal born terrible and armed to the nines.

*
* *

Can the sea in his prolific smiling dark places of the destroyers
that it produces, reproduce quite sure more and more.

Their main wealth defies the rage of those beings greedy, being inaccessible to their rapacity.
I mean the vast world of atoms living microscopic animal, the true abyss of life within it ferments.

Hase
said that the lack of sunlight excluded life, and yet, in the depths of live Tues countless swarms
of starfish. The waves are peopled by infusoria microscopic worms
and mollusks and lots of them crawling on their shells.

Crabs tanned, radiant anemones, snowy porcelain, gold cyclostomes, wavy curls, everything lives
and moves. They swarm the animalcules light that momentarily attracted to the surface, forming
streaks appear, snakes, fire or shining garlands. In its transparent thick sea must be lighted
here and there with such brilliance; the same waters have some gloss, semi-light on the fish
can see and live as dead. That is its own light, his own lantern, sky, moon and stars.

Everyone is given the salt seen in the fertility of the sea. Concentrated water Deposits are
non-violet else infusoria. They all sailors that in such or such a long voyage that have not
crossed over living waters.

Freycinet saw sixty million square meters of scarlet red is nothing but an animal-plant so tiny
that a single square meter forty million of them live. In the Gulf of Bengal, in 1854, Captain Kingman,
sailed for thirty miles on a huge white layer facing the sea looks like a plain covered with snow.
There was not a single cloud, the sky was leaden in contrast with the brilliance of the sea. Closer Look
the white water was a jelly, and observed a mass of the lens that by moving animalcules producing
unique lighting effects.

Account Peron, who for twenty leagues sailed through a kind of gray powder, which, seen under
the microscope, turned out to be a layer of eggs of species unknown, on a space huge, covered
and could not see the water.

In the homeless coast of Greenland, where the man who is about to expire given the Nature, the sea
is densely populated

.
 The house was very quiet, the
snapping of the kitchen fire, the steady tick-tock, tick-tock of the old-fashioned clock blending
with, rather than breaking, the silence.

Mother Douglas closed her eyes. Her groping left hand ceased its aimless plucking at a yarn
knot in the patchwork comforter. Her breath came evenly--Mary Hope wondered if she slept. A
hand fell on Mary Hope's shoulder, though she had not heard a footfall. She seemed prepared,
seemed to know what she must do. She slipped out of the chair, and Belle slipped into it. Mother
Douglas opened her eyes, turned them that way; infinite weariness marked the glance. Her left
hand resumed again its vague groping, the work-worn fingers plucking at the coverlet.

Sitting there in the dusk, her fingers faintly outlined in the old wooden armchair in which
Aleck Douglas had been wont to sit and brood somberly over his work and his wrongs, Belle began
softly to sing:

    "Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
    How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair?"

The withered hand lay still, the fingers clutching tightly a fold of cotton cloth. Mother Douglas
looked and closed her eyes. Leaning close, when the song was finished, Belle saw that the grim
lips were trembling, that tears were slipping down the too calm face. With her handkerchief
she wiped away the tears, and sang again. The "Girl with a Thousand Songs" had many Scottish
melodies in her repertoire, and the years had not made her forget.

At the last, the groping left hand reached painfully across, found Belle's hand waiting, and
closed on it tightly. Whenever Belle stopped singing the hand would clutch hers. When she began
again the fingers would relax a little. It was not much, but it was enough.

In the kitchen Mary Hope moved quietly about, cooking supper, straining and putting away the
milk Hugh brought in. In the kitchen Lance sat and watched her, and made love to her with his
big eyes, with his voice that made of the most commonplace remark a caress.

But that night, when Mary Hope was asleep and Belle was dozing beside the stricken woman, Lance
saddled Jamie and led Coaley home. And while he rode, black Trouble rode with him and Love
could not smile and beat back the spectre with his fists, but hid his face and whimpered, and
was afraid.

For Lance was face to face again with that sinister, unnamed Something that hung over the Devil's
Tooth ranch. He might forget it for a few hours, engrossed with his love and in easing this
new trouble that had come to Mary Hope; he might forget, but that did not make his own trouble
any the less menacing, any the less real.

He could not tell her so, now while she had this fresh worry over her mother, but Lance knew--and
while he rode slowly he faced the knowledge--that he could not marry Mary Hope while the cloud
hung over the Devil's Tooth. And that there was a cloud, a black, ominous cloud from which
the lightning might be expected to strike and blast the Lorrigans, he could not deny. It was
there. He knew it, knew just how loud were its mutterings, knew that it was gathering swiftly,
pushing up over the horizon faster than did the storm of the morning.

He would not put Coaley down the Slide trail, but took him around by the wagon road. They plodded
along at a walk, Coaley's stiffened muscles giving him the gait of an old horse. There had
been no urgent need to take Coaley home at once, but it was an excuse, and Lance used it. He
could not think,--he could not face his own trouble when he was near Mary Hope. She drove everything
else from his mind, and Lance knew that some things must not be driven from his mind. He had
set himself to do certain things. Now, with Mary Hope loving him, there was all the more reason
why he should do them.

The ranch seemed deserted, though of course it was late and he knew that every one would be
in bed. He found a lantern, put Coaley into the box stall again, and spent a long time rubbing
him down and carrying him fresh hay and water. He went up then and roused Sam Pretty Cow, who
was sleeping in the small cabin he had elected to make his own private habitation on the ranch.
Sam Pretty Cow told him that no one had come home as yet.

"Two, three days, I dunno. Mebby Tom comes then," he hazarded, blinking at Lance. "This too
quick. Nobody comes back same day, you bet."

Lance stood looking down at him, scowling thoughtfully. "Sam, you've been a long time with
the outfit. You've been a good man. You aren't crippled up--and you're the best rider of the
bunch of us. Why don't you go out any more?"

Sam lighted a cigarette, blew out the blazing match and laid the burnt stub carefully on a
box. He smoked stolidly, gazing at the dingy wall before him.

"Bust them bronks in the corral," he said at last, grinning briefly. "You stay long, you see
me ride. Uh-huh--yo' bet."

"Well, yes. That's all right. But why don't you go with the outfit?" Lance leaned against the
wall, arms folded, studying him. It was almost hopeless, trying to get anything out of Sam
Pretty Cow; still, Lance tried it.

Sam Pretty Cow looked up at him, looked down at his bare feet that he had swung out of bed
when Lance wakened him.

"Uh-huh. That's why. That all right, I'm go. That ain't all right, I'm don' go. You bet."

Lance tap-tapped his right arm with the fingers of his left hand, chewed his lip and looked
at Sam Pretty Cow.

"Still, dad lets you stick around the outfit," he drawled meaningly.

Sam Pretty Cow shot a quick glance toward him, looked at the door, relaxed again and studied
his toes which he wriggled on the dirty floor.

"I'm good man, you bet. I'm mind my business." He drew a long breath, glanced again from the
door to Lance's face. "Tom's damn smart man--me, I'm mebby smarter. I dunno."

Lance looked down at him, smiling strangely. "Sam, I'm minding my business, too. I'm doing
it by--not minding my own business. Tom Lorrigan's a smart man--but I'm Tom Lorrigan's son."

Sam turned his foot over, looked critically at the calloused sole of it, turned it back again
and blew a mouthful of smoke. "Yeah--uh-huh. You damn smart--you don't like them damn jail.
I'm don't. We both smart, you bet."

Lance lifted an eyebrow. "What's the Piegan word for accomplice, Sam?" he asked softly.

Sam Pretty Cow considered. "Me, I'm don' know them damn word," he decided.

"It's a word that sends smart men to jail, Sam. It means the man that stays at home and--knows."

Sam Pretty Cow tucked his feet under the thin blanket, laid his half-smoked cigarette on the
box, with the burning end out over the edge.

"Uh-huh. Yeah. You bet." He looked up at Lance, for the first time meeting his eyes squarely.
"I'm know them damn word you call. Nh-hn. Long time I'm got that what it mean on my heart.
You're damn right." He waited a minute, saw the Lorrigan look on Lance's face, on his lips
that smiled enigmatically. "Them Californy got bronks to bust?"

"Surest thing you know, Sam. But that's all right. You stay."

Sam Pretty Cow looked doubtful as an Indian may ever be expected to look.

"You stay, Sam. There'll be bronks to bust on the Devil's Tooth for a long while yet." He moved
to the door, pulled it open and stood looking out. Only a few miles away Mary Hope lay asleep,
loving him in her dreams, please God. Here, the Shadow hung black over the Devil's Tooth. He
turned to Sam Pretty Cow whose hand was stretched toward the smoky lamp.

"You forget that word, Sam. It doesn't mean anything at all--to a Piegan. And Sam, if I'm not
around to-morrow morning, you ride over to the Douglas ranch, and take back the horse I borrowed.
Belle may want to send you to town. She's there."

Sam Pretty Cow's eyes widened appreciably. "Uh-huh--all right. I'm go," he promised, and blew
out the light.

Lance went slowly up to the house and lay face downward on his bed.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

THE DOPE

Traveling lightly, Lance had covered a hundred and fifty miles in four days, through country
where trails were few and rough. He had made wide detours, had slept on the ground in his slicker,
had eaten bacon and bannocks cooked in the small frying pan which he carried in the sack with
his meager rations. He had missed altogether the Devil's Tooth outfit, and was swinging back
now by way of the Lava Beds, where Tom had said that they were going. It was because Tom had
named that as his destination that Lance had ridden elsewhere to find him; good reasoning,
but so far unproductive of results.

Four days, and he had not heard from Mary Hope, had learned nothing conclusive, either for
or against the Devil's Tooth. Some clues he had gleaned, some evidence that strengthened his
suspicions, but nothing to make him feel that the trip had been worth the hardship.

Without knowing just why, he had ridden out expecting to learn the best or the worst and have
done with nagging suspicion. It had seemed to him that Fate meant to be kind, that his destiny
and Mary Hope's pointed the way to happiness. Now he was beginning to doubt. How was happiness
possible, if the outlaw blood of the Lorrigans ran at high pressure through the veins of his
family? He did not know to a certainty that it did, but until he knew that it did not he could
never marry Mary Hope. He had to know. It had been pure madness, going to her as he had gone.
While his horse plodded up the hill to where the lava outcroppings began, Lance meditated gloomily
on the madness that had driven him to her. He had felt so sure of himself and his future, so
much the master of his destiny and hers! Yet, even while he wooed her tempestuously he had
known that it was madness, that Trouble was reaching even then to pluck him by the sleeve.
Mary Hope and her stern, Scotch integrity linked to the blackened Lorrigan name that might
soon stand on the roster of the State's prison? It was impossible, inconceivable. He had been
a hound to say to her what he had said.

True, when her mother was stricken he had been there to help her, to comfort her. But it would
be small comfort to Mary Hope when the storm broke over the Devil's Tooth.

"And I said Fate was with us--I said nothing could hurt her! And it will hurt her all her life."

His sweaty horse paused to breathe, heaving a great sigh, looking discouragedly at the climb
yet before him. Lance came to himself and swung off, giving the horse an apologetic slap on
the shoulder. "You ought to kick me cold, Sorry, for making you pack my hulking carcase up
this hill. Why didn't you stop at the bottom?"

Sorry looked at him, waited for Lance to take the lead, and climbed after him more briskly.
He was a big-boned, well-muscled animal, but two hundred pounds had been a heavy load to carry
up hill, and he was glad to be rid of it.

At the top Lance did not remount. The thickly strewn flat rocks made treacherous footing, and
more than one man had taken a nasty fall because he had chosen to ride that mile of lava when
he should have walked. It was somewhere along this stretch of rock outcropping that Shorty
had broken his knee so that he would never ride again to the round-up.

Lance was walking along with his head down, brooding over his trouble, when he fancied he heard
a faint halloo. Sorry stopped and craned his head. But Lance could see nothing save the barren
stretch of lava and the monotonous wilderness beyond, with mountains in the far background
and the Black Rim stretching grim on the left of him. He started on, thinking that perhaps
some animal or bird was responsible for the sound. But he had gone but a short distance when
it came again, more distinctly because he was half listening for it.

He waited, made a guess at the location of the person who shouted, and turned that way, changing
the reins from his right hand to his left and pulling his holstered six-shooter within easy
reach of his hand. This was not the country, his was not the errand, for carelessness, and
Lance was taking no risk.

As he walked his eyes roved continually over the brown expanse of rocks and stunted juniper
that formed the Lava Beds. Behind him came Sorry, his worn shoes slipping now and then on a
smooth rock, his head bobbing patiently, close to Lance's shoulder. As so often happens, it
was the horse that first discovered the object of their search. He pulled away from the direct
line, looking and looking at what Lance, keen-eyed though he was, mistook for a black rock
with a juniper bush growing beside it.

Lance turned that way, focussed his glasses upon the object and saw what had happened. A horse
had fallen with its rider, the two lying together, the man pinned under the horse. A black
horse which he recognized, and a big, red-faced cowpuncher with gray eyes that did not twinkle.
While Lance looked, the man lifted his head, seemed to be staring straight into Lance's face,
opened his mouth and contorted his pain-racked face in a shout. It was strange to have the
sound reach Lance's ears thinned and weakened by distance, while the glasses brought the injured
man so close that he could see the wild look of entreaty in his eyes. Lance put up the glasses
and began running, with Sorry stumbling and slipping behind him.

"I been here since morning," the big cowpuncher chattered feverishly when Lance came up to
him. "I'm fixed, all right! I was dozing and I didn't jump and he caught me when he fell. I
guess his leg is broke, but so is mine, fur's that goes. I come down hard on a rock and I guess
I broke some ribs or something. Hurt like hell for a few hours--it ain't so bad now. Look out
when you go to make him git up--if he rolls on me it's all off. I guess it's all off, anyway,
but I don't want to be squashed to death."

Lance bit his lip. It was hard to hear the man talking, talking, in that rapid, headlong fashion,
while his leg lay under the full weight of the black horse and the sun blazed on his uncovered
head. Our pride, also prevents us
from looking out for our goods, commending introduce themselves and provide insistently. Almost
all the Spanish have for an article of faith and standard of our commercial conduct that that
good cloth is sold in the ark, and the cloth manufacture we feel good.

I gather everything I said that Spain could now go by the laws of free failed However, because at
last there is no law or rule without exception, and that, unless another law more powerful European
law of affinity, which makes us follow the upward movement of all this great republic or confederation
of nations, the agonies that we could become death. Meanwhile, it is clear to me, and for anyone
who is not blinded by empty theories, Spain now consumes more than it produces. And this, not
only the state but also society. In vain we strive to cover the deficit. It must work harder
or spend much less. It is necessary, above all, do not borrow, do not continue cheating.

Apart from the honor of Spain which has been pilloried and taken to shame recruitment in many
homes, the conditions that give us money are horrific, Jewish, usurious by heroically. Every million
cost us more than four, that if we are nominal may be effective, if by some miracle of Providence
we leave the present misery. Random we contract, we play with our future, so that, if we ever have
improve the taste of fortune, this taste is embittered to the chagrin of duty actually four who gave
us no more than one, to provide a moderate gain of 400 100 in the capital. Meanwhile, the
interest we pay is at least 12 per 100. Maybe we fix for that art to be a 16 or a 18.

Any deal or negotiation to be done, or has been or is being done,
for money, perhaps the sacrifice dissimulate to profane eyes, but
did not diminish.

It is safe that the money we make, and convoluted that the method of take, it must cost us same
or more than the simple and expedient to issue Threes. Transmitted operation the picturesque
language of the common people will always pull the feet of a hanged man.

They say those who understand finance, which is necessary to provide
resources and not to us can provide you with fewer sacrifices.

If so, God save me from criticizing Mr. Minister of Finance. All I say and say the trick is to
borrow from so ruinous a way not very clever or very subtle, not too pilgrim, and, if science
the Treasury is that only it can be assumed that there is no science of Finance and the last
slob can do what most skilled teacher.

I hesitated and I hesitate even to post this Meditation, fed rare,
these disordered thoughts mine, that we live in anguish and terror
that infuses some hearts science Spanish economy, have inspired me,
without me being able to remedy.

Again not here also argue other reasons as the most despicable plain
common sense; and since the baseness of this common sense at the level
of science has to be within infinite.

All this I admit and proclaim.

However, such is the love we have for our children, Meditation and this is my daughter, who though
born sickly and wretched, I dare not to kill her. Rather, I venture to give life, albeit short-lived
and labored, publishing in a newspaper, and exposing fatherly love to the anger or contempt of
the wise, you may make at this time of parental happiness. Maybe mutter, as he murmured the
mob on board the ships on the eve of that happy and memorable dawn in which first appeared to the
frightened eyes of Europeans the smiling and fertile shores the New World.


Lance stood looking down at him while he fumbled in his pocket, pulled out a small leather
notebook and some papers.

"I'm a stock detective, see. My name's Burt Brownlee. I was just about ready to turn in the
dope and have the whole outfit pulled. Well, it's all here. They been rustling right and left,
see. But they're cute--they're damn cute. We been trying to work up the case on the outside,
and it seemed like somebody in the Black Rim was sending stock out, and so I've been working
on this end. Now here's the data. I followed 'em, and I've got the dope. I know now how they
work it, and my evidence and this dope here, that can be verified later on when the time comes,
will put the whole bunch over the road, see. They're outlaws--always have been--but they won't
be by the time they get outa the pen."

"You better keep that," Lance cut in gruffly. "Man, that's nothing you want to be gabbling
to a stranger. Shut up, and let me put you on my horse."

"No, I want to tell yuh," Burt insisted with all the obstinacy of a man half crazy with pain
and whisky. "I want to tell yuh, and I'm going to tell yuh! Get down here and listen. Here's
a map, and here's the brands they worked, and here's how they worked 'em. And here's the dates."

On one knee Lance kneeled and listened, his jaws set hard together. Fast as the man talked
the thoughts of Lance flew ahead, snatched at the significance of every detail, every bit of
evidence. Some things puzzled Burt Brownlee, but Lance knew the answer to the puzzle while
Burt talked and talked. Finally he laid his hand over the finely traced maps that showed secret
trails, unguessed, hidden little draws where stolen stock had been concealed, all the fine
threads that would weave the net close around the Lorrigans.

"Here, put that stuff up. This is not getting you to a doctor, and this can wait. Put it up."

"No, you take it. And if I don't pull through, you turn it in. You keep it. I don't want to
be found dead with that dope on me--you can't tell who might get hold of it." He thrust the
papers and the book eagerly into Lance's unwilling hand.

"No-o, you can't tell who might get hold of it," Lance admitted, biting his lip. "Well, let
me take your riding outfit off this horse and then we'll go."

While he pulled saddle and bridle off the dead horse, Burt Brownlee talked and talked and talked.
He wanted more whisky, which Lance promised him he should have when he was ready to get on
the horse. He told further evidence against the Devil's Tooth, told how he had followed Tom
for two days only to see him later at the ranch where he had returned while Burt had for a
time lost the trail. On that trip, he said, he would have gotten the full details of one "job"
had he not turned off to follow Tom Lorrigan.

While he worked Lance listened stoically. When he was ready to start he led Sorry close, lifted
the fellow as tenderly as he could, saw him faint again with the pain, and somehow got him
on the horse while he was still unconscious. Burt Brownlee was a big man, but he was not of
great weight. Lance bound him to the saddle with his own riata, revived him with a little more
whisky, and started for Conley's, who lived nearest.

It was ten miles to Conleys, as riders guessed the distance. Lance walked and led Sorry, and
tried to hold Burt Brownlee in the saddle, and listened to his rambling talk, and gave him
more whisky when he seemed ready to die. During certain intervals when Burt seemed lucid enough
to realize his desperate condition, Lance heartened him with assurance that they were almost there.

On the way into the canyon Burt Brownlee suffered greatly on the steep trail, down which the
horse must go with forward joltings that racked terribly the man's crushed side. The whisky
was gone; he had finished the scanty supply at the canyon's crest, because he begged for it
so hard that Lance could not steel himself to refuse. At the bottom Lance stopped Sorry, and
put an arm around Burt. Lance's face was set masklike in its forced calm, but his voice was
very tender, with the deep, vibrant note Mary Hope loved so ardently.

"Lean against me, old man, and rest a minute. It's pretty tough going, but you're game. You're
dead game. You'll make it. Wait. I'll stand on this rock--now lean hard, and rest. Ho, there's
no whisky--water will have to do you, now. I've a little in my canteen, and when you've rested--"

"I'm going," said Burt, lurching against Lance's steady strength. "You're a white man. That
Lorrigan dope--don't forget what I told you--turn it in--"

Lance's mouth twisted with sudden bitterness. "I won't--forget," he said. "I'll turn it--in."

"I'm--a goner. Just--stand and let me--lean--"

Lance stood, and let him lean, and with his handkerchief he very gently dried Burt's cold,
perspiring face. It seemed an endless time that he stood there. Now and then Burt clutched
him with fingers that gripped his shoulders painfully, but Lance never moved. Once, when Sorry
turned his head and looked back inquiringly, wondering why they did not go on, Lance spoke
to the horse and his voice was calm and soothing. But when it was all over, Lance's underlip
was bleeding at the corner where he had bitten into it.

He walked into Conley's yard an hour after that, his face drearily impassive, a dead man lashed
to the saddle. He asked for paper and a pen, and in a firm, even handwriting he described tersely
the manner of Burt Brownlee's death, told where the dead horse and the saddle would be found,
and as an afterthought, lest there be trouble in locating the spot, he drew a sketch of that
particular part of the Lava Beds. He signed the statement, and had the excited Conleys, shaking
man and half hysterical wife, sign also as witnesses. His matter-of-fact treatment of the affair
impressed them to the point of receiving his instructions as though they were commands which
must on no account be disobeyed in any particular.

"I'll be back and tell the coroner. He'll want to see the horse and saddle, perhaps. Mr. Conley,
you can find them without any trouble. If he wants an inquest, tell him I'll be on hand. Thank
you, Mrs. Conley,--no, I'll not wait for anything to eat. I'm not hungry. I must get home.
Good-by--sorry I can't do any more for you."

He mounted Sorry, pricked him into a gallop, and presently disappeared around a bend of the
trail that led in the direction of the Devil's Tooth ranch.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

HOW ONE TRAIL ENDED

Darkness falls late on the Black Rim country in midsummer. It was just deepening from dusk
when Lance rode up to the corral gate, pulled the saddle and bridle off Sorry with swift jerks
that bespoke a haste born of high nervous tension, and strode up to the house. From the bunk
house, when he passed, came the murmur of low-keyed voices. The outfit, then, was at home once
more. From the shaded window of Belle's bedroom a thin silver of light shone, where the blind
was curled back at the edge, but the rest of the house was dark. He went in, moving softly,
but Belle must have heard his step on the porch, for she came out with her bedroom lamp in
her hand, the other raised to impress quiet upon him.

"Lance, honey! Where on earth have you been?" She set the lamp down on the table and came close,
putting her arms around him, her eyes searching the impenetrable calm of his face, the veiled
purpose behind his eyes. It was the Lorrigan fighting look; she had seen it once or twice in
Tom's face and it had frightened her. She was frightened now, but her own intrepid soul pushed
back her fear.

"Sh-sh, honey," she whispered, though Lance had neither moved nor spoken since she touched
him. "Sh-sh--Mary Hope and her mother are here, and they're both asleep. I--honey, we were
so worried, when you didn't come back. That note you sent didn't say a thing, and I was afraid--And
I was between the devil and the deep sea, honey. I couldn't stay away from here, when I didn't
know--and I couldn't leave Hope there, and the women that came flocking when they heard the
news were just cows for brains. And the old lady won't have a nurse and she wouldn't let me
out of her sight--she keeps me singing about all the time she's awake, or reciting poetry--Bobbie
Burns, mostly, and Scott. Would you ever think she'd stand for Bobbie Burns? But I can do it
as Scotch as she can, and she likes it.

"So she wouldn't let me leave, and I couldn't stay--and I had Hugh make up a bed in the spring
wagon, and brought her over here. If you and Hope are going to be married right away, the old
lady will need to be here, anyway. The doctor tried to talk hospital--he just tried. The old
lady can write now with her left hand so we can make it out, and when he said hospital to her
she--she almost swore.

"So it's all right, Lance, honey--my God, Lance, what is it? Have you heard from Duke?" She
broke down suddenly, and clutched him in a way that reminded him poignantly of that dying man
in the canyon. Her whisper became sibilant, terrified. "What is it? What has happened? Lance,
tell me! Tom is here, and Al; they were here when we came, to-day--"

Lance took a deep breath. Very gently he leaned and kissed her on the forehead, reached back
and pulled her hands away from his shoulders.

"It's nothing, Belle. I'm--tired. And you--you surprised me. Will it waken them if I--clean
up a little before I go to bed? I'll--be careful." He forced his eyes, his lips, to smile at
her. "Good girl, Belle. I'm--you're a trump. Now go back to bed. Lance is on the job--Lance
won't leave again like that--he'll--settle down."

He sat down on the nearest chair and pulled off his boots. He made an imperative gesture toward
her bedroom, and Belle, giving him a strange, searching look, went in and closed the door after
her. He gave a sigh of relief when she was gone, never dreaming how little he had imposed upon her.

In his stocking feet he went to the kitchen, found hot water in the teakettle, carried it to
his room and shaved, cleansing his body as well as he could from the dust of the trip without
making any sound that might disturb the sleeping invalid and Mary Hope. He dressed himself
carefully as though he were going to meet guests. The set look was still in his face when he
stood before the dresser mirror, knotting the blue tie that harmonized best with the shirt
he wore. He pulled the tan leather belt straight, so that the plain silver buckle was in the
middle, took something off the bed and pushed it carefully inside the waistband of his trousers,
on the left side, taking great care that its position was right to the fraction of an inch.
He took his tan Oxford shoes in his hand, pulled open his door as quietly as any burglar could
have done, stepped down upon the ground and put on the shoes, lacing them carefully, tucking
in the bow ends fastidiously.

Then, moving very softly, he went down the path to the bunk-house, opened the door and walked
in, never dreaming that Belle was no more than a dozen steps behind him, or that, when he closed
the door, she was standing just outside, listening.

The blood of his actress mother carried him insouciantly over the pregnant silence that received
him. He leaned negligently against the wall beside the closed door, his arms folded, his eyebrows
tilted upward at the inner ends, his lips smiling quizzically.

"I've another funny story to tell you fellows," he drawled, just before the silence became
awkward. "Glad you're all here--it's too good to keep, too good to waste on part of the outfit.
I want you all to get the kick. You'll enjoy it--being cattlemen. It's a joke that was pulled
on an outfit down in Arizona."

Like a trained monologist, he had them listening, deceived by his smiling ease, waiting to
hear the joke on the Arizona outfit. Tom and Al, at the table with some papers before them,
papers that held figures and scribbled names, he quite overlooked. But they, too, listened
to the story, were imposed upon by that quizzical smile, by his mimicry, by the bold, swift
strokes with which he painted word pictures which their imaginations seized upon as fast as
they were made.

It was Tom who first felt a suspicion of Lance's purpose, and shifted his position a little,
so that his right hand would be free. As he did so, without looking toward him Lance's left
fingers began tapping, tapping the muscles of his right arm; his right hand had sagged a little.
Tom's eyebrows pulled together. Quite well he knew that pose. He waited, listened with closer
attention to the story.

Lance paused, as your skillful raconteur usually does pause before the climax. His glance went
impersonally over the faces of his audience. Most of them were leaning forward, a few were
breathing hard. They were listening, straining unconsciously to get the meaning he withheld
from them. Lance's right hand sagged another half inch, his lips pulled sidewise in the enigmatical
smile of the Lorrigans.

"I lied, of course--about the outfit this joke is on. It's really the Devil's Tooth I'm talking
about. But the kick remains, so listen, folks, just listen.

"I'm a Lorrigan. Two of you are Lorrigans, and you know what I mean when I say that. The rest
of you had better guess what I mean, if you don't know--and guess right!

"I'm talking to you with my back against the wall--in more ways than one. Don't think I'm fool
enough not to know it. But you're listening with your backs against another wall; I believe
it is of stone, usually, and the windows have bars. I don't think you're such fools you fail
to grasp my meaning. I'm talking--and you're going to listen.

"What I said--well, I have the dope, you know. I know where you took that last bunch of stolen
horses, and I know the date when you turned them over. I have a map or two--I know those secret
trails you made, that lead into that hidden little basin that the Rim has not discovered yet. History! Oh, the story in operas was a fun thing
... Semiramis, Nebuchadnezzar, the Crusades, Attila ... great everything ... Gumi but those of Castrillo
... so much death, so ashamed, so dispersion and decay ... it shrank the mood. Fortunately, the conversation
turned to the Tiplona, ​​and because of this was recalled operas being sung then and now being
sung in comparison with those. The truth was that now never sung opera in town, as almost for
eight years, there seemed no bad quartet. Then enabled, which had so sad the contest, deigned
to give a news item, contrary to custom. His habit was highly despise all upcoming events, past or
future, not required to be referrals or induced, high retention, as he called memory. Said
cavalier air good man

- Well, the opera will you have now, and good, because the mayor told
me they have asked the theater from the famous Lion and Gorgheggi
Mochi.

- The Gorgheggi! - Shouted to the audience.

And so the reporter made a surprise move in his chair, tucked in the
shade, and the widow Helmets looked at him and sighed quietly.

Eight days later they were in town Mochi tenor, known in all provincial theaters the kingdom, and
his protégé and disciple the Gorgheggi. The Foreign sang the first night and although the largest
newspaper in the capital philharmonic "did not dare to issue a single trial hearing ", the public,
less circumspect (truth is also that with less responsibility to art history), is excited
at once and swore mass "from the Tiplona had not been heard here prodigy on. The Gorgheggi
was a nightingale, and besides, how pretty, how kind, how considerate the public, to thank the applause!
". Yes she was beautiful, it was an English translation by his friend Mochi Italian, sweet and
gentle movements, eye clear and serene, white and strong, had a face of pure lines, which looked
modestly with original styling, in which the hair, light brown in waves, served as a simple
framework to that pale white, which, even in the daytime, as I thought Bonifacio, seemed to be reflections
of the moon.
 You'll quit, or I'll kill you!"

He waited, watching Tom. Tom, watching Lance, got up and faced him cold-eyed, unafraid, weighing
not chances, but values rather.

"You'd kill me, would you!" he asked, his voice matching the drawl of Lance.

"Sure, I'd kill you!" Lance smiled back.

Eyes on a level, the two stared at each other, smiling that deadly, Lorrigan smile, the smile
of old Tom Lorrigan the killer.

"You would, all right," Tom said. Then his stiffened muscles relaxed. A twinkle came into his
eyes. "If you're game enough to do that, kid, by God, I'm game enough to quit!"

Lance unfolded his arms, reached out with his open right hand and met Tom's hand in a close
grip. "That's the stuff, dad! I knew you had it in you--I knew it!"

Outside the door, Belle hugged her six-shooter to her breast and leaned against the wall, her
knees shaking under her. "Thank God! Oh, thank God a Lorrigan can be bigger than all the Lorrigan
blood that's in him!" she whispered. "Oh, Lance, honey--oh, thank God!"

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

THE MAKING OF NEW TRAILS

At the corral, that time-honored conference ground of all true range men, the three Lorrigans
leaned their backs against the rails and talked things over in true range style: laconic phrases
that stated their meaning without frills or mental reservations, and silences that carried
their thoughts forward to the next utterance.

"Al can take the outfit and drift," said Tom, as though he were discussing some detail of the
round-up. "He knows where--and they can scatter, I'll give 'em a horse apiece as a--a kinda
bonus. I'll have to stay, looks like. Fall round-up's coming on."

"Wel-ll," said Lance, throwing an arm over a rail and drumming with his fingers, "I was raised
on round-ups. I don't suppose I've forgotten all about it. You might turn the management over
to me for a year or so, and take a trip. Belle needs it, dad. I think I could keep things riding
along, all right."

"Sounds kinda like you had that idea for a joker up your sleeve," Al observed meaningly. "Are
you plumb sure of that dope, Lance?"

Lance removed his arm from the corral rail, and reached into his pocket. "I didn't think you
had it in you, Al, to be that big a fool. But since you've said it, here's the dope. Take it,
dad. I said I'd turn it in, but I didn't say who'd receive it. The stock detective that's been
camping on your trail for the last few weeks was killed on the Lava Beds to-day. I found him.
He's at Conley's, now, waiting for the coroner. You might ride over, Al, and see for yourself.
And on the way, you might ride up the Slide trail and take a look around the Tooth. You'll
see signs where he's watched the ranch from up there. And you can go on down and find where
he camped several times at Cottonwood Spring.

"The coroner won't get on the job before to-morrow or next day, and it will take a little time,
I suppose, for Brownlee's employers to wake up and wonder what became of the evidence he was
sent to collect. You'll have, perhaps, a week in which to make your getaway. They're waiting
outside the Rim for the evidence this Burt Brownlee was collecting, so that they could make
one big clean-up.

"I'm not setting myself up as a judge, or anything like that--but--well, the going's good,
right now. It may not be so good if you wait."

He lighted a match and held it up so that Tom could glance at the maps and skim the contents
of the memorandum book. By the blaze of the match Lance's face still looked rather hard, determined
to see the thing through.

"You'd better burn that stuff, dad. And in the morning--how would it be if we went to town
and got the legal end of my new job straightened out! I'll want a Power of Attorney. You may
be gone for some time. I suppose you know," he added, "that Mary Hope and I are going to be
married. So you and Belle can take a trip somewhere. They say it's worth while going down to
the big cattle country in the Argentine--South America, you know."

Tom did not reply. He had lighted a second match and was studying attentively the data in Burt
Brownlee's book. The third match told him enough to convince him. He gave a snort when darkness
enveloped them again.

"I sharpened my pencil pretty darn fine when I made out my bill against the Black Rim a few
years ago--and by the humpin' hyenas, these figures here kinda go to show I overcharged 'em.
Some. Not so damn much, either, if you look at my side. Better get up the horses, Al, and you'n
the boys take the trail. The kid's right. The goin's dern good, right now. Better'n what it
will be."

In the scuffed sand before the corral gate Tom made a small fire, with a few crumpled papers
and one small book, which he tore apart and fed, leaf by leaf, to the flames. The light showed
him grimly smiling, when he tilted his head and looked up at Lance who watched him.

"So you'n the Douglas kid is figuring on getting hitched! Well, don't ever try to eye her down
like you done to yore dad. She'll brain yuh, likely--if you wait long enough for her to make
up her mind."

Lance laughed. Up at the house Belle heard him and caught her breath. She stared hard at the
three forms silhouetted like Rembrandt figures around the little fire, started toward them
and stopped. She was a wise woman, was Belle. Some things a woman may know--and hide the knowledge
deep in her heart, and in the hiding help her mate.

Black Rim folk, who always knew so much of their neighbors' affairs, once more talked and chortled
and surmised, and never came within a mile of the truth. The young college rooster had come
home to the Devil's Tooth, they gossiped, and had a row with Al; so Al left home, and Duke
too. The Lorrigans always had been hard to get along with, but that Lance--he sure must be
a caution to cats, the way he'd cleaned off the ranch.

Marrying the Douglas girl, and taking that paralyzed old lady right to the ranch, had probably
had a lot to do with it. Lance might be willing to forget that old trouble with Scotty, but
the rest of the Lorrigans sure never would. And it was queer, too, how all that rustling talk
petered out. Mebby there hadn't been much in it, after all.

Not even Mary Hope guessed why she and Lance were left so completely in charge of the ranch.
Sometimes, when the invalid was captious and showed too plainly that she preferred Belle's
playing and singing to the musical efforts of her own daughter, and scrawled impatient questions
about Belle's return, Mary Hope would wonder if Tom Lorrigan really hated her, and if her coming
had practically driven him out of his own home. She would cry a little, then,--unless Lance
happened to be somewhere near. If he were, there was no crying for Mary Hope.

"He's a good son," Mother Douglas once wrote, "I wish Aleck was alive, to see how the Lord
has changed the Lorrigans."

DANGEROUS DAYS.

A brilliant story of married life. A romance of fine purpose and stirring appeal.

THE AMAZING INTERLUDE.

Illustrations by The Kinneys.

The story of a great love which cannot be pictured--an interlude--amazing, romantic.

LOVE STORIES.

This book is exactly what its title indicates, a collection of love affairs--sparkling with
humor, tenderness and sweetness.

"K." Illustrated. How the young man met the situation is entertainingly told.

THE CIRCULAR STAIRCASE. Illustrated by Lester Ralph.

THE GOLDEN SNARE

Thrilling adventures in the Far Northland.

NOMADS OF THE NORTH

The story of a bear-cub and a dog.

KAZAN

The tale of a "quarter-strain wolf and three-quarters husky" torn between the call of the human
and his wild mate.

BAREE, SON OF KAZAN

The story of the son of the blind Grey Wolf and the gallant part he played in the lives of
a man and a woman. 

He stopped coming here Dona Guiomar, the oppressed had heart, and tears, tried in vain to contain
broken by her beautiful eyes.

Cervantes Oídola had serious and sad, and shaken and taken by a melancholy
sentence Margarita.

THE FLOWER OF THE NORTH

The story of Fort o' God, where the wild flavor of the wilderness is blended with the courtly
atmosphere of France.

THE GRIZZLY KING

The story of Thor, the big grizzly.

ISOBEL

A love story of the Far North.

THE WOLF HUNTERS

A thrilling tale of adventure in the Canadian wilderness.

THE GOLD HUNTERS

The story of adventure in the Hudson Bay wilds.

THE COURAGE OF MARGE O'DOONE

Filled with exciting incidents in the land of strong men and women.

BACK TO GOD'S COUNTRY

A thrilling story of the Far North. The great Photoplay was made from this book.

BRAND BLOTTERS

A story of the turbid life of the frontier with a charming love interest running through its pages.

STEVE YEAGER

A story brimful of excitement, with enough gun-play and adventure to suit anyone.

A DAUGHTER OF THE DONS

A Western story of romance and adventure, comprising a vivacious and stirring tale. Instinct ... blood .... Education is not enough against nature. "

Since then raised the girl with no hope of saving her, as if a flower
cultivated rotten and by the bite of a worm. Do not expect anything,
but did his duty.

THE VISION SPLENDID

In which two cousins are contestants for the same prizes: political honors and the hand of a girl.

THE SHERIFF'S SON

The hero finally conquers both himself and his enemies and wins the love of a wonderful girl.
Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list

THE SKY PILOT IN NO MAN'S LAND

The clean-hearted, strong-limbed man of the West leaves his hills and forests to fight the
battle for freedom in the old world.

BLACK ROCK

A story of strong men in the mountains of the West.

THE SKY PILOT

A story of cowboy life, abounding in the freshest humor, the truest tenderness and the finest
courage.

THE PROSPECTOR

A tale of the foothills and of the man who came to them to lend a hand to the lonely men and
women who needed a protector. 

The Count was known conqueror Alhedín-nigh irresistible. On the other hand, nobody stopped to notice
that the worshipers perpetual, eternal lovers sigh have been always from the bottom up, and
not vice versa.

THE DOCTOR

The story of a "preacher-doctor" whom big men and reckless men loved for his unselfish life
among them.

THE FOREIGNER

A tale of the Saskatchewan and of a "foreigner" who made a brave and winning fight for manhood
and love.

CORPORAL CAMERON

This splendid type of the upright, out-of-door man about which Ralph Connor builds all his
stories, appears again in this book.

Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York

B. M. BOWER'S NOVELS

May be had wherever books are said.

