THE GIST OF SWEDENBORG

Compiled by

JULIAN K. SMYTH and WILLIAM F. WUNSCH

This Book Is Published by the Trustees of the Iungerich Publication Fund Swedenborg Foundation,
Inc. New York

1920

FOREWORD

The reason for a compilation such as is here presented should be obvious. Swedenborg's theological
writings comprise some thirty or more substantial volumes, the result of the most concentrated
labor extending over a period of twenty-seven years. To study these writings in their whole
extent, to see them in their minute unfoldment out of the Word of God, is a work of years.
It is doubtful if there is a phase of man's religious experience for which an interpretation
is not here to be found. Notwithstanding this immense sweep of doctrine there are certain vital,
fundamental truths on which it all rests:--the Christ-God, Man a spiritual being, the warfare
of Regeneration, Marriage, the Sacred Scriptures, the Life of Charity and Faith, the Divine
Providence, Death and the Future Life, the Church. We have endeavored to press within the small
compass of this book passages which give the gist of Swedenborg's teachings on these subjects.

The compilers would gladly have made room for the interpretative and philosophical teachings
which contribute so much to the content and form of Swedenborg's theology; but they have confined
their effort to setting forth briefly and clearly the positive spiritual teachings, where these
seemed most packed with religious meaning and moment.

The translation of the passages here brought together has been carefully revised.

JULIAN K. SMYTH.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Emanuel Swedenborg was born at Stockholm, January 29, 1688.

A devout home (the father was a Lutheran clergyman, and afterwards Bishop of Skara) stimulated
in the boy the nature which was to become so active in his culminating life-work. A university
education at Upsala, however, and studies for five years in England, France, Holland and Germany,
brought other interests into play first. The earliest of these were mathematics and astronomy,
in the pursuit of which he met Flamsteed and Halley. His gift for the detection and practical
employment of general laws soon carried him much farther afield in the sciences. Metallurgy,
geology, a varied field of invention, chemistry, as well as his duties as an Assessor on the
Board of Mines and of a legislator in the Diet, all engaged him, with an immediate outcome
in his work, and often with results in contributions to human knowledge which are gaining recognition
only now. The Principia and two companion volumes, dedicated to his patron, the Duke of Brunswick,
crowned his versatile productions in the physical sciences. Academies of science, at home and
abroad, were electing him to membership.

Conspicuous in Swedenborg's thought all along was the premise that there is a God and the presupposition
of that whole element in life which we call the spiritual. As he pushed his studies into the
fields of physiology and psychology, this premised realm of the spirit became the express goal
of his researches. Some of his most valuable and most startling discoveries came in these fields.
Outstanding are a work on The Brain and two on the Animal Kingdom (kingdom of the anima, or
soul). As his gaze sought the soul, however, in the light in which he had more and more successfully
beheld all his subjects for fifty-five years, she eluded direct knowledge. He was increasingly
baffled, until a new light broke in on him. Then he was borne along, in a profound humiliation
of his intellectual ambitions, by another way. For when the new light steadied, he had undergone
a personal religious experience, the rich journals of which he himself never published. But
what was of public concern, his consciousness was opened into the world of the spirit, so that
he could observe its facts and laws as, for so long, he had observed those of the material
world, and in its own world could receive a revelation of the doctrines of man's spiritual life.

It was now, for the first time, too, that he gave a deep consideration to the condition of
the Christian Church, revealed in otherworld judgment to be one of spiritual devastation and
impotency. To serve in the revelation of "doctrine for a New Church" became his Divinely appointed
work. He forwent his reputation as a man of science, gave up his assessorship, cleared his
desk of everything but the Scriptures. He beheld in the Word of God a spiritual meaning, as
he did a spiritual world in the world of phenomena. In revealing both of these the Lord, he
said, made His Second Coming. For the rest of his long life Swedenborg gave himself with unremitting
labor but with a saving calm to this commanding cause, publishing his great Latin volumes of
Scripture interpretation and of theological teaching at Amsterdam or London, at first anonymously,
and distributing them to clergy and universities. The titles of his principal theological works
appear in the following compilation from them. Upon his death-bed this herald of a new day
for Christianity solemnly affirmed the reality of his experience and the reception by him of
his teaching from the Lord.

Swedenborg died in London, March 29, 1772. In 1908 his remains were removed from the Swedish
Church in that city to the cathedral at Upsala, where they lie in a monument erected to his
memory by the Swedish Parliament.

WILLIAM F. WUNSCH.

     Documents Concerning the Life and Character of Swedenborg
     (3 vols.) 1875-1877, R.L. Tafel, is the main collection of
     biographical material; The Life and Mission of Emanuel
     Swedenborg, 1883, Benjamin Worcester, and Emanuel
     Swedenborg, His Life, Teachings and Influence, 1907, George
     Trobridge, are two of the better known biographies.

THE GIST OF SWEDENBORG

     "At this day nothing but the self-evidenced reason of love
     will re-establish the Church."--Canons, Prologue.

GOD THE LORD

    "Believe in God: believe also in Me."

                         John, XIV, 1

    "My Lord, and my God!"

                         John, XX, 28

ONE AND INFINITE

God is One, and Infinite. The true quality of the Infinite does not appear; for the human mind,
however highly analytical and exalted, is itself finite, and the finiteness in it cannot be
laid aside. It is not fitted, therefore, to see the Infinity of God, and thus God, as He is
in Himself, but can see God from behind in shadow; as it is said of Moses, when he asked to
see God, that he was placed in a cleft of the rock, and saw His hinder side. It is enough to
acknowledge God from things finite, that is, created, in which He is infinitely.

--True Christian Religion, n. 28

"INTO HIS MARVELLOUS LIGHT"

We read in the Word that Jehovah God dwells in light inaccessible. Who, then, could approach
Him, unless He had come to dwell in accessible light, that is, unless He had descended and
assumed a Humanity and in it had become the Light of the world? Who cannot see that to approach
Jehovah the Father in His light is as impossible as to take the wings of the morning and to
fly with them to the sun?

--True Christian Religion, n. 176

THE CHRIST-GOD

We ought to have faith in God the Saviour, Jesus Christ, because that is faith in the visible
God in Whom is the Invisible; and faith in the visible God, Who is at once Man and God, enters
into man. For while faith is spiritual in essence it is natural in form, for everything spiritual,
in order to be anything with a man, is received by him in what is natural.

--True Christian Religion, n. 339

Man's conjunction with the Lord is not with His supreme Divine Being itself, but with His Divine
Humanity, and by this with the supreme Divine Being; for man can have no idea whatever of the
supreme Divine Being of the Lord, utterly transcending his thought as it does; but of His Divine
Human Being he can have an idea. Hence the Gospel according to John says that no one has at
any time seen God except the only-begotten Son, and that there is no approach to the Father
save by Him. For the same reason He is called a Mediator.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 4211

GOD-MAN

In the Lord, God and Man are not two but one Person, yea, altogether one, as soul and body
are. This is plain in many of the Lord's own utterances; as that the Father and He are one;
that all things of the Father are His, and all His the Father's; that He is in the Father,
and the Father in Him; that all things are given into His hand; that He has all power; that
whosoever believes in Him has eternal life; that He is God of heaven and earth.

--Doctrine Concerning the Lord, n. 60

There is one God, and the Lord is He, His Divinity and Humanity being one Person.

--Divine Providence, n. 122

They who think of the Lord's Humanity, and not at the same time of His Divinity, by no means
allow the expression "Divine Humanity"; for they think of the Humanity by itself and of the
Divinity by itself, which is like thinking of man apart from his soul or life, which, however,
is no conception of man, still less of the Lord.

--Apocalypse Explained, n. 26

WHY HE CAME

The Lord from eternity, Who is Jehovah, came into the world to subdue the hells and to glorify
His Humanity. Without Him no mortal could have been saved; and they are saved who believe in Him.

--True Christian Religion, n. 2

The Lord came into the world to save the human race which would otherwise have perished in
eternal death. This salvation the Lord effected by subjugating the hells, which infested every
man coming into the world and going out of the world, and by glorifying His Humanity; for so
He can hold the hells subdued to eternity. The subjugation of the hells, and the glorification
at the same time of His Humanity, were effected by temptations let into the Humanity He had
from the mother, and by unbroken victories. His passion on the cross was the last temptation
and complete victory.

--Heavenly Doctrine, n. 293

HOW HE CAME

Because, from His essence, God burned with the love of uniting Himself to man, it was necessary
that He should cover Himself around with a body adapted to reception and conjunction. He therefore
descended and assumed a human nature in pursuance of the order established by Him from the
creation of the world. That is, He was to be conceived by a power produced from Himself; He
was to be carried in the womb; He was to be born, and then to grow in wisdom and in love, and
so was to approach to union with His Divine origin. Thus God became Man, and Man God.

--True Christian Religion, n. 838

THE LIFE ON EARTH

The Lord had at first a human nature from the mother, of which He gradually divested Himself
while He was in the world. Accordingly He kept experiencing two states: a state of humiliation
or privation, as long and as far as He was conscious in the human nature from the mother; and
a state of glorification or union with the Divine, as long and as far as He was conscious in
the Humanity received from the Father. In the state of humiliation He prayed to the Father
as to One other than Himself; but in the state of glorification He spoke with the Father as
with Himself. In this state He said that the Father was in Him, and He in the Father, and that
the Father and He were one.

The Lord consecutively put off the human nature assumed from the mother, and put on a Humanity
from the Divine in Himself, which is the Divine Humanity and the Son of God.

--Doctrine Concerning the Lord, nn. 29, 35

THE LOVE OF HIS LIFE

When the Lord was in the world, His life was altogether the life of a love for the whole human
race, which He burned to save forever. That life was of the intensest love by which He united
Himself to the Divine and the Divine to Himself. For being itself, or Jehovah, is pure mercy
from love for the whole human race; and that life was one of sheer love, as it can never be
with any man.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 2253

"COME UNTO ME"

Do you, my friend, flee evil, and do good, and believe in the Lord with your whole heart and
with your whole soul, and the Lord will love you, and give you love for doing, and faith for
believing. Then will you do good from love, and from a faith which is confidence will you believe.
If you persevere in this, a reciprocal conjunction will take place, and one that is perpetual,
indeed is salvation itself, and everlasting life.

--True, Christian Religion, n. 484

THE TRINITY; THE FULNESS OF HIS BEING

They who are truly men of the Church, that is, who are in love to the Lord and in charity toward
the neighbor, know and acknowledge a Trine. Still, they humble themselves before the Lord,
and adore Him alone, inasmuch as they know that there is no approach to the Divine Itself,
called the Father, but by the Son; and that all that is holy, and of the Holy Spirit, proceeds
from Him. When they are in this idea, they adore no other than Him, by Whom and from Whom are
all things; consequently they adore One.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 2329

God is one in essence and in person. This God is the Lord. The Divinity itself, which is called
Jehovah "the Father," is the Lord from eternity. The Divine Humanity is "the Son" begotten
from His Divine from eternity, and born in the world. For this reason man was created a form
of Divine order. God is in him, and as far as he lives according to Divine order, fully so;
but if he does not live according to Divine order, still God is in him, but in his highest
parts, endowing him with the ability to understand truth and to will what is good. But as far
as man lives contrary to order, so far he shuts up the lower parts of his mind or spirit, and
prevents God from descending and filling them with His presence. Then God is in him, but he
is not in God.

--True Christian Religion, nn. 66, 70

AN INSTRUMENT OF LIFE

Man is an instrument of life, and God alone is life. God pours His life into His instrument
and every part of him, as the sun pours its heat into a tree and every part of it. God also
gives man to feel this life in himself as his own. God wills that he should do so, that man
may live as of himself according to the laws of order, which are as many as there are precepts
in the Word, and may dispose himself to receive the love of God. But still God perpetually
holds with His finger the perpendicular above the scales, and regulates, but never violates
by compulsion, man's free decision. Man's free will is from this: that he feels life in himself
as his, and God leaves him so to feel, that reciprocal conjunction may take place between Him
and man.

--True Christian Religion, n. 504

"ABIDE IN ME"

Man is so created that he can be more and more closely united to the Lord. He is so united
not by knowledge alone, nor by intelligence alone, nor even by wisdom alone, but by a life
in accordance with these. The more closely he is united to the Lord, the wiser and happier
he becomes, the more distinctly he seems to himself to be his own, and the more clearly he
perceives that he is the Lord's.

--Divine Providence, nn. 32 et al.

TWO MINDS: TWO WORLDS

Man is so created as to live simultaneously in the natural world and in the spiritual world.
Thus he has an internal and an external nature or mind; by the former living in the spiritual
world, by the latter in the natural world.

--Heavenly Doctrine, n. 36

INALIENABLE POWERS

There are in man from the Lord two capacities by which the human being is distinguished from
the beasts. One capacity is the ability to understand what is true and what is good. It is
called rationality, and is a capacity of his understanding. The other capacity is the ability
to do the true and the good. It is called freedom, and is a power of the will. By virtue of
his rationality, man can think what he pleases, as well against God as with Him, and with his
neighbor or against his neighbor. He can also will and do what he thinks; and when he sees
evil and fears punishment, by virtue of freedom he can refrain from doing. By these two capacities
man is man and is distinguished from the beasts. Man has these twin powers from the Lord, and
they are from Him every moment; nor are they ever taken away, for if they were, man's humanity
would perish. The Lord is in these two powers with every man, with the evil as well as the
good. They are His abiding-place in the race. Thence it is that every human being, evil as
well as good, lives to eternity.

--Divine Love and Wisdom, n. 240

THE DRAG OF HEREDITY

Man inclines to the nature he derives hereditarily, and lapses into it. Thus he strengthens
any evil in it, and also adds others of himself. These evils are quite opposed to the spiritual
life. They destroy it. Unless, therefore, a man receives new life from the Lord, which is spiritual
life, he is condemned; for he wills nothing else and thinks nothing else than concerns him
and the world.

--Heavenly Doctrine, n. 176

LOVES OF SELF AND THE WORLD

The reason why the love of self and the love of the world are infernal loves, and yet man has
been able to come into them, and thus to ruin will and understanding in him, is as follows:
By creation the love of self and the love of the world are heavenly loves; for they are loves
of the natural man serving his spiritual loves, as a foundation does a house. From the love
of self and the world, a man wishes well by his body, desires food, clothing and habitation,
takes thought for his household, seeks occupation to be useful, wishes also for obedience's
sake to be honored according to the dignity of the thing he does, and to be delighted and recreated
by the pleasures of the world;--yet all this for the sake of the end, which must be use. By
this a man is in position to serve the Lord and to serve the neighbor. But when there is no
love of serving the Lord and the neighbor, but only a love of serving oneself at the world's
hands, then from being heavenly that love becomes infernal, for it causes a man to sink mind
and character in his proprium, or what is his own, which in itself is the whole of evil.

--Divine Love and Wisdom, n. 396

THE NEED FOR SELF-ACTION

No one can cleanse himself of evils by his own power and abilities; but neither can this be
done without the power and abilities of the man, used as his own. If this strength were not
to all appearance his own, no one would be able to fight against the flesh and its lusts, which,
nevertheless, is enjoined upon all men. He would not think of combat.

Because man is reformed by conflicts with the evils of his flesh and by victories over them,
the Son of Man says to each of the seven Churches, that He will give gifts "to him that overcometh."

--True Christian Religion, n. 610

Without moral struggle no one is regenerated, and many spiritual wrestlings succeed one after
another. For, inasmuch as regeneration has for its end that the life of the old man may die
and the new and heavenly life be implanted, there will unfailingly be combat. The life of the
old man resists and is unwilling to be extinguished, and the life of the new man cannot enter,
except where the life of the old has been extinguished. From this it is plain that there is
combat, and ardent combat, because for life.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 8403

REPENTANCE AND THE REMISSION OF SINS

He who would be saved, must confess his sins, and do repentance. To confess sins is to know
evils, to see them in oneself, to acknowledge them, to make oneself guilty and condemn oneself
on account of them. Done before God, this is to confess sins. To do repentance is to desist
from sins after one has thus confessed them and from a humble heart has besought forgiveness,
and then to live a new life according to the precepts of charity and faith.

He who merely acknowledges generally that he is a sinner, making himself guilty of all evils,
without examining himself,--that is, without seeing his sins,--makes a confession but not the
confession of repentance. Inasmuch as he does not know his evils, he lives as before.

One who lives the life of charity and faith does repentance daily. He reflects upon the evils
in him, acknowledges them, guards against them, and beseeches the Lord for help. For of oneself
one continually lapses toward evil; but he is continually raised up by the Lord and led to good.

Repentance of the mouth and not of the life is not repentance. Nor are sins pardoned on repentance
of the mouth, but on repentance of the life. Sins are constantly pardoned man by the Lord,
for He is mercy itself; but still they adhere to man, however he supposes they have been remitted.
Nor are they removed from him save by a life according to the precepts of true faith. So far
as he lives according to these precepts, sins are removed; and so far as they are removed,
so far they are remitted.

--Heavenly Doctrine, nn. 159-165

TEMPTATION AND PRAYER

When a man shuns evils as sins, he flees them because they are contrary to the Lord and to
His Divine laws; and then he prays to the Lord for help and for power to resist them--a power
which is never denied when it is asked. By these two means a man is cleansed of evils. He cannot
be cleansed of evils if he only looks to the Lord and prays; for then, after he has prayed,
he believes that he is quite without sins, or that they have been forgiven, by which he understands
that they are taken away. But then he still remains in them; and to remain in them is to increase
them. Nor are evils removed only by shunning them; for then the man looks to himself, and thereby
strengthens the origin of evil, which was that he turned himself back from the Lord and turned
to himself.

--The Doctrine Concerning Charity, n. 146

THE GREAT ARENA

In temptations the hells fight against man, and the Lord for him. To every falsity which the
hells inject, there is an answer from the Divine. The falsities inflow into the outward man,
the answer into the inward man, coming to perception scarcely otherwise than as hope, and the
resulting consolation, in which, however, there is a multitude of things of which the man is
unaware.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 8159

In temptations a man is left, to all appearance, to himself alone; yet he has not been left
alone, for God is then most present in his inmost being, and upholds him. When anyone overcomes
in temptation, therefore, he enters into closer union with God.

--True Christian Religion, n. 126

"BY LITTLE AND LITTLE"

When man is being regenerated, he is not regenerated speedily but slowly. The reason is that
all things which he has thought, purposed and done since infancy, have added themselves to
his life and have come to constitute it. They have also formed such a connection among themselves
that no one thing can be removed unless all are at the same time. Regeneration, or the implantation
of the life of heaven in man, begins in his infancy, and continues to the last of his life
in the world, and is perfected to eternity.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 9334

A NEW MAN

When a man is regenerated, he becomes altogether another, and a new, man. While his appearance
and his speech are the same, yet his mind is not; for his mind is then open toward heaven,
and there dwell in it love for the Lord, and charity toward the neighbor, together with faith.
It is the mind which makes another and a new man. The change of state cannot be perceived in
man's body, but in his spirit. When it [the body] is put off then his spirit appears, and in
altogether another form, too, when he has been regenerated; for it has then a form of love
and charity with inexpressible beauty, in the place of the earlier form, which was one of hatred
and cruelty with a deformity also inexpressible.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 3212

CHILDHOOD

     "It is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one
     of these little ones should perish."

                                        --Matthew, XVIII, 14

Never could a man live,--certainly not as a human being,--unless he had in himself something
vital, that is, some innocence, neighborly love, and mercy. This a man receives from the Lord
in infancy and childhood. What he receives then is treasured up in him, and is called in the
Word the remnant or remains, which are of the Lord alone with him, and they make it possible
for him truly to be a man on reaching adult age. These states are the elements of his regeneration,
and he is led into them; for the Lord works by means of them. These remains are also called
"the living soul" in all flesh.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 1050

All states of innocence from infancy on, of love toward parents, brothers, teachers and friends;
of charity to the neighbor, and also of mercy to the poor and needy; all states of goodness
and truth, with their goods and truths, impressed on; the memory, are preserved in man by the
Lord, and are stored up unconsciously to himself in his internal man, and are carefully kept
from evils and falsities. They are all so preserved by the Lord that not the smallest of them
is lost. Every state from infancy even to extreme old age not only remains in another life,
but also returns. Returning, these states are such as they were during a man's abode in the
world. Not only the goods and truths, stored up in the memory, remain and return, but likewise
all the states of innocence and charity; and when states of evil and the false, or of wickedness
and phantasy recur, these latter states are attempered by the former through the Divine operation
of the Lord.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 561

PRAYER

    "O Thou who hearest prayer;
    Unto Thee shall all flesh come."

                   --Psalm, LXV, 2

Prayer, in itself considered, is speech with God. There is then some inward view of the objects
of the prayer, and answering to that something like an influx into the perception or thought.
Thus there is a kind of opening of the man's interiors toward God, with a difference according
to the man's state and according to the nature of the object of the prayer. Things inward are
excited by external worship; and outward things are kept in holiness by external worship, so
that things inward can flow in. Moreover, a man is imbued in this way with knowledge, and prepared
to receive celestial things, so as to be endowed with states of holiness, though he is unaware
of it. These states of holiness the Lord preserves to him for the use of eternal life; for
in the other life all one's states of life recur.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 1618

THE SACRAMENTS

Baptism and the Holy Supper are the holiest acts of worship. Baptism and the Holy Supper are
as it were two gates, through which a man is introduced into eternal life. After the first
gate there is a plain, which he must traverse; and the second is the goal where the prize is,
to which he directed his course; for the palm is not given until after the contest, nor the
reward until after the combat.

--True Christian Religion, nn. 667, 721

I. BAPTISM

Baptism was instituted for a sign that a man is of the Church and for a memorial that he is
to be regenerated. For the washing of baptism is no other than spiritual washing, which is
regeneration. All regeneration is effected by the Lord through truths of faith and a life according
to them. Baptism, therefore, testifies that a man is of the Church and that he can be regenerated;
for it is in the Church that the Lord is acknowledged, Who regenerates man, and there the Word
is, where are truths of faith, by which is regeneration.

--Heavenly Doctrine, nn. 202, 203

The sign of the cross which a child receives on the forehead and breast at baptism is a sign
of inauguration into the acknowledgment and worship of the Lord.

--True Christian Religion, n. 682

II. THE HOLY SUPPER

The Holy Supper was instituted that by means of it there might be conjunction of the Church
with heaven, and thus with the Lord. When one takes the bread, which is the Body, one is conjoined
with the Lord by the good of love to Him, from Him; and when one takes the wine, which is the
Blood, one is conjoined to the Lord by the good of faith in Him, from Him.

--Heavenly Doctrine, nn. 210, 213

In the Holy Supper the Lord is fully present, both as to His glorified Humanity, and as to
the Divine. And because He is fully present, therefore the whole of His redemption is; for
where the Lord the Redeemer is, there redemption is. Therefore all who observe the Holy Communion
worthily, become His redeemed, and receives the fruits of redemption, namely, liberation from
hell, union with the Lord, and salvation.

--True Christian Religion, nn. But those who renounce the world and live in the spirit in this
manner acquire a melancholy life, unreceptive of heavenly joy. To receive the life of heaven
a man must by all means live in the world and engage in its duties and affairs and by a moral
and civil life receive the spiritual life. 528, 533

THE DECALOGUE

     "Come, let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual
     covenant that shall not be forgotten."

                                          --Jeremiah, L, 5

The conjunction of God with man, and of man with God, is taught in the two Tables which were
written with the finger of God, called the Tables of the Covenant. These Tables obtain with
all nations who have a religion. From the first Table they know that God is to be acknowledged,
hallowed and worshipped. From the second Table they know that a man is not to steal, either
openly or by trickery, nor to commit adultery, nor to kill, whether by blow or by hatred, nor
to bear false witness in a court of justice, or before the world, and further that he ought
not to will those evils. From this Table a man knows the evils which he must shun, and in the
measure that he knows them and shuns them, God conjoins him to Himself, and in turn from His
Table gives man to acknowledge, hallow and worship Him. So, also, He gives him not to meditate
evils, and, in so far as he does not will them, to know truths freely.

--Apocalypse Explained, n. 1179

As one views the two tables, it is plain that they are so conjoined that God from His table
looks to man, and that in turn man from his table looks to God. Thus the regard is reciprocal.
It is such from its origin, which is the marriage of good and truth; also from its correspondence
with the marriage of the Lord and the Church. If it be received from its Author, Who is the
Lord, sanctity from Him follows, which continually cleanses and purifies it. Then, if there
be in man's will a longing for it and an effort toward it, this love becomes continually cleaner
and purer. All who are in such love shun extra-conjugial loves (which are conjunctions with
others than their own conjugial partner) as they would shun the loss of the soul and the lakes
of hell; and in the measure that married partners shun such conjunctions, even in respect of
libidinous desires of the will and any intentions from them, so far love truly conjugial is
purified with them, and becomes successively spiritual.

--Conjugial Love, nn. 64, 71

THE HEIGHT OF SERVICE

Conjugial love is the love at the foundation of all good loves, and is inscribed on all the
least life of the human being. Its delights therefore surpass the delights of all other loves,
and it also gives delight to other loves, in the measure of its presence and union with them.
Into it all delights from first to last are collected, on account of the superior excellence
of its use, which is the propagation of the human race, and from it of an angelic heaven. As
this service was the supreme end of creation, all the beatitudes, satisfaction, delights, pleasantnesses
and pleasures, which the Lord the Creator could possibly confer upon man, are gathered into
this love.

--Conjugial Love, n. 68

ITS WHOLE ESTATE

The states of conjugial love are Innocence, Peace, Tranquillity, Inmost Friendship, full Confidence,
and mutual desire of mind and heart to do each other every good. From all of these come blessedness,
satisfaction, agreeableness and pleasure; and as the eternal fruition of them, heavenly happiness.
These states can be realized only in the marriage of one man with one wife.

--Conjugial Love, nn. 180, 181

THE SACRED SCRIPTURES

    "They testify of Me."

                       --John, V, 39

GOD'S WORD

In its inmosts the Sacred Scripture is no other than God, that is, the Divine which proceeds
from God.... In its derivatives it is accommodated to the perception of angels and men. In
these it is Divine likewise, but in another form, in which this Divine is called "Celestial,"
"Spiritual," and "Natural." These are no other than coverings of God. Still the Divine, which
is inmost, and is covered with such things as are accommodated to the perceptions of angels
and men, shines forth like light through crystalline forms, but variously, according to the
state of mind which a man has formed for himself, either from God or from self. In the sight
of the man who has formed the state of his mind from God, the Sacred Scripture is like a mirror
in which he sees God, each in his own way. The truths which he learns from the Word and which
become a part of him by a life according to them, compose that mirror. The Sacred Scripture
is the fulness of God.

--True Christian Religion, n. 6

IN ITS BOSOM SPIRITUAL

The Word in its bosom is spiritual. Descending from Jehovah the Lord, and passing through the
angelic heavens, the Divine (in itself ineffable and imperceptible) became level with the perception
of angels and finally the perception of man. Hence the Word has a spiritual sense, which is
within the natural, just as the soul is in the body, or as thought is in speech, or volition
in action.

--True Christian Religion, n. 193

THE LETTER OF THE WORD

The truths of the sense of the letter of the Word are in part appearances of truth, and are
taken from things in nature, and thus accommodated and adapted to the grasp of the simple and
also of little children. But being correspondences, they are receptacles and abodes of genuine
truth; and are like enclosing and containing vessels. The naked truths themselves, which are
enclosed and contained, are in the Word's spiritual sense; and the naked goods in its celestial
sense.

The doctrine of genuine truth can also be drawn in full from the literal sense of the Word;
for the Word in this sense is like a man clothed, whose face and hands are bare. All that concerns
man's life, and so his salvation, is bare; the rest is clothed.

--Doctrine Concerning the Sacred Scripture, nn. 40, 55

ITS LANGUAGE

The whole natural world corresponds to the spiritual world; not only generally, but in detail.
Whatever comes forth in the natural world from the spiritual, is therefore called correspondent.
The world of nature comes forth and subsists from the spiritual world, just as an effect does
from its efficient cause.

--Heaven and Hell, n. 89

