ALSO

A REPUBLICATION of the Sentiments of several Authors of Note on this interesting Subject: Particularly
an Extract of a Treatise written by GRANVILLE SHARPE.

By ANTHONY BENEZET

    ACTS xvii. 24, 26.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed MDCCLXXI.

LONDON: Re-printed MDCCLXXII.

    Introduction.

    CHAPTER I. A GENERAL account of Guinea; particularly those
    parts on the rivers Senegal and Gambia.

    CHAP. II. Account of the Ivory-Coast, the Gold-Coast and
    the Slave-Coast.

    CHAP. III. Of the kingdoms of Benin, Kongo and Angola.

    CHAP. IV. Guinea, first discovered and subdued by the
    Arabians. The Portuguese make descents on the coast, and carry
    off the natives. Oppression of the Indians: De la Casa pleads
    their cause.

    CHAP. V. The English's first trade to the coast of Guinea:
    Violently carry off some of the Negros.

    CHAP. VI. Slavery more tolerable under Pagans and Turks
    than in the colonies. As christianity prevailed, ancient
    slavery declined.

    CHAP. VII. Montesquieu's sentiments of slavery. Morgan
    Godwyn's advocacy on behalf of Negroes and Indians, &c.

    CHAP. VIII. Grievous treatment of the Negroes in the colonies,
    &c.

    CHAP. IX. Desire of gain the true motive of the Slave trade.
    Misrepresentation of the state of the Negroes in Guinea.

    CHAP. X. State of the Government in Guinea, &c.

    CHAP. XI. Accounts of the cruel methods used in carrying on of
    the Slave trade, &c.

    CHAP. XII. Extracts of several voyages to the coast of Guinea,
    &c.

    CHAP. XIII. Numbers of Negroes, yearly brought from Guinea,
    by the English, &c.

    CHAP. XIV. Observations on the situation and disposition of the
    Negroes in the northern colonies, &c.

    CHAP. XV. Europeans capable of bearing reasonable labour in
    the West Indies, &c.

    Extracts from Granville Sharp's representations, &c.

    Sentiments of several authors, viz. George Wallace, Francis
    Hutcheson, and James Foster.

    Extracts of an address to the assembly of Virginia.

    Extract of the bishop of Gloucester's sermon.

INTRODUCTION.

The slavery of the Negroes having, of late, drawn the attention of many serious minded people;
several tracts have been published setting forth its inconsistency with every christian and
moral virtue, which it is hoped will have weight with the judicious; especially at a time when
the liberties of mankind are become so much the subject of general attention. For the satisfaction
of the serious enquirer who may not have the opportunity of seeing those tracts, and such others
who are sincerely desirous that the iniquity of this practice may become effectually apparent,
to those in whose power, it may be to put a stop to any farther progress therein; it is proposed,
hereby, to republish the most material parts of said tracts; and in order to enable the reader
to form a true judgment of this matter, which, tho' so very important, is generally disregarded,
or so artfully misrepresented by those whose interest leads them to vindicate it, as to bias
the opinions of people otherwise upright; some account will be here given of the different
parts of Africa, from which the Negroes are brought to America; with an impartial relation
from what motives the Europeans were first induced to undertake, and have since continued this
iniquitous traffic. And here it will not be improper to premise, that tho' wars, arising from
the common depravity of human nature, have happened, as well among the Negroes as other nations,
and the weak sometimes been made captives to the strong; yet nothing appears, in the various
relations of the intercourse and trade for a long time carried on by the Europeans on that
coast, which would induce us to believe, that there is any real foundation for that argument,
so commonly advanced in vindication of that trade, viz. "That the slavery of the Negroes took
its rise from a desire, in the purchasers, to save the lives of such of them as were taken
captives in war, who would otherwise have been sacrificed to the implacable revenge of their
conquerors." A plea which when compared with the history of those times, will appear to be
destitute of Truth; and to have been advanced, and urged, principally by such as were concerned
in reaping the gain of this infamous traffic, as a palliation of that, against which their
own reason and conscience must have raised fearful objections.

SOME

HISTORICAL ACCOUNT

OF

GUINEA.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Price 2s. 6d. stitched.]

CHAP. I.

Guinea affords an easy living to its inhabitants, with but little toil. The climate agrees
well with the natives, but extremely unhealthful to the Europeans. Produces provisions in the
greatest plenty. Simplicity of their housholdry. The coast of Guinea described from the river
Senegal to the kingdom of Angola. The fruitfulness of that part lying on and between the two
great rivers Senegal and Gambia. Account of the different nations settled there. Order of government
amongst the Jalofs. Good account of some of the Fulis. The Mandingos; their management, government,
&c. Their worship. 518. Allow me to add a Query: Who are the persons now privileged to wear these
collars? and under what circumstances, and at what dates, was such
privilege reduced to its present limitation?

[Greek: Phi.]

Martello Towers (Vol. ii., p. 9.).--A misspelling for Mortella towers. They are named after a
tower which commands the entrance to the harbour of St. Fiorenzo, in Corsica; but they are common
along the coasts of the Mediterranean. They were built along the low parts of the Sussex and
Kent coasts, in consequence of the powerful defence made by Ensign Le Tellier at the Tower
of Mortella, with a garrison of 38 men only, on 8th February, 1794, against an attack by sea, made
by the Fortitude and Juno, part of Lord Hood's fleet, and by land, made by a detachment of troops
under Major-General Dundas. The two ships kept up a fire for two hours and a half without making
any material impression, and then hauled out of gun-shot, the Fortitude having lost 6 men killed
and 56 wounded, 8 dangerously. The troops were disembarked, and took possession of a height comnanding
the tower; and their battering was as unsuccessful, till a hot shot fell and set fire to the
bass-junk, with which, to the depth of five feet, the immensely thick parapet wall was lined. This
induced the small garrison, of whom two were mortally wounded, to surrender. The tower mounted
only one 6 and two 18-pounders, and the carriage of one of the latter had been rendered unserviceable
during the cannonade. (See James' Naval History, vol. i. p. 285.) The towers along the English
coast extend from Hythe to Seaford, where the last tower is numbered 74, at intervals of about
a quarter of a mile, except where the coast is protected by the cliffs. The tower at Seaford
is 32 feet high, with a circumference of 136 feet at the base, and gradually tapering to 90
feet at the top. The wall is 6 feet thick at the top next the sea, and 2 feet on the land side. The cost
of each tower was very large,--from 15,000l. to 20,000l. I am not aware of any blue book on the
subject; blue books were not so much in vogue at the time of their erection, or perhaps a little
less would have been spent in these erections, and a little more pains would have been taken
to see that they were properly built. Some have been undermined by the sea and washed down already;
in others, the facing of brick has crumbled away; and in all the fancied security which the
original tower taught us to expect would be probably lessened were the English towers subjected
to an attack.

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

"A Frog he would a-wooing go" (Vol. ii., p. 75.).--I know not whether this foolish ballad is
worth the notice it has already received, but I can venture to say that the supposed Irish version
is but a modern variance from the old ballad which I remember above sixty years, and which began--

"There
was a frog lived in a well, Heigho crowdie! And a merry mouse in a mill, With a howdie crowdie,
&c. &c. This frog he would a-wooing go, Heigho crowdie! Whether his mother would let him or
no, With a howdie crowdie," &c.
Of the rest of the ballad I only remember enough to be able to say
that it had little or no resemblance to the version in your last Number.

C.

William
of Wykeham (Vol. ii., p. 89.).--1. I believe that there is no better
life of this prelate than that by Bishop Lowth.

2. The public records
published since he wrote give several further particulars of Wykeham's
early career, but a proper notice of them would be too extended for
your columns.

3. The other furniture, except what belongs to cookery, gives the women
but little trouble; the moveables of the greatest among them amounting only to a few earthen
pots, some wooden utensils, and gourds or calabashes; from these last, which grow almost naturally
over their huts, to which they afford an agreeable shade, they are abundantly stocked with
good clean vessels for most houshold uses, being of different sizes, from half a pint to several
gallons.

[Footnote A: Gentleman's Magazine, Supplement, 1763. Extract of a letter wrote from the island
of Senegal, by Mr. Boone, practitioner of physic there, to Dr. Brocklesby of London.

    "To form just idea of the unhealthiness of the climate, it will
    be necessary to conceive a country extending three hundred
    leagues East, and more to the North and South. Through this
    country several large rivers empty themselves into the sea;
    particularly the Sanaga, Gambia and Sherbro; these, during the
    rainy months, which begin in July and continue till October,
    overflow their banks, and lay the whole flat country under
    water; and indeed, the very sudden rise of these rivers is
    incredible to persons who have never been within the tropicks,
    and are unacquainted with the violent rains that fall there. At
    Galem, nine hundred miles from the mouth of the Sanaga, I am
    informed that the waters rise one hundred and fifty feet
    perpendicular, from the bed of the river. This information I
    received from a gentleman, who was surgeon's mate to a party
    sent there, and the only survivor of three captains command,
    each consisting of one captain, two lieutenants, one ensign, a
    surgeon's mate, three serjeants, three corporals, and fifty
    privates.

    "When the rains are at an end, which usually happens in October,
    the intense heat of the sun soon dries up the waters which lie
    on the higher parts of the earth, and the remainder forms lakes
    of stagnated waters, in which are found all sorts of dead
    animals. These waters every day decrease, till at last they are
    quite exhaled, and then the effluvia that arises is almost
    insupportable. At this season, the winds blow so very hot from
    off the land, that I can compare them to nothing but the heat
    proceeding from the mouth of an oven. This occasions the
    Europeans to be sorely vexed with bilious and putrid fevers.
    From this account you will not be surprized, that the total loss
    of British subjects in this island only, amounted to above two
    thousand five hundred, in the space of three years that I was
    there, in such a putrid moist air as I have described."

]

[Footnote B: James Barbot, agent general to the French African company, in his account of Africa,
page 105, says, "The natives are seldom troubled with any distempers, being little affected
with the unhealthy air. In tempestuous times they keep much within doors; and when exposed
to the weather, their skins being suppled, and pores closed by daily anointing with palm oil,
the weather can make but little impression on them."]

That part of Africa from which the Negroes are sold to be carried into slavery, commonly known
by the name of Guinea, extends along the coast three or four thousand miles. Beginning at the
river Senegal, situate about the 17th degree of North latitude, being the nearest part of Guinea,
as well to Europe as to North America; from thence to the river Gambia, and in a southerly
course to Cape Sierra Leona, comprehends a coast of about seven hundred miles; being the same
tract for which Queen Elizabeth granted charters to the first traders to that coast: from Sierra
Leona, the land of Guinea takes a turn to the eastward, extending that course about fifteen
hundred miles, including those several civilians known by name of the Grain Coast, the Ivory
Coast, the Gold Coast, and the Slave Coast, with the large kingdom of Benin. From thence the
land runs southward along the coast about twelve hundred miles, which contains the kingdoms
of Congo and Angola; there the trade for slaves ends. From which to the southermost Cape of
Africa, called the Cape of Good Hope, the country is settled by Caffres and Hottentots, who
have never been concerned in the making or selling slaves.

Of the parts which are above described, the first which presents itself to view, is that situate
on the great river Senegal, which is said to be navigable more than a thousand miles, and is
by travellers described to be very agreeable and fruitful. Andrew Brue, principal factor for
the French African company, who lived sixteen years in that country, after describing its fruitfulness
and plenty, near the sea, adds,[A] "The farther you go from the sea, the country on the river
seems the more fruitful and well improved; abounding with Indian corn, pulse, fruit, &c. Here
are vast meadows, which feed large herds of great and small cattle, and poultry numerous: The
villages that lie thick on the river, shew the country is well peopled." The same author, in
the account of a voyage he made up the river Gambia, the mouth of which lies about three hundred
miles South of the Senegal, and is navigable about six hundred miles up the country, says,[B]
"That he was surprized to see the land so well cultivated; scarce a spot lay unimproved; the
low lands, divided by small canals, were all formed with rice, &c. the higher ground planted
with millet, Indian corn, and pease of different sorts; their beef excellent; poultry plenty,
and very cheap, as well as all other necessaries of life." Francis Moor, who was sent from
England about the year 1735, in the service of the African company, and resided at James Fort,
on the river Gambia, or in other factories on that river, about five years, confirms the above
account of the fruitfulness of the country. William Smith, who was sent in the year 1726, by
the African company, to survey their settlements throughout the whole coast of Guinea[C] says,
"The country about the Gambia is pleasant and fruitful; provisions of all kinds being plenty
and exceeding cheap." The country on and between the two above-mentioned rivers is large and
extensive, inhabited principally by those three Negro nations known by the name of Jalofs,
Fulis, and Mandingos. The Jalofs possess the middle of the country. The Fulis principal settlement
is on both sides of the Senegal; great numbers of these people are also mixed with the Mandingos;
which last are mostly settled on both sides the Gambia. The government of the Jalofs is represented
as under a better regulation than can be expected from the common opinion we entertain of the
Negroes. We are told in the Collection,[D] "That the King has under him several ministers of
state, who assist him in the exercise of justice. The grand Jerafo is the chief justice thro'
all the King's dominions, and goes in circuit from time to time to hear complaints, and determine
controversies. The King's treasurer exercises the same employment, and has under him Alkairs,
who are governors of towns or villages. That the Kondi, or Viceroy, goes the circuit with the
chief justice, both to hear causes, and inspect into the behaviour of the Alkadi, or chief
magistrate of every village in their several districts[E]." Vasconcelas, an author mentioned
in the collection, says, "The ancientest are preferred to be the Prince's counsellors, who
keep always about his person; and the men of most judgment and experience are the judges." They,
like all the other wounded, are brave and cheerful, but it will take great courage to maintain
this cheer, groping a long lifetime in the dark. One man counted 151 trains of twenty cars each,
or 3,000 carriages, filled with German wounded passing back in a steady stream through Belgium.
Behind all the active fronts these train loads of wounded are daily bearing their burden of
suffering humanity. The cities and towns of Europe are filled with limping or crippled or
wounded men today.

Opposite the writer at the ship's table sat a young man with the lower part of his face carried
away. His chin and jaw were gone, yet he must live on for a lifetime deformed. Another young
fellow had spent seven long weary months in training. The moment his regiment reached the front
it was ordered immediately into action. He sprang to the top of the trench, but never got over it.
He fell back wounded. Within three days he was back in England again, but with only one leg.
Seven months of training, five minutes in action, then crippled for life! The writer saw one
young fellow whose face was left contorted by shrapnel, which had carried away one eye and the
bridge of his nose. He was a quiet, earnest Christian. He said, "Of course, they cannot send me
back again into the line or compel me to go with only one eye, but I am going just the same.
I am going to give all that I have left to the country and the cause." [4]

Hear that young soldier of France, Alfred Casalis, a brilliant student of philosophy and theology,
a Student Volunteer for the African mission field, as he writes home to his father and mother
at the age of nineteen: "I volunteered of course.

I know with an unalterable knowledge and with an unconquerable confidence
that the foundation of my faith is unshakeable, it rests upon the
Rock.

I shall fight with a good conscience and without fear (I hope), certainly
without hate.

I feel myself filled with an illimitable hope.

You can have no idea of the peace in which I live.

On the march I sing inwardly.

I listen to the music that is slumbering inside me.

The Master's call is always ringing loudly in my ears.

I am not afraid of death. I have made the sacrifice of my life. I know that to die is to begin
to live." And the last sentence of the unfinished letter written before the charge in which he
fell, "The attack cannot but succeed. There will be some wounded, some killed, but we shall go
forward and far--" In the other pocket of his coat, at the end of
his will were the words, "'I have fought the good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith.' And I would that all my friends,
all those who are every moment with me, and whose hearts beat with
mine, should repeat the word of our hope, 'Because I live, ye shall
live also.'" Many are industrious and
laborious, keeping their ground well cultivated, and breeding a good stock of cattle.[A] Every
town has an Alkadi, or Governor, who has great power; for most of them having two common fields
of clear ground, one for corn, and the other for rice, the Alkadi appoints the labour of all
the people. The men work the corn ground, and the women and girls the rice ground; and as they
all equally labour, so he equally divides the corn amongst them; and in case they are in want,
the others supply them. This Alkadi decides all quarrels, and has the first voice in all conferences
in town affairs." Some of these Mandingos who are settled at Galem, far up the river Senegal,
can read and write Arabic tolerably, and are a good hospitable people, who carry on a trade
with the inland nations."[B] They are extremely populous in those parts, their women being
fruitful, and they not suffering any person amongst them, but such as are guilty of crimes,
to be made slaves." We are told from Jobson,"[C] That the Mahometan Negroes say their prayers
thrice a day. Each village has a priest who calls them to their duty. It is surprizing (says
the author) as well as commendable, to see the modesty, attention, and reverence they observe
during their worship. He asked some of their priests the purport of their prayers and ceremonies;
their answer always was, That they adored God by prostrating themselves before him; that by
humbling themselves, they acknowledged their own insignificancy, and farther intreated him
to forgive their faults, and to grant them all good and necessary things as well as deliverance
from evil." Jobson takes notice of several good qualities in these Negroe priests, particularly
their great sobriety. They gain their livelihood by keeping school for the education of the
children. The boys are taught to read and write. They not only teach school, but rove about
the country, teaching and instructing, for which the whole country is open to them; and they
have a free course through all places, though the Kings may be at war with one another.

[Footnote A: Astley's collect. vol. 2, page 269.]

[Footnote B: Astley's collect. vol. 2, page 73.]

[Footnote C: Ibid, 296.]

The three fore-mentioned nations practise several trades, as smiths, potters, sadlers, and
weavers. Their smiths particularly work neatly in gold and silver, and make knifes, hatchets,
reaping hooks, spades and shares to cut iron, &c. &c. Their potters make neat tobacco pipes,
and pots to boil their food. Some authors say that weaving is their principal trade; this is
done by the women and girls, who spin and weave very fine cotton cloth, which they dye blue
or black.[A] F. Moor says, the Jalofs particularly make great quantities of the cotton cloth;
their pieces are generally twenty-seven yards long, and about nine inches broad, their looms
being very narrow; these they sew neatly together, so as to supply the use of broad cloth.

[Footnote A: F. Moor, 28.]

It was in these parts of Guinea, that M. Adanson, correspondent of the Royal Academy of Sciences
at Paris, mentioned in some former publications, was employed from the year 1749, to the year
1753, wholly in making natural and philosophical observations on the country about the rivers
Senegal and Gambia. Speaking of the great heats in Senegal, he says,[A] "It is to them that
they are partly indebted for the fertility of their lands; which is so great, that, with little
labour and care, there is no fruit nor grain but grow in great plenty."

[Footnote A: M. Adanson's voyage to Senegal, &c, page 308.]

Of the soil on the Gambia, he says,[A] "It is rich and deep, and amazingly fertile; it produces
spontaneously, and almost without cultivation, all the necessaries of life, grain, fruit, herbs,
and roots. Every thing matures to perfection, and is excellent in its kind."[B] One thing,
which always surprized him, was the prodigious rapidity with which the sap of trees repairs
any loss they may happen to sustain in that country: "And I was never," says he, "more astonished,
than when landing four days after the locusts had devoured all the fruits and leaves, and even
the buds of the trees, to find the trees covered with new leaves, and they did not seem to
me to have suffered much."[C] "It was then," says the same author; "the fish season; you might
see them in shoals approaching towards land. Some of those shoals were fifty fathom square,
and the fish crowded together in such a manner, as to roll upon one another, without being
able to swim. As soon as the Negroes perceive them coming towards land, they jump into the
water with a basket in one hand, and swim with the other. They need only to plunge and to lift
up their basket, and they are sure to return loaded with fish." Speaking of the appearance
of the country, and of the disposition of the people, he says,[D] "Which way soever I turned
mine eyes on this pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect image of pure nature; an agreeable solitude,
bounded on every side by charming landscapes; the rural situation of cottages in the midst
of trees; the ease and indolence of the Negroes, reclined under the shade of their spreading
foliage; the simplicity of their dress and manners; the whole revived in my mind the idea of
our first parents, and I seemed to contemplate the world in its primitive state. They are,
generally speaking, very good-natured, sociable, and obliging. I was not a little pleased with
this my first reception; it convinced me, that there ought to be a considerable abatement made
in the accounts I had read and heard every where of the savage character of the Africans. I
observed both in Negroes and Moors, great humanity and sociableness, which gave me strong hopes
that I should be very safe amongst them, and meet with the success I desired in my enquiries
after the curiosities of the country."[E] He was agreeably amused with the conversation of
the Negroes, their fables, dialogues, and witty stories with which they entertain each other
alternately, according to their custom. Speaking of the remarks which the natives made to him,
with relation to the stars and planets, he says, "It is amazing, that such a rude and illiterate
people, should reason so pertinently in regard to those heavenly bodies; there is no manner
of doubt, but that with proper instruments, and a good will, they would become excellent astronomers."

[Footnote A: Idem, page 164.]

[Footnote B: M. Adanson, page 161.]

[Footnote C: Idem, page 171.]

[Footnote D: Ibid, page 54.]

[Footnote E: Adanson, page 252, ibid.]

CHAP. II

The Ivory Coast; its soil and produce. The character of the natives misrepresented by some
authors. These misrepresentations occasioned by the Europeans having treacherously carried
off many of their people. John Smith, surveyor to the African company, his observations thereon.
John Snock's remarks. The Gold Coast and Slave Coast, these have the most European factories,
and furnish the greatest number of slaves to the Europeans. Exceeding fertile. The country
of Axim, and of Ante. Good account of the inland people Great fishery. Extraordinary trade
for slaves. The Slave Coast. The kingdom of Whidah. Fruitful and pleasant. The natives kind
and obliging. Very populous. Keep regular markets and fairs. Good order therein. Murder, adultery,
and theft severely punished. The King's revenues. The principal people have an idea of the
true God. Commendable care of the poor. Several small governments depend on plunder and the
slave trade.

That part of Guinea known by the name of the Grain, and Ivory Coast, comes next in course.
This coast extends about five hundred miles. The soil appears by account, to be in general
fertile, producing abundance of rice and roots; indigo and cotton thrive without cultivation,
and tobacco would be excellent, if carefully manufactured; they have fish in plenty; their
flocks greatly increase, and their trees are loaded with fruit. They make a cotton cloth, which
sells well on the Coast. In a word, the country is rich, and the commerce advantageous, and
might be greatly augmented by such as would cultivate the friendship of the natives. These
are represented by some writers as a rude, treacherous people, whilst several other authors
of credit give them a very different character, representing them as sensible, courteous and
the fairest traders on the coast of Guinea. In the Collection, they are said[A] to be averse
to drinking to excess, and such as do, are severely punished by the King's order: On enquiry
why there is such a disagreement in the character given of these people, it appears, that though
they are naturally inclined to be kind to strangers, with whom they are fond of trading, yet
the frequent injuries done them by Europeans, have occasioned their being suspicious and shy.
The same cause has been the occasion of the ill treatment they have sometimes given to innocent
strangers, who have attempted to trade with them. As the Europeans have no settlement on this
part of Guinea, the trade is carried on by signals from the ships, on the appearance of which
the natives usually come on board in their canoes, bringing their gold-dust, ivory, &c. which
has given opportunity to some villainous Europeans to carry them off with their effects, or
retain them on board till a ransom is paid. It is noted by some, that since the European voyagers
have carried away several of these people, their mistrust is so great, that it is very difficult
to prevail on them to come on board. William Smith remarks,[B] "As we past along this coast,
we very often lay before a town, and fired a gun for the natives to come off, but no soul came
near us; at length we learnt by some ships that were trading down the coast, that the natives
came seldom on board an English ship, for fear of being detained or carried off; yet last some
ventured on board, but if those chanced to spy any arms, they would all immediately take to
their canoes, and make the best of their way home. They had then in their possession one Benjamin
Cross the mate of an English vessel, who was detained by them to make reprisals for some of
their men, who had formerly been carried away by some English vessel." In the Collection we
are told,[C]This villainous custom is too often practised, chiefly by the Bristol and Liverpool
ships, and is a great detriment to the slave trade on the windward coast. John Snock, mentioned
in Bosman[D] when on that coast, wrote, "We cast anchor, but not one Negro coming on board,
I went on shore, and after having staid a while on the strand, some Negroes came to me; and
being desirous to be informed why they did not come on board, I was answered that about two
months before, the English had been there with two large vessels, and had ravaged the country,
destroyed all their canoes, plundered their houses, and carried off some of their people, upon
which the remainder fled to the inland country, where most of them were that time; so that
there being not much to be done by us, we were obliged to return on board.[E] When I enquired
after their wars with other countries, they told me they were not often troubled with them;
but if any difference happened, they chose rather to end the dispute amicably, than to come
to arms."[F] He found the inhabitants civil and good-natured. Speaking of the King of Rio Seftré
lower down the coast, he says, "He was a very agreeable, obliging man, and that all his subjects
are civil, as well as very laborious in agriculture, and the pursuits of trade," Marchais says,[G]
"That though the country is very populous, yet none of the natives (except criminals) are sold
for slaves." Vaillant never heard of any settlement being made by the Europeans on this part
of Guinea; and Smith remarks,[H] "That these coasts, which are divided into several little
kingdoms, and have seldom any wars, is the reason the slave trade is not so good here as on
the Gold and Slave Coast, where the Europeans have several forts and factories." A plain evidence
this, that it is the intercourse with the Europeans, and their settlements on the coast, which
gives life to the slave trade.

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 2, page 560.]

[Footnote B: W. Smith, page 111.]

[Footnote C: Astley's collection, vol. 2, page 475.]

[Footnote D: W. Bosman's description of Guinea, page 440.]

[Footnote E: W. Bosman's description of Guinea, page 429.]

[Footnote F: Ibid, 441.]

[Footnote G: Astley's collection, Vol. 2, page 565.]

[Footnote H: Smith's voyage to Guinea, page 112.]

Next adjoining to the Ivory Coast, are those called the Gold Coast, and the Slave Coast; authors
are not agreed about their bounds, but their extent together along the coast may be about five
hundred miles. And as the policy, produce, and oeconomy of these two kingdoms of Guinea are
much the same, I shall describe them together.

Here the Europeans have the greatest number of forts and factories, from whence, by means of
the Negro sailors, a trade is carried on above seven hundred miles back in the inland country;
whereby great numbers of slaves are procured, as well by means of the wars which arise amongst
the Negroes, or are fomented by the Europeans, as those brought from the back country. Here
we find the natives more reconciled to the European manners and trade; but, at the same time,
much more inured to war, and ready to assist the European traders in procuring loadings for
the great number of vessels which come yearly on those coasts for slaves. This part of Guinea
is agreed by historians to be, in general, extraordinary fruitful and agreeable; producing
(according to the difference of the soil) vast quantities of rice and other grain; plenty of
fruit and roots; palm wine and oil, and fish in great abundance, with much tame and wild cattle.
Bosman, principal factor for the Dutch at D'Elmina, speaking of the country of Axim, which
is situate towards the beginning of the Gold Coast, says,[A] "The Negro inhabitants are generally
very rich, driving a great trade with the Europeans for gold. That they are industriously employed
either in trade, fishing, or agriculture; but chiefly in the culture of rice, which grows here
in an incredible abundance, and is transported hence all over the Gold Coast. The inhabitants,
in lieu, returning full fraught with millet, jamms, potatoes, and palm oil." The same author
speaking of the country of Ante, says,[B] "This country, as well as the Gold Coast, abounds
with hills, enriched with extraordinary high and beautiful trees; its valleys, betwixt the
hills, are wide and extensive, producing in great abundance very good rice, millet, jamms,
potatoes, and other fruits, all good in their kind." He adds, "In short, it is a land that
yields its manurers as plentiful a crop as they can wish, with great quantities of palm wine
and oil, besides being well furnished with all sorts of tame, as well as wild beasts; but that
the last fatal wars had reduced it to a miserable condition, and stripped it of most of its
inhabitants."

[Footnote A: Bosman's description of the coast of Guinea, p, 5.]

[Footnote B: Idem, page 14.]

[Footnote C: Bosman, page 41.]

William Smith gives much the same account of the before-mentioned parts of the Gold Coast,
and adds, "The country about D'Elmina and Cape Coast, is much the same for beauty and goodness,
but more populous; and the nearer we come towards the Slave Coast, the more delightful and
rich all the countries are, producing all sorts of trees, fruits, roots, and herbs, that grow
within the Torrid Zone." J. Barbot also remarks,[A] with respect to the countries of Ante and
Adom, "That the soil is very good and fruitful in corn and other produce, which it affords
in such plenty, that besides what serves for their own use, they always export great quantities
for sale; they have a competent number of cattle, both tame and wild, and the rivers abundantly
stored with fish, so that nothing is wanting for the support of life, and to make it easy."
In the Collection it is said,[B] "That the inland people on that part of the coast, employ
themselves in tillage and trade, and supply the market with corn, fruit, and palm wine; the
country producing such vast plenty of Indian corn, that abundance is daily exported, as well
by Europeans as Blacks resorting thither from other parts." "These inland people are said to
live in great union and friendship, being generally well tempered, civil, and tractable; not
apt to shed human blood, except when much provoked, and ready to assist one another."

[Footnote A: John Barbot's description of Guinea, page 154.]

[Footnote B: Astley's collect. vol. 2. page 535.]

In the Collection[A] it is said, "That the fishing business is esteemed on the Gold Coast next
to trading; that those who profess it are more numerous than those of other employments. That
the greatest number of these are at Kommendo, Mina, and Kormantin. From each of which places,
there go out every morning, (Tuesday excepted, which is the Fetish day, or day of rest) five,
six, and sometimes eight hundred canoes, from thirteen to fourteen feet long, which spread
themselves two leagues at sea, each fisherman carrying in his canoe a sword, with bread, water,
and a little fire on a large stone to roast fish. Thus they labour till noon, when the sea
breeze blowing fresh, they return on the shore, generally laden with fish; a quantity of which
the inland inhabitants come down to buy, which they sell again at the country markets."

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 2, page 640.]

William Smith says,[A] "The country about Acra, where the English and Dutch have each a strong
fort, is very delightful, and the natives courteous and civil to strangers." He adds, "That
this place seldom fails of an extraordinary good trade from the inland country, especially
for slaves, whereof several are supposed to come from very remote parts, because it is not
uncommon to find a Malayan or two amongst a parcel of other slaves. The Malaya, people are
generally natives of Malacca, in the East Indies, situate several thousand miles from the Gold
Coast." They differ very much from the Guinea Negroes, being of a tawny complexion, with long
black hair.

[Footnote A: William Smith, page 145.]

Most parts of the Slave Coasts are represented as equally fertile and pleasant with the Gold
Coast. The kingdom of Whidah has been particularly noted by travellers.[A] William Smith and
Bosman agree, "That it is one of the most delightful countries in the world. The great number
and variety of tall, beautiful, and shady trees, which seem planted in groves, the verdant
fields every where cultivated, and no otherwise divided than by those groves, and in some places
a small foot-path, together with a great number of villages, contribute to afford the most
delightful prospect; the whole country being a fine easy, and almost imperceptible ascent,
for the space of forty or fifty miles from the sea. That the farther you go from the sea, the
more beautiful and populous the country appears. That the natives were kind and obliging, and
so industrious, that no place which was thought fertile, could escape being planted, even within
the hedges which inclose their villages. And that the next day after they had reaped, they
sowed again."

[Footnote A: Smith, page 194. Bosman, page 319.]

Snelgrave also says, "The country appears full of towns and villages; and being a rich soil,
and well cultivated, looks like an entire garden." In the Collection,[A] the husbandry of the
Negroes is described to be carried on with great regularity: "The rainy season approaching,
they go into the fields and woods, to fix on a proper place for sowing; and as here is no property
in ground, the King's licence being obtained, the people go out in troops, and first clear
the ground from bushes and weeds, which they burn. The field thus cleared, they dig it up a
foot deep, and so let it remain for eight or ten days, till the rest of their neighbours have
disposed their ground in the same manner. They then consult about sowing, and for that end
assemble at the King's Court the next Fetish day. The King's grain must be sown first. They
then go again to the field, and give the ground a second digging, and sow their seed. Whilst
the King or Governor's land is sowing; he sends out wine and flesh ready dressed; enough to
serve the labourers. Afterwards, they in like manner sow the ground, allotted for their neighbours,
as diligently as that of the King's, by whom they are also feasted; and so continue to work
in a body for the public benefit, till every man's ground is tilled and sowed. None but the
King, and a few great men, are exempted from this labour. Their grain soon sprouts out of the
ground. When it is about a man's height, and begins to ear, they raise a wooden house in the
centre of the field, covered with straw, in which they set their children to watch their corn,
and fright away the birds."

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 2, page 651.]

Bosman[A] speaks in commendation of the civility, kindness, and great industry of the natives
of Whidah; this is confirmed by Smith,[B] who says, "The natives here seem to be the most gentleman-like
Negroes in Guinea, abounding with good manners and ceremony to each other. The inferior pay
the utmost deference and, respect to the superior, as do wives to their husbands, and children
to their parents. All here are naturally industrious, and find constant employment; the men
in agriculture, and the women in spinning and weaving cotton. The men, whose chief talent lies
in husbandry, are unacquainted with arms; otherwise, being a numerous people, they could have
made a better defence against the King of Dahome, who subdued them without much trouble.[C]
Throughout the Gold Coast, there are regular markets in all villages, furnished with provisions
and merchandize, held every day in the week, except Tuesday, whence they supply not only the
inhabitants, but the European ships. The Negro women are very expert in buying and selling,
and extremely industrious; for they will repair daily to market from a considerable distance,
loaded like pack-horses, with a child, perhaps, at their back, and a heavy burden on their
heads. After selling their wares, they buy fish and other necessaries, and return home loaded
as they came.

[Footnote A: Bosman, page 317.]

[Footnote B: Smith, page 195.]

[Footnote C: Collect, vol. 2, p. 657.]

"There is a market held at Sabi every, fourth day,[A] also a weekly one in the province of
Aplogua, which is so resorted to, that there are usually five or six thousand merchants. Their
markets are so well regulated and governed, that seldom any disorder happens; each species
of merchandize and merchants have a place allotted them by themselves. The buyers may haggle
as much as they will, but it must be without noise or fraud. To keep order, the King appoints
a judge, who, with four officers well armed, inspects the markets, hears all complaints, and,
in a summary way, decides all differences; he has power to seize, and sell as slaves, all who
are catched in stealing, or disturbing the peace. In these markets are to be sold men, women,
children, oxen, sheep, goats, and fowls of all kinds; European cloths, linen and woollen; printed
callicoes, silk, grocery ware, china, golddust, iron in bars, &c. in a word, most sorts of
European goods, as well as the produce of Africa and Asia. They have other markets, resembling
our fairs, once or twice a year, to which all the country repair; for they take care to order
the day so in different governments, as not to interfere with each other."

[Footnote A: Collect. vol. 3, p. 11.]

With respect to government, William Smith says,[A] "That the Gold Coast and Slave Coast are
divided into different districts, some of which are governed by their Chiefs, or Kings; the
others, being more of the nature of a commonwealth are governed by some of the principal men,
called Caboceros, who, Bosman says, are properly denominated civil fathers, whose province
is to take care of the welfare of the city or village, and to appease tumults." But this order
of government has been much broken since the coming of the Europeans. Both Bosman and Barbot
mention murther and adultery to be severely punished on the Coast, frequently by death; and
robbery by a fine proportionable to the goods stolen.

[Footnote A: Smith, page 193.]

The income of some of the Kings is large, Bosman says, "That the King of Whidah's revenues
and duties on things bought and sold are considerable; he having the tithe of all things sold
in the market, or imported in the country."[A] Both the abovementioned authors say, The tax
on slaves shipped off in this King's dominions, in some years, amounts to near twenty thousand
pounds.

[Footnote A: Bosman, page 337. Barbot, page 335.]

Bosman tells us, "The Whidah Negroes have a faint idea of a true God, ascribing to him the
attributes of almighty power and omnipresence; but God, they say, is too high to condescend
to think of mankind; wherefore he commits the government of the world to those inferior deities
which they worship." Some authors say, the wisest of these Negroes are sensible of their mistake
in this opinion, but dare not forsake their own religion, for fear of the populace rising and
killing them. This is confirmed by William Smith, who says, "That all the natives of this coast
believe there is one true God, the author of them and all things; that they have some apprehension
of a future state; and that almost every village has a grove, or public place of worship, to
which the principal inhabitants, on a set day, resort to make their offerings."

In the Collection[A] it is remarked as an excellency in the Guinea government, "That however
poor they may be in general, yet there are no beggars to be found amongst them; which is owing
to the care of their chief men, whose province it is to take care of the welfare of the city
or village; it being part of their office, to see that such people may earn their bread by
their labour; some are set to blow the smith's bellows, others to press palm oil, or grind
colours for their matts, and sell provision in the markets. The young men are listed to serve
as soldiers, so that they suffer no common beggar."

[Footnote A: Astley's collection, vol. 2, page 619.]

Bosman ascribes a further reason for this good order, viz. "That when a Negroe finds he cannot
subsist, he binds himself for a certain sum of money, and the master to whom he is bound is
obliged to find him necessaries; that the master sets him a sort of task, which is not in the
least slavish, being chiefly to defend his master on occasions; or in sowing time to work as
much as he himself pleases."[A]

[Footnote A: Bosman, page 119.]

Adjoining to the kingdom of Whidah, are several small governments, as Coto, great and small
Popo, Ardrah, &c. all situate on the Slave Coast, where the chief trade for slaves is carried
on. These are governed by their respective Kings, and follow much the same customs with those
of Whidah, except that their principal living is on plunder, and the slave trade.

CHAP. III.

The kingdom of Benin; its extent. Esteemed the most potent in Guinea. Fruitfulness of the soil.
Good disposition of the people. Order of government. Punishment of crimes. Large extent of
the town of Great Benin. Order maintained. The natives honest and charitable. Their religion.
The kingdoms of Kongo and Angola. Many of the natives profess christianity. The country fruitful.
Disposition of the people. The administration of justice. The town of Leango. Slave trade carried
on by the Portugueze. Here the slave trade ends.

Next adjoining to the Slave Coast, is the kingdom of Benin, which, though it extends but about
170 miles on the sea, yet spreads so far inland, as to be esteemed the most potent kingdom
in Guinea. By accounts, the soil and produce appear to be in a great measure like those before
described; and the natives are represented as a reasonable good-natured people. Artus says,[A]
"They are a sincere, inoffensive people, and do no injustice either to one another, or to strangers."
William Smith[B] confirms this account, and says, "That the inhabitants are generally very
good-natured, and exceeding courteous and civil. When the Europeans make them presents, which
in their coming thither to trade they always do, they endeavour to return them doubly."

[Footnote A: Collection. vol. 3, page 228.]

[Footnote B: Smith, page 228.]

Bosman tells us,[A] "That his countrymen the Dutch, who were often obliged to trust them till
they returned the next year, were sure to be honestly paid their whole debts."

[Footnote A: W. Bosman, page 405.]

There is in Benin a considerable order in government. Theft, murther, and adultery, being severely
punished. Barbot says,[A] "If a man and a woman of any quality be surprized in adultery, they
are both put to death, and their bodies are thrown on a dunghill, and left there a prey to
wild beasts." He adds, "The severity of the laws in Benin against adultery,[B] amongst all
orders of people, deters them from venturing, so that it is but very seldom any persons are
punished for that crime." Smith says, "Their towns are governed by officers appointed by the
King, who have power to decide in civil cases, and to raise the public taxes; but in criminal
cases, they must send to the King's court, which is held at the town of Oedo, or Great Benin.
This town, which covers a large extent of ground, is about sixty mile from the sea."[C] Barbot
tells us, "That it contains thirty streets, twenty fathom wide, and almost two miles long,
commonly, extending in a straight line from one gate to another; that the gates are guarded
by soldiers; that in these streets markets are held every day, for cattle, ivory, cotton, and
many sorts of European goods. This large town is divided into several wards, or districts,
each governed by its respective King of a street, as they call them; to administer justice,
and to keep good order. The inhabitants are very civil and good natured, condescending to what
the Europeans require of them in a civil way." The same author confirms what has been said
by others of their justice in the payment of their debts; and adds, "That they, above all other
Guineans, are very honest and just in their dealings; and they have such an aversion for theft,
that by the law of the country it is punished with death." We are told by the same author,[D]
"That the King of Benin is able upon occasion to maintain an army of a hundred thousand men;
but that, for the most part, he does not keep thirty thousand." William Smith says, "The natives
are all free men; none but foreigners can be bought and sold there.[E] They are very charitable,
the King as well as his subjects." Bosman confirms this,[F] and says, "The King and great Lords
subsist several poor at their place of residence on charity, employing those who are fit for
any work, and the rest they keep for God's sake; so that here are no beggars."

[Footnote A: Barbot, page 237.]

[Footnote B: By this account of the punishment inflicted on adulterers in this and other parts
of Guinea, it appears the Negroes are not insensible of the sinfulness of such practices. How
strange must it then appear to the serious minded amongst these people, (nay, how inconsistent
is it with every divine and moral law amongst ourselves) that those christian laws which prohibit
fornication and adultery, are in none of the English governments extended to them, but that
they are allowed to cohabit and separate at pleasure? And that even their masters think so
lightly of their marriage engagements, that, when it suits with their interest, they will separate
man from wife, and children from both, to be sold into different, and even distant parts, without
regard to their sometimes grievous lamentations; whence it has happened, that such of those
people who are truly united in their marriage covenant, and in affection to one another, have
been driven to such desperation, as either violently to destroy themselves, or gradually to
pine away, and die with mere grief. It is amazing, that whilst the clergy of the established
church are publicly expressing a concern, that these oppressed people should be made acquainted
with the christian religion, they should be thus suffered, and even forced, so flagrantly to
infringe one of the principal injunctions of our holy religion!]

[Footnote C: J. Barbot, page 358, 359.]

[Footnote D: Barbot, page 369.]

[Footnote E: W. Smith, page 369.]

[Footnote F: Bosman, page 409.]

As to religion, these people believe there is a God, the efficient cause of all things; but,
like the rest of the Guineans, they are superstitiously and idolatrously inclined.

The last division of Guinea from which slaves are imported, are the kingdoms of Kongo and Angola:
these lie to the South of Benin, extending with the intermediate land about twelve hundred
miles on the coast. Great numbers of the natives of both these kingdoms profess the christian
religion, which was long since introduced by the Portugueze, who made early settlements in
that country.

In the Collection it is said, that both in Kongo and Angola, the soil is in general fruitful,
producing great plenty of grain, Indian corn, and such quantities of rice, that it hardly bears
any price, with fruits, roots, and palm oil in plenty.

The natives are generally a quiet people, who discover a good understanding, and behave in
a friendly manner to strangers, being of a mild conversation, affable, and easily overcome
with reason.

In the government of Kongo, the King appoints a judge in every particular division, to hear
and determine disputes and civil causes; the judges imprison and release, or impose fines,
according to the rule of custom; but in weighty matters, every one may appeal to the King,
before whom all criminal causes are brought, in which he giveth sentence; but seldom condemneth
to death.

The town of Leango stands in the midst of four Lordships, which abound in corn, fruit, &c.
Here they make great quantities of cloth of divers kinds, very fine and curious; the inhabitants
are seldom idle; they even make needle-work caps as they walk in the streets.

The slave trade is here principally managed by the Portugueze, who carry it far up into the
inland countries. They are said to send off from these parts fifteen thousand slaves each year.

At Angola, about the 10th degree of South latitude, ends the trade for slaves.

CHAP. IV.

The antientest accounts of the Negroes is from the Nubian Geography, and the writings of Leo
the African. Some account of those authors. The Arabians pass into Guinea. The innocency and
simplicity of the natives. They are subdued by the Moors. Heli Ischia shakes off the Moorish
yoke. The Portugueze make the first descent in Guinea. From whence they carry off some of the
natives. More incursions of the like kind. The Portugueze erect the first fort at D'Elmina.
They begin the slave trade. Cada Mosto's testimony. Anderson's account to the same purport.
De la Casa's concern for the relief of the oppressed Indians. Goes over into Spain to plead
their cause. His speech before Charles the Fifth.

The most antient account we have of the country of the Negroes, particularly that part situate
on and between the two great rivers of Senegal and Gambia, is from the writings of two antient
authors, one an Arabian, and the other a Moor. The first[A] wrote in Arabic, about the twelfth
century. His works, printed in that language at Rome, were afterwards translated into Latin,
and printed at Paris, under the patronage of the famous Thuanus, chancellor of France, with
the title of Geographica Nubiensis, containing an account or all the nations lying on the Senegal
and Gambia. The other wrote by John Leo,[B] a Moor, born at Granada, in Spain, before the Moors
were totally expelled from that kingdom. He resided in Africa; but being on a voyage from Tripoli
to Tunis, was taken by some Italian Corsairs, who finding him possessed of several Arabian
books, besides his own manuscripts, apprehended him to be a man of learning, and as such presented
him to Pope Leo the Tenth. This Pope encouraging him, he embraced the Romish religion, and
his description of Africa was published in Italian. From these writings we gather, that after
the Mahometan religion had extended to the kingdom of Morocco, some of the promoters of it
crossing the sandy desarts of Numidia, which separate that country from Guinea, found it inhabited
by men, who, though under no regular government, and destitute of that knowledge the Arabians
were favoured with, lived in content and peace. The first author particularly remarks, "That
they never made war, or travelled abroad, but employed themselves in tending their herds, or
labouring in the ground." J. Leo says, page 65. "That they lived in common, having no property
in land, no tyrant nor superior lord, but supported themselves in an equal state, upon the
natural produce of the country, which afforded plenty of roots, game, and honey. That ambition
or avarice never drove them into foreign countries to subdue or cheat their neighbours. Thus
they lived without toil or superfluities." "The antient inhabitants of Morocco, who wore coats
of mail, and used swords and spears headed with iron, coming amongst these harmless and naked
people, soon brought them under subjection, and divided that part of Guinea which lies on the
rivers Senegal and Gambia into fifteen parts; those were the fifteen kingdoms of the Negroes,
over which the Moors presided, and the common people were Negroes. These Moors taught the Negroes
the Mahometan religion, and arts of life; particularly the use of iron, before unknown to them.
About the 14th century, a native Negro, called Heli Ischia, expelled the Moorish conquerors;
but tho' the Negroes threw off the yoke of a foreign nation, they only changed a Libyan for
a Negroe master. Heli Ischia himself becoming King, led the Negroes on to foreign wars, and
established himself in power over a very large extent of country." Since Leo's time, the Europeans
have had very little knowledge of those parts of Africa, nor do they know what became of his
great empire. It is highly probable that it broke into pieces, and that the natives again resumed
many of their antient customs; for in the account published by William Moor, in his travels
on the river Gambia, we find a mixture of the Moorish and Mahometan customs, joined with the
original simplicity of the Negroes. It appears by accounts of antient voyages, collected by
Hackluit, Purchas, and others, that it was about fifty years before the discovery of America,
that the Portugueze attempted to sail round Cape Bojador, which lies between their country
and Guinea; this, after divers repulses occasioned by the violent currents, they effected;
when landing on the western coasts of Africa, they soon began to make incursions into the country,
and to seize and carry off the native inhabitants. As early as the year 1434, Alonzo Gonzales,
the first who is recorded to have met with the natives, being on that coast, pursued and attacked
a number of them, when some were wounded, as was also one of the Portugueze; which the author
records as the first blood spilt by christians in those parts. Six years after, the same Gonzales
again attacked the natives, and took twelve prisoners, with whom he returned to his vessels;
he afterwards put a woman on shore, in order to induce the natives to redeem the prisoners;
but the next day 150 of the inhabitants appeared on horses and camels, provoking the Portugueze
to land; which they not daring to venture, the natives discharged a volley of stones at them,
and went off. After this, the Portugueze still continued to send vessels on the coast of Africa;
particularly we read of their falling on a village, whence the inhabitants fled, and, being
pursued, twenty-five were taken: "He that ran best," says the author, "taking the most. In
their way home they killed some of the natives, and took fifty-five more prisoners.[C] Afterwards
Dinisanes Dagrama, with two other vessels, landed on the island Arguin, where they took fifty-four
Moors; then running along the coast eighty leagues farther, they at several times took fifty
slaves; but here seven of the Portugueze were killed. Then being joined by several other vessels,
Dinisanes proposed to destroy the island, to revenge the loss of the seven Portugueze; of which
the Moors being apprized, fled, so that no more than twelve were found, whereof only four could
be taken, the rest being killed, as also one of the Portugueze." Many more captures of this
kind on the coast of Barbary and Guinea, are recorded to have been made in those early times
by the Portugueze; who, in the year 1481, erected their first fort at D'Elmina on that coast,
from whence they soon opened a trade for slaves with the inland parts of Guinea.

[Footnote A: See Travels into different parts of Africa, by Francis Moor, with a letter to
the publisher.]

[Footnote B: Ibid.]

[Footnote C: Collection, vol. 1, page 13.]

From the foregoing accounts, it is undoubted, that the practice of making slaves of the Negroes,
owes its origin to the early incursions of the Portugueze on the coast of Africa, solely from
an inordinate desire of gain. This is clearly evidenced from their own historians, particularly
Cada Mosto, about the year 1455, who writes,[A] "That before the trade was settled for purchasing
slaves from the Moors at Arguin, sometimes four, and sometimes more Portugueze vessels, were
used to come to that gulph, well armed; and landing by night, would surprize some fishermen's
villages: that they even entered into the country, and carried off Arabs of both sexes, whom
they sold in Portugal." And also, "That the Portugueze and Spaniards, settled on four of the
Canary islands, would go to the other island by night, and seize some of the natives of both
sexes, whom they sent to be sold in Spain."

[Footnote A: Collection vol. 1, page 576.]

After the settlement of America, those devastations, and the captivating the miserable Africans,
greatly increased.

Anderson, in his history of trade and commerce, at page 336, speaking of what passed in the
year 1508, writes, "That the Spaniards had by this time found that the miserable Indian natives,
whom they had made to work in their mines and fields, were not so robust and proper for those
purposes as Negroes brought from Africa; wherefore they, about that time, began to import Negroes
for that end into Hispaniola, from the Portugueze settlements on the Guinea coasts; and also
afterwards for their sugar works." This oppression of the Indians had, even before this time,
rouzed the zeal, as well as it did the compassion, of some of the truly pious of that day;
particularly that of Bartholomew De las Casas, bishop of Chapia; whom a desire of being instrumental
towards the conversion of the Indians, had invited into America. It is generally agreed by
the writers of that age, that he was a man of perfect disinterestedness, and ardent charity;
being affected with this sad spectacle, he returned to the court of Spain, and there made a
true report of the matter; but not without being strongly opposed by those mercenary wretches,
who had enslaved the Indians; yet being strong and indefatigable, he went to and fro between
Europe and America, firmly determined not to give over his pursuit but with his life. After
long solicitation, and innumerable repulses, he obtained leave to lay the matter before the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, then King of Spain. As the contents of the speech he made before
the King in council, are very applicable to the case of the enslaved Africans, and a lively
evidence that the spirit of true piety speaks the same language in the hearts of faithful men
in all ages, for the relief of their fellow creatures from oppression of every kind, I think
it may not be improper here to transcribe the most interesting parts of it. "I was," says this
pious bishop, "one of the first who went to America; neither curiosity nor interest prompted
me to undertake so long and dangerous a voyage; the saving the souls of the heathen was my
sole object. Why was I not permitted, even at the expence of my blood, to ransom so many thousand
souls, who fell unhappy victims to avarice or lust? I have been an eye witness to such cruel
treatment of the Indians, as is too horrid to be mentioned at this time.--It is said that barbarous
executions were necessary to punish or check the rebellion of the Americans;--but to whom was
this owing? Did not those people receive the Spaniards, who first came amongst them, with gentleness
and humanity? Did they not shew more joy, in proportion, in lavishing treasure upon them, than
the Spaniards did greediness in receiving it?--But our avarice was not yet satisfied;--tho'
they gave up to us their land and their riches, we would tear from them their wives, their
children and their liberties.--To blacken these unhappy people, their enemies assert, that
they are scarce human creatures?--but it is we that ought to blush, for having been less men,
and more barbarous, than they.--What right have we to enslave a people who are born free, and
whom we disturbed, tho' they never offended us?--They are represented as a stupid people, addicted
to vice?--but have they not contracted most of their vices from the example of the christians?
And as to those vices peculiar to themselves, have not the christians quickly exceeded them
therein? Nevertheless it must be granted, that the Indians still remain untainted with many
vices usual amongst the Europeans; such as ambition, blasphemy, treachery, and many like monsters,
which have not yet took place with them; they have scarce an idea of them; so that in effect,
all the advantage we can claim, is to have more elevated notions of things, and our natural
faculties more unfolded and more cultivated than theirs.--Do not let us flatter our corruptions,
nor voluntarily blind ourselves; all nations are equally free; one nation has no right to infringe
upon the freedom of any other; let us do towards these people as we would have them to have
done towards us, if they had landed upon our shore, with the same superiority of strength.
And indeed, why should not things be equal on both sides? How long has the right of the strongest
been allowed to be the balance of justice? What part of the gospel gives a sanction to such
a doctrine? In what part of the whole earth did the apostles and the first promulgators of
the gospel ever claim a right over the lives, the freedom, or the substance of the Gentiles?
What a strange method this is of propagating the gospel, that holy law of grace, which, from
being, slaves to Satan, initiates us into the freedom of the children of God!--Will it be possible
for us to inspire them with a love to its dictates, while they are so exasperated at being
dispossessed of that invaluable blessing, Liberty? The apostles submitted to chains themselves,
but loaded no man with them. Christ came to free, not to enslave us.--Submission to the faith
he left us, ought to be a voluntary act, and should be propagated by persuasion, gentleness,
and reason."

"At my first arrival in Hispaniola, (added the bishop) it contained a million of inhabitants;
and now (viz. in the space of about twenty years) there remains scarce the hundredth part of
them; thousands have perished thro' want, fatigue, merciless punishment, cruelty, and barbarity.
If the blood of one man unjustly shed, calls loudly for vengeance; how strong must be the cry
of that of so many unhappy creatures which is shedding daily?"--The good bishop concluded his
speech, with imploring the King's clemency for subjects so unjustly oppressed; and bravely
declared, that heaven would one day call him to an account, for the numberless acts of cruelty
which he might have prevented. The King applauded the bishop's zeal; promised to second it;
but so many of the great ones had an interest in continuing the oppression, that nothing was
done; so that all the Indians in Hispaniola, except a few who had hid themselves in the most
inaccessible mountains, were destroyed.

CHAP. V.

First account of the English trading to Guinea. Thomas Windham and several others go to that
coast. Some of the Negroes carried off by the English. Queen Elizabeth's charge to Captain
Hawkins respecting the natives. Nevertheless he goes on the coast and carries off some of the
Negroes. Patents are granted. The King of France objects to the Negroes being kept in slavery.
As do the college of Cardinals at Rome. The natives, an inoffensive people; corrupted by the
Europeans. The sentiments of the natives concerning the slave-trade, from William Smith: Confirmed
by Andrew Brue and James Barbot.

It was about the year 1551, towards the latter end of the reign of King Edward the Sixth, when
some London merchants sent out the first English ship, on a trading voyage to the coast of
Guinea; this was soon followed by several others to the same parts; but the English not having
then any plantations in the West Indies, and consequently no occasion for Negroes, such ships
traded only for gold, elephants teeth, and Guinea pepper. This trade was carried on at the
hazard of losing their ships and cargoes, if they had fallen into the hands of the Portuguese,
who claimed an exclusive right of trade, on account of the several settlements they had made
there.[A] In the year 1553, we find captain Thomas Windham trading along the coast with 140
men, in three ships, and sailing as far as Benin, which lies about 3000 miles down the coast,
to take in a load of pepper.[B] Next year John Lock traded along the coast of Guinea, as far
as D'Elmina, when he brought away considerable quantities of gold and ivory. He speaks well
of the natives, and says,[C] "That whoever will deal with them must behave civilly, for they
will not traffic if ill used." In 1555, William Towerson traded in a peaceable manner with
the natives, who made complaint to him of the Portuguese, who were then settled in their castle
at D'Elmina, saying, "They were bad men, who made them slaves if they could take them, putting
irons on their legs."

[Footnote A: Astley's collection, vol. 1. page 139.]

[Footnote B: Collection vol. 1. p. 148.]

[Footnote C: Ibid. 257.]

This bad example of the Portuguese was soon followed by some evil disposed Englishmen; for
the same captain Towerson relates,[A] "That in the course of his voyage, he perceived the natives,
near D'Elmina, unwilling to come to him, and that he was at last attacked by them; which he
understood was done in revenge for the wrong done them the year before, by one captain Gainsh,
who had taken away the Negro captain's son, and three others, with their gold, &c. This caused
them to join the Portuguese, notwithstanding their hatred of them, against the English." The
next year captain Towerson brought these men back again; whereupon the Negroes shewed him much
kindness.[B] Quickly after this, another instance of the same kind occurred, in the case of
captain George Fenner, who being on the coast, with three vessels, was also attacked by the
Negroes, who wounded several of his people, and violently carried three of his men to their
town. The captain sent a messenger, offering any thing they desired for the ransom of his men:
but they refused to deliver them, letting him know, "That three weeks before, an English ship,
which came in the road, had carried off three of their people; and that till they were brought
again, they would not restore his men, even tho' they should give their three ships to release
them." It was probably the evil conduct of these, and some other Englishmen, which was the
occasion of what is mentioned in Hill's naval history, viz. "That when captain Hawkins returned
from his first voyage to Africa, Queen Elizabeth sent for him, when she expressed her concern,
lest any of the African Negroes should be carried off without their free consent; which she
declared would be detestable, and would call down the vengeance of heaven upon the undertakers."
This captain Hawkins, afterwards sir John Hawkins, seems to have been the first Englishman
who gave public countenance to this wicked traffic: For Anderson, before mentioned, at page
401, says, "That in the year 1562, captain Hawkins, assisted by subscription of sundry gentlemen,
now fitted out three ships; and having learnt that Negroes were a very good commodity in Hispaniola,
he sailed to the coast of Guinea, took in Negroes, and sailed with them for Hispaniola, where
he sold them, and his English commodities, and loaded his three vessels with hides, sugar and
ginger, &c. with which he returned home anno 1563, making a prosperous voyage." As it proved
a lucrative business, the trade was continued both by Hawkins and others, as appears from the
naval chronicle, page 55, where it is said, "That on the 18th of October, 1564, captain John
Hawkins, with two ships of 700 and 140 tuns, sailed for Africa; that on the 8th of December
they anchored to the South of Cape Verd, where the captain manned the boat, and sent eighty
men in armour into the country, to see if they could take some Negroes; but the natives flying
from them, they returned to their ships, and proceeded farther down the coast. Here they staid
certain days, sending their men ashore, in order (as the author says) to burn and spoil their
towns and take the inhabitants. The land they observed to be well cultivated, there being plenty
of grain, and fruit of several sorts, and the towns prettily laid out. On the 25th, being informed
by the Portugueze of a town of Negroes called Bymba, where there was not only a quantity of
gold, but an hundred and forty inhabitants, they resolved to attack it, having the Portugueze
for their guide; but by mismanagement they took but ten Negroes, having seven of their own
men killed, and twenty-seven wounded. They then went farther down the coast; when, having procured
a number of Negroes, they proceeded to the West Indies, where they sold them to the Spaniards."
And in the same naval chronicle, at page 76, it is said, "That in the year 1567, Francis Drake,
before performing his voyage round the world, went with Sir John Hawkins in his expedition
to the coast of Guinea, where taking in a cargo of slaves, they determined to steer for the
Caribbee islands." How Queen Elizabeth suffered so grievous an infringement of the rights of
mankind to be perpetrated by her subjects, and how she was persuaded, about the 30th year of
her reign, to grant patents for carrying on a trade from the North part of the river Senegal,
to an hundred leagues beyond Sierra Leona, which gave rise to the present African company,
is hard to account for, any otherwise than that it arose from the misrepresentation made to
her of the situation of the Negroes, and of the advantages it was pretended they would reap
from being made acquainted with the christian religion. This was the case of Lewis the XIIIth,
King of France, who, Labat, in his account of the isles of America, tells us, "Was extremely
uneasy at a law by which the Negroes of his colonies were to be made slaves; but it being strongly
urged to him as the readiest means for their conversion to christianity, he acquiesced therewith."
Nevertheless, some of the christian powers did not so easily give way in this matter; for we
find,[C] "That cardinal Cibo, one of the Pope's principal ministers of state, wrote a letter
on behalf of the college of cardinals, or great council at Rome, to the missionaries in Congo,
complaining that the pernicious and abominable abuse of selling slaves was yet continued, requiring
them to remedy the same, if possible; but this the missionaries saw little hopes of accomplishing,
by reason that the trade of the country lay wholly in slaves and ivory."

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 1. p. 148.]

[Footnote B: Ibid. 157.]

[Footnote C: Collection, vol. 3, page 164.]

From the foregoing accounts, as well as other authentic publications of this kind, it appears
that it was the unwarrantable lust of gain, which first stimulated the Portugueze, and afterwards
other Europeans, to engage in this horrid traffic. By the most authentic relations of those
early times, the natives were an inoffensive people, who, when civilly used, traded amicably
with the Europeans. It is recorded of those of Benin, the largest kingdom in Guinea,[A]That
they were a gentle, loving people; and Reynold says,[B] "They found more sincere proofs of
love and good will from the natives, than they could find from the Spaniards and Portugueze,
even tho' they had relieved them from the greatest misery." And from the same relations there
is no reason to think otherwise, but that they generally lived in peace amongst themselves;
for I don't find, in the numerous publications I have perused on this subject, relating to
these early times, of there being wars on that coast, nor of any sale of captives taken in
battle, who would have been otherwise sacrificed by the victors:[C] Notwithstanding some modern
authors, in their publications relating to the West Indies, desirous of throwing a veil over
the iniquity of the slave trade, have been hardy enough, upon meer supposition or report, to
assert the contrary.

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 1, page 202.]

[Footnote B: Idem, page 245.]

[Footnote C: Note, This plea falls of itself, for if the Negroes apprehended they should be
cruelly put to death, if they were not sent away, why do they manifest such reluctance and
dread as they generally do, at being brought from their native country? William Smith, at page
28, says, "The Gambians abhor slavery, and will attempt any thing, tho' never so desperate,
to avoid it," and Thomas Philips, in his account of a voyage he performed to the coast of Guinea,
writes, "They, the Negroes, are so loth to leave their own country, that they have often leaped
out of the canoe, boat, or ship, into the sea, and kept under water till they were drowned,
to avoid being taken up."]

It was long after the Portugueze had made a practice of violently forcing the natives of Africa
into slavery, that we read of the different Negroe nations making war upon each other, and
selling their captives. And probably this was not the case, till those bordering on the coast,
who had been used to supply the vessels with necessaries, had become corrupted by their intercourse
with the Europeans, and were excited by drunkenness and avarice to join them in carrying on
those wicked schemes, by which those unnatural wars were perpetrated; the inhabitants kept
in continual alarms; the country laid waste; and, as William Moor expresses it, Infinite numbers
sold into slavery.

[Footnote A: William Smith, page 266.]

In the accounts relating to the African trade, we find this melancholy truth farther asserted
by some of the principal directors in the different factories; particularly A. Brue says,[A]
"That the Europeans were far from desiring to act as peace-makers amongst the Negroes; which
would be acting contrary to their interest, since the greater the wars, the more slaves were
procured," And William Bosman also remarks,[B] "That one of the former commanders gave large
sums of money to the Negroes of one nation, to induce them to attack some of the neighbouring
nations, which occasioned a battle which was more bloody than the wars of the Negroes usually
are." This is confirmed by J. Barbot, who says, "That the country of D'Elmina, which was formerly
very powerful and populous, was in his time so much drained of its inhabitants by the intestine
wars fomented amongst the Negroes by the Dutch, that there did not remain inhabitants enough
to till the country."

[Footnote A: Collection, vol. 2, page 98.]

[Footnote B: Bosman, page 31.]

CHAP. VI.

The conduct of the Europeans and Africans compared. Slavery more tolerable amongst the antients
than in our colonies. As christianity prevailed amongst the barbarous nations, the inconsistency
of slavery became more apparent. The charters of manumission, granted in the early times of
christianity, founded on an apprehension of duty to God. The antient Britons, and other European
nations, in their original state, no less barbarous than the Negroes. Slaves in Guinea used
with much greater lenity than the Negroes are in the colonies.--Note. How the slaves are treated
in Algiers, as also in Turkey.

Such is the woeful corruption of human nature, that every practice which flatters our pride
and covetousness, will find its advocates! This is manifestly the case in the matter before
us; the savageness of the Negroes in some of their customs, and particularly their deviating
so far from the feelings of humanity, as to join in captivating and selling each other, gives
their interested oppressors a pretence for representing them as unworthy of liberty, and the
natural rights of mankind. With all your money, Dan, I think you'd--"

"With all my money--with all my money, Amos," cried the old man, shaking his hands, "with all my
money--I can just stand and wait. Amos--he's a fool, I know--but he's the only boy I've got--the only
boy. And with all my money--what good will it do me? Anne won't have it--and Morty's all I've
got and he's going before I do. Amos--Amos--tell me, Amos--what have I done to deserve this of God?
Haven't I done as I ort? Why is this put on me?" He sat panting and blinking and shaking his
ever-denying, palsied head. Amos did not reply. The chauffeur was taking his seat in the car. "Ain't
I paid my share in the church? Ain't I give parks to the city? Ain't I had family prayers for
fifty years? Ain't I been a praying member all my life nearly? Ain't I supported missions? Why,"
he panted, "is it put on me to die without a son to bear my name and take care of my property? I made
over two millions to him the other day. But why, Amos," the old man's voice was broken and he
whimpered, "has the Lord sent this to Morty?"

Amos did not reply, but the big voice of Grant spoke very softly: "Uncle Dan, Morty's got tuberculosis--you
know that. Tuberculosis has made you twenty per cent. interest for twenty years--those hothouses
for consumption of yours in the Valley. But it's cost the poor scores and scores of lives. Morty
has it." Grant's voice rose solemnly. "Vengeance is mine sayeth the Lord, I will repay. You've got
your interest, and the Lord has taken his toll."

The old man showed his colorless gums as he opened a raging mouth.

"You--you--eh, you blasphemer!" He shook as with a chill and screamed, "But we've got you now--we'll
fix you!"

The car for Harvey came, and the Adamses climbed in.

Amos Adams, sitting on the hard seat of the street car looking into the moonlight, considered
seriously his brother-in-law, and his low estate. That he had to be helped into his limousine,
that he had to be wrapped up like a baby, that his head was palsied and his hands fluttering,
seemed strange and rather inexplicable to Amos. He counted Daniel a young man, four years his
junior, barely seventy-nine; a man who should be in his prime. Amos did not realize that his legs
had been kept supple by climbing on and off a high printer's stool hourly for fifty years, and
that his body had buffeted the winds of the world unprotected all those years and had kept
fit. But Daniel Sands's sad case seemed pathetic to the elder Adams and he cut into some rising
stream of conversation from Grant and the Bowmans inadvertently with: "Poor Daniel--Morty
doomed, and Daniel himself looking like the breaking up of a hard winter--poor Daniel! He doesn't
seem to have got the hang of things in this world; he can't seem to get on some way. I'm sorry
for Daniel, Grant; he might have made quite a man if he'd not been fooled by money."

Clearly Amos was meditating aloud; no one replied and the talk flowed on. But the old man looked
into the moonlight and dreamed dreams.

The next day was Grant's day at his carpenter's bench, and when he came to his office with his
kit in his hands at five o'clock in the afternoon, he found Violet Hogan waiting with the
letters he was to sign, and with the mail opened and sorted. As he was signing his letters
Violet gave him the news of the day:

"Dick Bowman ran in at noon and asked me to see if I could get Dr. Nesbit and George Brotherton
and Henry Fenn down here this evening to talk over his investment of little Ben's money. The check
will come to-morrow." Grant looked up from his desk, but before he could ask a question Violet answered:
"They'll be down at eight. The Doctor is that proud! And Mr. Brotherton is cutting lodge--the
Shriners, themselves--to come down."

It was a grave and solemn council that sat by Grant Adams's desk that evening discussing the
disposal of little Ben's five thousand. Excepting Mr. Brotherton, no one there had ever handled
that much money at one time. For though the Doctor was a man of affairs the money he handled in
politics came easy and went easy, and the money he earned Mrs. Nesbit always had invested for
him. So he and Lida Bowman sat rather apart while Dick and Brotherton considered the safety of
bonds and mortgages and time deposits and other staple methods of investing the vast sum which
was about to be paid to them for Ben's accident.

They also considered plans for his education--whether he should learn telegraphy or should cultivate
his voice, or go to college or what not. In this part of the council the Doctor took a hand. But
Lida Bowman kept her wonted silence. The money could not take the bitterness from her loss;
though it did relieve her despair. While they talked, as a mere incident of the conversation,
some one spoke of having seen Joe Calvin come down to the Wahoo Fuel Company's offices that
day in his automobile. Doctor Nesbit recalled having seen Calvin conferring with Tom Van Dorn
and Daniel Sands in Van Dorn's office that afternoon. Then Dick Bowman craning his neck asked
for the third time when Henry Fenn would show up; and for the third time it was explained
that Henry had taken the Hogan children to the High School building in Harvey to behold the
spectacle of Janice Hogan graduating from the eighth grade into the High School. Then Dick explained:

"Well,
I just thought Henry would know about this paper I got to-day from the constable. It's a legal
document, and probably has something to do with getting Benny's money or something. I couldn't
make it out so I thought I'd just let Henry figure on it and tell me what to do." And when
a few minutes later Fenn came in, with a sense of duty to the Hogans well done, Dick handed Fenn
the paper and asked with all the assurance of a man who expects the reassurance of an affirmative
answer:

"Well, Henry--she's all right, ain't she? Just some legal formality to go through, I suppose?"

Henry
Fenn took the document from Bowman's hand. Henry stood under the electric, read it and sat thinking
for a few seconds, with widely furious eyes.

"Well," he said, "they've played their trump, boys. Doc Jim--your law's been attacked in the federal
court--under Tom Van Dorn--damn him!"

The group barked a common question in many voices. Fenn replied: "As I make it out, they got
a New York stockholder of the Wahoo Valley Fuel Company to ask for an injunction against paying
little Ben his money to-morrow, and the temporary injunction has been granted with the hearing
set for June 16."

"And won't they pay us without a suit?" asked Bowman. "Why, I don't see how that can be--they've
been paying for accidents for a year now."

"Why, the law's through all the courts!" queried Brotherton.

"The state courts--yes," answered Fenn, "but they didn't own the federal court until they got
Tom in."

Bowman's jaw began to tremble. His Adam's apple bobbed like a cork, and no one spoke. Finally
Dr. Nesbit spoke in his high-keyed voice: "I presume legal verbiage is all they talk in hell!"
and sat pondering.

"Is there no way to beat it?" asked Brotherton.

"Not in this court, George," replied Fenn, "that's why they brought suit in this court."

"That means a long fight--a big law suit, Henry?" asked Bowman.

"Unless they compromise or wear you out," replied the lawyer.

"And can't a jury decide?"

"No--it's an injunction. It's up to the court, and the court is Tom Van Dorn," said Fenn.

Then Dick Bowman spoke: "And there goes little Ben's school and a chance to make something out
of what's left of him. Why, it don't look right when the legislature's passed it, and the people's
confirmed it and nine lawyers in all the state courts have said it's law,--for the attorney
for the company holding a job as judge to turn over all them forms of law. Can't we do something?"

"Yes,"
spoke the big voice of Grant Adams for the first time since Fenn made his announcement, "we can
strike--that's one thing we can do.

Why," he continued, full of emotion, "I could no more hold those
men down there against a strike when they hear this than I could fly.

They'll have to fight for this right, gentlemen!"

"Be calm now, Grant," piped the Doctor; "don't go off half cocked."

Grant's eyes flared--his nose dilated and the muscles of his heavy jaw worked and knotted. He
answered in a harsh voice:

"Oh, I'll be calm all right, Doctor. I'm going down in the morning and plead for peace. But I
know my people. I can't hold 'em."

Those in the room stood for a moment in dazed silence; then the Doctor and Brotherton, realizing
the importance of further discussion that night, soon withdrew from the room, leaving Dick voluble
in his grief and Lida, his wife, stony and speechless beside him. She shook no sympathizing
hand, not even Grant's, as the Bowmans left for home. But she climbed out of the chair and down the
stairs on tired, heavy feet.

In the morning there was turmoil in the Valley. In the Times Jared Thurston, with the fatuous
blundering which characterizes all editors of papers like his, printed the news that little Ben
Bowman would be denied his rights, as a glorious victory over the reformers. In an editorial,
written in old Joe Calvin's best style, the community was congratulated upon having one judge
at last who would put an end to the socialistic foolishness that had been written by demagogues
on the state statute books, and hinting rather broadly that the social labor program adopted
by the people at the last election through the direct vote would go the way of the fool statute
under which the Bowman lad hoped to cheat the courts of due process of law.

In vain did Grant Adams try to rally carpenters to the trocha. He pleaded with the men to raise
a special fund to take little Ben's case through the federal courts; but he failed.

The Wahoo Valley saw in the case of little Ben Bowman the drama of greed throttling poverty, all
set forth in stark, grim terms that no one could question. The story appealed directly to the
passions of the Valley and the Valley's voice rose in the demand to resort to its last weapon
of defense. The workers felt that they must strike or forfeit their self-respect. And day by
day the Times, gloating at the coming downfall in Van Dorn's program of labor-repression, threw
oil on the flaming passions of the Valley, so labor raged and went white hot. The council of the
Wahoo Valley Trades Workers came together to vote on the strike. Every unit of seven was asked
to meet and vote. Grant sat in his office with the executive committee a day and a night counting
the slowly returning votes. Grant had influence enough to make them declare emphatically for
a peaceful strike. But the voice of the Valley was for a strike. The spring was at its full.
The little garden plots were blooming. The men felt confident. A conference of the officials
of the council was called to formulate the demands. Grant managed to put off the strike until the
hearing on the temporary injunction, June 16, was held. But the men drew up their demands and
were ready for the court decision which they felt would be finally against them.

The Wahoo Valley was stirred deeply by the premonitions of the coming strike. It was proud of its record
for industrial peace, and the prospect of war in the Valley overturned all its traditions.

Market
Street had its profound reaction, too. Market Street and the Valley, each in its own way, felt
the dreaded turmoil coming, knew what commercial disaster the struggle meant, but Market Street
was timid and powerless and panic-stricken. Yet life went on. In the Valley there were births and
deaths and marriages, and on the hill in Harvey, Mrs. Bedelia Nesbit was working out her plans
to make over the Nesbit house, while Lila, her granddaughter, was fluttering about in the seventh
Heaven, for she was living under the same sky and sun and stars that bent over Kenyon, her
lover, home from Boston for the Morton-Adams wedding. He might be hailed as a passing ship
once or twice a day, if she managed to time her visits to Market Street properly, or he might
be seen from the east veranda of her home at the proper hour, and there was a throb of joy that
blotted out all the rest of the pale world. There was one time; two times indeed they were,
and a hope of a third, when slipping out from under the shadow of her grandmother's belligerent plumes,
Lila had known the actual fleeting touch of hands; the actual feasting of eyes and the quick
rapture of meeting lips at a tryst. And when Mrs. Nesbit left for Minneapolis to consult an architect,
and to be gone two weeks--Harvey and the Valley and the strike slipped so far below the sky-line
of the two lovers that they were scarcely aware that such things were in the universe.

Kenyon could not see even the grim cast of decision mantling Grant's
face.

Day by day, while the votes assembled which ordered the strike, the deep abiding purpose of Grant
Adams's soul rose and stood ready to master him. He and the men seemed to be coming to their
decision together. As the votes indicated by a growing majority their determination, in a score
of ways Grant made it evident to those about him, that for him time had fruited; the day was
ready and the hour at hand for his life plans to unfold. Those nearest him knew that the season
of debate for Grant Adams had passed. He was like one whose sails of destiny are set and who
longs to put out into the deep and let down his nets. So he passed the long days impatiently
until the hearing of the injunction in little Ben's suit arrived, and every day burned some
heavier line into his face that recorded the presence of the quenchless fire of purpose in
his heart.

A smiling, affable man was Judge Thomas Van Dorn in his court the morning of June 16. He had
his ticket bought for Chicago and a seat in the great convention of his party assured. He walked
through the court room, rather dapperly. He put his high silk hat on the bench beside him, by
way of adding a certain air of easy informality to the proceedings. His red necktie brought
out every thin wrinkle in his burnished brown face and upon the pink brow threaded by a chain lightning
of a scar. The old mushy, emotional voice of his youth and maturity
had thickened, and he talked loudly. He listened to arguments of counsel.
Young Joe Calvin, representing the Fuel Company, was particularly
eloquent. Henry Fenn knew that his case was hopeless, but made such
reply as he could.

"Well," cut in the court before Fenn was off his
feet at the close of his argument, "there's nothing to your contention.
The court is familiar with those cases, cited by counsel. Either the
constitution means what it says or it doesn't. This court is willing
to subscribe to a fund to pay this Bowman child a just compensation.
This is a case for charity and the company is always generous in its
benevolence. The Socialists may have the state courts, and the people
are doubtless crazy--but this court will uphold the constitution.
The injunction is made permanent. The court stands adjourned."

The
crowd of laborers in the court room laughed in the Judge's face. They
followed Grant Adams, who with head bowed in thought walked slowly
to the street car. "Well, fellows," said Grant, "here's the end. As
it stands now, the law considers steel and iron in machinery more
sacred than flesh and blood. The court would have allowed them to
appropriate money for machines without due process of law; but it
enjoins them from appropriating money for flesh and blood." He was
talking to the members of the Valley Labor Council as they stood waiting
for a car. "We may as well miss a car and present our demands to the
Calvins. The sooner we get this thing moving, the better."

Ten minutes
later the Council walked into the office of Calvin and Calvin. There
sat Joseph Calvin, the elder, a ratty little man still, with a thin
stringy neck and with a bald head. His small, mousy eyes blinked at
the workmen. He was exceedingly polite. He admitted that he was attorney
for the owners' association in the Valley, that he could if he chose
speak for them in any negotiations they might desire to make with
their employees, but that he was authorized to say that the owners
were not ready to consider or even to receive any communication from
the men upon any subject--except as individual employees might desire
to confer with superintendents or foremen in the various mines and
mills.

So they walked out. At labor headquarters in South Harvey,
Nathan Perry came sauntering in.

"Well, boys--let's have your agreement--I
think I know what it is. We're ready to sign."

In an hour men were
carrying out posters to be distributed throughout the Valley, signed
by Grant Adams, chairman of the Wahoo Valley Trades Workers' Council.
It read:

STRIKE STRIKE STRIKE

The managers of our mines and mills
in the Wahoo Valley have refused to confer with representatives of
the workers about an important matter. Therefore we order a general
strike of all workers in the mines and mills in this District. Workers
before leaving will see that their machines are carefully oiled, covered,
and prepared to rest without injury. For we claim partnership interest
in them, and should protect them and all our property in the mines
and mills in this Valley. During this strike, we pledge ourselves.

To
orderly conduct.

To keep out of the saloons.

To protect our property
in the mines and mills.

To use our influence to restrain all violence
of speech or conduct. And we make the following demands:

First. That
prices of commodities turned out in this district shall not be increased
to the public as a result of concessions to us in this strike, and
to that end we demand.

Second. That we be allowed to have a representative
in the offices of all concerns interested, said representative to
have access to all books and accounts, guaranteeing to labor such
increases in wages as shall be evidently just, allowing 8 per cent.
dividends on stock, the payment of interest on bonds, and such sums
for upkeep, maintenance, and repairs as shall not include the creation
of a surplus or fund for extensions.

"From one age to another the gloom grows thicker and darker, till error gets established by
general opinion; but whoever attends to perfect goodness, and remains under the melting influence
of it, finds a path unknown to many, and sees the necessity to lean upon the arm of divine
strength, and dwell alone, or with a few in the right, committing their cause to him who is
a refuge to his people. Negroes are our fellow creatures, and their present condition among
us requires our serious consideration. We know not the time, when those scales, in which mountains
are weighed, may turn. The parent of mankind is gracious, his care is over his smallest creatures,
and a multitude of men escape not his notice; and though many of them are trodden down and
despised, yet he remembers them. He seeth their affliction, and looketh upon the spreading
increasing exaltation of the oppressor. He turns the channel of power, humbles the most haughty
people, and gives deliverance to the oppressed, at such periods as are consistent with his
infinite justice and goodness. And wherever gain is preferred to equity, and wrong things publickly
encouraged, to that degree that wickedness takes root and spreads wide amongst the inhabitants
of a country, there is a real cause for sorrow, to all such whose love to mankind stands on
a true principle, and wisely consider the end and event of things." Consideration on keeping
Negroes, by John Woolman, part 2. p. 50.]

He complains, "That they were suffered to live with their women in no better way than direct
fornication; no care being taken to oblige them to continue together when married; but that
they were suffered at their will to leave their wives, and take to other women." I shall conclude
this sympathizing clergyman's observations, with an instance he gives, to shew, "that not only
discouragements and scoffs at that time prevailed in Barbadoes, to establish an opinion that
the Negroes were not capable of religious impressions, but that even violence and great abuses
were used to prevent any thing of the kind taking place. It was in the case of a poor Negro,
who having, at his own request, prevailed on a clergyman to administer baptism to him, on his
return home the brutish overseer took him to task, giving him to understand, that that was
no sunday's work for those of his complexion; that he had other business for him, the neglect
whereof would cost him an afternoon's baptism in blood, as he in the morning had received a
baptism with water, (these, says the clergyman, were his own words) which he accordingly made
good; of which the Negro complained to him, and he to the governor; nevertheless, the poor
miserable creature was ever after so unmercifully treated by that inhuman wretch, the overseer,
that, to avoid his cruelty, betaking himself to the woods, he there perished." This instance
is applicable to none but the cruel perpetrator; and yet it is an instance of what, in a greater
or less degree, may frequently happen, when those poor wretches are left to the will of such
brutish inconsiderate creatures as those overseers often are. This is confirmed in a History
of Jamaica, wrote in thirteen letters, about the year 1740, by a person then residing in that
island, who writes as follows, "I shall not now enter upon the question, whether the slavery
of the Negroes be agreeable to the laws of nature or not; though it seems extremely hard they
should be reduced to serve and toil for the benefit of others, without the least advantage
to themselves. Happy Britannia, where slavery is never known! where liberty and freedom chears
every misfortune. Here (says the author) we can boast of no such blessing; we have at least
ten slaves to one freeman. I incline to touch the hardships which these poor creatures suffer,
in the tenderest manner, from a particular regard which I have to many of their masters, but
I cannot conceal their sad circumstances intirely: the most trivial error is punished with
terrible whipping. I have seen some of them treated in that cruel manner, for no other reason
but to satisfy the brutish pleasure of an overseer, who has their punishment mostly at his
discretion. I have seen their bodies all in a gore of blood, the skin torn off their backs
with the cruel whip; beaten pepper and salt rubbed in the wounds, and a large stick of sealing
wax dropped leisurely upon them. It is no wonder, if the horrid pain of such inhuman tortures
incline them to rebel. Most of these slaves are brought from the coast of Guinea. When they
first arrive, it is observed, they are simple and very innocent creatures; but soon turn to
be roguish enough. And when they come to be whipt, urge the example of the whites for an excuse
of their faults."

These accounts of the deep depravity of mind attendant on the practice of slavery, verify the
truth of Montesquieu's remark of its pernicious effects. And altho' the same degree of opposition
to instructing the Negroes may not now appear in the islands as formerly, especially since
the Society appointed for propagating the Gospel have possessed a number of Negroes in one
of them; nevertheless the situation of these oppressed people is yet dreadful, as well to themselves
as in its consequence to their hard task-masters, and their offspring, as must be evident to
every impartial person who is acquainted with the treatment they generally receive, or with
the laws which from time to time have been made in the colonies, with respect to the Negroes;
some of them being absolutely inconsistent with reason, and shocking to humanity. By the 329th
act of the assembly of Barbadoes, page 125, it is enacted,

"That if any Negroe or other slave under punishment by his master, or his order, for running
away, or any other crime or misdemeanors towards his said master, unfortunately shall suffer
in life or member, (which seldom happens) no person whatsoever shall be liable to any fine
therefore. But if any man shall, of wantonness, or only of bloody-mindedness or cruel intention,
wilfully kill a Negroe, or other slave of his own, he shall pay into the public treasury, fifteen
pounds sterling." Now that the life of a man should be so lightly valued, as that fifteen pounds
should be judged a sufficient indemnification of the murder of one, even when it is avowedly
done wilfully, wantonly, cruelly, or of bloody-mindedness, is a tyranny hardly to be paralleled:
nevertheless human laws cannot make void the righteous law of God, or prevent the inquisition
of that awful judgment day, when, "at the hand of every man's brother the life of man shall
be required." By the law of South Carolina, the person that killeth a Negroe is only subject
to a fine, or twelve months imprisonment. It is the same in most, if not all the West-Indies.
And by an act of the assembly of Virginia, (4 Ann. Ch. 49. sect. 27. p. 227.) after proclamation
is issued against slaves, "that run away and lie out, it is lawful for any person whatsoever
to kill and destroy such slaves, by such ways and means as he, she, or they shall think fit,
without accusation or impeachment of any crime for the same."--And lest private interest should
incline the planter to mercy, it is provided, "That every slave so killed, in pursuance of
this act, shall be paid for by the public."

It was doubtless a like sense of sympathy with that expressed by Morgan Godwyn before mentioned,
for the oppressed Negroes, and like zeal for the cause of religion, so manifestly trampled
upon in the case of the Negroes, which induced Richard Baxter, an eminent preacher amongst
the Dissenters in the last century, in his christian directory, to express himself as follows,
viz. Undoubtedly they are presently bound to deliver them, because by right the man is his
own, therefore no man else can have a just title to him."

CHAP. VIII.

Griffith Hughes's account of the number of Negroes in Barbadoes. Cannot keep up their usual
number without a yearly recruit. Excessive hardships wear the Negroes down in a surprising
manner. A servitude without a condition, inconsistent with reason and natural justice. The
general usage the Negroes meet with in the West Indies. Inhuman calculations of the strength
and lives of the Negroes. Dreadful consequences which may be expected from the cruelty exercised
upon this oppressed part of mankind.

We are told by Griffith Hughes, rector of St. Lucy in Barbadoes, in his natural history of
that island, printed in the year 1750, "That there were between sixty-five and seventy thousand
Negroes, at that time, in the island, tho' formerly they had a greater number. That in order
to keep up a necessary number, they were obliged to have a yearly supply from Africa. That
the hard labour, and often want of necessaries, which these unhappy creatures are obliged to
undergo, destroy a greater number than are bred there." He adds, "That the capacities of their
minds in common affairs of life are but little inferior, if at all, to those of the Europeans.
If they fail in some arts, he says, it may be owing more to their want of education, and the
depression of their spirits by slavery, than to any want of natural abilities." This destruction
of the human species, thro' unnatural hardships, and want of necessary supplies, in the case
of the Negroes, is farther confirmed in an account of the European settlements in America,
printed London, 1757, where it is said, par. 6. chap. The island of Barbadoes, (the Negroes
upon which do not amount to eighty thousand) notwithstanding all the means which they use to
increase them by propagation, and that the climate is in every respect (except that of being
more wholesome) exactly resembling the climate from whence they come; notwithstanding all this,
Barbadoes lies under a necessity of an annual recruit of five thousand slaves, to keep up the
stock at the number I have mentioned. This prodigious failure, which is at least in the same
proportion in all our islands, shews demonstratively that some uncommon and unsupportable hardship
lies upon the Negroes, which wears them down in such a surprising manner." One would imagine,
they were framed to be the disgrace of the human species; banished from their country, and
deprived of that blessing, liberty, on which all other nations set the greatest value, they
are in a measure reduced to the condition of beasts of burden. In general, a few roots, potatoes
especially, are their food, and two rags, which neither screen them from the heat of the day,
nor the extraordinary coolness of the night, all their covering; their sleep very short; their
labour almost continual; they receive no wages, but have twenty lashes for the smallest fault."
A thoughtful person, who had an opportunity of observing the miserable condition of the Negroes
in one of our West India islands, writes thus, "I met with daily exercise to see the treatment
which those miserable wretches met with from their masters; with but few exceptions. They whip
them most unmercifully on small occasions: you will see their bodies all whealed and scarred;
in short, they seem to set no other value on their lives, than as they cost them so much money;
and are restrained from killing them, when angry, by no worthier consideration, than that they
lose so much. So keep constantly on your guard against any excesses. In this new experience
you may find temptations both in wine and women. You must entirely resist both temptations,
. . . treating all women with perfect courtesy." [2] Kitchener's words furnish a text for
the two-fold danger which confronts these men. Here for an unhurried hour, with the generous backing
of the officers, we plead with the men on military, medical, and moral grounds, for the sake of
their own homes and families, for the sake of conscience and country, on the grounds of duty
both to God and to man, to hold to the high ideals and the best traditions of the homeland. Here,
with no church save the great dome of God's blue heaven above us, seated on the green grass, under
the warm summer sun, we have the priceless privilege of trying to safeguard the life of these
men in the grave danger of wartime.

We were encouraged alike by the splendid support of the officers and the warm-hearted and eager
response of the men as they broke into prolonged applause.

The General in command attended one meeting and pledged us his support for our whole program for
the men. He had already cooperated with us most generously on the Canal Zone, in the Philippines,
and in Mexico. Three colonels presided at three successive meetings, and gave the work their
strong moral support. Three bands were furnished in two days. The official backing of the
authorities placed the stamp of approval on the whole moral effort for the welfare of the men.
In no other army in Europe that we have seen have the officers taken such a keen interest in the
highest welfare of the troops, or offered such constant and efficient cooperation with every
effort to surround the men with the best moral influences.

After the meeting, the regimental parade and the strenuous physical drill of the morning, the Colonel
called for a short break, and the men gathered to learn some popular songs. Major Roosevelt
assembled his battalion, and Archie Roosevelt enthusiastically led the men in singing Julia Ward
Howe's "Battle Hymn of the Republic" and the modern soldier songs of the war.

After nine hours of hard drill, the men swung cheerfully down the hillside into the village street.
Now they have lined up, and with ravenous appetites are waiting for the evening meal. We are almost
as hungry as they, and are glad to share the meal with them. Here on the table are huge piles
of good home-made bread. It is almost the first white bread we have seen after months of brown
war bread in England and France. Here are heaping plates of good pork and beans, tinned salmon,
plenty of fried potatoes, and piping hot coffee. This is followed by a delicious pudding, as good
as the men would have had in their own homes. Well fed, well clothed, well equipped, sleeping under
Uncle Sam's warm blankets, on comfortable "Gold Medal" cots, our boys are well cared for.

In another village, at the close of the day, the Colonel commanding two battalions of the infantry
called the men together in the open square of the market place, and after a band concert invited
us to address the troops on the moral issues of the war. The next day almost the same program
was repeated, and at noon in an open field on a grassy hillside the Major of another battalion
marched out his men for a similar lecture. Every commanding officer seemed eager to arrange
for meetings, to summon the men, and to back up the messages given to them. Not only have General
Pershing, General Sibert, and the Colonels commanding the various regiments, met us half way in
every plan for the welfare of the troops; but they have taken the initiative in insisting that every
provision should be made for the physical, mental, and moral occupation and safeguarding of
the men.

Probably more men are led astray in the war zone when they go on leave
than at any other time, in reaction from the deadly monotony of camp
life, or the inferno of the trenches. London and Paris are the chief
centers of danger. In London, just before sailing for the States,
we visited the finely equipped American "Eagle" Hut in the Strand.
It would be difficult to devise a more homelike or attractive place
for soldiers. It is matter of astonishment how a people, who, as a nation, are looked
upon as generous and humane, and so much value themselves for their uncommon sense of the benefit
of liberty, can live in the practice of such extreme oppression and inhumanity, without seeing
the inconsistency of such conduct, and feeling great remorse. Nor is it less amazing to hear
these men calmly making calculations about the strength and lives of their fellow men. In Jamaica,
if six in ten of the new imported Negroes survive the seasoning, it is looked upon as a gaining
purchase. And in most of the other plantations, if the Negroes live eight or nine years, their
labour is reckoned a sufficient compensation for their cost. If calculations of this sort were
made upon the strength and labour of beasts of burden, it would not appear so strange; but
even then, a merciful man would certainly use his beast with more mercy than is usually shewn
to the poor Negroes. Will not the groans, the dying groans, of this deeply afflicted and oppressed
people reach heaven? and when the cup of iniquity is full, must not the inevitable consequence
be, the pouring forth of the judgments of God upon their oppressors? But alas! is it not too
manifest that this oppression has already long been the object of the divine displeasure? For
what heavier judgment, what greater calamity, can befal any people, than to become subject
to that hardness of heart, that forgetfulness of God, and insensibility to every religious
impression, as well as that general depravation of manners, which so much prevails in these
colonies, in proportion as they have more or less enriched themselves at the expence of the
blood and bondage of the Negroes.

It is a dreadful consideration, as a late author remarks, that out of the stock of eighty thousand
Negroes in Barbadoes, there die every year five thousand more than are born in that island;
which failure is probably in the same proportion in the other islands. In effect, this people
is under a necessity of being entirely renewed every sixteen years. And what must we think
of the management of a people, who, far from increasing greatly, as those who have no loss
by war ought to do, must, in so short a time as sixteen years, without foreign recruits, be
entirely consumed to a man! Is it not a christian doctrine, that the labourer is worthy of
his hire? And hath not the Lord, by the mouth of his prophet, pronounced, "Wo unto that man
who buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; who uses his neighbour's
service without wages, and giveth him nought for his work?" And yet the poor Negro slaves are
constrained, like the beasts, by beating, to work hard without hire or recompence, and receive
nothing from the hand of their unmerciful masters, but such a wretched provision as will scarce
support them under their fatigues. The intolerable hardships many of the slaves undergo, are
sufficiently proved by the shortness of their lives.--And who are these miserable creatures,
that receive such barbarous treatment from the planter? Can we restrain our just indignation,
when we consider that they are undoubtedly his brethren! his neighbours! the children of the
same Father, and some of those for whom Christ died, as truly as for the planter himself. Let
the opulent planter, or merchant, prove that his Negro slave is not his brother, or that he
is not his neighbour, in the scripture sense of these appellations; and if he is not able so
to do, how will he justify the buying and selling of his brethren, as if they were of no more
consideration than his cattle? The wearing them out with continual labour, before they have
lived out half their days? The severe whipping and torturing them, even to death, if they resist
his unsupportable tyranny? Let the hardiest slave-holder look forward to that tremendous day,
when he must give an account to God of his stewardship; and let him seriously consider, whether,
at such a time, he thinks he shall be able to satisfy himself, that any act of buying and selling,
or the fate of war, or the birth of children in his house, plantation, or territories, or any
other circumstance whatever, can give him such an absolute property in the persons of men,
as will justify his retaining them as slaves, and treating them as beasts? Let him diligently
consider whether there will not always remain to the slave a superior property or right to
the fruit of his own labour; and more especially to his own person; that being which was given
him by God, and which none but the Giver can justly claim?

CHAP. IX.

The advantage which would have accrued to the natives of Guinea, if the Europeans had acted
towards them agreeable to the dictates of humanity and christianity. An inordinate desire of
gain in the Europeans, the true occasion of the slave trade. Notice of the misrepresentations
of the Negroes by most authors, in order to palliate the iniquity of the slave trade. Those
misrepresentations refuted, particularly with respect to the Hottentot Negroes.

From the foregoing accounts of the natural disposition of the Negroes, and the fruitfulness
of most parts of Guinea, which are confirmed by authors of candour, who have wrote from their
own knowledge, it may well be concluded, that the Negroes acquaintance with the Europeans might
have been a happiness to them, if these last had not only bore the name, but had also acted
the part, of Christians, and used their endeavours by example, as well as precept, to make
them acquainted with the glad tidings of the gospel, which breathes peace and good will to
man, and with that change of heart, that redemption from sin, which christianity proposeth;
innocence and love might then have prevailed, nothing would have been wanting to complete the
happiness of the simple Africans: but the reverse has happened; the Europeans, forgetful of
their duty as men and christians, have conducted themselves in so iniquitous a manner, as must
necessarily raise in the minds of the thoughtful and well-disposed Negroes, the utmost scorn
and detestation of the very name of christians. All other considerations have given way to
an infallible desire of gain, which has been the principal and moving cause of the most iniquitous
and dreadful scene that was, perhaps, ever acted upon the face of the earth; instead of making
use of that superior knowledge with which the Almighty, the common Parent of mankind, had favoured
them, to strengthen the principle of peace and good will in the breasts of the incautious Negroes,
the Europeans have, by their bad example, led them into excess of drunkenness, debauchery,
and avarice; whereby every passion of corrupt nature being inflamed, they have been easily
prevailed upon to make war, and captivate one another; as well to furnish means for the excesses
they had been habituated to, as to satisfy the greedy desire of gain in their profligate employers,
who to this intent have furnished them with prodigious quantities of arms and ammunition. Thus
they have been hurried into confusion, distress, and all the extremities of temporal misery;
every thing, even the power of their Kings, has been made subservient to this wicked purpose;
for instead of being protectors of their subjects, some of those rulers, corrupted by the excessive
love of spirituous liquors, and the tempting baits laid before them by the factors, have invaded
the liberties of their unhappy subjects, and are become their oppressors.

Here it may be necessary to observe, that the accounts we have of the inhabitants of Guinea,
are chiefly given by persons engaged in the trade, who, from self-interested views, have described
them in such colours as were least likely to excite compassion and respect, and endeavoured
to reconcile so manifest a violation of the rights of mankind to the minds of the purchasers;
yet they cannot but allow the Negroes to be possessed of some good qualities, though they contrive
as much as possible to cast a shade over them. A particular instance of this appears in Astley's
collection, vol. 2. p. 73, where the author, speaking of the Mandingos settled at Galem, which
is situated 900 miles up the Senegal, after saying that they carry on a commerce to all the
neighbouring kingdoms, and amass riches, adds, "That excepting the vices peculiar to the Blacks,
they are a good sort of people, honest, hospitable, just to their word, laborious, industrious,
and very ready to learn arts and sciences." Here it is difficult to imagine what vices can
be peculiarly attendant on a people so well disposed as the author describes these to be. With
respect to the charge some authors have brought against them, as being void of all natural
affection, it is frequently contradicted by others. In vol. 2. of the Collection, p. 275, and
629, the Negroes of North Guinea, and the Gold Coast, are said to be fond of their children,
whom they love with tenderness. And Bosman says, p. 340, "Not a few in his country (viz. Holland)
fondly imagine, that parents here sell their children, men their wives, and one brother the
other: but those who think so deceive themselves; for this never happens on any other account
but that of necessity, or some great crime." The same is repeated by J. Barbot, page 326, and
also confirmed by Sir Hans Sloane, in the introduction to his natural history of Jamaica; where
speaking of the Negroes, he says, "They are usually thought to be haters of their own children,
and therefore it is believed that they sell and dispose of them to strangers for money: but
this is not true; for the Negroes of Guinea being divided into several captainships, as well
as the Indians of America, have wars; and besides those slain in battle, many prisoners are
taken, who are sold as slaves, and brought thither: but the parents here, although their children
are slaves for ever, yet have so great love for them, that no master dares sell, or give away,
one of their little ones, unless they care not whether their parents hang themselves or no."
J. Barbot, speaking of the occasion of the natives of Guinea being represented as a treacherous
people, ascribes it to the Hollanders (and doubtless other Europeans) usurping authority, and
fomenting divisions between the Negroes. At page 110, he says, "It is well known that many
of the European nations trading amongst these people, have very unjustly and inhumanly, without
any provocation, stolen away, from time to time, abundance of the people, not only on this
coast, but almost every where in Guinea, who have come on board their ships in a harmless and
confiding manner: these they have in great numbers carried away, and sold in the plantations,
with other slaves which they had purchased." And although some of the Negroes may be justly
charged with indolence and supineness, yet many others are frequently mentioned by authors
as a careful, industrious, and even laborious people. But nothing shews more clearly how unsafe
it is to form a judgment of distant people from the accounts given of them by travellers, who
have taken but a transient view of things, than the case of the Hottentots, viz. those several
nations of Negroes who inhabit the most southern part of Africa: these people are represented
by several authors, who appear to have very much copied their relations one from the other,
as so savage and barbarous as to have little of human, but the shape: but these accounts are
strongly contradicted by others, particularly Peter Kolben, who has given a circumstantial
relation of the disposition and manners of those people.[A] He was a man of learning, sent
from the court of Prussia solely to make astronomical and natural observations there; and having
no interest in the slavery of the Negroes, had not the same inducement as most other relators
had, to misrepresent the natives of Africa. He resided eight years at and about the Cape of
Good Hope, during which time he examined with great care into the customs, manners, and opinions
of the Hottentots; whence he sets these people in a quite different light from what they appeared
in former authors, whom he corrects, and blames for the falsehoods they have wantonly told
of them. At p. 61, he says, "The details we have in several authors, are for the most part
made up of inventions and hearsays, which generally prove false." Nevertheless, he allows they
are justly to be blamed for their sloth.--The love of liberty and indolence is their all; compulsion
is death to them. While necessity obliges them to work, they are very tractable, obedient,
and faithful; but when they have got enough to satisfy the present want, they are deaf to all
further intreaty. He also faults them for their nastiness, the effect of sloth; and for their
love of drink, and the practice of some unnatural customs, which long use has established amongst
them; which, nevertheless, from the general good disposition of these people, there is great
reason to believe they might be persuaded to refrain from, if a truly christian care had been
extended towards them. He says, "They are eminently distinguished by many virtues, as their
mutual benevolence, friendship, and hospitality; they breathe kindness and good will to one
another, and seek all opportunities of obliging. Is a Hottentot's assistance required by one
of his countrymen? he runs to give it. Is his advice asked? he gives it with sincerity. Is
his countryman in want? he relieves him to the utmost of his power." Their hospitality extends
even to European strangers: in travelling thro' the Cape countries, you meet with a chearful
and open reception, in whatsoever village you come to. In short, he says, page 339, "The integrity
of the Hottentots, their strictness and celerity in the execution of justice, and their charity,
are equalled by few nations. In alliances, their word is sacred; there being hardly any thing
they look upon as a fouler crime than breach of engagements. Theft and adultery they punish
with death." They firmly believe there is a God, the author of all things, whom they call the
God of gods; but it does not appear that they have an institution of worship directly regarding
this supreme Deity. When pressed on this article, they excuse themselves by a tradition, "That
their first parents so grievously offended this great God, that he cursed them and their posterity
with hardness of heart; so that they know little about him, and have less inclination to serve
him." It is, in design and execution, more like his "Self-Help" than any of his other works.
Mr. Smiles always writes pleasantly, but he writes best when he is telling anecdotes, and using
them to enforce a moral that he is too wise to preach about, although he is not afraid to state
it plainly. By means of it "Self-Help" at once became a standard book, and "Character" is,
in its way, quite as good as "Self-Help." It is a wonderful storehouse of anecdotes and biographical
illustrations.--Examiner, London.

* * * * *

Self-Help.

Self-Help; with Illustrations of Character, Conduct, and Perseverance. By SAMUEL SMILES. New Edition,
Revised and Enlarged. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00.

The writings of Samuel Smiles are a valuable aid in the education
of boys.

His style seems to have been constructed entirely for their tastes; his topics are admirably selected,
and his mode of communicating excellent lessons of enterprise, truth, and self-reliance might be
called insidious and ensnaring if these words did not convey an idea which is only applicable to lessons
of an opposite character and tendency taught in the same attractive style. The popularity of
this book, "Self-Help," abroad has made it a powerful instrument of good, and many an English
boy has risen from its perusal determined that his life will be moulded after that of some of those
set before him in this volume. It was written for the youth of another country, but its wealth
of instruction has been recognized by its translation into more than
one European language, and it is not too much to predict for it a
popularity among American boys.--N. Y. World.

* * * * *

Thrift.

Thrift.
By SAMUEL SMILES. 12mo, Cloth, $1.00.

The mechanic, farmer, apprentice,
clerk, merchant, and a large circle of readers outside of these classes
will find in the volume a wide range of counsel and advice, presented
in perspicuous language, and marked throughout by vigorous good sense;
and who, while deriving from it useful lessons for the guidance of
their personal affairs, will also be imbibing valuable instruction
in an important branch of political economy. The first[A]
says, "Kidnapping or stealing of human creatures is punished there, and even sometimes with
death." And, W. Bosman, whose long residence on the coast, enabled him to speak with certainty,
says,[B] "That the laws were severe against murder, thievery, and adultery." And adds, "That
man-stealing was punished on the Gold Coast with rigid severity and sometimes with death itself."
Hence it may be concluded, that the sale of the greatest part of the Negroes to the Europeans
is supported by violence, in defiance of the laws, through the knavery of their principal men,[C]
who, (as is too often the case with those in European countries) under pretence of encouraging
trade, and increasing the public revenue, disregard the dictates of justice, and trample upon
those liberties which they are appointed to preserve.

[Footnote A: Barbot, p. 303.]

[Footnote B: Bosman, p. 143.]

[Footnote C: Note. Barbot, page 270, says, the trade of slaves is in a more peculiar manner
the business of Kings, rich men, and prime merchants, exclusive of the inferior sort of blacks.]

Fr. Moor also mentions man-stealing as being discountenanced by the Negroe Governments on the
river Gambia, and speaks of the inslaving the peaceable inhabitants, as a violence which only
happens under a corrupt administration of justice; he says,[A] "The Kings of that country generally
advise with their head men, scarcely doing any thing of consequence, without consulting them
first, except the King of Barsailay, who being subject to hard drinking, is very absolute.
It is to this King's insatiable thirst for brandy, that his subjects freedoms and families
are in so precarious a situation.[B] Whenever this King wants goods or brandy, he sends a messenger
to the English Governor at James Fort, to desire he would send a sloop there with a cargo:
this news, being not at all unwelcome, the Governor sends accordingly; against the arrival
of the sloop, the King goes and ransacks some of his enemies towns, seizing the people, and
selling them for such commodities as he is in want of, which commonly are brandy, guns, powder,
balls, pistols, and cutlasses, for his attendants and soldiers; and coral and silver for his
wives and concubines. In case he is not at war with any neighbouring King, he then falls upon
one of his own towns, which are numerous, and uses them in the same manner." "He often goes
with some of his troops by a town in the day time, and returning in the night, sets fire to
three parts of it, and putting guards at the fourth, there seizes the people as they run out
from the fire; he ties their arms behind them, and marches them either to Joar or Cohone, where
he sells them to the Europeans."

[Footnote A: Moor, page 61.]

[Footnote B: Idem, p. 46.]

A. Brue, the French director, gives much the same account, and says,[A] "That having received
goods, he wrote to the King, that if he had a sufficient number of slaves, he was ready to
trade with him. This Prince, as well as the other Negroe monarchs, has always a sure way of
supplying his deficiencies, by selling his own subjects, for which they seldom want a pretence.
The King had recourse to this method, by seizing three hundred of his own people, and sent
word to the director, that he had the slaves ready to deliver for the goods." It seems, the
King wanted double the quantity of goods which the factor would give him for these three hundred
slaves; but the factor refusing to trust him, as he was already in the company's debt, and
perceiving that this refusal had put the King much out of temper, he proposed that he should
give him a licence for taking so many more of his people, as the goods he still wanted were
worth but this the King refused, saying "It might occasion a disturbance amongst his subjects."[B]
Except in the above instance, and some others, where the power of the Negroe Kings is unlawfully
exerted over their subjects, the slave-trade is carried on in Guinea with some regard to the
laws of the country, which allow of none to be sold, but prisoners taken in their national
wars, or people adjudged to slavery in punishment for crimes; but the largeness of the country,
the number of kingdoms or commonwealths, and the great encouragement given by the Europeans,
afford frequent pretences and opportunities to the bold designing profligates of one kingdom,
to surprize and seize upon not only those of a neighbouring government, but also the weak and
helpless of their own;[C] and the unhappy people, taken on those occasions, are, with impunity,
sold to the Europeans. These practices are doubtless disapproved of by the most considerate
amongst the Negroes, for Bosman acquaints us, that even their national wars are not agreeable
to such. He says,[D] "If the person who occasioned the beginning of the war be taken, they
will not easily admit him to ransom, though his weight in gold should be offered, for fear
he should in future form some new design against their repose."

[Footnote A: Collection vol. 2. p. 29.]

[Footnote B: Note, This Negroe King thus refusing to comply with the factor's wicked proposal,
shews, he was sensible his own conduct was not justifiable; and it likewise appears, the factor's
only concern was to procure the greatest number of slaves, without any regard to the injustice
of the method by which they were procured. This Andrew Brue, was, for a long time, principal
director of the French African factory in those parts; in the management of which, he is in
the collection said to have had extraordinary success. The part he ought to have acted as a
christian towards the ignorant Africans seems quite out of the question; the profit of his
employers appears to have been his sole concern. At page 62, speaking of the country on the
Senegal river, he says, "It was very populous, the soil rich; and if the people were industrious,
they might, of their own produce, carry on a very advantageous trade with strangers; there
being but few things in which they could be excelled; but (he adds) it is to be hoped, the
Europeans will never let them into the secret." A remark unbecoming humanity, much more christianity!]

[Footnote C: This inhuman practice is particularly described by Brue, in collect. vol. 2. page
98, where he says, "That some of the natives are, on all occasions, endeavouring to surprize
and carry off their country people. They land (says he) without noise, and if they find a lone
cottage, without defence, they surround it, and carry off all the people and effects to their
boat, and immediately reimbark." This seems to be mostly practised by some Negroes who dwell
on the sea coast.]

[Footnote D: Bosman, p. 155.]

CHAP. XI.

An account of the shocking inhumanity, used in the carrying on of the slave-trade, as described
by factors of different nations, viz. by Francis Moor, on the river Gambia; and by John Barbot,
A. Brue, and William Bosman, through the coast of Guinea. Note. Of the large revenues arising
to the Kings of Guinea from the slave-trade.

First, Francis Moor, factor for the English African company, on the river Gambia,[A] writes,
"That there are a number of Negro traders, called joncoes, or merchants, who follow the slave-trade
as a business; their place of residence is so high up in the country as to be six weeks travel
from James Fort, which is situate at the mouth of that river. These merchants bring down elephants
teeth, and in some years two thousand slaves, most of which, they say, are prisoners taken
in war. They buy them from the different Princes who take them; many of them are Bumbrongs
and Petcharies; nations, who each of them have different languages, and are brought from a
vast way inland. Their way of bringing them is tying them by the neck with leather thongs,
at about a yard distant from each other, thirty or forty in a string, having generally a bundle
of corn or elephants teeth upon each of their heads. In their way from the mountains, they
travel thro' very great woods, where they cannot for some days get water; so they carry in
skin bags enough to support them for a time. I cannot (adds Moor) be certain of the number
of merchants who follow this trade, but there may, perhaps, be about an hundred, who go up
into the inland country, with the goods which they buy from the white men, and with them purchase,
in various countries, gold, slaves, and elephants teeth.

[Footnote A: Moor, page 28.]

John Barbot, the French factor, in his account of the manner by which the slaves are procured,
says,[A] "The slaves sold by the Negroes, are for the most part prisoners of war, or taken
in the incursions they make in their enemies territories; others are stolen away by their neighbours,
when found abroad on the road, or in the woods; or else in the corn fields, at the time of
the year when their parents keep them there all the day to scare away the devouring small birds."
Speaking of the transactions on that part of Guinea called the Slave Coast, where the Europeans
have the most factories, and from whence they bring away much the greatest number of slaves,
the same author, and also Bosman[B] says, "The inhabitants of Coto do much mischief, in stealing
those slaves they sell to the Europeans, from the upland country.--That the inhabitants of
Popo excell the former; being endowed with a much larger share of courage, they rob more successfully,
by which means they increase their riches and trade," The author particularly remarks, "That
they are encouraged in this practice by the Europeans; sometimes it happens, according to the
success of their inland excursions, that they are able to furnish two hundred slaves or more,
in a few days." And he says,[C] "The blacks of Fida, or Whidah, are so expeditious in trading
for slaves, that they can deliver a thousand every month."--"If there happens to be no stock
of slaves there, the factor must trust the blacks with his goods, to the value of one hundred
and fifty, or two hundred pounds; which goods they carry up into the inland country, to buy
slaves at all markets,[D] for above six hundred miles up the country, where they are kept like
cattle in Europe; the slaves sold there being generally prisoners of war, taken from their
enemies like other booty, and perhaps some few sold by their own countrymen, in extreme want,
or upon a famine, as also some as a punishment of heinous crimes." So far Barbot's account;
that given by William Bosman is as follows:[E] "When the slaves which are brought from the
inland countries come to Whidah, they are put in prison together; when we treat concerning
buying them, they are all brought out together in a large plain, where, by our surgeons, they
are thoroughly examined, and that naked, both men and women, without the least distinction
or modesty.[F] Those which are approved as good, are set on one side; in the mean while a burning
iron, with the arms or name of the company, lies in the fire, with which ours are marked on
the breast. There is a greater tolerance towards vice. Many more men practice sexual vice than before
and most refuse to condemn it. It might be said that the men are more open to religion, but
less religious. They are also more open on the question of sacrifice, the need for living or dying
for others."

An army chaplain who himself served in the ranks writes of the soldier: "He lives an animal life
in which the thinking is done for him. Indeed his relative comfort depends upon the extent
to which he can abstain from thinking. In France the number who take drink increases greatly.
It is wicked, damnably wicked that our lads through ignorance should
be allowed to slip into sins which in themselves are deadly, but which
also open the door to deadlier sins. . . .

There are many indications that when the Army returns there will
be a great social upheaval.

Men feel that they are out to fight Prussianism, but they are becoming
growingly conscious of Prussianism in our own national life.

They are very conscious of it in military life."

If we were to sum up our impressions we would be compelled to say that there has been an increase
of immorality, drinking, and bad language during the period of the war.

II

Let us now ask, What is the attitude of the men to religion, and what are the characteristics
of their religious life in war time? The war seems to have intensified all the tendencies of peace
time. It makes a man a greater sinner or a greater saint. He is either driven to God or away from
Him. It would be impossible for any single human mind adequately
to sum up the good and evil of war, and strike a balance between the
two.

Most Christians cannot believe that war is in itself good.

To those who have seen its hideous reality it is unquestionably a dire evil. Even the best
results of war might have been better attained by other means. The good is often revealed rather
than caused by it. A moral equivalent for war might have been found. Certainly no Christian could
defend war save as a last resort, forced upon a nation in defense of its life or for the lives
of others, when all more rational or judicial methods had failed.

Among the obvious evil results of war we would be compelled to name at least ten: The wanton destruction
of human life; the maiming and suffering inflicted upon the wounded; the breaking up of homes
and the terrible suffering caused to women and children; the loss of wealth and property, with
the subsequent hardship for the poor which it entails, and the destruction of art, architecture,
and the higher material accomplishments of civilization; the outbreak of immorality and drunkenness,
which always accompanies war; the hardening of the finer sensibilities of men through the cruelty
and barbarity of modern warfare; the increase of hatred and suspicion; the dividing of humanity
and the destruction of its sense of unity, brotherhood, and cooperation; the breakdown of international
law and respect for law and order; and the loss of reverence for human life and the sense of
its priceless value.

An equal number of possible good effects may be mentioned which war
may at times call out: The development of courage and heroism; the
call to sacrifice in the sinking of selfish individual interests for
the sake of a cause; the discipline of obedience and the development
of corporate action; the bringing of men out of selfish and careless
lives to the facing of the great realities of God, life, death, and
immortality; the awful object lesson of the results of sin, both personal
and national, and the teaching of the terrible lesson that "the wages
of sin is death"; the widening of men's horizons, the breaking of
old molds, ruts, and restrictions and the opening of men's minds to
new ideas; the chastening and mellowing influence of suffering, with
its possible development of sympathy, tenderness, and unselfishness;
the deepening of the sense of brotherhood within a single nation with
the sinking of the false or artificial social distinctions of peace
time; the strengthening of religious unity by the stripping off of
nonessentials and the laying bare of the great simple fundamentals;
and the new contact with the practical ministry of religion in hours
of deepest need in camps, in hospitals, and on the battlefields, with
the resultant strengthening hold on the great verities of the love
of God, the cross of Christ, and the service of men.

It will depend upon the individual and his theories of life how he will strike the balance between
these two sides of the good and evil of war. While the good effects of a war are seen more
clearly after it is over, certainly during the war the vast majority
of men at the front would almost unanimously agree that the preponderating
influence and effect for the time being is evil.

At the beginning of the war in 1914 there was talk of a religious
revival in the various countries.

The churches for a time were filled. The opening of the war drove men to God. With the passing
months, which have now dragged into years, many of the high ideals have gradually been lowered
or lost.

Men are certainly ready to listen to a living message and are probably more open than ever before
in their lives to religious influences, because of their desperate need. They are between the
nether and upper millstones of sin and death.

On the one hand they meet the pressure of terrible temptations, and on the other they have
to face the awful fact of death, unready and unprepared. But although the men are open to
a religious message and to the Christian challenge presented by one
who has a real message, it could hardly be maintained by anyone that
there is a revival of religion at the front today.

Rather the opposite is true.

A friend of the present writer, a chaplain in charge of the religious work in one of the five
armies at the front, well says:

"On the whole, I venture to say, there is not a great revival of the Christian religion at the
front. Deep in their hearts is a great trust and faith in God. It is an inarticulate faith
expressed in deeds. The top levels, as it were, of their consciousness, are much filled with
grumbling and foul language and physical occupations; but beneath lie deep spiritual springs,
whence issue their cheerfulness, stubbornness, patience, generosity, humility, and willingness
to suffer and to die. There is religion about; only, very often it is not the Christian religion.
Rather it is natural religion. It is the expression of a craving for security. Literally it is
a looking for salvation."

It may be asked, To what extent are the men thinking of religion and discussing its problems? One
friend of the writer, a young Anglican chaplain, says: "The men are not thinking at all. They
are 'carrying on.' They spend hours in playing a game like House because it requires no thought."
However, it would probably be fairer to say that at times all of them think about religion, although
they do not talk very much about it. It is not, however, consistent thought leading to action.
Rather they have moments of deep impressions, vague longings, intuitions, and hunger of heart.
But the minute anyone starts a discussion or begins to attack religion, men show that they have
been thinking, or that they have ideas of their own in private.

Most of them believe in God, although they do not know Him in a personal way. They believe in
religion, but have not made it vital and dominant in their lives.

They have a vague sense or intuition that there is a God and that
He is a good God, round about and above them.

He is looked upon, however, not as One whom they are to seek first, but rather as a last resort;
not as a present Father and constant Friend, but as One to whom they can turn in time of need.
They have a vague feeling of unworthiness, although no clear sense of sin. Yet they also have
an inarticulate belief or intuition that they have tried, however brokenly or unsuccessfully, to live
up to such light as they had or to some standard of their own. They feel that somehow, though they
have often failed, at bottom they are not so very bad, and that God is very, very good. Their
vague feeling would probably find its most accurate expression in
Faber's hymn, "There's a wideness in God's mercy, like the wideness
of the sea."

They revere God from afar off and in one compartment of their being, but they have never opened
their lives to Him. They have a reverence for Him in the face of death, in the hour of need,
and in the great crises of life. Most of them like to sing the Christian hymns on Sunday evening
and have thoughts of home and of loved ones that are sacred. They do not feel that they have come
into close personal relations with God, but neither do they consciously feel that they are out of
relation with Him. They do not think they are altogether right with Him, but neither do they
feel in the bottom of their hearts that they are wholly wrong with Him. The vast majority of them
in the hour of death do not feel that they have either consciously accepted or rejected Him.
They have not loved darkness rather than light, nor have they wholly chosen the light and rejected the
darkness.

It will depend upon the individual how he classifies these men. Some will believe that the
great love of the Good Shepherd, who laid down His life for the sheep, will somehow in the end
not be thwarted in His seeking to save the lost. Not only will men differ in their judgment, but
it is exceedingly difficult to pass judgment upon an individual soldier. He seems to be a different
man under different circumstances. In the temptations at the base camp, he would perhaps appear
to be utterly irreligious and profane. He can hardly be recognized as the same man as he prays
in the hour of battle, or as he lies wounded, chastened, and sobered, in the hospital. Which
situation reveals the true man?

Before us as we write lies the photograph of a young sergeant. Before the war he was an atheist,
an illegitimate child, a member of the criminal class. But in the trenches he found God. Blown
up by a mine, for sixteen days he lost the power of speech and of memory. He returned from the front
with a deep sense of God, but with no personal, vital relationship to Christ. He eagerly welcomed
the first real message that went straight to his heart, and the personal word of loving sympathy
which led him to relate his deep experience of the trenches to the presence of the living Christ.
All this man needed was someone to interpret to him his own experience, and bring him into
the relationship with God which his own heart craved and longed for.

Beside this photograph is the card of a strong-willed, self-righteous young Pharisee, who had no use
for religion in peace time, but who was driven to God by his awful
conflict with sin in this war.

Next comes the card of a young man who formerly had lived a proper conventional life without bad
habits. The war taught him to drink and he finally became a drunkard, but in his extremity he found
Christ as a personal Saviour. Next comes the card of a man who had been in a public house for
thirty-two years--twenty-seven years as a bar tender and five years as a saloon keeper. He said,
"I have sent men to hell with drink. I have seen women who would sell the clothes off the backs
of their children or pawn their husband's clothing to get drink." Yet this man has been brought
to God during the war. Many a man has found God on the field of battle, or like the thief has turned
to him in the hour of death.[2]

One young soldier thus describes his experience which is typical of many another: There had been
a charge, a hopeless affair from the start. He lay in the long grass between the lines, unable
to move, and with an unceasing throbbing pain in his left leg and arm. A whizz-bang had caught
him in both places. He just lay there, feeling strangely peaceful. Above him he could see the
stars. All this bloodshed--what was the good of it? He suddenly felt terribly small and lonely,
and he was so very, very weak. "God!" he whispered softly. "God everywhere!" Then into his
tired brain came a new phrase--"Underneath are the everlasting arms." He sighed contentedly,
as a tired child. They fetched him in at last. He will never again be sound of limb; but there
is in his memory and in his heart that which may make him a staunch fighter in other fields.
He has learned a new way of prayer, and the courage that is born of faith well-founded.

The idea has been widely preached by many British chaplains that death in battle saves. This may
be good Mohammedanism, but it is surely not the Christian message that is given to Christ's ministers
to preach.

But such a passage cannot be taken out of its context either in Christ's teaching or in the man's
own life. Our Lord had said that we were to love even as He loved, that is, out of a pure and
surrendered heart to lay down our life for our friends; and He added, "Ye are my friends if ye do
the things which I command you." It is going far beyond the province of the Christian minister
to offer any hope other than that which is offered by our Lord Himself. It is not death or a
bullet or battle that saves. Christ only saves, and there is no other name given under heaven.
This offer is made to all men and at all times.

But although one may not preach so dangerous and misleading a doctrine, it is nevertheless
possible to realize that many a man is unconsciously more of a Christian than he knows, and that in the
last day he may say with surprise: "When saw I Thee an hungered and fed Thee?"

We may turn to "A Student in Arms" for his interpretation of the feeling of the common soldier in
this crisis:

"Then at last we 'got out.' We were confronted with dearth, danger, and death. . . . They,
who had formerly been our despair, were now our glory. Their spirits effervesced. Their wit
sparkled. Hunger and thirst could not depress them. Rain could not damp them. Cold could not
chill them. Every hardship became a joke. . . . Never was such a triumph of spirit over matter.
. . . If it was another fellow that was hit, it was an occasion for tenderness and grief. But
if one of them was hit, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? . . . Life?
They did not value life! They had never been able to make much of a fist of it. But if they
lived amiss they died gloriously, with a smile for the pain and the dread of it. What else had
they been born for? It was their chance.

With a gay heart they gave their greatest gift, and with a smile to think that after all they
had anything to give which was of value. One by one Death challenged them. One by one they smiled
in his grim visage, and refused to be dismayed. They had been lost, but they had found the path
that led them home; and when at last they laid their lives at the feet of the Good Shepherd,
what could they do but smile?"

It has been well said that there is much natural religion in the trenches, but that much of
this religion is not Christian. What is the attitude of the men to Christ Himself? Most of
them associate Him with all that is highest and noblest in life. They link Him with God in their
thought, and with themselves in their time of deepest need. Although His name with that of God
is sometimes taken on their lips in profanity, there is often a deep
reverence for Him.

Thousands have seen the cross of Christ standing among the ruins
in the villages of Belgium and Northern France, when all about seems
to be battered and wrecked.

The old skeptical theories and captious criticisms of pre-war days are little heard during this
awful time. Generally speaking, the facts of the gospel narrative are not disputed. They believe
in Christ as the revelation of God. They have no difficulty with the doctrine of the divinity of Christ
and do not doubt that He is a living reality and has power to save.

Their only difficulty is with their own sin. They do not know how to break from it or are
unwilling to give it up.

The great need of the hour is for interpretation. On the one hand, men have had in their hours
of great need a deep experience of God which they do not understand; yet on the other hand,
they are gripped by the power of temptation which alone they cannot overcome. They admire the virtues
of courage, generosity, and purity, but for the most part they see no connection between these
and the presentation of Christ in the lives and words of those about them who profess to be Christians.
What is needed is personally to relate the man to the God and Father of Jesus Christ, with Whom
he has been brought face to face at the battle front. There is urgent and imperative need of the giving
of that message, both in public presentation and in the channels of personal friendship.

One chaplain says of the men: "I am sure the soldier has got religion:
I am sure he has got Christianity; but he does not know he has got
Christianity.

I am convinced that of the hundreds of men who go into action the majority come out affected towards
good rather than coarsened. They come out realizing that there are times when they cannot get
on without God; they are not frightened of Him, they flee to Him with their simple cries for
strength."

While another, a student who laid down his life at the front, makes this valuable suggestion as
to the presentation of Christ: "When I was talking to them at these services, I always used
to try to make them feel that Christ was the fulfilment of all the best things that they admired,
that He was their natural hero. I would tell them some story of heroism and meanness contrasted,
of courage and cowardice, of noble forgiveness and vile cruelty, and so get them on the side of the
angels. Then I would try and spring it upon them that Christ was the Lord of the heroes and
the brave men and the noble men, and that He was fighting against all that was mean and cruel
and cowardly, and that it was up to them to take their stand by His side if they wanted to make
the world a little better instead of a little worse."

III

The third question discussed with the men was, What is the attitude of the soldier to the churches,
and what lesson has the Church to learn from the present war? Let
it be said at the very outset that the writer speaks as a member of
the Church and in deep sympathy with it. As the divinely constituted
organization which stands for the highest human ideals, and for the
establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth, we all are, or ought
to be, members of the Church. "With charity for all and with malice
toward none," we see no ground for self-complacence on the part of
any branch of the Church, and no part of it which deserves sweeping
condemnation from the rest. Doubtless it will seem to many that it
is unwise to confess our faults, but the men at the front are not
silent, however much we may desire to be. We would do well to face
the facts which this war is forcing upon our attention, however much
we may dislike the searching glare of the present conflict. Obviously
something is wrong. Had the Church fulfilled her divine mission, the
present war between so-called "Christian" nations would have been
impossible.

As was stated in the preceding chapter, according to
the opinion of the majority, less than 20 per cent or one-fifth of
the men are vitally related to any of the Christian communions. Add to this, the
prodigious number who are killed in the incursions and intestine wars, by which the Negroes
procure the number of slaves wanted to load the vessels. How dreadful then is this slave-trade,
whereby so many thousands of our fellow creatures, free by nature, endued with the same rational
faculties, and called to be heirs of the same salvation with us, lose their lives, and are,
truly and properly speaking, murdered every year! For it is not necessary, in order to convict
a man of murder, to make it appear that he had an intention to commit murder; whoever does,
by unjust force or violence, deprive another of his liberty, and, while he hath him in his
power, continues so to oppress him by cruel treatment, as eventually to occasion his death,
is actually guilty of murder. It is enough to make a thoughtful person tremble, to think what
a load of guilt lies upon our nation on this account; and that the blood of thousands of poor
innocent creatures, murdered every year in the prosecution of this wicked trade, cries aloud
to Heaven for vengeance. Were we to hear or read of a nation that destroyed every year, in
some other way, as many human creatures as perish in this trade, we should certainly consider
them as a very bloody, barbarous people; if it be alledged, that the legislature hath encouraged,
and still does encourage this trade, It is answered, that no legislature on earth can alter
the nature of things, so as to make that to be right which is contrary to the law of God, (the
supreme Legislator and Governor of the world) and opposeth the promulgation of the Gospel of
peace on earth, and good will to man. Injustice may be methodized and established by law, but
still it will be injustice, as much as it was before; though its being so established may render
men more insensible of the guilt, and more bold and secure in the perpetration of it.

[Footnote A: Appendix to Anderson's history, p. 68.]

CHAP. XIV.

Observations on the disposition and capacity of the Negroes: Why thought inferior to that of
the Whites. Affecting instances of the slavery of the Negroes. Reflections thereon.

Doubts may arise in the minds of some, whether the foregoing accounts, relating to the natural
capacity and good disposition of the inhabitants of Guinea, and of the violent manner in which
they are said to be torn from their native land, are to be depended upon; as those Negroes
who are brought to us, are not heard to complain, and do but seldom manifest such a docility
and quickness of parts, as is agreeable thereto. But those who make these objections, are desired
to note the many discouragements the poor Africans labour under, when brought from their native
land. Let them consider, that those afflicted strangers, though in an enlightened Christian
country, have yet but little opportunity or encouragement to exert and improve their natural
talents: They are constantly employed in servile labour; and the abject condition in which
we see them, naturally raises an idea of a superiority in ourselves; whence we are apt to look
upon them as an ignorant and contemptible part of mankind. Add to this, that they meet with
very little encouragement of freely conversing with such of the Whites, as might impart instruction
to them. It is a fondness for wealth, for authority, or honour, which prompts most men in their
endeavours to excell; but these motives can have little influence upon the minds of the Negroes;
few of them having any reasonable prospect of any other than a state of slavery; so that, though
their natural capacities were ever so good, they have neither inducement or opportunity to
exert them to advantage: This naturally tends to depress their minds, and sink their spirits
into habits of idleness and sloth, which they would, in all likelihood, have been free from,
had they stood upon an equal footing with the white people. They are suffered, with impunity,
to cohabit together, without being married; and to part, when solemnly engaged to one another
as man and wife; notwithstanding the moral and religious laws of the land, strictly prohibiting
such practices. This naturally tends to beget apprehensions in the most thoughtful of those
people, that we look upon them as a lower race, not worthy of the same care, nor liable to
the same rewards and punishments as ourselves. Nevertheless it may with truth be said, that
both amongst those who have obtained their freedom, and those who remain in servitude, some
have manifested a strong sagacity and an exemplary uprightness of heart. If this hath not been
generally the case with them, is it a matter of surprize? Have we not reason to make the same
complaint of many white servants, when discharged from our service, though many of them have
had much greater opportunities of knowledge and improvement than the blacks; who, even when
free, labour under the same difficulties as before: having but little access to, and intercourse
with, the most reputable white people, they remain confined within their former limits of conversation.
And if they seldom complain of the unjust and cruel usage they have received, in being forced
from their native country, &c. it is not to be wondered at; it being a considerable time after
their arrival amongst us, before they can speak our language; and, by the time they are able
to express themselves, they have great reason to believe, that little or no notice would be
taken of their complaints: yet let any person enquire of those who were capable of reflection,
before they were brought from their native land, and he will hear such affecting relations,
as, if not lost to the common feelings of humanity, will sensibly affect his heart. The case
of a poor Negroe, not long since brought from Guinea, is a recent instance of this kind. From
his first arrival, he appeared thoughtful and dejected, frequently dropping tears when taking
notice of his master's children, the cause of which was not known till he was able to speak
English, when the account he gave of himself was, "That he had a wife and children in his own
country; that some of these being sick and thirsty, he went in the night time, to fetch water
at a spring, where he was violently seized and carried away by persons who lay in wait to catch
men, from whence he was transported to America. The remembrance of his family, friends, and
other connections, left behind, which he never expected to see any more, were the principal
cause of his dejection and grief." Many cases, equally affecting, might be here mentioned;
but one more instance, which fell under the notice of a person of credit, will suffice. One
of these wretched creatures, then about 50 years of age, informed him, "That being violently
torn from a wife and several children in Guinea, he was sold in Jamaica, where never expecting
to see his native land or family any more, he joined himself to a Negroe woman, by whom he
had two children: after some years, it suiting the interest of his owner to remove him, he
was separated from his second wife and children, and brought to South Carolina, where, expecting
to spend the remainder of his days, he engaged with a third wife, by whom he had another child;
but here the same consequence of one man being subject to the will and pleasure of another
man occurring, he was separated from this last wife and child, and brought into this country,
where he remained a slave." Can any, whose mind is not rendered quite obdurate by the love
of wealth, hear these relations, without being deeply touched with sympathy and sorrow? And
doubtless the case of many, very many of these afflicted people, upon enquiry, would be found
to be attended with circumstances equally tragical and aggravating. And if we enquire of those
Negroes, who were brought away from their native country when children, we shall find most
of them to have been stolen away, when abroad from their parents, on the roads, in the woods,
or watching their corn-fields. Now, you that have studied the book of conscience, and you that
are learned in the law, what will you say to such deplorable cases? When, and how, have these
oppressed people forfeited their liberty? Does not justice loudly call for its being restored
to them? Have they not the same right to demand it, as any of us should have, if we had been
violently snatched by pirates from our native land? Is it not the duty of every dispenser of
justice, who is not forgetful of his own humanity, to remember that these are men, and to declare
them free? Where instances of such cruelty frequently occur, and are neither enquired into,
nor redressed, by those whose duty it is to seek judgment, and relieve the oppressed, Isaiah
i. 17. what can be expected, but that the groans and cries of these sufferers will reach Heaven;
and what shall we do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what will ye answer him? Did
not he that made them, make us; and did not one fashion us in the womb? Job xxxi. 14.

CHAP XIV.

The expediency of a general freedom being granted to the Negroes considered. Reasons why it
might be productive of advantage and safety to the Colonies.

It is scarce to be doubted, but that the foregoing accounts will beget in the heart of the
considerate readers an earnest desire to see a stop put to this complicated evil, but the objection
with many is, What shall be done with those Negroes already imported, and born in our families?
Must they be sent to Africa? That would be to expose them, in a strange land, to greater difficulties
than many of them labour under at present. To let them suddenly free here, would be perhaps
attended with no less difficulty; for, undiciplined as they are in religion and virtue, they
might give a loose to those evil habits, which the fear of a master would have restrained.
These are objections, which weigh with many well disposed people, and it must be granted, these
are difficulties in the way; nor can any general change be made, or reformation effected, without
some; but the difficulties are not so great but that they may be surmounted. If the government
was so considerate of the iniquity and danger attending on this practice, as to be willing
to seek a remedy, doubtless the Almighty would bless this good intention, and such methods
would be thought of, as would not only put an end to the unjust oppression of the Negroes,
but might bring them under regulations, that would enable them to become profitable members
of society; for the furtherance of which, the following proposals are offered to consideration:
That all farther importation of slaves be absolutely prohibited; and as to those born among
us, after serving so long as may appear to be equitable, let them by law be declared free.
Let every one, thus set free, be enrolled in the county courts, and be obliged to be a resident,
during a certain number of years, within the said county, under the care of the overseers of
the poor. Thus being, in some sort, still under the direction of governors, and the notice
of those who were formerly acquainted with them, they would be obliged to act the more circumspectly,
and make proper use of their liberty, and their children would have an opportunity of obtaining
such instructions, as are necessary to the common occasions of life; and thus both parents
and children might gradually become useful members of the community. And further, where the
nature of the country would permit, as certainly the uncultivated condition of our southern
and most western colonies easily would, suppose a small tract of land were assigned to every
Negroe family, and they obliged to live upon and improve it, (when not hired out to work for
the white people) this would encourage them to exert their abilities, and become industrious
subjects. Hence, both planters and tradesmen would be plentifully supplied with chearful and
willing-minded labourers, much vacant land would be cultivated, the produce of the country
be justly increased, the taxes for the support of government lessened to individuals, by the
increase of taxables, and the Negroes, instead of being an object of terror,[A] as they certainly
must be to the governments where their numbers are great, would become interested in their
safety and welfare.

[Footnote A: The hard usage the Negroes meet with in the plantations, and the great disproportion
between them and the white people, will always be a just cause of terror. In Jamaica, and some
parts of South-Carolina, it is supposed that there are fifteen blacks to one white.]

CHAP. XV.

Answer to a mistaken opinion, that the warmth of the climate in the West-Indies, will not permit
white people to labour there. No complaint of disability in the whites, in that respect, in
the settlement of the islands. Idleness and diseases prevailed, as the use of slaves increased.
The great advantage which might accrue to the British nation, if the slave trade was entirely
laid aside, and a fair and friendly commerce established through the whole coast of Africa.
Those islands were, at first, wholly cultivated by white men; the encouragement they then met
with, for a long course of years, was such as occasioned a great increase of people. Richard
Ligon, in his history of Barbadoes, where he resided from the year 1647 to 1650, about 24 years
after his first settlement, writes, "that there were then fifty thousand souls on that island,
besides Negroes; and that though the weather was very hot, yet not so scalding but that servants,
both christians and slaves, laboured ten hours a day." By other accounts we gather, that the
white people have since decreased to less than one half the number which was there at that
time; and by relations of the first settlements of the other islands, we do not meet with any
complaints of unfitness in the white people for labour there, before slaves were introduced.
The island of Hispaniola, which is one of the largest of those islands, was at first planted
by the Buccaneers, a set of hardy laborious men, who continued so for a long course of years;
till following the example of their neighbours, in the purchase and use of Negroe slaves, idleness
and excess prevailing, debility and disease naturally succeeded, and have ever since continued.
If, under proper regulations, liberty was proclaimed through the colonies, the Negroes, from
dangerous, grudging, half-fed slaves, might become able, willing-minded labourers. And if there
was not a sufficient number of these to do the necessary work, a competent number of labouring
people might be procured from Europe, which affords numbers of poor distressed objects, who,
if not overlooked, with proper usage, might, in several respects, better answer every good
purpose in performing the necessary labour in the islands, than the slaves now do.

A farther considerable advantage might accrue to the British nation in general, if the slave
trade was laid aside, by the cultivation of a fair, friendly, and humane commerce with the
Africans; without which, it is not possible the inland trade of that country should ever be
extended to the degree it is capable of; for while the spirit of butchery and making slaves
of each other, is promoted by the Europeans amongst the Negroes, no mutual confidence can take
place; nor will the Europeans be able to travel with safety into the heart of their country,
to form and cement such commercial friendships and alliances, as might be necessary to introduce
the arts and sciences amongst them, and engage their attention to instruction in the principles
of the christian religion, which is the only sure foundation of every social virtue. Africa
has about ten thousand miles of sea coast, and extends in depth near three thousand miles from
east to west, and as much from north to south, stored with vast treasures of materials, necessary
for the trade and manufactures of Great-Britain; and from its climate, and the fruitfulness
of its soil, capable, under proper management, of producing in the greatest plenty, most of
the commodities which are imported into Europe from those parts of America subject to the English
government;[A] and as, in return, they would take our manufactures, the advantages of this
trade would soon become so great, that it is evident this subject merits the regard and attention
of the government.

[Footnote A: See note, page 109.]

EXTRACT

FROM A

REPRESENTATION

OF THE

INJUSTICE

AND

DANGEROUS TENDENCY

OF TOLERATING

SLAVERY;

OR

Admitting the least CLAIM of private Property in the Persons of Men in England.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

FIRST PRINTED IN LONDON.

MDCCLXIX.

CONTENTS.

The occasion of this Treatise. All Persons during their residence in Great Britain are subjects;
and as such, bound to the laws, and under the Kings protection. By the English laws, no man,
of what condition soever, to be imprisoned, or any way deprived of his LIBERTY, without a legal
process. The danger of Slavery taking place in England. Prevails in the Northern Colonies,
notwithstanding the people's plea in favour of Liberty. Advertisements in the New-York Journal
for the sale of SLAVES. Advertisements to the same purpose in the public prints in England.
The danger of confining any person without a legal warrant. Instances of that nature. Note,
Extract of several American laws, Reflexions thereon.

Page 5. Indeed there are many instances of persons being freed from slavery by the laws of
England, but (God be thanked) there is neither law, nor even a precedent, (at least I have
not been able to find one) of a legal determination to justify a master in claiming or detaining
any person whatsoever as a slave in England, who has not voluntarily bound himself as such
by a contract in writing.

Page 20. An English subject cannot be made a slave without his own free consent: but--a foreign
slave is made a subject with or without his own consent: there needs no contract for this purpose,
as in the other case; nor any other act or deed whatsoever, but that of his being landed in
England; For according to statute 32d of Henry VIII. c. 16. Sect. 9. "Every alien or stranger
born out of the King's obeisance, not being denizen, which now or hereafter shall come into
this realm, or elsewhere within the King's dominions, shall, after the said first of September
next coming, be bounden by and unto the laws and statutes of this realm, and to all and singular
the contents of the same."

Now it must be observed, that this law makes no distinction of bond or free, neither of colours
or complexions, whether of black, brown, or white; for "every alien or stranger (without exception)
are bounden by and unto the law, &c."

This binding, or obligation, is properly expressed by the English word ligeance, (à ligando)
which may be either perpetual or temporary. Wood, b. I. c. 3. p. 37. But one of these is indispensably
due to the Sovereign from all ranks and conditions of people; their being bounden unto the
laws, (upon which the Sovereign's right is founded) expresses and implies this subjection to
the laws; and therefore to alledge, that an alien is not a subject, because he is in bondage,
is not only a plea without foundation, but a contradiction in terms; for every person who,
in any respect, is in subjection to the laws, must undoubtedly be a subject.

I come now to the main point--"That every man, woman, or child, that now is, or hereafter shall
be, an inhabitant or resiant of this kingdom of England, dominion of Wales, or town of Berwick
upon Tweed," is, in some respect or other, the King's subject, and, as such, is absolutely
secure in his or her personal liberty, by virtue of a statute, 31st Car. II. ch. 11. and particularly
by the 12th Sect. of the same, wherein subjects of all conditions are plainly included.

This act is expressly intended for the better securing the liberty of the subject, and for
prevention of imprisonment beyond the seas. It contains no distinction of "natural born, naturalized,
denizen, or alien subject; nor of white or black, freemen, or even of bond-men," (except in
the case already mentioned of a contract in writing, by which it shall appear, that the said
slave has voluntarily bound himself, without compulsion or illegal duress, allowed by the 13th
Sect. and the exception likewise in the 14th Sect. concerning felons) but they are all included
under the general titles of "the subject, any of the said subjects, every such person" &c.
Now the definition of the word "person," in its relative or civil capacity (according to Wood.
b. I. c. 11. p. 27.) is either the King, or a subject. These are the only capital distinctions
that can be made, tho' the latter consists of a variety of denominations and degrees.

But if I were even to allow, that a Negroe slave is not a subject, (though I think I have clearly
proved that he is) yet it is plain that such an one ought not to be denied the benefit of the
King's court, unless the slave-holder shall be able to prove likewise that he is not, a Man;
because every man may be free to sue for, and defend his right in our courts, says a stat.
20th Edw. III. c. 4. and elsewhere, according to law. 28th Edw. III, c. 3, No man therefore,
of what estate or condition that he be, can lawfully be detained in England as a slave; because
we have no law whereby a man may be condemned to slavery without his own consent, (for even
convicted felons must "in open court pray to transported.") (See Habeas Corpus act, Sect. 14.)
and therefore there cannot be any "due process of the law" tending to so base a purpose. It
follows therefore, that every man, who presumes to detain any person whatsoever as a slave,
otherwise than by virtue of a written contract, acts manifestly without "due process of the
law," and consequently is liable to the slave's "action of false imprisonment," because "every
man may be free to sue," &c. so that the slave-holder cannot avail himself of his imaginary
property, either by the assistance of the common law, or of a court of equity, (except it appears
that the said slave has voluntarily bound himself, without compulsion or illegal duress) for
in both his suit will certainly appear both unjust and indefensible. The former cannot assist
him, because the statute law at present is so far from supposing any man in a state of slavery,
that it cannot even permit such a state, except in the two cases mentioned in the 13th and
14th Section of the Habeas Corpus act; and the courts of equity likewise must necessarily decide
against him, because his mere mercenary plea of private property cannot equitably, in a case
between man and man, stand in competition with that superior property which every man must
necessarily be allowed to have in his own proper person.

How then is the slave-holder to secure what he esteems his property? Perhaps he will endeavour
clandestinely to seize the supposed slave, in order to transport him (with or without his consent)
to the colonies, where such property is allowed: but let him take care what he does, the very
attempt is punishable; and even the making over his property to another for that purpose, renders
him equally liable to the severe penalties of the law, for a bill of sale may certainly be
included under the terms expressed in the Habeas Corpus act, 12th Sect. viz. "Any warrant or
writing for such commitment, detainer, imprisonment, or transportation," &c. It is also dangerous
for a counsellor, or any other person to advise (see the act "shall be advising") such proceedings,
by saying, "That a master may legally compel him (the slave) to return again to the plantations."
Likewise an attorney, notary-public, or any other person, who shall presume to draw up, negotiate,
of even to witness a bill of sale, or other instrument for such commitment, &c. offends equally
against the law, because "All, or any person or persons, that shall frame, contrive, write,
seal, or countersign any warrant or writing for such commitment, detainer, imprisonment, or
transportation; or shall be advising, aiding, or assisting in the same, or any of them," are
liable to all the penalties of the act. "And the plaintiff, in every such action, shall have
judgment to recover his treble costs, besides damages; which damages so to be given shall not
be less than five hundred pounds;" so that the injured may have ample satisfaction for their
sufferings: and even a judge may not direct or instruct a jury contrary to this statute, whatever
his private opinion may be concerning property in slaves; because no order or command, nor
no injunction, is allowed to interfere with this golden act of liberty.

--I have before observed, that the general term, "every alien," includes all strangers whatsoever,
and renders them subject to the King, and the laws, during their residence in this kingdom;
and this is certainly true, whether the aliens be Turks, Moors, Arabians, Tartars, or even
savages, from any part of the world.--Men are rendered obnoxious to the laws by their offences,
and not by the particular denomination of their rank, order, parentage, colour, or country;
and therefore, though we should suppose that any particular body of people whatsoever were
not known, or had in consideration by the legislature at the different times when the severe
penal laws were made, yet no man can reasonably conceive, that such men are exempted on this
account from the penalties of the said laws, when legally convicted of having offended against
them.

Laws calculated for the moral purpose of preventing oppression, are likewise usually supposed
to be everlasting, and to make up a part of our happy constitution; for which reason, though
the kind of oppression to be guarded against, and the penalties for offenders, are minutely
described therein, yet the persons to be protected are comprehended in terms as general as
possible; that "no person who now is, or hereafter shall be, an inhabitant or resiant in this
kingdom," (see Habeas Corpus act, Sect. 12th) may seem to be excluded from protection. The
general terms of the several statutes before cited, are so full and clear, that they admit
of no exception whatsoever; for all persons (Negroes as well as others) must be included in
the terms "the subject;"--"no subject of this realm that now is, or hereafter shall be, an
inhabitant, &c. any subject; every such person;" see Habeas Corpus act. Also every man may
be free to sue, &c. 20th Edward III. cap. 4. and no man, of what estate or condition that he
be, shall be taken or imprisoned, &c. True justice makes no respect of persons, and can never
deny, to any one that blessing to which all mankind have an undoubted right, their natural
liberty: though the law makes no mention of Negroe slaves, yet this is no just argument for
excluding them from the general protection of our happy constitution.

Neither can the objection, that Negroe slaves were not "had in consideration or contemplation,"
when these laws were made, prove any thing against them; but, on the contrary, much in their
favour; for both these circumstances are strong presumptive proofs, that the practice of importing
slaves into this kingdom, and retaining them as such, is an innovation entirely foreign to
the spirit and intention of the laws now in force.

--Page 79. A toleration of slavery is, in effect, a toleration of inhumanity; for there are
wretches in the world who make no scruple to gain, by wearing out their slaves with continual
labour, and a scanty allowance, before they have lived out half their natural days. It is notorious,
that this is too often the case in the unhappy countries where slavery is tolerated.

See the account of the European settlements in America, Part VI. Chap. 11. concerning the "misery
of the Negroes, great waste of them," &c. which informs us not only of a most scandalous profanation
of the Lord's day, but also of another abomination, which must be infinitely more heinous in
the sight of God, viz. oppression carried to such excess, as to be even destructive of the
human species.

At present, the inhumanity of constrained labour in excess, extends no farther in England than
to our beasts, as post and hackney-horses, sand-asses, &c.

But thanks to our laws, and not to the general good disposition of masters, that it is so;
for the wretch who is bad enough to maltreat a helpless beast, would not spare his fellow man
if he had him as much in his power.

The maintenance of civil liberty is therefore absolutely necessary to prevent an increase of
our national guilt, by the addition of the horrid crime of tyranny.--Notwithstanding that the
plea of necessity cannot here be urged, yet this is no reason why an increase of the practice
is not to be feared.

Our North American colonies afford us a melancholy instance to the contrary; for though the
climate in general is so wholesome and temperate, that it will not authorise this plea of necessity
for the employment of slaves, any more than our own, yet the pernicious practice of slave-holding
is become almost general in those parts. At New-York, for instance, the infringement on civil
or domestic liberty is become notorious, notwithstanding the political controversies of the
inhabitants in praise of liberty; but no panegyric on this subject (howsoever elegant in itself)
can be graceful or edifying from the mouth or pen of one of those provincials, because men
who do not scruple to detain others in slavery, have but a very partial and unjust claim to
the protection of the laws of liberty; and indeed it too plainly appears that they have no
real regard for liberty, farther than their own private interests are concerned; and (consequently)
that they have so little detestation of despotism and tyranny, that they do not scruple to
exercise them whenever their caprice excites them, or their private interest seems to require
an exertion of their power over their miserable slaves.

Every petty planter, who avails himself of the service of slaves, is an arbitrary monarch,
or rather a lawless Bashaw in his own territories, notwithstanding that the imaginary freedom
of the province wherein he resides, may seem to forbid the observation.

The boasted liberty of our American colonies, therefore, has so little right to that sacred
name, that it seems to differ from the arbitrary power of despotic monarchs only in one circumstance,
viz. that it is a many-headed monster of tyranny, which entirely subverts our most excellent
constitution; because liberty and slavery are so opposite to each other, that they cannot subsist
in the same community. "Political liberty (in mild or well regulated governments) makes civil
liberty valuable; and whosoever is deprived of the latter, is deprived also of the former."
This observation of the learned Montesquieu, I hope sufficiently justifies my censure of the
Americans for their notorious violation of civil liberty;--The New-York Journal, or, The General
Advertiser, for Thursday, 22d October, 1767, gives notice by advertisement, of no less than
eight different persons who have escaped from slavery, or are put up to public sale for that
horrid purpose.

That I may demonstrate the indecency of such proceedings in a free country, I shall take the
liberty of laying some of these advertisements before my readers, by way of example.

"To be SOLD for want of Employment, A likely strong active Negroe man, of about 24 years of
age, this country born, (N.B. A natural born subject) understands most of a baker's trade,
and a good deal of farming business, and can do all sorts of house-work.--Also a healthy Negroe
wench, of about 21 years old, is a tolerable cook, and capable of doing all sorts of house-work,
can be well recommended for her honesty and sobriety: she has a female child of nigh three
years old, which will be sold with the wench if required, &c." Here is not the least consideration,
or scruple of conscience, for the inhumanity of parting the mother and young child. From the
stile, one would suppose the advertisement to be of no more importance than if it related merely
to the sale of a cow and her calf; and that the cow should be sold with or without her calf,
according as the purchaser should require.--But not only Negroes, but even American Indians,
are detained in the same abominable slavery in our colonies, though there cannot be any reasonable
pretence whatsoever for holding one of these as private property; for even if a written contract
should be produced as a voucher in such a case, there would still remain great suspicion, that
some undue advantage had been taken of the Indian's ignorance concerning the nature of such a bond.

"Run away, on Monday the 21st instant, from J----n T----, Esq. of West-Chester county, in the
province of New-York, An Indian slave, named Abraham, he may have changed his name, about 23
years of age, about five feet five inches."

Upon the whole, I think I may with justice conclude, that those advertisements discover a shameless
prostitution and infringement on the common and natural rights of mankind--But hold! perhaps
the Americans may be able, with too much justice, to retort this severe reflexion, and may
refer us to news-papers published even in the free city of London, which contain advertisements
not less dishonourable than their own. See advertisement in the Public Ledger of 31st December,
1761.

"For SALE, A healthy NEGROE GIRL, aged about fifteen years; speaks good English, works at her
needle, washes well, does houshold work, and has had the small-pox. By J.W. &c."

Another advertisement, not long ago, offered a reward for stopping a female slave who had left
her mistress in Hatton-garden. And in the Gazetteer of 18th April, 1769, appeared a very extraordinary
advertisement with the following title;

"Horses, Tim Wisky, and black Boy, To be sold at the Bull and Gate Inn. Holborn, A very good
Tim Wisky, little the worse for wear, &c." Afterwards, "A Chesnut Gelding;" then, "A very good
grey Mare;" and last of all, (as if of the least consequence) "A well-made good-tempered black
Boy, he has lately had the small-pox, and will be sold to any gentleman. Enquire as above."

Another advertisement in the same paper, contains a very particular description of a Negroe
man, called Jeremiah,--and concludes as follows:--"Whoever delivers him to Capt. M---- U----y,
on board the Elizabeth, at Prince's Stairs, Rotherhithe, on or before the 31st instant, shall
receive thirty guineas reward, or ten guineas for such intelligence as shall enable the Captain,
or his master, effectually to secure him. The utmost secrecy may be depended on." It is not
on account of shame, that men, who are capable of undertaking the desperate and wicked employment
of kidnappers, are supposed to be tempted to such a business, by a promise "of the utmost secrecy;"
but this must be from a sense of the unlawfulness of the act proposed to them, that they may
have less reason to fear a prosecution. And as such a kind of people are supposed to undertake
any thing for money, the reward of thirty guineas was tendered at the top of the advertisement,
in capital letters. No man can be safe, be he white or black, if temptations to break the laws
are so shamefully published in our news-papers.

A Creole Black boy is also offered to sale, in the Daily Advertiser of the same date.

Besides these instances, the Americans may, perhaps, taunt us with the shameful treatment of
a poor Negroe servant, who not long ago was put up to sale by public auction, together with
the effects of his bankrupt master.--Also, that the prisons of this free city have been frequently
prostituted of late, by the tyrannical and dangerous practice of confining Negroes, under the
pretence of slavery, though there have been no warrants whatsoever for their commitment.

This circumstance of confining a man without a warrant, has so great a resemblance to the proceedings
of a Popish inquisition, that it is but too obvious what dangerous practices such scandalous
innovations, if permitted to grow more into use, are liable to introduce. No person can be
safe, if wicked and designing men have it in their power, under the pretence of private property
as a slave, to throw a man clandestinely, without a warrant, into goal, and to conceal him
there, until they can conveniently dispose of him.

A free man may be thus robbed of his liberty, and carried beyond the seas, without having the
least opportunity of making his case known; which should teach us how jealous we ought to be
of all imprisonments made without the authority, or previous examination, of a civil magistrate.

The distinction of colour will, in a short time, be no protection against such outrages, especially
as not only Negroes, but Mulatoes, and even American Indians, (which appears by one of the
advertisements before quoted) are retained in slavery in our American colonies; for there are
many honest weather-beaten Englishmen, who have as little reason to boast of their complexion
as the Indians. And indeed, the more northern Indians have no difference from us in complexion,
but such as is occasioned by the climate, or different way of living. The plea of private property,
therefore, cannot, by any means, justify a private commitment of any person whatsoever to prison,
because of the apparent danger and tendency of such innovation. This dangerous practice of
concealing in prison was attempted in the case of Jonathan Strong; for the door-keeper of the
P----lt----y C----pt----r (or some person who acted for him) absolutely refused, for two days,
to permit this poor injured Negro to be seen or spoke with, though a person went on purpose,
both those days, to demand the same.--All laws ought to be founded upon the principle of "doing
as one would be done by;" and indeed this principle seems to be the very basis of the English
constitution; for what precaution could possibly be more effectual for that purpose, than the
right we enjoy of being judged by our Peers, creditable persons of the vicinage; especially,
as we may likewise claim the right of excepting against any particular juryman, who might be
suspected of partiality.

This law breathes the pure spirit of liberty, equity, and social love; being calculated to
maintain that consideration and mutual regard which one person ought to have for another, howsoever
unequal in rank or station.

But when any part of the community, under the pretence of private property, is deprived of
this common privilege, it is a violation of civil liberty, which is entirely inconsistent with
the social principles of a free state.

True liberty protects the labourer as well as his Lord; preserves the dignity of human nature,
and seldom fails to render a province rich and populous; whereas, on the other hand, a toleration
of slavery is the highest breach of social virtue, and not only tends to depopulation, but
too often renders the minds of both masters and slaves utterly depraved and inhuman, by the
hateful extremes of exaltation and depression.

If such a toleration should ever be generally admitted in England, (which God forbid) we shall
no longer deserve to be esteemed a civilized people; because, when the customs of uncivilized
nations, and the uncivilized customs which disgrace our own colonies, are become so familiar
as to be permitted amongst us with impunity, we ourselves must insensibly degenerate to the
same degree of baseness with those from whom such bad customs were derived; and may, too soon,
have the mortification to see the hateful extremes of tyranny and slavery fostered under every
roof.

An attempt to prove the dangerous tendency, injustice, and disgrace of tolerating slavery amongst
Englishmen, would, in any former age, have been esteemed as superfluous and ridiculous, as
if a man should undertake, in a formal manner, to prove, that darkness is not light.

Sorry am I, that the depravity of the present age has made a demonstration of this kind necessary.

Now, that I may sum up the amount of what has been said in a single sentence, I shall beg leave
to conclude in the words of the great Sir Edward Coke, which, though spoken on a different
occasion, are yet applicable to this; see Rushworth's Hist. Col. An. 1628. 4 Caroli. fol. 450.

"It would be no honour to a King or kingdom, to be a King of bondmen or slaves: the end of
this would be both dedecus[A] and damnum[B] both to King and kingdom, that in former times
have been so renowned."

[Footnote A: Disgrace.]

[Footnote B: Loss.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Note, at page 63; According to the laws of Jamaica, printed in London, in 1756, "If any slave
having been one whole year in this island, (says an act, No 64, clause 5, p. 114) shall run
away, and continue absent from his owner's service for the space of thirty days, upon complaint
and proof, &c. before any two justices of the peace, and three freeholders, &c. it shall and
may be lawful for such justices and freeholders to order such slave to be punished, by cutting
off one of the feet of such slave, or inflict such other corporal punishment as they shall
think fit." Now that I may inform my readers, what corporal punishments are sometimes thought
fit to be inflicted, I will refer to the testimony of Sir Hans Sloane, (see voyage to the islands
of Madeira, Barbadoes, &c. and Jamaica, with the natural history of the last of these islands,
&c. London 1707. Sir Hans adds, "These punishments are sometimes merited by the Blacks, who
are a very perverse generation of people; and though they appear very harsh, yet are scarce
equal to some of their crimes, and inferior to what punishments other European nations inflict
on their slaves in the East-Indies, as may be seen by Moquet, and other travellers." Thus Sir
Hans Sloane endeavours to excuse those shocking cruelties, but certainly in vain, because no
crimes whatsoever can merit such severe punishments, unless I except the crimes of those who
devise and inflict them. Sir Hans Sloane, indeed, mentions rebellion as the principal crime;
and certainly it is very justly esteemed a most heinous crime, in a land of liberty, where
government is limited by equitable and just laws, if the same are tolerably well observed;
but in countries where arbitrary power is exercised with such intolerable cruelty as is before
described, if resistance be a crime, it is certainly the most natural of all others.

But the 19th clause of the 38th act, would indeed, on a slight perusal, induce us to conceive,
that the punishment for rebellion is not so severe as it is represented by Sir Hans Sloane;
because a slave, though deemed rebellious, is thereby condemned to no greater punishment than
transportation. Nevertheless, if the clause be thoroughly considered, we shall find no reason
to commend the mercy of the legislature; for it only proves, that the Jamaica law-makers will
not scruple to charge the slightest and most natural offences with the most opprobrious epithets;
and that a poor slave, who perhaps has no otherwise incurred his master's displeasure than
by endeavouring (upon the just and warrantable principles of self-preservation,) to escape
from his master's tyranny, without any criminal intention whatsoever, is liable to be deemed
rebellious, and to be arraigned as a capital offender. "For every slave and slaves that shall
run away, and continue but for the space of twelve months, except such slave or slaves as shall
not have been three years in this island, shall be deemed rebellious," &c. (see act 38, clause
19. p. 60.) Thus we are enabled to define what a West Indian tyrant means by the word rebellious.
But unjust as this clause may seem, yet it is abundantly more merciful and considerate than
a subsequent act against the same poor miserable people, because the former assigns no other
punishment for persons so deemed rebellious, than that they, "Shall be transported by order
of two justices and three freeholders," &c. whereas the latter spares not the blood of these
poor injured fugitives: For by the 66th act, a reward of 50 pounds is offered to those who
"shall kill or bring in alive any rebellious slaves," that is, any of these unfortunate people
whom the law has "deemed rebellious," as above; and this premium is not only tendered to commissioned
parties (see 2d. clause) but even to any private "hunter, slave, or other person," (see 3d.
clause.) Thus it is manifest, that the law treats these poor unhappy men with as little ceremony
and consideration as if they were merely wild beasts. But the innocent blood that is shed in
consequence of such a detestable law, must certainly call for vengeance on the murderous abettors
and actors of such deliberate wickedness: And though many of the guilty wretches should even
be so hardened and abandoned as never afterwards to be capable of sincere remorse, yet a time
will undoubtedly come, when they will shudder with dreadful apprehensions, on account of the
insufficiency of so wretched an excuse, as that their poor murdered brethren were by law "deemed
rebellious" But bad as these laws are, yet in justice to the freeholders of Jamaica, I must
acknowledge, that their laws are not near so cruel and inhuman as the laws of Barbadoes and
Virginia, and seem at present to be much more reasonable than they have formerly been; many
very oppressive laws being now expired, and others less severe enacted in their room.

But it is far otherwise in Barbadoes; for by the 329th act, p. 125.

The most consummate wickedness, I suppose, that any body of people, under the specious form
of a legislature, were ever guilty of! This act contains several other clauses which are shocking
to humanity, though too tedious to mention here.

According to an act of Virginia, (4 Anne, ch. 49. sec.

Also by an act of Virginia, (9 Geo. I. ch. 4. sect. 18. p. 343.) it is ordained, "That, where
any slave shall hereafter be found notoriously guilty of going abroad in the night, or running
away, and lying out, and cannot be reclaimed from such disorderly courses by the common method
of punishment, it shall and may be lawful to and for the court of the county, upon complaint
and proof thereof to them made by the owner of such slave, to order and direct every such slave
to be punished by dismembering, or any other way, not touching life, as the said county court
shall think fit."

I have already given examples enough of the horrid cruelties which are sometimes thought fit
on such occasions. But if the innocent and most natural act of "running away" from intolerable
tyranny, deserves such relentless severity, what kind of punishment have these law-makers themselves
to expect hereafter, on account of their own enormous offences! Alas! to look for mercy (without
a timely repentance) will only be another instance of their gross injustice! "Having their
consciences seared with a hot iron," they seem to have lost all apprehensions that their slaves
are men, for they scruple not to number them with beasts. See an act of Barbadoes, (No 333.
p. 128.) intituled, "An act for the better regulating of outcries in open market:" here we
read of "Negroes, cattle, coppers, and stills, and other chattels, brought by execution to
open market to be outcried, and these (as if all of equal importance) are ranged together in
great lots or numbers to be sold."

--Page 70. In the 329th act of Barbadoes, (p. 122.) it is asserted, that "brutish slaves deserve
not, for the baseness of their condition, to be tried by a legal trial of twelve men of their
peers, or neighbourhood, which neither truly can be rightly done, as the subjects of England
are;" (yet slaves also are subjects of England, whilst they remain within the British dominions,
notwithstanding this insinuation to the contrary) "nor is execution to be delayed towards them,
in case of such horrid crimes committed," &c.

A similar doctrine is taught in an act of Virginia, (9 Geo. I. ch. 4. sect. 3. p. 339.) wherein
it is ordained, "that every slave, committing such offence as by the laws ought to be punished
by death, or loss of member, shall be forthwith committed to the common goal of the county,
&c. And the sheriff of such county, upon such commitment, shall forthwith certify the same,
with the cause thereof, to the governor or commander in chief, &c. who is thereupon desired
and impowered to issue a commission of Oyer and Terminer, To such persons as he shall think
fit; which persons, forthwith after the receipt of such commission, are impowered and required
to cause the offender to be publicly arraigned and tried, &c. without the solemnity of a jury,"
&c. Now let us consider the dangerous tendency of those laws. As Englishmen, we strenuously
contend for this absolute and immutable necessity of trials by juries: but is not the spirit
and equity of this old English doctrine entirely lost, if we partially confine that justice
to ourselves alone, when we have it in our power to extend it to others? The natural right
of all mankind, must principally justify our insisting upon this necessary privilege in favour
of ourselves in particular; and therefore if we do not allow that the judgment of an impartial
jury is indispensably necessary in all cases whatsoever, wherein the life of man is depending,
we certainly undermine the equitable force and reason of those laws, by which we ourselves
are protected, and consequently are unworthy to be esteemed either Christians or Englishmen.

Whatever right the members of a provincial assembly may have to enact bye laws, for particular
exigences among themselves, yet in so doing they are certainly bound, in duty to their sovereign,
to observe most strictly the fundamental principles of that constitution, which his Majesty
is sworn to maintain; for wheresoever the bounds of the British empire are extended, there
the common law of England must of course take place, and cannot be safely set aside by any
private law whatsoever, because the introduction of an unnatural tyranny must necessarily endanger
the King's dominions. The many alarming insurrections of slaves in the several colonies, are
sufficient proofs of this. The common law of England ought therefore to be so established in
every province, as to include the respective bye laws of each province; instead of being by
them excluded, which latter has been too much the case.

Every inhabitant of the British colonies, black as well as white, bond as well as free, are
undoubtedly the King's subjects, during their residence within the limits of the King's dominions;
and as such, are entitled to personal protection, however bound in service to their respective
masters; therefore, when any of these are put to death, "without the solemnity of a jury,"
I fear that there is too much reason to attribute the guilt of murder to every person concerned
in ordering, the same, or in consenting thereto; and all such persons are certainly responsible
to the King and his laws, for the loss of a subject. The horrid iniquity, injustice, and dangerous
tendency of the several plantation laws which I have quoted, are so apparent, that it is unnecessary
for me to apologize for the freedom with which I have treated them. If such laws are not absolutely
necessary for the government of slaves, the law-makers must unavoidably allow themselves to
be the most cruel and abandoned tyrants upon earth; or, perhaps, that ever were on earth. On
the other hand, if it be said, that it is impossible to govern slaves without such inhuman
severity, and detestable injustice, the same will certainly be an invincible argument against
the least toleration of slavery amongst christians, because the temporal profit of the planter
or master, however lucrative, cannot compensate the forfeiture of his everlasting welfare,
or (at least I may be allowed to say) the apparent danger of such a forfeiture.

Oppression is a most grievous crime, and the cries of these much injured people, (though they
are only poor ignorant heathens) will certainly reach heaven! The scriptures (which are the
only true foundation of all laws) denounce a tremendous judgment against the man who should
offend even one little-one; "It were better for him (even the merciful Saviour of the world
hath himself declared) that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and be cast into the sea,
than that he should offend one of these little ones." Luke xvii. 2. Who then shall attempt
to vindicate those inhuman establishments of government, under which, even our own countrymen
so grievously offend and oppress (not merely one, or a few little ones, but) an immense multitude
of men, women, children, and the children of their children, from generation to generation?
May it not be said with like justice, it were better for the English nation that these American
dominions had never existed, or even that they should have been sunk into the sea, than that
the kingdom of Great Britain should be loaded with the horrid guilt of tolerating such abominable
wickedness! In short, if the King's prerogative is not speedily exerted for the relief of his
Majesty's oppressed and much injured subjects in the British colonies, (because to relieve
the subject from the oppression of petty tyrants is the principal use of the royal prerogative,
as well as the principal and most natural means of maintaining the same) and for the extension
of the British constitution to the most distant colonies, whether in the East or West Indies,
it must inevitably be allowed, that great share of this enormous guilt will certainly rest
on this side the water.

I hope this hint will be taken notice of by those whom it may concern; and that the freedom
of it will be excused, as from a loyal and disinterested adviser.

Extracts from the writings

of several noted authors,

on the subject of the, slavery of the Negroes,

viz.

George Wallace,

Francis Hutcheson,

James Foster.

George Wallace, in his System of the Principles of the Laws of Scotland, speaking of the slavery
of the Negroes in our colonies, says, "We all know that they (the Negroes) are purchased from
their Princes, who pretend to have a right to dispose of them, and that they are, like other
commodities, transported, by the merchants who have bought them, into America, in order to
be exposed to sale. If this trade admits of a moral or a rational justification, every crime,
even the most atrocious, may be justified. Government was instituted for the good of mankind;
kings, princes, governors, are not proprietors of those who are subject to their authority;
they have not a right to make them miserable. On the contrary, their authority is vested in
them, that they may, by the just exercise of it, promote the happiness of their people. Of
course, they have not a right to dispose of their liberty, and to sell them for slaves. Besides
no man has a right to acquire, or to purchase them; men and their liberty are not in commercio;
they are not either saleable or purchaseable. One, therefore, has no body but himself to blame,
in case he shall find himself deprived of a man, whom he thought he had, by buying for a price,
made his own; for he dealt in a trade which was illicit, and was prohibited by the most obvious
dictates of humanity. For these reasons, every one of those unfortunate men who are pretended
to be slaves, has a right to be declared to be free, for he never lost his liberty; he could
not lose it; his Prince had no power to dispose of him. Of course, the sale was ipso jure void.
This right he carries about with him, and is entitled every where to get it declared. As soon,
therefore, as he comes into a country in which the judges are not forgetful of their own humanity,
it is their duty to remember that he is a man, and to declare him to be free. I know it has
been said, that questions concerning the state of persons ought to be determined by the law
of the country to which they belong; and that, therefore, one who would be declared to be a
slave in America, ought, in case he should happen to be imported into Britain, to be adjudged,
according to the law of America, to be a slave; a doctrine than which nothing can be more barbarous.
Ought the judges of any country, out of respect to the law of another, to shew no respect to
their kind, and to humanity? out of respect to a law, which is in no sort obligatory upon them,
ought they to disregard the law of nature, which is obligatory on all men, at all times, and
in all places? Are any laws so binding as the eternal laws of justice? Is it doubtful, whether
a judge ought to pay greater regard to them, than to those arbitrary and inhuman usages which
prevail in a distant land? Aye, but our colonies would be ruined if slavery was abolished.
Be it so; would it not from thence follow, that the bulk of mankind ought to be abused, that
our pockets may be filled with money, or our mouths with delicacies? The purses of highwaymen
would be empty, in case robberies were totally abolished; but have men a right to acquire money
by going out to the highway? Have men a right to acquire it by rendering their fellow-creatures
miserable? Is it lawful to abuse mankind, that the avarice, the vanity, or the passions of
a few may be gratified? No! There is such a thing as justice to which the most sacred regard
is due. It ought to be inviolably observed. Have not these unhappy men a better right to their
liberty, and to their happiness, than our American merchants have to the profits which they
make by torturing their kind? Let, therefore, our colonies be ruined, but let us not render
so many men miserable.

"But it is false, that either we or our colonies would be ruined by the abolition of slavery.
It might occasion a stagnation of business for a short time. Every great alteration produces
that effect; because mankind cannot, on a sudden, find ways of disposing of themselves, and
of their affairs; but it would produce many happy effects. "The civil constitution in every State
shall be republican. The law of nations shall be founded on a federation of free States. People
or nations regarded as States may be judged like individual men. If it is a duty to realize a state
of public law, and if at the same time there is a well-grounded hope of its being realized--although
it may be only by approximation to it that advances ad infinitum--then perpetual peace is a
fact that is destined historically to follow the falsely so-called
treaties of peace which have been but cessations of hostilities.

Perpetual peace is, therefore, no empty idea, but a practical thing which, through its gradual
solution, is coming always nearer its final realization; and it may well be hoped that progress
toward it will be made at more rapid rates of advance in the times to come." [1]

[1] English Edition--Pages 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 81, 127.

APPENDIX II

EXTRACTS FROM "THE TREATMENT OF ARMENIANS"

BY

VISCOUNT BRYCE

From Four Members of the German Missions Staff in Turkey to the Imperial German Ministry of Foreign
Affairs at Berlin: "Out of 2,000 to 3,000 peasant women from the
Armenian Plateau who were brought here in good health, only forty
or fifty skeletons are left.

The prettier ones are the victims of their gaolers' lust; the plain ones succumb to blows, hunger,
and thirst. Every day more than a hundred corpses are carried out of Aleppo. All this happened
under the eyes of high Turkish officials. The German scutcheon is in danger of being smirched
for ever in the memory of the Near Eastern peoples."

Events in Armenia, published in the Sonnenaufgang, and in the Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift,
November, 1915: "Twelve hundred of the most prominent Armenians and
other Christians were arrested; 674 of them were embarked on thirteen
Tigris barges, the prisoners were stripped of all their money and
then of their clothes; after that they were thrown into the river.
Five or six priests were stripped naked one day, smeared with tar,
and dragged through the streets. For a whole month corpses were observed
floating down the River Euphrates, hideously mutilated. The prisons
at Biredjik are filled regularly every day and emptied every night--into
the Euphrates." . . .

From a German eye-witness: "In Moush there
are 25,000 Armenians; in the neighborhood there are 300 villages,
each containing about 500 houses. In all these not a single male Armenian
is now to be seen, and hardly a woman.

A set of inaccurate popular phrases blind us in these matters; "Captives owe their lives, and
all to the purchasers, say they. Just in the same manner, we, our nobles, and princes, often
owe our lives to midwives, chirurgeons, physicians," &c. one who was the means of preserving
a man's life, is not therefore entitled to make him a slave, and sell him as a piece of goods.

James Foster, D.D. in his discourses on natural religion and social virtue also shews his just
indignation at this wicked practice; which he declares to be "a criminal and outrageous violation
of the natural right of mankind." At page 156, vol. 2 he says, "Should we have read concerning
the Greeks or Romans of old, that they traded with a view to make slaves of their own species,
when they certainly knew that this would involve in schemes of blood and murder, of destroying,
or enslaving each other; that they even fomented wars, and engaged whole nations and tribes
in open hostilities, for their own private advantage; that they had no detestation of the violence
and cruelty, but only feared the ill success of their inhuman enterprises; that they carried
men like themselves, their brethren, and the off-spring of the same common parent, to be sold
like beasts of prey, or beasts of burden, and put them to the same reproachful trial, of their
soundness, strength, and capacity for greater bodily service; that quite forgetting and renouncing
the original dignity of human nature, communicated to all, they treated them with more severity,
and ruder discipline, than even the ox or the ass, who are void of understanding--should we
not, if this had been the case, have naturally been led to despise all their pretended refinements
of morality; and to have concluded, that as they were not nations destitute of politeness,
they must have been entire strangers to virtue and benevolence?

EXTRACT

From an ADDRESS

in the

VIRGINIA GAZETTE,

of MARCH 19, 1767.

Mr. RIND,

Permit me, in your paper, to address the members of our assembly on two points, in which the
public interest is very nearly concerned.

The abolition of slavery, and the retrieval of specie in this colony, are the subjects on which
I would bespeak their attention.--

Long and serious reflections upon the nature and consequences of slavery have convinced me,
that it is a violation both of justice and religion; that it is dangerous to the safety of
the community in which it prevails; that it is destructive to the growth of arts and sciences;
and lastly, that it produces a numerous and very fatal train of vices, both in the slave and
in his master.

To prove these assertions, shall be the purpose of the following essay.

That slavery then is a violation of justice, will plainly appear, when we consider what justice
is. It is truly and simply defined, as by Justinian, constans et perpetua voluntas ejus suum
cuique tribuendi; a constant endeavour to give every man his right.

Now, as freedom is unquestionably the birth-right of all mankind, Africans as well as Europeans,
to keep the former in a state of slavery, is a constant violation of that right, and therefore
of justice.

The ground on which the civilians who favour slavery, admit it to be just, namely, consent,
force, and birth, is totally disputable; for surely a man's own will and consent cannot be
allowed to introduce so important an innovation into society, as slavery, or to make himself
an outlaw, which is really the state of a slave; since neither consenting to, nor aiding the
laws of the society in which he lives, he is neither bound to obey them, nor entitled to their
protection.

To found any right in force, is to frustrate all right, and involve every thing in confusion,
violence, and rapine. With these two, the last must fall; since, if the parent cannot justly
be made a slave, neither can the child be born in slavery. "The law of nations, says Baron
Montesquieu, has doomed prisoners to slavery, to prevent their being slain; the Roman civil
law permitted debtors, whom their creditors might treat ill, to sell themselves. And the law
of nature requires that children, whom their parents, being slaves, cannot maintain, should
be slaves like them. These reasons of the civilians are not just; it is not true that a captive
may be slain, unless in a case of absolute necessity; but if he hath been reduced to slavery,
it is plain that no such necessity existed, since he was not slain. It is not true that a free
man can sell himself, for sale supposes a price; but a slave and his property becomes immediately
that of his master; the slave can therefore receive no price, nor the master pay, &c. And if
a man cannot sell himself, nor a prisoner of war be reduced to slavery, much less can his child."
Such are the sentiments of this illustrious civilian; his reasonings, which I have been obliged
to contract, the reader interested in this subject will do well to consult at large.

Yet even these rights of imposing slavery, questionable, nay, refutable as they are, we have
not to authorise the bondage of the Africans. For neither do they consent to be our slaves,
nor do we purchase them of their conquerors. The British merchants obtain them from Africa
by violence, artifice, and treachery, with a few trinkets to prompt those unfortunate people
to enslave one another by force or stratagem. Purchase them indeed they may, under the authority
of an act of the British parliament. An act entailing upon the Africans, with whom we are not
at war, and over whom a British parliament could not of right assume even a shadow of authority,
the dreadful curse of perpetual slavery, upon them and their children for ever. There cannot
be in nature, there is not in all history, an instance in which every right of men is more
flagrantly violated. The laws of the antients never authorised the making slaves, but of those
nations whom they had conquered; yet they were heathens, and we are christians. They were misled
by a monstrous religion, divested of humanity, by a horrible and barbarous worship; we are
directed by the unerring precepts of the revealed religion we possess, enlightened by its wisdom,
and humanized by its benevolence; before them, were gods deformed with passions, and horrible
for every cruelty and vice; before us, is that incomparable pattern of meekness, charity, love
and justice to mankind, which so transcendently distinguished the Founder of christianity,
and his ever amiable doctrines.

Reader, remember that the corner stone of your religion, is to do unto others as you would
they should do unto you; ask then your own heart, whether it would not abhor any one, as the
most outrageous violater of that and every other principle of right, justice, and humanity,
who should make a slave of you and your posterity for ever! Remember, that God knoweth the
heart; lay not this flattering unction to your soul, that it is the custom of the country;
that you found it so, that not your will; but your necessity, consents. Ah! think how little
such an excuse will avail you in that aweful day, when your Saviour shall pronounce judgment
on you for breaking a law too plain to be misunderstood, too sacred to be violated. If we say
we are christians, yet act more inhumanly and unjustly than heathens, with what dreadful justice
must this sentence of our blessed Saviour fall upon us, "Not every one that saith unto me Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which
is in heaven." Matth. vii. 21. Think a moment how much your temporal, your eternal welfare
depends upon an abolition of a practice which deforms the image of your God, tramples on his
revealed will, infringes the most sacred rights, and violates humanity.

Enough, I hope, has been asserted, to prove that slavery is a violation of justice and religion.
That it is dangerous to the safety of the state in which it prevails, may be as safely asserted.

What one's own experience has not taught; that of others must decide. The name was applyed, either
because after time that Alexander had persuaded himself to be Jupiter Hammon's sonne, whose
statue was with Ram's hornes, both his owne and his successors' coins were stampt with horned
images: or else in respect of his II pillars erected in the East
as a Nihil ultra[6] of his conquest, and some say because hee had
in power the Easterne and Westerne World, signified in the two hornes.

But howsoever, it well fits the passage, either, as if hee had personated Creseide at the entrance
of two wayes, not knowing which to take; in like sense as that of Prodicus his Hercules, Pythagoras
his Y., or the Logicians Dilemma expresse; or else, which is the truth of his conceit, that
hee was at a nonplus, as the interpretation in his next staffe makes
plaine.

How many of noble Chaucer's readers never so much as suspect this his short essay of knowledge,
transcending the common Rode? And by his treatise of the Astrolabe (which, I dare sweare,
was chiefly learned out of Messahalah) it is plaine hee was much acquainted with the mathematiques,
and amongst their authors had it."

D'Herbelot says:

"Dhoul (or Dhu) carnun, with the two horns, is the surname of Alexander,
that is, of an ancient and fabulous Alexander of the first dynasty
of the Persians.

795.

Article Sedd, Tagioug and Magioug.

993. Article Khedher.

395. b. 335. b. Fael.

"But 317. Escander, he says, Alexander the Great has the same title secondarily. The truth probably
is the reverse, that the fabulous personage was taken from the real
conqueror.

"Hofmann, in Seleucus, says that the area of Seleucus is called Terik Dhylkarnain, i.e. Epocha
Alexandri Cornigen. Tarik means probably the date of an event."

There can be no doubt that the word in Chaucer is this Arabic word; nor, I think, that Speght's
story is really taught by the Arabs, our teachers in mathematics. Whether the application is from
Alexander, (they would know nothing of his date with regard to Pythagoras), or merely from
two-horned, is doubtful.

The latter might possibly mean the ox.

Mr. Halliwell gives a quotation from Stanyhurst, in which it means "dull persons"--an obvious
misuse of it for Englishmen, and which Skene fortifies by an A.-S.
derivation, but which is clearly not Cressida's meaning, or she would
have said, "I am Dulcarnon," not "I am at Dulcarnon;" and so Mrs.
Roper. Good disposition
of the natives, ibid.

Advertisements in the New-York Journal, for the sale of slaves, 158. Also in the news-papers
of London, 160.

Africa, that part from whence the Negroe slaves are brought, how divided, 6. Capable of a considerable
trade, 143.

Alien (every) or stranger coming within the King's dominion, becomes a subject, 148.

Antientest account of the Negroes, 41. Were then a simple innocent people, 43.

Angola, a plentiful country, 39. Character of the natives, 40. Government, ibid.

B

Barbadoes (laws of) respecting Negroe slaves, 170.

Barbot (John) agent general of the French African Company, his account of the Gold Coast, 25.
Of the Slave Coast, 27.

Bosman (William) principal factor for the Dutch at D'Elmina, his account of the Gold Coast,
23. Of the Slave Coast, 27.

Brue (Andrew) principal factor of the French African Company, his account of the country on
the river Senegal, 7. And on the river Gambia, 8.

Benin (kingdom of) good character of the natives, 35. Punishment of crimes, 36. Order of government,
ibid. Largeness and order of the city of Great Benin, 37.

Britons (antient) in their original state no less barbarous than the African Negroes, 68.

Baxter (Richard) his testimony against slavery, 83.

C

Corruption of some of the Kings of Guinea, 107.

D

De la Casa (bishop of Chapia) his concern for the Indians, 47. His speech to Charles the Fifth
Emperor of Germany and King of Spain, 48. Prodigious destruction of the Indians in Hispaniola, 51.

Divine principle in every man, its effects on those who obey its dictates, 14.

E

Elizabeth (Queen) her caution to captain Hawkins not to enslave any of the Negroes, 55.

English, their first trade on the coast of Guinea, 52.

Europeans are the principal cause of the wars which subsist amongst the Negroes, 61.

English laws allow no man, of what condition soever, to be deprived of his liberty, without
a legal process, 150. The danger of confining any person without a warrant, 162.

F

Fishing, a considerable business on the Guinea coast, 26. How carried on, ibid.

Foster (James) his testimony against slavery, 186.

Fuli Negroes good farmers, 10. Those on the Gambia particularly recommended for their industry
and good behaviour, ibid.

France (King of) objects to the Negroes in his dominions being reduced to a state of slavery, 58.

G

Gambia (river)8, 14.

Gloucester (bishop of) extract of his sermon, 195.

Godwyn (Morgan) his plea in favour of the Negroes and Indians, 75. Complains of the cruelties
exercised upon slaves, 76. A false opinion prevailed in his time, that the Negroes were not
objects of redeeming grace, 77.

Gold Coast has several European factories, 22. Great trade for slaves, ibid. Carried on far
in the inland country, ibid. Natives more reconciled to the Europeans, and more diligent in
procuring slaves, ibid. Extraordinarily fruitful and agreeable, 22, 25. The natives industrious,
24.

Great Britain, all persons during their residence there are the King's subjects, 148.

Guinea extraordinarily fertile, 2. Extremely unhealthy to the Europeans, 4. But agrees well
with the natives, ibid. Prodigious rising of waters, ibid. Hot winds, ibid. Surprising vegetation,
15.

H

Hawkins (captain) lands on the coast of Guinea and seizes on a number of the natives, which
he sells to the Spaniards, 55.

Hottentots misrepresented by authors, 101. True account given of these people by Kolben, 102.
Love of liberty and sloth their prevailing passions, 102. Distinguished by several virtues,
103. Firm in alliances, ibid. Offended at the vices predominant amongst christians, 104. Make
nor keep no slaves, ibid.

Hughes (Griffith) his account of the number of Negroes in Barbadoes, 85. Speaks well of their
natural capacities, 86.

Husbandry of the Negroes carried on in common, 28.

Hutcheson (Francis) his declaration against slavery, 184.

I

Jalof Negroes, their government, 9.

Indians grievously oppressed by the Spaniards, 47. Their cause pleaded by Bartholomew De la
Casa, 48. Inland people, good account of them, 25.

Ivory Coast fertile, &c. 18. Natives falsely represented to be a treacherous people, ibid.
Kind when well used, 19. Have no European factories amongst them, 21. And but few wars; therefore
few slaves to be had there, 22.

J

Jury, Negroes tried and condemned without the solemnity of a jury, 174. Highly repugnant to
the English constitution, 176. Dangerous to those concerned therein, ibid.

L

Laws in Guinea severe against man-stealing, and other crimes, 106.

M

Mandingoe Negroes a numerous nation, 11. Great traders, ibid. Laborious, 11. Their government,
13. Their worship, ibid. Manner of tillage, ibid. At Galem they suffer none to be made slaves
but criminals, 20.

Maloyans (a black people) sometimes sold amongst Negroes brought from very distant parts, 27.

Markets regularly kept on the Gold and Slave Coasts, 30.

Montesquieu's sentiments on slavery, 72.

Moor (Francis) factor to the African company, his account of the slave-trade on the river Gambia,
111.

Mosaic law merciful in its chastisements, 73. Has respect to human nature, ibid.

N

National wars disapproved by the most considerate amongst the Negroes, 110.

Negroes (in Guinea) generally a humane, sociable people, 2. Simplicity of their way of living,
5. Agreeable in conversation, 16. Sensible of the damage accruing to them from the slave-trade,
61. Misrepresented by most authors, 98. Offended at the brutality of the European factors,
116. Shocking cruelties exercised on them by masters of vessels, 124. How many are yearly brought
from Guinea by the English, 129. The numbers who die on the passage and in the seasoning, 120.

Negroe slaves (in the colonies) allowed to cohabit and separate at pleasure, 36. Great waste
of them thro' hard usage in the islands, 86. Melancholy case of two of them, 136. Proposals
for setting them free, 129. Tried and condemned without the solemnity of a jury, 174.

Negroes (free) discouragement they met with, 133.

P

Portugueze carry on a great trade for slaves at Angola, 40. Make the first incursions into
Guinea, 44. From whence they carry off some of the natives, ibid. Beginners of the slave-trade,
46. Erect the first fort at D'Elmina, ibid.

R

Rome (the college of cardinals at) complain of the abuse offered to the Negroes in selling
them for slaves, 58. 

7, 8, 9, and 10.

P.M. is referred to our 27th No., p. 445., where he will learn that the supposed French original
of "Not a Drum was heard" was a clever hoax from the ready pen of
Father Prout.

The date when P.M. read the poem, and not the date it bore, is a point necessary to be established
to prove its existence "anterior to the supposed author of that beautiful poem".
Will the Correspondent who wished for Vol. 8. of Rushworth, furnish
his name and address, as a copy has been reported. If put
an end to, would make way for a very extensive trade through Africa, 143. The danger of slavery
taking place in England, 164.

Sloane (Sir Hans) his account of the inhuman and extravagant punishments inflicted on Negroes, 89.

Smith (William) surveyor to the African company, his account of the Ivory Coast, 20. Of the
Gold Coast, 24.

V

VIRGINIA (laws), respecting Negro slaves, 172. Virginia (address to the assembly) setting forth
the iniquity and danger of slavery, 189.

W

WALLACE (George) his testimony against slavery, 180.

West Indies, white people able to perform the necessary work there, 141.

Whidah (kingdom of) agreeable and fruitful, 27. Natives treat one another with respect, 29.

