There was a strong chorus of confirmation from the others, and Joe's eyes flashed.

"Have you considered," he continued, rapidly, while a warm color began to conquer his pallor,--"have
you considered the powerful influence which will be against me, and more against me now, I
should tell you, than ever before?  That influence, I mean, which is striving so hard to discredit
me that lynch-law has been hinted for poor Fear if I should clear him!  Have you thought of
that? Have you thought--"

"Have we thought o' Martin Pike?" exclaimed Mr. Sheehan, springing to his feet, face aflame
and beard bristling.  "Ay, we've thought o' Martin Pike, and our thinkin' of him is where he
begins to git what's comin' to him!  What d'ye stand there pickin' straws fer?  What's the
matter with ye?" he demanded, angrily, his violence tenfold increased by the long repression
he had put upon himself during the brewer's deliberate utterances. "If Louie Farbach and his
crowd says they're fer ye, I guess ye've got a chanst, haven't ye?"

"Wait," said Joe.  "I think you underestimate Pike's influence--"

"Underestimate the devil!" shouted Mr. Sheehan, uncontrollably excited. "You talk about influence!
He's been the worst influence this town's ever had--and his tracks covered up in the dark wherever
he set his ugly foot down.  These men know it, and you know some, but not the worst of it,
because none of ye live as deep down in it as I do!  Ye want to make a clean town of it, ye
want to make a little heaven of the Beach--"

"And in the eyes of Judge Pike," Joe cut him off, "and of all who take their opinions from
him, I REPRESENT Beaver Beach!"

Mike Sheehan gave a wild shout.  "Whooroo! It's come!  I knowed it would!  The day I couldn't
hold my tongue, though I passed my word I would when the coward showed the deed he didn't dare
to git recorded! Waugh!"  He shouted again, with bitter laughter.  "Ye do!  In the eyes o'
them as follow Martin Pike ye stand fer the Beach and all its wickedness, do ye?  Whooroo!
It's come!  Ye're an offence in the eyes o' Martin Pike and all his kind because ye stand fer
the Beach, are ye?"

"You know it!" Joe answered, sharply.  "If they could wipe the Beach off the map and me with it--"

"Martin Pike would?" shouted Mr. Sheehan, while the others, open-mouthed, stared at him. "Martin
Pike would?"

"I don't need to tell you that," said Joe.

Mr. Sheehan's big fist rose high over the table and descended crashing upon it.  "It's a damn
lie!" he roared.  "Martin Pike owns Beaver Beach!"

XXIII

JOE WALKS ACROSS THE COURT-HOUSE YARD

From within the glossy old walnut bar that ran from wall to wall, the eyes of the lawyers and
reporters wandered often to Ariel as she sat in the packed court-room watching Louden's fight
for the life and liberty of Happy Fear. She had always three escorts, and though she did not
miss a session, and the same three never failed to attend her, no whisper of scandal arose.
But not upon them did the glances of the members of the bar and the journalists with tender
frequency linger; nor were the younger members of these two professions all who gazed that
way.  Joe had fought out the selection of the jury with the prosecutor at great length and
with infinite pains; it was not a young jury, and IT stared at her.  The "Court" wore a gray
beard with which a flock of sparrows might have villaged a grove, and yet, in spite of the
vital necessity for watchfulness over this fighting case, IT once needed to be stirred from
a trancelike gaze in Miss Tabor's direction and aroused to the realization that It was there
to Sit and not to dream.

The August air was warm outside the windows, inviting to the open country, to swimmin'-hole,
to orchard reveries, or shaded pool wherein to drop a meditative line; you would have thought
no one could willingly coop himself in this hot room for three hours, twice a day, while lawyers
wrangled, often unintelligibly, over the life of a dingy little creature like Happy Fear, yet
the struggle to swelter there was almost like a riot, and the bailiffs were busy men.

It was a fighting case throughout, fought to a finish on each tiny point as it came up, dragging,
in the mere matter of time, interminably, yet the people of Canaan (not only those who succeeded
in penetrating to the court-room, but the others who hung about the corridors, or outside the
building, and the great mass of stay-at-homes who read the story in the Tocsin) found each
moment of it enthralling enough.  The State's attorney, fearful of losing so notorious a case,
and not underestimating his opponent, had modestly summoned others to his aid; and the attorney
for the defence, single-handed, faced "an array of legal talent such as seldom indeed had hollered
at this bar"; faced it good-naturedly, an eyebrow crooked up and his head on one side, most
of the time, yet faced it indomitably.  He had a certain careless and disarming smile when
he lost a point, which carried off the defeat as of only humorous account and not at all part
of the serious business in hand; and in his treatment of witnesses, he was plausible, kindly,
knowing that in this case he had no intending perjurer to entrap; brought into play the rare
and delicate art of which he was a master, employing in his questions subtle suggestions and
shadings of tone and manner, and avoiding words of debatable and dangerous meanings;--a fine
craft, often attempted by blunderers to their own undoing, but which, practised by Joseph Louden,
made inarticulate witnesses articulate to the precise effects which he desired.  This he accomplished
as much by the help of the continuous fire of objections from the other side as in spite of
them.  He was infinitely careful, asking never an ill-advised question for the other side to
use to his hurt, and, though exhibiting only a pleasant easiness of manner, was electrically alert.

A hundred things had shown Ariel that the feeling of the place, influenced by "public sentiment"
without, was subtly and profoundly hostile to Joe and his client; she read this in the spectators,
in the jury, even in the Judge; but it seemed to her that day by day the inimical spirit gradually
failed, inside the railing, and also in those spectators who, like herself, were enabled by
special favor to be present throughout the trial, and that now and then a kindlier sentiment
began to be manifested. She was unaware how strongly she contributed to effect this herself,
not only through the glow of visible sympathy which radiated from her, but by a particular
action. Claudine was called by the State, and told as much of her story as the law permitted
her to tell, interlarding her replies with fervent protestations (too quick to be prevented)
that she "never meant to bring no trouble to Mr. Fear" and that she "did hate to have gen'lemen
starting things on her account."  When the defence took this perturbed witness, her interpolations
became less frequent, and she described straightforwardly how she had found the pistol on the
floor near the prostrate figure of Cory, and hidden it in her own dress.  The attorneys for
the State listened with a somewhat cynical amusement to this portion of her testimony, believing
it of no account, uncorroborated, and that if necessary the State could impeach the witness
on the ground that it had been indispensable to produce her. She came down weeping from the
stand; and, the next witness not being immediately called, the eyes of the jurymen naturally
followed her as she passed to her seat, and they saw Ariel Tabor bow gravely to her across
the railing.  Now, a thousand things not set forth by legislatures, law-men and judges affect
a jury, and the slight salutation caused the members of this one to glance at one another;
for it seemed to imply that the exquisite lady in white not only knew Claudine, but knew that
she had spoken the truth.  It was after this, that a feeling favorable to the defence now and
then noticeably manifested itself in the courtroom.  Still, when the evidence for the State
was all in, the life of Happy Fear seemed to rest in a balance precarious indeed, and the little
man, swallowing pitifully, looked at his attorney with the eyes of a sick dog.

Then Joe gave the prosecutors an illuminating and stunning surprise, and, having offered in
evidence the revolver found upon Claudine, produced as his first witness a pawnbroker of Denver,
who identified the weapon as one he had sold to Cory, whom he had known very well. The second
witness, also a stranger, had been even more intimately acquainted with the dead man, and there
began to be an uneasy comprehension of what Joe had accomplished during that prolonged absence
of his which had so nearly cost the life of the little mongrel, who was at present (most blissful
Respectability!) a lively convalescent in Ariel's back yard.  The second witness also identified
the revolver, testifying that he had borrowed it from Cory in St. Louis to settle a question
of marksmanship, and that on his returning it to the owner, the latter, then working his way
eastward, had confided to him his intention of stopping in Canaan for the purpose of exercising
its melancholy functions upon a man who had once "done him good" in that city.

By the time the witness had reached this point, the Prosecutor and his assistants were on their
feet, excitedly shouting objections, which were promptly overruled.  Taken unawares, they fought
for time; thunder was loosed, forensic bellowings; everybody lost his temper--except Joe; and
the examination of the witness proceeded.  Cory, with that singular inspiration to confide
in some one, which is the characteristic and the undoing of his kind, had outlined his plan
of operations to the witness with perfect clarity.  He would first attempt, so he had declared,
to incite an attack upon himself by playing upon the jealousy of his victim, having already
made a tentative effort in that direction. Failing in this, he would fall back upon one of
a dozen schemes (for he was ready in such matters, he bragged), the most likely of which would
be to play the peacemaker; he would talk of his good intentions toward his enemy, speaking
publicly of him in friendly and gentle ways; then, getting at him secretly, destroy him in
such a fashion as to leave open for himself the kind gate of self-defence.  In brief, here
was the whole tally of what had actually occurred, with the exception of the last account in
the sequence which had proved that demise for which Cory had not arranged and it fell from
the lips of a witness whom the prosecution had no means of impeaching. When he left the stand,
unshaken and undiscredited, after a frantic cross-examination, Joe, turning to resume his seat,
let his hand fall lightly for a second upon his client's shoulder.

That was the occasion of a demonstration which indicated a sentiment favorable to the defence
(on the part of at least three of the spectators); and it was in the nature of such a hammering
of canes upon the bare wooden floor as effectually stopped all other proceedings instantly.
The indignant Judge fixed the Colonel, Peter Bradbury, and Squire Buckalew with his glittering
eye, yet the hammering continued unabated; and the offenders surely would have been conducted
forth in ignominy, had not gallantry prevailed, even in that formal place.  The Judge, reluctantly
realizing that some latitude must be allowed to these aged enthusiasts, since they somehow
seemed to belong to Miss Tabor, made his remarks general, with the time-worn threat to clear
the room, whereupon the loyal survivors of Eskew relapsed into unabashed silence.

It was now, as Joe had said, a clear-enough case. Only the case itself, however, was clear,
for, as he and his friends feared, the verdict might possibly be neither in accordance with
the law, the facts, nor the convictions of the jury.  Eugene's defection had not altered the
tone of the Tocsin.

All day long a crowd of men and boys hung about the corridors of the Court-house, about the
Square and the neighboring streets, and from these rose sombre murmurs, more and more ominous.
The public sentiment of a community like Canaan can make itself felt inside a court-room; and
it was strongly exerted against Happy Fear. The Tocsin had always been a powerful agent; Judge
Pike had increased its strength with a staff which was thoroughly efficient, alert, and always
able to strike centre with the paper's readers; and in town and country it had absorbed the
circulation of the other local journals, which resisted feebly at times, but in the matter
of the Cory murder had not dared to do anything except follow the Tocsin's lead.  The Tocsin,
having lit the fire, fed it--fed it saltpetre and sulphur--for now Martin Pike was fighting hard.

The farmers and people of the less urban parts of the country were accustomed to found their
opinions upon the Tocsin.  They regarded it as the single immutable rock of journalistic righteousness
and wisdom in the world.  Consequently, stirred by the outbursts of the paper, they came into
Canaan in great numbers, and though the pressure from the town itself was so strong that only
a few of them managed to crowd into the court-room, the others joined their voices to those
sombre murmurs outdoors, which increased in loudness as the trial went on.

The Tocsin, however, was not having everything its own way; the volume of outcry against Happy
Fear and his lawyer had diminished, it was noticed, in "very respectable quarters."  The information
imparted by Mike Sheehan to the politicians at Mr. Farbach's had been slowly seeping through
the various social strata of the town, and though at first incredulously rejected, it began
to find acceptance; Upper Main Street cooling appreciably in its acceptance of the Tocsin as
the law and the prophets.  There were even a few who dared to wonder in their hearts if there
had not been a mistake about Joe Louden; and although Mrs. Flitcroft weakened not, the relatives
of Squire Buckalew and of Peter Bradbury began to hold up their heads a little, after having
made home horrible for those gentlemen and reproached them with their conversion as the last
word of senile shame.  In addition, the Colonel's grandson and Mr. Bradbury's grandson had
both mystifyingly lent countenance to Joe, consorting with him openly; the former for his own
purposes--the latter because he had cunningly discovered that it was a way to Miss Tabor's
regard, which, since her gentle rejection of him, he had grown to believe (good youth!) might
be the pleasantest thing that could ever come to him.  In short, the question had begun to
thrive:  Was it possible that Eskew Arp had not been insane, after all?

The best of those who gathered ominously about the Court-house and its purlieus were the young
farmers and field-hands, artisans and clerks; one of the latter being a pimply faced young
man (lately from the doctor's hands), who limped, and would limp for the rest of his life,
he who, of all men, held the memory of Eskew Arp in least respect, and was burningly desirous
to revenge himself upon the living.

The worst were of that mystifying, embryonic, semi-rowdy type, the American voyou, in the production
of which Canaan and her sister towns everywhere over the country are prolific; the young man,
youth, boy perhaps, creature of nameless age, whose clothes are like those of a brakeman out
of work, but who is not a brakeman in or out of work; wearing the black, soft hat tilted forward
to shelter--as a counter does the contempt of a clerk--that expression which the face does
not dare wear quite in the open, asserting the possession of supreme capacity in wit, strength,
dexterity, and amours; the dirty handkerchief under the collar; the short black coat always
double-breasted; the eyelids sooty; one cheek always bulged; the forehead speckled; the lips
cracked; horrible teeth; and the affectation of possessing secret information upon all matters
of the universe; above all, the instinct of finding the shortest way to any scene of official
interest to the policeman, fireman, or ambulance surgeon,--a singular being, not professionally
criminal; tough histrionically rather than really; full of its own argot of brag; hysterical
when crossed, timid through great ignorance, and therefore dangerous.  It furnishes not the
leaders but the mass of mobs; and it springs up at times of crisis from Heaven knows where.
You might have driven through all the streets of Canaan, a week before the trial, and have
seen four or five such fellows; but from the day of its beginning the Square was full of them,
dingy shuttlecocks batted up into view by the Tocsin.

They kept the air whirring with their noise. The news of that sitting which had caused the
Squire, Flitcroft, and Peter Bradbury to risk the Court's displeasure, was greeted outside
with loud and vehement disfavor; and when, at noon, the jurymen were marshalled out to cross
the yard to the "National House" for dinner, a large crowd followed and surrounded them, until
they reached the doors of the hotel.  "Don't let Lawyer Louden bamboozle you!"  "Hang him!"
"Tar and feathers fer ye ef ye don't hang him!"  These were the mildest threats, and Joe Louden,
watching from an upper window of the Court-house, observed with a troubled eye how certain
of the jury shrank from the pressure of the throng, how the cheeks of others showed sudden
pallor.  Sometimes "public sentiment" has done evil things to those who have not shared it;
and Joe knew how rare a thing is a jury which dares to stand square against a town like Canaan
aroused.

The end of that afternoon's session saw another point marked for the defence; Joe had put the
defendant on the stand, and the little man had proved an excellent witness.  During his life
he had been many things--many things disreputable; high standards were not brightly illumined
for him in the beginning of the night-march which his life had been.  He had been a tramp,
afterward a petty gambler; but his great motive had finally come to be the intention to do
what Joe told him to do: that, and to keep Claudine as straight as he could.  In a measure,
these were the two things that had brought him to the pass in which he now stood, his loyalty
to Joe and his resentment of whatever tampered with Claudine's straightness. He was submissive
to the consequences: he was still loyal.  And now Joe asked him to tell "just what happened,"
and Happy obeyed with crystal clearness.  Throughout the long, tricky cross-examination he
continued to tell "just what happened" with a plaintive truthfulness not to be imitated, and
throughout it Joe guarded him from pitfalls (for lawyers in their search after truth are compelled
by the exigencies of their profession to make pitfalls even for the honest), and gave him,
by various devices, time to remember, though not to think, and made the words "come right"
in his mouth.  So that before the sitting was over, a disquieting rumor ran through the waiting
crowd in the corridors, across the Square, and over the town, that the case was surely going
"Louden's way."  This was also the opinion of a looker-on in Canaan--a ferret-faced counsellor
of corporations who, called to consultation with the eminent Buckalew (nephew of the Squire),
had afterward spent an hour in his company at the trial.  "It's going that young fellow Louden's
way," said the stranger.  "You say he's a shyster, but--"

"Well," admitted Buckalew, with some reluctance, "I don't mean that exactly.  I've got an old
uncle who seems lately to think he's a great man."

"I'll take your uncle's word for it," returned the other, smiling.  "I think he'll go pretty far."

They had come to the flight of steps which descended to the yard,--and the visitor, looking
down upon the angry crowd, added, "If they don't kill him!"

Joe himself was anxious concerning no such matter.  He shook hands with Happy at the end of
the sitting, bidding him be of good cheer, and, when the little man had marched away, under
a strong guard, began to gather and sort his papers at a desk inside the bar.  This took him
perhaps five minutes, and when he had finished there were only three people left in the room:
a clerk, a negro janitor with a broom, and the darky friend who always hopefully accompanies
a colored man holding high public office.  These two approvingly greeted the young lawyer,
the janitor handing him a note from Norbert Flitcroft, and the friend mechanically "borrowing"
a quarter from him as he opened the envelope.

"I'll be roun' yo' way to git a box o' SE-gahs," laughed the friend, "soon ez de campaign open
up good.  Dey all goin' vote yo' way, down on the levee bank, but dey sho' expecks to git to
smoke a little 'fo' leckshun-day!  We knows who's OW frien'!"

Norbert's missive was lengthy and absorbing; Joe went on his way, perusing it with profound
attention; but as he descended the stairway to the floor below, a loud burst of angry shouting,
outside the building, caused him to hasten toward the big front doors which faced Main Street.
The doors opened upon an imposing vestibule, from which a handsome flight of stone steps, protected
by a marble balustrade, led to the ground.

Standing at the top of these steps and leaning over the balustrade, he had a clear view of
half the yard.  No one was near him; everybody was running in the opposite direction, toward
that corner of the yard occupied by the jail, the crowd centring upon an agitated whirlpool
of men which moved slowly toward a door in the high wall that enclosed the building; and Joe
saw that Happy Fear's guards, conducting the prisoner back to his cell, were being jostled
and rushed.  The distance they had made was short, but as they reached the door the pressure
upon them increased dangerously. Clubs rose in the air, hats flew, the whirlpool heaved tumultuously,
and the steel door clanged.

Happy Fear was safe inside, but the jostlers were outside--baffled, ugly, and stirred with
the passion that changes a crowd into a mob.

Then some of them caught sight of Joe as he stood alone at the top of the steps, and a great
shout of rage and exultation arose.

For a moment or two he did not see his danger. At the clang of the door, his eyes, caught by
the gleam of a wide white hat, had turned toward the street, and he was somewhat fixedly watching
Mr. Ladew extricate Ariel (and her aged and indignant escorts) from an overflow of the crowd
in which they had been caught.  But a voice warned him: the wild piping of a newsboy who had
climbed into a tree near by.

"JOE LOUDEN!" he screamed.  "LOOK OUT!"

With a muffled roar the crowd surged back from the jail and turned toward the steps.  "Tar
and feather him!"  "Take him over to the river and throw him in!"  "Drown him!"  "Hang him!"

Then a thing happened which was dramatic enough in its inception, but almost ludicrous in its
effect.  Joe walked quietly down the steps and toward the advancing mob with his head cocked
to one side, one eyebrow lifted, and one corner of his mouth drawn down in a faintly distorted
smile.

He went straight toward the yelling forerunners, with only a small bundle of papers in his
hands, and then--while the non-partisan spectators held their breath, expecting the shock of
contact--straight on through them.

A number of the bulge-cheeked formed the scattering van of these forerunners, charging with
hoarse and cruel shrieks of triumph.  The first, apparently about to tear Joseph Louden to
pieces, changed countenance at arm's-length, swerved violently, and with the loud cry, "HEAD
HIM OFF!" dashed on up the stone steps.  The man next behind him followed his lead, with the
same shout, strategy, and haste; then the others of this advance attack, finding themselves
confronting the quiet man, who kept his even pace and showed no intention of turning aside
for them, turned suddenly aside for HIM, and, taking the cue from the first, pursued their
way, bellowing:  "HEAD HIM OFF! HEAD HIM OFF!" until there were a dozen and more rowdyish men
and youths upon the steps, their eyes blazing with fury, menacing Louden's back with frightful
gestures across the marble balustrade, as they hysterically bleated the chorus, "HEAD HIM OFF!"

Whether or not Joe could have walked through the entire mob as he had walked through these
is a matter for speculation; it was believed in Canaan that he could.  Already a gust of mirth
began to sweep over the sterner spirits as they paused to marvel no less at the disconcerting
advance of the lawyer than at the spectacle presented by the intrepid dare-devils upon the
steps; a kind of lane actually opening before the young man as he walked steadily on.  And
when Mr. Sheehan, leading half a dozen huge men from the Farbach brewery, unceremoniously shouldered
a way through the mob to Joe's side, reaching him where the press was thickest, it is a question
if the services of his detachment were needed.

The laughter increased.  It became voluminous. Homeric salvos shook the air.  And never one
of the fire-eaters upon the steps lived long enough to live down the hateful cry of that day,
"HEAD HIM OFF!" which was to become a catch-word on the streets, a taunt more stinging than
any devised by deliberate invention, an insult bitterer than the ancestral doubt, a fighting-word,
and the great historical joke of Canaan, never omitted in after-days when the tale was told
how Joe Louden took that short walk across the Court-house yard which made him Mayor of Canaan.

XXIV

MARTIN PIKE KEEPS AN ENGAGEMENT

An hour later, Martin Pike, looking forth from the Mansion, saw a man open the gate, and, passing
between the unemotional deer, rapidly approach the house.  He was a thin young fellow, very
well dressed in dark gray, his hair prematurely somewhat silvered, his face prematurely somewhat
lined, and his hat covered a scar such as might have been caused by a blow from a blunt instrument
in the nature of a poker.

He did not reach the door, nor was there necessity for him to ring, for, before he had set
foot on the lowest step, the Judge had hastened to meet him.  Not, however, with any fulsomely
hospitable intent; his hand and arm were raised to execute one of his Olympian gestures, of
the kind which had obliterated the young man upon a certain by-gone morning.

The Judge's choler got the better of his uneasiness. "You're a pretty one to come ordering
me around!" he broke out.  "You slanderer, do you suppose I haven't heard how you're going
about traducing me, undermining my character in this community, spreading scandals that I am
the real owner of Beaver Beach--"

"It can easily be proved, Judge," Joe interrupted, quietly, "though you're wrong: I haven't
been telling people.  I haven't needed to--even if I'd wished.  Once a thing like that gets
out you can't stop it--ever!  That isn't all: to my knowledge you own other property worse
than the Beach; I know that you own half of the worst dens in the town: profitable investments,
too.  You bought them very gradually and craftily, only showing the deeds to those in charge--as
you did to Mike Sheehan, and not recording them.  Sheehan's betrayal of you gave me the key;
I know most of the poor creatures who are your tenants, too, you see, and that gave me an advantage
because they have some confidence in me.  My investigations have been almost as quiet and careful
as your purchases."

"You damned blackmailer!"  The Judge bent upon him a fierce, inquiring scrutiny in which, oddly
enough, there was a kind of haggard hopefulness. "And out of such stories," he sneered, "you
are going to try to make political capital against the Tocsin, are you?"

"No," said Joe.  "It was necessary in the interests of my client for me to know pretty thoroughly
just what property you own, and I think I do. These pieces I've mentioned are about all you
have not mortgaged.  You couldn't do that without exposure, and you've kept a controlling interest
in the Tocsin clear, too--for the sake of its influence, I suppose.  Now, do you want to hear
any more, or will you agree to meet me at Miss Tabor's this evening?"

Whatever the look of hopefulness had signified, it fled from Pike's face during this speech,
but he asked with some show of contempt, "Do you think it likely?"

"Very well," said Joe, "if you want me to speak here."  And he came a little closer to him.
"You bought a big block of Granger Gas for Roger Tabor," he began, in a low voice.  "Before
his death you sold everything he had, except the old house, put it all into cash for him, and
bought that stock; you signed the check as his attorney-in-fact, and it came back to you through
the Washington National, where Norbert Flitcroft handled it.  He has a good memory, and when
he told me what he knew, I had him to do some tracing; did a little myself, also. Judge Pike,
I must tell you that you stand in danger of the law.  You were the custodian of that stock
for Roger Tabor; it was transferred in blank; though I think you meant to be 'legal' at that
time, and that was merely for convenience in case Roger had wished you to sell it for him.
But just after his death you found yourself saddled with distillery stock, which was going
bad on your hands.  Other speculations of yours were failing at the same time; you had to have
money--you filed your report as administrator, crediting Miss Tabor with your own stock which
you knew was going to the wall, and transferred hers to yourself.  Then you sold it because
you needed ready money.  You used her fortune to save yourself--but you were horribly afraid!
No matter how rotten your transactions had been, you had always kept inside the law; and now
that you had gone outside of it, you were frightened. You didn't dare come flat out to Miss
Tabor with the statement that her fortune had gone; it had been in your charge all the time
and things might look ugly.  So you put it off, perhaps from day to day.  You didn't dare tell
her until you were forced to, and to avoid the confession you sent her the income which was
rightfully hers.  That was your great weakness."

Joe had spoken with great rapidity, though keeping his voice low, and he lowered it again,
as he continued:  "Judge Pike, what chance have you to be believed in court when you swear
that you sent her twenty thousand dollars out of the goodness of your heart?  Do you think
SHE believed you?  It was the very proof to her that you had robbed her. For she knew you!
Do you want to hear more now?  Do you think this is a good place for it?  Do you wish me to
go over the details of each step I have taken against you, to land you at the bar where this
poor fellow your paper is hounding stands to-day?"

The Judge essayed to answer, and could not. He lifted his hand uncertainly and dropped it,
while a thick dew gathered on his temples. Inarticulate sounds came from between his teeth.

"You will come?" said Joe.

Martin Pike bent his head dazedly; and at that the other turned quickly from him and went away
without looking back.

Ariel was in the studio, half an hour later, when Joe was announced by the smiling Mr. Warden.
Ladew was with her, though upon the point of taking his leave, and Joe marked (with a sinking
heart) that the young minister's cheeks were flushed and his eyes very bright.

"It was a magnificent thing you did, Mr. Louden," he said, offering his hand heartily; "I saw
it, and it was even finer in one way than it was plucky.  It somehow straightened things out
with such perfect good nature; it made those people feel that what they were doing was ridiculous."

"So it was," said Joe.

"Few, under the circumstances, could have acted as if they thought so! And I hope you'll let
me call upon you, Mr. Louden."

"I hope you will," he answered; and then, when the minister had departed, stood looking after
him with sad eyes, in which there dwelt obscure meditations. Ladew's word of farewell had covered
a deep look at Ariel, which was not to be mistaken by Joseph Louden for anything other than
what it was: the clergyman's secret was an open one, and Joe saw that he was as frank and manly
in love as in all other things. "He's a good fellow," he said at last, sighing.  "A good man."

Ariel agreed.  "And he said more to me than he did to you."

"Yes, I think it probable," Joe smiled sorrowfully.

"About YOU, I mean."  He had time to fear that her look admitted confusion before she proceeded:
"He said he had never seen anything so fine as your coming down those steps.  Ah, he was right!
But it was harder for me to watch you, I think, than for you to do it, Joe.  I was so horribly
afraid--and the crowd between us--if we could have got near you--but we couldn't--we--"

She faltered, and pressed her hand close upon her eyes.

"We?" asked Joe, slowly.  "You mean you and Mr. Ladew?"

"Yes, he was there; but I mean"--her voice ran into a little laugh with a beatific quaver in
it--"I mean Colonel Flitcroft and Mr. Bradbury and Mr. Buckalew, too--we were hemmed in together
when Mr. Ladew found us--and, oh, Joe, when that cowardly rush started toward you, those three--I've
heard wonderful things in Paris and Naples, cabmen quarrelling and disappointed beggars--but
never anything like them to-day--"

"You mean they were profane?"

"Oh, magnificently--and with such inventiveness! All three begged my pardon afterwards.  I
didn't grant it--I blessed them!"

"Did they beg Mr. Ladew's pardon?"

"Ah, Joe!" she reproached him.  "He isn't a prig.  And he's had to fight some things that you
of all men ought to understand.  He's only been here a few months, but he told me that Judge
Pike has been against him from the start.  It seems that Mr. Ladew is too liberal in his views.
And he told me that if it were not for Judge Pike's losing influence in the church on account
of the Beaver Beach story, the Judge would probably have been able to force him to resign;
but now he will stay."

"He wishes to stay, doesn't he?"

"Very much, I think.  And, Joe," she continued, thoughtfully, "I want you to do something for
me. I want you to go to church with me next Sunday."

"To hear Mr. Ladew?"

"Yes.  I wouldn't ask except for that."

"Very well," he consented, with averted eyes. "I'll go."

Her face was radiant with the smile she gave him.  "It will make me very happy," she said.

He bent his head and fumbled over some papers he had taken from his pocket.  "Will you listen
to these memoranda?  We have a great deal to go over before eight o'clock."

Judge Pike stood for a long while where Joe had left him, staring out at the street, apparently.
Really he saw nothing.  Undoubtedly an image of blurring foliage, cast-iron, cement, and turf,
with sunshine smeared over all, flickered upon the retinas of his eyes; but the brain did not
accept the picture from the optic nerve.  Martin Pike was busy with other visions.  Joe Louden
had followed him back to his hidden deeds and had read them aloud to him as Gabriel would read
them on Judgment-day.  Perhaps THIS was the Judgment-day.

Pike had taken charge of Roger Tabor's affairs because the commissions as agent were not too
inconsiderable to be neglected.  To make the task simpler, he had sold, as time went on, the
various properties of the estate, gradually converting all of them into cash.  Then, the opportunity
offering, he bought a stock which paid excellent dividends, had it transferred in blank, because
if it should prove to Roger's advantage to sell it, his agent could do so without any formal
delays between Paris and Canaan.  At least, that is what the Judge had told himself at the
time, though it may be that some lurking whisperer in his soul had hinted that it might be
well to preserve the great amount of cash in hand, and Roger's stock was practically that.
Then came the evil days.  Laboriously, he had built up a name for conservatism which most of
the town accepted, but secretly he had always been a gambler: Wall Street was his goal; to
adventure there, as one of the great single-eyed Cyclopean man-eaters, his fond ambition; and
he had conceived the distillery trust as a means to attain it; but the structure tumbled about
his ears; other edifices of his crumbled at the same time; he found himself beset, his solvency
endangered, and there was the Tabor stock, quite as good as gold; Roger had just died, and
it was enough to save him.--Save?  That was a strange way to be remembering it to-day, when
Fate grinned at him out of a dreadful mask contorted like the face of Norbert Flitcroft.

Martin Pike knew himself for a fool.  What chance had he, though he destroyed the check a thousand
times over, to escape the records by which the coil of modern trade duplicates and quadruplicates
each slip of scribbled paper?  What chance had he against the memories of men? Would the man
of whom he had bought, forget that the check was signed by Roger's agent?  Had the bank-clerk
forgotten?  Thrice fool, Martin Pike, to dream that in a town like Canaan, Norbert or any of
his kind could touch an order for so great a sum and forget it!  But Martin Pike had not dreamed
that; had dreamed nothing.  When failure confronted him his mind refused to consider anything
but his vital need at the time, and he had supplied that need.  And now he grew busy with the
future: he saw first the civil suit for restitution, pressed with the ferocity and cunning
of one who intended to satisfy a grudge of years; then, perhaps, a criminal prosecution....
But he would fight it!  Did they think that such a man was to be overthrown by a breath of
air?  By a girl, a bank-clerk, and a shyster lawyer?  They would find their case difficult
to prove in court. He did not believe they COULD prove it. They would be discredited for the
attempt upon him and he would win clear; these Beaver Beach scandals would die of inertia presently;
there would be a lucky trick in wheat, and Martin Pike would be Martin Pike once more; reinstated,
dictator of church, politics, business; all those things which were the breath of his life
restored.  He would show this pitiful pack what manner of man they hounded!  Norbert Flitcroft....

The Judge put his big hand up to his eyes and rubbed them.  Curious mechanisms the eyes....
That deer in line with the vision--not a zebra? A zebra after all these years?  And yet ...
curious, indeed, the eyes! ... a zebra....  Who ever heard of a deer with stripes?  The big
hand rose from the eyes and ran through the hair which he had always worn rather long.  It
would seem strange to have it cut very short....  Did they use clippers, perhaps? ...

He started suddenly and realized that his next-door neighbor had passed along the sidewalk
with head averted, pretending not to see him.  A few weeks ago the man would not have missed
the chance of looking in to bow--with proper deference, too!  Did he know?  He could not know
THIS! It must be the Beaver Beach scandal.  It must be. It could not be THIS--not yet!  But
it MIGHT be. How many knew?  Louden, Norbert, Ariel--who else? And again the deer took on the
strange zebra look.

The Judge walked slowly down to the gate; spoke to the man he had employed in Sam Warden's
place, a Scotchman who had begun to refresh the lawn with a garden hose; bowed affably in response
to the salutation of the elder Louden, who was passing, bound homeward from the factory, and
returned to the house with thoughtful steps.  In the hall he encountered his wife; stopped
to speak with her upon various household matters; then entered the library, which was his workroom.
He locked the door; tried it, and shook the handle. After satisfying himself of its security,
he pulled down the window-shades carefully, and, lighting a gas drop-lamp upon his desk, began
to fumble with various documents, which he took from a small safe near by.  But his hands were
not steady; he dropped the papers, scattering them over the floor, and had great difficulty
in picking them up. He perspired heavily: whatever he touched became damp, and he continually
mopped his forehead with his sleeve.  After a time he gave up the attempt to sort the packets
of papers; sank into a chair despairingly, leaving most of them in disorder. A light tap sounded
on the door.

"Martin, it's supper-time."

With a great effort he made shift to answer: "Yes, I know.  You and Mamie go ahead.  I'm too
busy to-night.  I don't want anything."

A moment before, he had been a pitiful figure, face distraught, hands incoherent, the whole
body incoordinate, but if eyes might have rested upon him as he answered his wife they would
have seen a strange thing; he sat, apparently steady and collected, his expression cool, his
body quiet, poised exactly to the quality of his reply, for the same strange reason that a
young girl smiles archly and coquettes to a telephone.

"But, Martin, you oughtn't to work so hard. You'll break down--"

"No fear of that," he replied, cheerfully.  "You can leave something on the sideboard for me."

After another fluttering remonstrance, she went away, and the room was silent again.  His arms
rested upon the desk, and his head slowly sank between his elbows.  When he lifted it again
the clock on the mantel-piece had tinkled once.  It was half-past seven.  He took a sheet of
note-paper from a box before him and began to write, but when he had finished the words, "My
dear wife and Mamie," his fingers shook so violently that he could go no further.  He placed
his left hand over the back of his right to steady it, but found the device unavailing: the
pen left mere zigzags on the page, and he dropped it.

He opened a lower drawer of the desk and took out of it a pistol; rose, went to the door, tried
it once more, and again was satisfied of his seclusion. Then he took the weapon in both hands,
the handle against his fingers, one thumb against the trigger, and, shaking with nausea, lifted
it to the level of his eyes.  His will betrayed him; he could not contract his thumb upon the
trigger, and, with a convulsive shiver, he dropped the revolver upon the desk.

He locked the door of the room behind him, crept down the stairs and out of the front-door.
He walked shamblingly, when he reached the street, keeping close to the fences as he went on,
now and then touching the pickets with his hands like a feeble old man.

He had always been prompt; it was one of the things of which he had been proud: in all his
life he had never failed to keep a business engagement precisely upon the appointed time, and
the Court-house bell clanged eight when Sam Warden opened the door for his old employer to-night.

The two young people looked up gravely from the script-laden table before them as Martin Pike
came into the strong lamplight out of the dimness of the hall, where only a taper burned. 
He shambled a few limp steps into the room and came to a halt.  Big as he was, his clothes
hung upon him loosely, like coverlets upon a collapsed bed; and he seemed but a distorted image
of himself, as if (save for the dull and reddened eyes) he had been made of yellowish wax and
had been left too long in the sun.  Abject, hopeless, his attitude a confession of ruin and
shame, he stood before his judges in such wretchedness that, in comparison, the figure of Happy
Fear, facing the court-room through his darkest hour, was one to be envied.

"Well," he said, brokenly, "what are you going to do?"

Joe Louden looked at him with great intentness for several moments. Then he rose and came forward.
"Sit down, Judge," he said.  "It's all right.  Don't worry."

XXV

THE JURY COMES IN

Mrs. Flitcroft, at breakfast on the following morning, continued a disquisition which had ceased,
the previous night, only because of a provoking human incapacity to exist without sleep.  Her
theme was one which had exclusively occupied her since the passing of Eskew, and, her rheumatism
having improved so that she could leave her chair, she had become a sort of walking serial;
Norbert and his grandfather being well assured that, whenever they left the house, the same
story was to be continued upon their reappearance.  The Tocsin had been her great comfort:
she was but one helpless woman against two strong men; therefore she sorely needed assistance
in her attack upon them, and the invaluable newspaper gave it in generous measure.

"Yes, young man," she said, as she lifted her first spoonful of oatmeal, "you BETTER read the
Tocsin!"

"I AM reading it," responded Norbert, who was almost concealed by the paper.

"And your grandfather better read it!" she continued, severely.

"I already have," said the Colonel, promptly. "Have you?"

"No, but you can be sure I will!"  The good lady gave the effect of tossing her head.  "And
you better take what it says to heart, you and some others.  It's a wonder to me that you and
Buckalew and old Peter don't go and hold that Happy Fear's hand durin' the trial!  And as for
Joe Louden, his step-mother's own sister, Jane, says to me only yesterday afternoon, 'Why,
law! Mrs. Flitcroft,' she says, 'it's a wonder to me,' she says, 'that your husband and those
two other old fools don't lay down in the gutter and let that Joe Louden walk over 'em.'"

"Did Jane Quimby say 'those two other old fools'?" inquired the Colonel, in a manner which
indicated that he might see Mr. Quimby in regard to the slander.

"I can't say as I remember just precisely her exact words," admitted Mrs. Flitcroft, "but that
was the sense of 'em!  You've made yourselves the laughin'-stock of the whole town!"

"Oh, we have?"

"And I'd like to know"--her voice became shrill and goading--"I'd like to know what Judge Pike
thinks of you and Norbert!  I should think you'd be ashamed to have him pass you in the street."

"I've quit speaking to him," said Norbert, coldly, "ever since I heard he owned Beaver Beach."

"That story ain't proved yet!" returned his grandmother, with much irascibility.

"Well, it will be; but that's not all."  Norbert wagged his head.  "You may be a little surprised
within the next few days."

"I've been surprised for the PAST few!" she replied, with a bitterness which overrode her satisfaction
in the effectiveness of the retort. "Surprised!  I'd like to know who wouldn't be surprised
when half the town acts like it's gone crazy. People PRAISIN' that fellow, that nobody in their
sober minds and senses never in their lives had a good word for before!  Why, there was more
talk yesterday about his doin's at the Court-house--you'd of thought he was Phil Sheridan!
It's 'Joe Louden' here and 'Joe Louden' there, and 'Joe Louden' this and 'Joe Louden' that,
till I'm sick of the name!"

"Then why don't you quit saying it?" asked the Colonel, reasonably.

"Because it'd OUGHT to be said!" she exclaimed, with great heat. "Because he'd ought to be
held up to the community to be despised.  You let me have that paper a minute," she pursued,
vehemently; "you just let me have the Tocsin and I'll read you out some things about him that
'll show him in his true light!"

"All right," said Norbert, suddenly handing her the paper.  "Go ahead."

And after the exchange of a single glance the two gentlemen composed themselves to listen.

"Ha!" exclaimed Mrs. Flitcroft.  "Here it is in head-lines on the first page.  'Defence Scores
Again and Again.  Ridiculous Behavior of a Would-Be Mob.  Louden's--'"  She paused, removed
her spectacles, examined them dubiously, restored them to place, and continued: "'Louden's
Masterly Conduct and Well-Deserved--'" she paused again, incredulous--"'Well-Deserved Triumph--'"

"Go on," said the Colonel, softly.

"Indeed I will!" the old lady replied.  "Do you think I don't know sarcasm when I see it? 
Ha, ha!"  She laughed with great heartiness. "I reckon I WILL go on!  You listen and try to
LEARN something from it!"  She resumed the reading:

"'It is generally admitted that after yesterday's sitting of the court, the prosecution in
the Fear-Cory murder trial has not a leg to stand on.  Louden's fight for his client has been,
it must be confessed, of a most splendid and talented order, and the bottom has fallen out
of the case for the State, while a verdict of Not Guilty, it is now conceded, is the general
wish of those who have attended and followed the trial. But the most interesting event of the
day took place after the session, when some miscreants undertook to mob the attorney for the
defence in the Court-house yard.  He met the attack with a coolness and nerve which have won
him a popularity that--'" Mrs. Flitcroft again faltered.

"Go on," repeated the Colonel.  "There's a great deal more."

"Look at the editorials," suggested Norbert. "There's one on the same subject."

Mrs. Flitcroft, her theory of the Tocsin's sarcasm somewhat shaken, turned the page.  "We Confess
a Mistake" was the rubric above the leader, and she uttered a cry of triumph, for she thought
the mistake was what she had just been reading, and that the editorial would apologize for
the incomprehensible journalistic error upon the first page. "'The best of us make mistakes,
and it is well to have a change of heart sometimes.'"  (Thus Eugene's successor had written,
and so Mrs. Flitcroft read.)  "'An open confession is good for the soul.  The Tocsin has changed
its mind in regard to certain matters, and means to say so freely and frankly.  After yesterday's
events in connection with the murder trial before our public, the evidence being now all presented,
for we understand that neither side has more to offer, it is generally conceded that all good
citizens are hopeful of a verdict of acquittal; and the Tocsin is a good citizen.  No good
citizen would willingly see an innocent man punished, and that our city is not to be disgraced
by such a miscarriage of justice is due to the efforts of the attorney for the defendant, who
has gained credit not only by his masterly management of this case, but by his splendid conduct
in the face of danger yesterday afternoon. He has distinguished himself so greatly that we
frankly assert that our citizens may point with pride to--'" Mrs. Flitcroft's voice, at the
beginning pitched to a high exultation, had gradually lowered in key and dropped down the scale
till it disappeared altogether.

"It's a wonder to me," the Colonel began, "that the Tocsin doesn't go and hold Joe Louden's hand."

"I'll read the rest of it for you," said Norbert, his heavy face lighting up with cruelty.
"Let's see--where were you?  Oh yes--'point with pride'?  'Our citizens may point with pride
to ...'"

Let us not linger to observe the unmanly behavior of an aged man and his grandson left alone
at the breakfast-table by a defenceless woman.

The Tocsin's right-about-face undermined others besides Mrs. Flitcroft that morning, and rejoiced
greater (though not better) men than the Colonel. Mr. Farbach and his lieutenants smiled, yet
stared, amazed, wondering what had happened.  That was a thing which only three people even
certainly knew; yet it was very simple.

The Tocsin was part of the Judge's restitution.

"The controlling interest in the paper, together with the other property I have listed," Joe
had said, studying his memoranda under the lamp in Roger's old studio, while Martin Pike listened
with his head in his hands, "make up what Miss Tabor is willing to accept.  As I estimate it,
their total value is between a third and a half of that of the stock which belonged to her."

"But this boy--this Flitcroft," said Pike, feebly; "he might--"

"He will do nothing," interrupted Joe.  "The case is 'settled out of court,' and even if he
were disposed to harass you, he could hardly hope to succeed, since Miss Tabor declines either
to sue or to prosecute."

The Judge winced at the last word.  "Yes--yes, I know; but he might--he might--tell."

"I think Miss Tabor's influence will prevent. If it should not--well, you're not in a desperate
case by any means; you're involved, but far from stripped; in time you may be as sound as ever.
And if Norbert tells, there's nothing for you to do but to live it down."  A faint smile played
upon Joe's lips as he lifted his head and looked at the other.  "It can be done, I think."

It was then that Ariel, complaining of the warmth of the evening, thought it possible that
Joe might find her fan upon the porch, and as he departed, whispered hurriedly:  "Judge Pike,
I'm not technically in control of the Tocsin, but haven't I the right to control its policy?"

"I understand," he muttered.  "You mean about Louden--about this trial--"

"That is why I have taken the paper."

"You want all that changed, you mean?"

She nodded decisively.  "From this instant. Before morning."

"Oh, well, I'll go down there and give the word." He rubbed his eyes wearily with big thumbs.
"I'm through fighting.  I'm done.  Besides, what's the use?  There's nothing more to fight."

"Now, Judge," Joe said, as he came in briskly, "we'll go over the list of that unencumbered
property, if you will."

This unencumbered property consisted of Beaver Beach and those other belongings of the Judge
which he had not dared to mortgage.  Joe had somehow explained their nature to Ariel, and these
with the Tocsin she had elected to accept in restitution.

"You told me once that I ought to look after my own property, and now I will.  Don't you see?"
she cried to Joe, eagerly.  "It's my work!"  She resolutely set aside every other proposition;
and this was the quality of mercy which Martin Pike found that night.

There was a great crowd to hear Joe's summing-up at the trial, and those who succeeded in getting
into the court-room declared that it was worth the struggle.  He did not orate, he did not
"thunder at the jury," nor did he slyly flatter them; he did not overdo the confidential, nor
seem so secure of understanding beforehand what their verdict would be that they felt an instinctive
desire to fool him.  He talked colloquially but clearly, without appeal to the pathetic and
without garnitures, not mentioning sunsets, birds, oceans, homes, the glorious old State, or
the happiness of liberty; but he made everybody in the room quite sure that Happy Fear had
fired the shot which killed Cory to save his own life.  And that, as Mr. Bradbury remarked
to the Colonel, was "what Joe was THERE for!"

Ariel's escort was increased to four that day: Mr. Ladew sat beside her, and there were times
when Joe kept his mind entirely to the work in hand only by an effort, but he always succeeded.
The sight of the pale and worshipping face of Happy Fear from the corner of his eye was enough
to insure that.  And people who could not get near the doors, asking those who could, "What's
he doin' now?" were answered by variations of the one formula, "Oh, jest walkin' away with it!"

Once the court-room was disturbed and set in an uproar which even the Judge's customary threat
failed to subdue.  Joe had been talking very rapidly, and having turned the point he was making
with perfect dexterity, the jury listening eagerly, stopped for a moment to take a swallow
of water.  A voice rose over the low hum of the crowd in a delirious chuckle:  "Why don't somebody
'HEAD HIM OFF!'"  The room instantly rocked with laughter, under cover of which the identity
of the sacrilegious chuckler was not discovered, but the voice was the voice of Buckalew, who
was incredibly surprised to find that he had spoken aloud.

The jury were "out," after the case had been given to them, seventeen minutes and thirty seconds
by the watch Claudine held in her hand.  The little man, whose fate was now on the knees of
the gods, looked pathetically at the foreman and then at the face of his lawyer and began to
shake violently, but not with fright.  He had gone to the jail on Joe's word, as a good dog
goes where his master bids, trustfully; and yet Happy had not been able to keep his mind from
considering the horrible chances.  "Don't worry," Joe had said.  "It's all right.  I'll see
you through." And he had kept his word.

The little man was cleared.

It took Happy a long time to get through what he had to say to his attorney in the anteroom,
and even then, of course, he did not manage to put it in words, for he had "broken down" with
sheer gratitude. "Why, damn ME, Joe," he sobbed, "if ever I--if ever you--well, by God! if
you ever--"  This was the substance of his lingual accomplishment under the circumstances.
But Claudine threw her arms around poor Joe's neck and kissed him.

Many people were waiting to shake hands with Joe and congratulate him. The trio, taking advantage
of seats near the rail, had already done that (somewhat uproariously) before he had followed
Happy, and so had Ariel and Ladew, both, necessarily, rather hurriedly.  But in the corridors
he found, when he came out of the anteroom, clients, acquaintances, friends: old friends, new
friends, and friends he had never seen before--everybody beaming upon him and wringing his
hand, as if they had been sure of it all from the start.

"KNOW him?" said one to another.  "Why, I've knowed him sence he was that high!  SMART little
feller he was, too!"  This was a total stranger.

"I said, years ago"--thus Mr. Brown, the "National House" clerk, proving his prophetic vision--"that
he'd turn out to be a big man some day."

They gathered round him if he stopped for an instant, and crowded after him admiringly when
he went on again, making his progress slow.  When he finally came out of the big doors into
the sunshine, there were as many people in the yard as there had been when he stood in the
same place and watched the mob rushing his client's guards. But to-day their temper was different,
and as he paused a moment, looking down on the upturned, laughing faces, with a hundred jocular
and congratulatory salutations shouted up at him, somebody started a cheer, and it was taken
up with thunderous good-will.

There followed the interrogation customary in such emergencies, and the anxious inquirer was
informed by four or five hundred people simultaneously that Joe Louden was all right.

"HEAD HIM OFF!" bellowed Mike Sheehan, suddenly darting up the steps. The shout increased,
and with good reason, for he stepped quickly back within the doors; and, retreating through
the building, made good his escape by a basement door.

He struck off into a long detour, but though he managed to evade the crowd, he had to stop
and shake hands with every third person he met. As he came out upon Main Street again, he encountered
his father.

"Howdy do, Joe?" said this laconic person, and offered his hand.  They shook, briefly.  "Well,"
he continued, rubbing his beard, "how are ye?"

"All right, father, I think."

"Satisfied with the verdict?"

"I'd be pretty hard to please if I weren't," Joe laughed.

Mr. Louden rubbed his beard again.  "I was there," he said, without emotion.

"At the trial, you mean?"

"Yes."  He offered his hand once more, and again they shook.  "Well, come around and see us,"
he said.

"Thank you.  I will."

"Well," said Mr. Louden, "good-day, Joe."

"Good-day, father."

The young man stood looking after him with a curious smile.  Then he gave a slight start. 
Far up the street he saw two figures, one a lady's, in white, with a wide white hat; the other
a man's, wearing recognizably clerical black.  They seemed to be walking very slowly.

It had been a day of triumph for Joe; but in all his life he never slept worse than he did
that night.

XXVI

ANCIENT OF DAYS

He woke to the chiming of bells, and, as his eyes slowly opened, the sorrowful people of a
dream, who seemed to be bending over him, weeping, swam back into the darkness of the night
whence they had come, and returned to the imperceptible, leaving their shadows in his heart.
Slowly he rose, stumbled into the outer room, and released the fluttering shade; but the sunshine,
springing like a golden lover through the open window, only dazzled him, and found no answering
gladness to greet it, nor joy in the royal day it heralded.

And yet, to the newly cleaned boys on their way to midsummer morning Sunday-school, the breath
of that cool August day was as sweet as stolen apples.  No doubt the stir of far, green thickets
and the twinkle of silver-slippered creeks shimmered in the longing vision of their minds'
eyes; even so, they were merry.  But Joseph Louden, sighing as he descended his narrow stairs,
with the bitterness still upon his lips of the frightful coffee he had made, heard the echo
of their laughter with wonder.

It would be an hour at least before time to start to church, when Ariel expected him; he stared
absently up the street, then down, and, after that, began slowly to walk in the latter direction,
with no very active consciousness, or care, of where he went.  He had fallen into a profound
reverie, so deep that when he had crossed the bridge and turned into a dusty road which ran
along the river-bank, he stopped mechanically beside the trunk of a fallen sycamore, and, lifting
his head, for the first time since he had set out, looked about him with a melancholy perplexity,
a little surprised to find himself there.

For this was the spot where he had first seen the new Ariel, and on that fallen sycamore they
had sat together.  "REMEMBER, ACROSS MAIN STREET BRIDGE AT NOON!"  And Joe's cheeks burned,
as he recalled why he had not understood the clear voice that had haunted him.  But that shame
had fallen from him; she had changed all that, as she had changed so many things.  He sank
down in the long grass, with his back against the log, and stared out over the fields of tall
corn, shaking in a steady wind all the way to the horizon.

"Changed so many things?" he said, half aloud. "Everything!"  Ah, yes, she had changed the
whole world for Joseph Louden--at his first sight of her!  And now it seemed to him that he
was to lose her, but not in the way he had thought.

Almost from the very first, he had the feeling that nothing so beautiful as that she should
stay in Canaan could happen to him.  He was sure that she was but for the little while, that
her coming was like the flying petals of which he had told her.

He had lain upon the earth; and she had lifted him up.  For a moment he had felt the beatific
wings enfolding him with gentle protection, and then saw them lifted to bear the angel beyond
his sight.  For it was incredible that the gods so loved Joe Louden that they would make greater
gifts to him than this little time with her which they had granted him.

"Changed so many things?"

The bars that had been between him and half of his world were down, shattered, never more to
be replaced; and the ban of Canaan was lifted. Could this have been, save for her?  And upon
that thought he got to his feet, uttering an exclamation of bitter self-reproach, asking himself
angrily what he was doing.  He knew how much she gave him, what full measure of her affection!
Was not that enough?--Out upon you, Louden! Are you to sulk in your tent, dour in the gloom,
or to play a man's part, and if she be happy, turn a cheery face upon her joy?

And thus this pilgrim recrossed the bridge, emerging to the street with his head up, smiling,
and his shoulders thrown back so that none might see the burden he carried.

Ariel was waiting on the porch for him.  She wore the same dress she had worn that Sunday of
their tryst; that exquisite dress, with the faint lavender overtint, like the tender colors
of the beautiful day he made his own.  She had not worn it since, and he was far distant when
he caught the first flickering glimpse of her through the lower branches of the maples, but
he remembered.... And again, as on that day, he heard a far-away, ineffable music, the Elf-land
horns, sounding the mysterious reveille which had wakened his soul to her coming.

She came to the gate to meet him, and gave him her hand in greeting, without a word--or the
need of one--from either.  Then together they set forth over the sun-flecked pavement, the
maples swishing above them, heavier branches crooning in the strong breeze, under a sky like
a Della Robbia background.  And up against the glorious blue of it, some laughing, invisible
god was blowing small, rounded clouds of pure cotton, as children blow thistledown.

When he opened her parasol, as they came out into the broad sunshine beyond Upper Main Street,
there was the faintest mingling of wild roses and cinnamon loosed on the air.

"Joe," she said, "I'm very happy!"

"That's right," he returned, heartily.  "I think you always will be."

"But, oh! I wish," she went on, "that Mr. Arp could have lived to see you come down the Court-house
steps."

"God bless him!" said Joe.  "I can hear the 'argument'!"

"Those dear old men have been so loyal to you, Joe."

"No," he returned; "loyal to Eskew."

"To you both," she said.  "I'm afraid the old circle is broken up; they haven't met on the
National House corner since he died.  The Colonel told me he couldn't bear to go there again."

"I don't believe any of them ever will," he returned.  "And yet I never pass the place that
I don't see Eskew in his old chair.  I went there last night to commune with him.  I couldn't
sleep, and I got up, and went over there; they'd left the chairs out; the town was asleep,
and it was beautiful moonlight--"

"To commune with him?  What about?"

"You."

"Why?" she asked, plainly mystified.

"I stood in need of good counsel," he answered, cheerfully, "or a friendly word, perhaps, and--as
I sat there--after a while it came."

"What was it?"

"To forget that I was sodden with selfishness; to pretend not to be as full of meanness as
I really was!  Doesn't that seem to be Eskew's own voice?"

"Weren't you happy last night, Joe?"

"Oh, it was all right," he said, quickly.  "Don't you worry."

And at this old speech of his she broke into a little laugh of which he had no comprehension.

"Mamie came to see me early this morning," she said, after they had walked on in silence for
a time.  "Everything is all right with her again; that is, I think it will be.  Eugene is coming
home. And," she added, thoughtfully, "it will be best for him to have his old place on the
Tocsin again. She showed me his letter, and I liked it.  I think he's been through the fire--"

Joe's distorted smile appeared.  "And has come out gold?" he asked.

"No," she laughed; "but nearer it!  And I think he'll try to be more worth her caring for.
She has always thought that his leaving the Tocsin in the way he did was heroic.  That was
her word for it.  And it WAS the finest thing he ever did."

"I can't figure Eugene out."  Joe shook his head.  "There's something behind his going away
that I don't understand."  This was altogether the truth; nor was there ever to come a time
when either he or Mamie would understand what things had determined the departure of Eugene
Bantry; though Mamie never questioned, as Joe did, the reasons for it, or doubted those Eugene
had given her, which were the same he had given her father. For she was content with his return.

Again the bells across the Square rang out their chime.  The paths were decorously enlivened
with family and neighborhood groups, bound churchward; and the rumble of the organ, playing
the people into their pews, shook on the air.  And Joe knew that he must speak quickly, if
he was to say what he had planned to say, before he and Ariel went into the church.

"Ariel?"  He tried to compel his voice to a casual cheerfulness, but it would do nothing for
him, except betray a desperate embarrassment.

She looked at him quickly, and as quickly away.

"Yes?"

"I wanted to say something to you, and I'd better do it now, I think--before I go to church
for the first time in two years!"  He managed to laugh, though with some ruefulness, and continued
stammeringly:  "I want to tell you how much I like him--how much I admire him--"

"Admire whom?" she asked, a little coldly, for she knew.

"Mr. Ladew."

"So do I," she answered, looking straight ahead. "That is one reason why I wanted you to come
with me to-day."

"It isn't only that.  I want to tell you--to tell you--"  He broke off for a second.  "You
remember that night in my office before Fear came in?"

"Yes; I remember."

"And that I--that something I said troubled you because it--it sounded as if I cared too much
for you--"

"No; not too much."  She still looked straight ahead.  They were walking very slowly.  "You
didn't understand.  You'd been in my mind, you see, all those years, so much more than I in
yours. I hadn't forgotten YOU.  But to you I was really a stranger--"

"No, no!" he cried.

"Yes, I was," she said, gently but very quickly. "And I--I didn't want you to fall in love
with me at first sight.  And yet--perhaps I did! But I hadn't thought of things in that way.
I had just the same feeling for you that I always had--always! I had never cared so much for
any one else, and it seemed to me the most necessary thing in my life to come back to that
old companionship--  Don't you remember--it used to trouble you so when I would take your hand?
I think I loved your being a little rough with me.  And once, when I saw how you had been hurt,
that day you ran away--"

"Ariel!" he gasped, helplessly.

"Have you forgotten?"

He gathered himself together with all his will. "I want to prove to you," he said, resolutely,
"that the dear kindness of you isn't thrown away on me; I want you to know what I began to
say: that it's all right with me; and I think Ladew--" He stopped again.  "Ah!  I've seen how
much he cares for you--"

"Have you?"

"Ariel," he said, "that isn't fair to me, if you trust me.  You could not have helped seeing--"

"But I have not seen it," she interrupted, with great calmness.  After having said this, she
finished truthfully:  "If he did, I would never let him tell me.  I like him too much."

"You mean you're not going to--"

Suddenly she turned to him.  "NO!" she said, with a depth of anger he had not heard in her
voice since that long-ago winter day when she struck Eugene Bantry with her clenched fist.
She swept over him a blinding look of reproach. "How could I?"

And there, upon the steps of the church, in the sudden, dazzling vision of her love, fell the
burden of him who had made his sorrowful pilgrimage across Main Street bridge that morning.

A manifold rustling followed them as they went down the aisle, and the sibilance of many whisperings;
but Joe was not conscious of that, as he took his place in Ariel's pew beside her.  For him
there was only the presence of divinity; the church was filled with it.

And then, as they knelt to pray, there were the white heads of the three old friends of Eskew
Arp; and beyond was the silver hair of Martin Pike, who knelt beside his daughter.  Joe felt
that people should be very kind to the Judge.

The sun, so eager without, came temperately through the windows, where stood angels and saints
in gentle colors, and the face of the young minister in this quiet light was like the faces
in the windows....

"Not only to confront your enemies," he said; "that is not enough; nor is it that I would have
you bluster at them, nor take arms against them; you will not have to do that if, when they
come at you, you do not turn one inch aside, but with an assured heart, with good nature, not
noisily, and with steadfastness, you keep on your way.  If you can do that, I say that they
will turn aside for you, and you shall walk straight through them, and only laughter be left
of their anger!"

There was a stir among the people, and many faces turned toward Joe. Two years ago he had sat
in the same church, when his character and actions had furnished the underlying theme of a
sermon, and he had recognized himself without difficulty: to-day he had not the shadow of a
dream that the same thing was happening.  He thought the people were turning to look at Ariel,
and he was very far from wondering at that.

She saw that he did not understand; she was glad to have it so.  She had taken off her gloves,
and he was holding them lightly and reverently in his hands, looking down upon them, his thin
cheeks a little flushed.  And at that, and not knowing the glory that was in his soul, something
forlorn in his careful tenderness toward her gloves so touched her that she felt the tears
coming to her eyes with a sudden rush.  And to prevent them.

"Not the empty gloves, Joe," she whispered.