Oct. 20. brite and fair. this afternoon me and Fatty Melcher wirked all the afternoon puting
leafs in old Putty Lowjys barn. old Putty said he wood pay us but when we asked him for our
pay he said we cood have all the horse chesnuts we wanted. so we got a baskit and picked it
full and went back to Fattys and pluged horse chesnuts at old Puttys cat.

Oct. 21. brite and fair. Skinny Bruce and Ben Rundlet got fiting today. old Bandbox Tomson
came in to lern us some music and he left his fiddel in the entry and at resess Ben he put
some sope on his bow and when old Bandbox tried to play on it he coodent make a squeak. then
old Francis asked every feller in school who done it, and when Ben said he dident know who
done it old Francis he up and whaled time out of Ben. i gess old Francis see Ben do it. ennyway
after school Skinny he hollered Ben how did you like your licking, and Ben he hollered back
Skinny Bruce is a redheaded goose, and Skinny he got mad and paisted Ben one in the eye and
Ben he give Skinny a sidewinder and then they fit from first base to Colbaths barn where Whack
got stunted and old Polly Smith came out and said if they dident stop fiting she wood go for
the polise, and so they stoped. i bet on Skinny.

Oct. 22, 186- brite and fair and most as hot as summer. that was prety mean of old Putty.

Oct. 23. Mary Watson, Beany's sister and Mary Straton whose father chased me and Beany when
we broke the gaslite, can run faster then enny of the fellers xcept Tomtit and Arthur Francis.

Oct. 24. i have been sick agen. not very sick but my legs aked ferful. mother says it is becaus
i am growin so fast, but i know why, me and Boog Chadwick rassled all yesterday afternoon.
ferst i throwed Boog and then Boog throwed me, and when we got through Boog was only 2 throws
ahead. we dident get mad at all. ennyway i dident have to go to church.

Oct. 25. tonite we had company to super. Mister and Missis Merill. Frankie did a funny thing.
father asked mother for some chese and mother she said they wasent enny, and Frankie he said
he knew where they was some and father said all rite Frankie if you can get some i will give
you a cent, father he thinks Frankie is auful smart, and so Frankie he climed out of his high
chair and ran out into the kitchen and bimeby he came in with 3 little peaces of chese and
father he asked him where he got them and he brought in the rat trap. you had just aught to
have herd them laff.

Oct. 26. Clowdy but no rane. some folks can eat chese that is all wiggly.

Oct. 27. still clowdy. i cant.

Oct. 28. Beany has got the best little ax i ever saw. his father got it for him to split his
kindlins. i wish i had one like it for i have to split my kindlins with a old rusty ax that
ways about a tun.

Oct. 29. brite and fair. tonite i went over and helped Beany split kindlins with his new ax.
it was jest as easy as ennything.

Oct. 30. brite and fair. old Tom Fifield killed his pig today and give Beany the bladder, and
we blew it up with a pipe stem and kicked it for a football after school. Jack Melvin is going
to have Micky Kelleys fathers pigs bladder, only he dont kill his pig till most winter. i am
going to have Oliver Lanes, and his pig is the bigest in town. i bet his will be as big as
the stewdcats big football. all the fellers wish they cood get it.

Oct. 31. cold as time this morning, but i had to go to church jest the same.

Nov. 1. Beany got a licking today for hollering after old Nancy Marble. she went into Beanys
house and told Beanys father. i hollered two but father was in boston and she coodent tell him.

