     "After marriage a lady worker continues to be a missionary
     in active service and her changed status will afford new
     opportunities for service. She will need rightly to
     apportion time to language study, home duties and her
     calling as a missionary. This will require changes in
     outlook and habits, but if the responsibilities of married
     life have been prayerfully accepted the varying claims on
     time and strength will not result in a permanent conflict of
     loyalties.

     "The establishing of a Christian home should be for the
     glory of God and the spread of the Gospel. One danger to be
     avoided is that of missionaries becoming so absorbed in
     their home as to neglect an active ministry amongst the
     people to whom they have been called. It is the mutual
     responsibility of both husband and wife to see that each
     does not hinder the other from fulfilling his or her
     ministry. Where there are children, it is recognized that
     new responsibilities are involved, but care should be taken
     that family claims do not monopolize the time and energies
     of either parent. Children who grow up in an atmosphere of
     loving yet firm discipline are not only a joy to their
     parents but an asset to the work of the Gospel.

What a wonderful thing is a Christian home! What a privilege to be able to establish, among
thousands of darkened, pagan homes, one that is truly Christian; and to be able to live out
the love of Christ in actual family relationships before people who know nothing of it!

This privilege has not been given to me. The Lord has not led me in that path. And yet, as
I have observed many young couples on the mission field, and older ones too, I have been able
to see a little of the price they have had to pay. The outsider, looking on, saw only the love
and blessing that radiated from these homes. But as I lived in some of them, I found that these
young couples were faced with constant problems, and even frustrations, and I wondered whether
or not I could have overcome all obstacles in the gallant way in which they did.

Shall we take a look at the sort of thing a young married couple on the mission field has to
face? We will call them John and Mary, and make them just ordinary folk who meet the kind of
situations most young missionaries meet.

       *       *       *       *       *

A home of her own--that was what Mary longed for. She and John had been married a few months
before leaving for the field, had studied for a term in language school, and now were living
with an older married couple until their acquaintance with the language and the customs of
the people was enough to warrant their being sent to a station of their own. Mary found the
language easy, but John found it hard; and they had been on the field for more than two years
before their desire for a home of their own was realized. It was just as well for Mary that
she was quick with the language. Little David was born when they had been out only a year,
and looking after David meant that she had several hours less each day for study than John had.

