"It was just at the time when he was failing rapidly that he found a copy of 'Science and Health'
on the street, and he claims that as soon as he began the reading of the book he began to get
better."

"This must be the work of the devil; it never was the book. You had better be careful, Rev.
Williams," said the Rev. Jones, with a startled look. "So I told the boy, and he asked me a
question which I would like to ask you."

"What is it?"

"Do you consider it good that my boy is well, Rev. Jones?"

"Why certainly."

"Did you ever hear of the devil doing good?"

"No," said the Rev. Jones, with a shake of his head.

"Then how can you say his getting well is the work of the devil who never does anything good?"

Rev. Jones sat back in his chair with a jerk.

"Rev. Williams, do you intend to defend this heretical cult?"

"Certainly not. I merely gave you the answer my boy gave me."

"A very bright answer, when you think of it," said Rev. Jones, rather stiffly.

"Especially so, coming from one of those simple-minded fellows who only believed they were
sick and then claimed that book healed them." It had nettled the Rev. Williams a little to
hear his son called simple-minded, after the boy had shown that his knowledge of the deep things
of the Bible surpassed his own, hence his reply.

"Well, all I've got to say is that there is nothing in Christian Science," said Mr. Jones,
with a bored look on his face.

"Rev. Jones, I did not come here out of idle curiosity, for you well know my wife has been
sick for years with tuberculosis, and has been gradually failing until at the present time
she is confined to her bed, and our family physician doesn't think she will ever get up from
it. My son claims that Christian Science has cured him and that it will cure his mother if
I will consent to try it. I told him I would not, and he said forever hereafter he would blame
my unreasonable prejudice for his mother's death, and knowing you to be a very well read man,
I came to you for advice."

"I have given you my opinion of it."

"On what do you base your opinion?"

"On what I have heard and read about it."

"Did you ever investigate it thoroughly, Rev. Jones?" "Thoroughly enough to convince myself
of the fallacy of its teachings."

"Did you ever talk to one of those practitioners?"

"No. They are a lot of hair-brained women and know no more than the author of 'Science and
Health,'" said the Rev. Jones with a contemptuous toss of his head.

"Did you ever read what they call their textbook, 'Science and Health?'"

"No, my time is too valuable to waste it on reading nonsense."

"How do you know it is nonsense?"

"I have heard enough of what it contains."

"Can you quote something, Mr. Jones?"

"Yes, here are some of the things printed in that book:

"There is no death. You haven't a body. Your stomach can't ache. There is no matter. Brains
can't think. There is no sickness. There is no sin. There is no evil. All is good, Good is
God, God is Mind, Mind is God, God is all." He stopped and looked at the Rev. Williams, then
continued, "All what, I would like to know."

"Are you sure the book contains these things?" "Certainly, I have it from a man who bought a book."

"If the book contains such assertions, it certainly must be nonsense."

"Nonsense, I should say so. No one but a demented person would write such stuff."

"I am glad I came to see you about this thing, as I hardly knew what to say to Walter in reply
to his accusations of being prejudiced."

"Oh, it's always well to investigate a new thing of this kind before you condemn it, at least
that is what I did."

"But you say you never read the book yourself?"

"No, I never saw the book myself, but my friend Dr. Thompson has one."

"Do you know whether he has read it carefully?"

"No, he never read it through, he intended to, but when he saw such assertions as I quoted
to you, he could see there was nothing in it."

"Why, certainly, of course. You must excuse me, Mr. Jones, for acting carefully in this matter,
because of the condition of my wife." "I would do the same if I were in your place, but you
can rest assured there is nothing in it."

"I suppose not, yet I wish there was for my wife's sake."

"You wouldn't dare use it if there was, they would cast you from your church."

"But no one need know it, Rev. Jones."

"Do you think one of those female practitioners could keep such a good thing? They would be
pleased beyond measure to be employed by a minister, and would scatter the news to the four
winds of heaven."

"I hadn't thought of that; thank you, Mr. Jones, for pointing out to me the danger of employing
one of those Christian Scientists. I also thank you for showing me the nonsense of thinking
Christian Science could cure my wife of something that the best physicians pronounce incurable.
I must be going now, as I wish to talk it all over with my son. Good day, Rev. Jones."

"Good bye, Rev. Williams, call again."

"I shall be pleased to."

The pastor wended his way home, well satisfied with himself. Walter could not now accuse him
of being prejudiced, for he had given Christian Science an impartial investigation, besides
he was congratulating himself that he had been wise enough to consult with a deep-thinking
man like Parson Jones, before employing a practitioner, for that practitioner would have delighted
in telling it to every person in his parish, and this would have resulted in the loss of his
position. The parson felt he had had a narrow escape from a great trouble.

As soon as he arrived home he called Walter to the library and told him of his visit to Parson
Jones, and also what Rev. Jones had said regarding Christian Science.

Walter was somewhat surprised at the news, but after a moment he said, "You say you have given
Christian Science an impartial investigation?"

"Yes, Walter, I have; you see I was not as prejudiced as you thought. I talked for an hour
with Parson Jones, and he convinced me that it was nothing but a lot of rubbish and nonsense."

"What does Parson Jones know about it?" "Why, Walter, Mr. Jones is considered the best educated
man in our city."

"Best educated in what?"

"In every thing in general."

"Did Parson Jones ever study Christian Science under a qualified Christian Science teacher?"

"No, I think not."

"Did he ever study 'Science and Health,' the text-book of this science?"

"No, he considered it a waste of time."

"Did he ever read 'Science and Health'?"

"No."

"Did he ever see the book?"

"He said not."

"Then he certainly must be a very bright man to know what Christian Science is. For a man that
can know all about a science of any kind without taking instructions, without studying, without
reading, without seeing the text-book of that science, is certainly a remarkably wise man."

"But, Walter, he got his information in a different way."

"How was that, father?" "His friend Dr. Thompson bought a 'Science and Health' and told him
all about it."

"Was Dr. Thompson ever taught Christian Science?"

"No, I guess not."

"Did he ever study or read 'Science and Health'?"

"He intended to read it, but when he saw such ridiculous assertions in it, he considered it
folly to read it," said the pastor.

"Another one of those wise men that know all about a science without instruction, study, or
reading."

"What do you mean, Walter?"

"Father, if Dr. Thompson had told you that he knew all about medicine by simply glancing into
a medical book, would you believe him?"

"Certainly not!"

"And if he had found therein some quotations that he did not understand, would you think it
strange?" said Walter.

"No."

