Nowhere was the crystallization of form and principle more pronounced than in religious life,
which fastened upon the mother country a deadening weight that hampered all progress, and in
the colonies, notably in the Philippines, virtually converted her government into a hagiarchy
that had its face toward the past and either could not or would not move with the current of
the times. So, when "the shot heard round the world," the declaration of humanity's right to
be and to become, in its all-encircling sweep, reached the lands controlled by her it was coldly
received and blindly rejected by the governing powers, and there was left only the slower,
subtler, but none the less sure, process of working its way among the people to burst in time
in rebellion and the destruction of the conservative forces that would repress it.

In the opening years of the nineteenth century the friar orders in the Philippines had reached
the apogee of their power and usefulness. Their influence was everywhere felt and acknowledged,
while the country still prospered under the effects of the vigorous and progressive administrations
of Anda and Vargas in the preceding century. Native levies had fought loyally under Spanish
leadership against Dutch and British invaders, or in suppressing local revolts among their
own people, which were always due to some specific grievance, never directed definitely against
the Spanish sovereignty. The Philippines were shut off from contact with any country but Spain,
and even this communication was restricted and carefully guarded. There was an elaborate central
government which, however, hardly touched the life of the native peoples, who were guided and
governed by the parish priests, each town being in a way an independent entity.

Of this halcyon period, just before the process of disintegration began, there has fortunately
been left a record which may be characterized as the most notable Spanish literary production
relating to the Philippines, being the calm, sympathetic, judicial account of one who had spent
his manhood in the work there and who, full of years and experience, sat down to tell the story
of their life. [4] In it there are no puerile whinings, no querulous curses that tropical Malays
do not order their lives as did the people of the Spanish village where he may have been reared,
no selfish laments of ingratitude over blessings unasked and only imperfectly understood by
the natives, no fatuous self-deception as to the real conditions, but a patient consideration
of the difficulties encountered, the good accomplished, and the unavoidable evils incident
to any human work. The country and the people, too, are described with the charming simplicity
of the eyes that see clearly, the brain that ponders deeply, and the heart that beats sympathetically.
Through all the pages of his account runs the quiet strain of peace and contentment, of satisfaction
with the existing order, for he had looked upon the creation and saw that it was good. There
is "neither haste, nor hate, nor anger," but the deliberate recital of the facts warmed and
illumined by the geniality of a soul to whom age and experience had brought, not a sour cynicism,
but the mellowing influence of a ripened philosophy. He was such an old man as may fondly be
imagined walking through the streets of Parañaque in stately benignity amid the fear and respect
of the brown people over whom he watched.

But in all his chronicle there is no suggestion of anything more to hope for, anything beyond. From
her come the men of Headland of Islefirth.
CHAP. VII

Of the Wedding of Olaf "Feilan," A.D. 920

Olaf "Feilan"
was the youngest of Thorstein's children. He was a tall man and strong,
goodly to look at, and a man of the greatest mettle. In less than a decade, the terrific convulsions in European politics
made themselves felt even in the remote Philippines, and then began the gradual drawing away
of the people from their rulers--blind gropings and erratic wanderings at first, but nevertheless
persistent and vigorous tendencies.

The first notable influence was the admission of representatives for the Philippines into the
Spanish Cortes under the revolutionary governments and the abolition of the trade monopoly
with Mexico. The last galleon reached Manila in 1815, and soon foreign commercial interests
were permitted, in a restricted way, to enter the country. Then with the separation of Mexico
and the other American colonies from Spain a more marked change was brought about in that direct
communication was established with the mother country, and the absolutism of the hagiarchy
first questioned by the numbers of Peninsular Spaniards who entered the islands to trade, some
even to settle and rear families there. These also affected the native population in the larger
centers by the spread of their ideas, which were not always in conformity with those that for
several centuries the friars had been inculcating into their wards. Moreover, there was a not-inconsiderable
portion of the population, sprung from the friars themselves, who were eager to adopt the customs
and ideas of the Spanish immigrants.

The suppression of many of the monasteries in Spain in 1835 caused a large influx of the disestablished
monks into the Philippines in search for a haven, and a home, thus bringing about a conflict
with the native clergy, who were displaced from their best holdings to provide berths for the
newcomers. At the same time, the increase of education among the native priests brought the
natural demand for more equitable treatment by the Spanish friar, so insistent that it even
broke out into open rebellion in 1843 on the part of a young Tagalog who thought himself aggrieved
in this respect.

Thus the struggle went on, with stagnation above and some growth below, so that the governors
were ever getting further away from the governed, and for such a movement there is in the course
of nature but one inevitable result, especially when outside influences are actively at work
penetrating the social system and making for better things. Among these influences four cumulative
ones may be noted: the spread of journalism, the introduction of steamships into the Philippines,
the return of the Jesuits, and the opening of the Suez Canal.

The printing-press entered the islands with the conquest, but its use had been strictly confined
to religious works until about the middle of the past century, when there was a sudden awakening
and within a few years five journals were being published. In 1848 appeared the first regular
newspaper of importance, El Diario de Manila, and about a decade later the principal organ
of the Spanish-Filipino population, El Comercio, which, with varying vicissitudes, has continued
down to the present. While rigorously censored, both politically and religiously, and accessible
to only an infinitesimal portion of the people, they still performed the service of letting
a few rays of light into the Cimmerian intellectual gloom of the time and place.

With the coming of steam navigation communication between the different parts of the islands
was facilitated and trade encouraged, with all that such a change meant in the way of breaking
up the old isolation and tending to a common understanding. Spanish power, too, was for the
moment more firmly established, and Moro piracy in Luzon and the Bisayan Islands, which had
been so great a drawback to the development of the country, was forever ended.

The return of the Jesuits produced two general results tending to dissatisfaction with the
existing order. To them was assigned the missionary field of Mindanao, which meant the displacement
of the Recollect Fathers in the missions there, and for these other berths had to be found.
Again the native clergy were the losers in that they had to give up their best parishes in
Luzon, especially around Manila and Cavite, so the breach was further widened and the soil
sown with discontent. But more far-reaching than this immediate result was the educational
movement inaugurated by the Jesuits. The native, already feeling the vague impulses from without
and stirred by the growing restlessness of the times, here saw a new world open before him.
A considerable portion of the native population in the larger centers, who had shared in the
economic progress of the colony, were enabled to look beyond their daily needs and to afford
their children an opportunity for study and advancement--a condition and a need met by the
Jesuits for a time.

With the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 communication with the mother country became cheaper,
quicker, surer, so that large numbers of Spaniards, many of them in sympathy with the republican
movements at home, came to the Philippines in search of fortunes and generally left half-caste
families who had imbibed their ideas. Native boys who had already felt the intoxication of
such learning as the schools of Manila afforded them began to dream of greater wonders in Spain,
now that the journey was possible for them. So began the definite movements that led directly
to the disintegration of the friar régime.

In the same year occurred the revolution in the mother country, which had tired of the old
corrupt despotism. Isabella II was driven into exile and the country left to waver about uncertainly
for several years, passing through all the stages of government from red radicalism to absolute
conservatism, finally adjusting itself to the middle course of constitutional monarchism. During
the effervescent and ephemeral republic there was sent to the Philippines a governor who set
to work to modify the old system and establish a government more in harmony with modern ideas
and more democratic in form. His changes were hailed with delight by the growing class of Filipinos
who were striving for more consideration in their own country, and who, in their enthusiasm
and the intoxication of the moment, perhaps became more radical than was safe under the conditions--surely
too radical for their religious guides watching and waiting behind the veil of the temple.

In January, 1872, an uprising occurred in the naval arsenal at Cavite, with a Spanish non-commissioned
officer as one of the leaders. From the meager evidence now obtainable, this would seem to
have been purely a local mutiny over the service questions of pay and treatment, but in it
the friars saw their opportunity. It was blazoned forth, with all the wild panic that was to
characterize the actions of the governing powers from that time on, as the premature outbreak
of a general insurrection under the leadership of the native clergy, and rigorous repressive
measures were demanded. Three native priests, notable for their popularity among their own
people, one an octogenarian and the other two young canons of the Manila Cathedral, were summarily
garroted, along with the renegade Spanish officer who had participated in the mutiny. No record
of any trial of these priests has ever been brought to light. The Archbishop, himself a secular
[5] clergyman, stoutly refused to degrade them from their holy office, and they wore their
sacerdotal robes at the execution, which was conducted in a hurried, fearful manner. At the
same time a number of young Manilans who had taken conspicuous part in the "liberal" demonstrations
were deported to the Ladrone Islands or to remote islands of the Philippine group itself.

This was the beginning of the end. Yet there immediately followed the delusive calm which ever
precedes the fatal outburst, lulling those marked for destruction to a delusive security. The
two decades following were years of quiet, unobtrusive growth, during which the Philippine
Islands made the greatest economic progress in their history. But this in itself was preparing
the final catastrophe, for if there be any fact well established in human experience it is
that with economic development the power of organized religion begins to wane--the rise of
the merchant spells the decline of the priest. Thorgerd betook herself on board there, taking
with her a great deal of goods. After that Thorgerd put to sea and had a very good voyage, and
arrived in Norway. Thorgerd had much kindred and many noble kinsmen there. They greeted her
warmly, and gave her the choice of whatever she liked to take at their hands. Thorgerd was pleased
at this, and said it was her wish to settle down in that land.

She had not been a widow long before a man came forward to woo her. His name was Herjolf;
he was a "landed man" as to title, rich, and of much account. Herjolf was a tall and strong man, but
he was not fair of feature; yet the most high-mettled of men, and was of all men the best skilled
at arms.
 This is evident from the ceaseless conflict that
went on between the religious orders and the Spanish political administrators, who were at
every turn thwarted in their efforts to keep the government abreast of the times.

The shock of the affair of 1872 had apparently stunned the Filipinos, but it had at the same
time brought them to the parting of the ways and induced a vague feeling that there was something
radically wrong, which could only be righted by a closer union among themselves. They began
to consider that their interests and those of the governing powers were not the same. In these
feelings of distrust toward the friars they were stimulated by the great numbers of immigrant
Spaniards who were then entering the country, many of whom had taken part in the republican
movements at home and who, upon the restoration of the monarchy, no doubt thought it safer
for them to be at as great a distance as possible from the throne. The young Filipinos studying
in Spain came from different parts of the islands, and by their association there in a foreign
land were learning to forget their narrow sectionalism; hence the way was being prepared for
some concerted action. Thus, aided and encouraged by the anti-clerical Spaniards in the mother
country, there was growing up a new generation of native leaders, who looked toward something
better than the old system.

It is with this period in the history of the country--the author's boyhood--that the story
of Noli Me Tangere deals. Typical scenes and characters are sketched from life with wonderful
accuracy, and the picture presented is that of a master-mind, who knew and loved his subject.
Terror and repression were the order of the day, with ever a growing unrest in the higher circles,
while the native population at large seemed to be completely cowed--"brutalized" is the term
repeatedly used by Rizal in his political essays. Spanish writers of the period, observing
only the superficial movements,--some of which were indeed fantastical enough, for

                                              "they,
    Who in oppression's darkness caved have dwelt,
    They are not eagles, nourished with the day;
    What marvel, then, at times, if they mistake their way?"

--and not heeding the currents at work below, take great delight in ridiculing the pretensions
of the young men seeking advancement, while they indulge in coarse ribaldry over the wretched
condition of the great mass of the "Indians." The author, however, himself a "miserable Indian,"
vividly depicts the unnatural conditions and dominant characters produced under the outworn
system of fraud and force, at the same time presenting his people as living, feeling, struggling
individuals, with all the frailties of human nature and all the possibilities of mankind, either
for good or evil; incidentally he throws into marked contrast the despicable depreciation used
by the Spanish writers in referring to the Filipinos, making clear the application of the self-evident
proposition that no ordinary human being in the presence of superior force can very well conduct
himself as a man unless he be treated as such.

The friar orders, deluded by their transient triumph and secure in their pride of place, became
more arrogant, more domineering than ever. In the general administration the political rulers
were at every turn thwarted, their best efforts frustrated, and if they ventured too far their
own security threatened; for in the three-cornered wrangle which lasted throughout the whole
of the Spanish domination, the friar orders had, in addition to the strength derived from their
organization and their wealth, the Damoclean weapon of control over the natives to hang above
the heads of both governor and archbishop. The curates in the towns, always the real rulers,
became veritable despots, so that no voice dared to raise itself against them, even in the
midst of conditions which the humblest indio was beginning to feel dumbly to be perverted and
unnatural, and that, too, after three centuries of training under the system that he had ever
been taught to accept as "the will of God."

The friars seemed long since to have forgotten those noble aims that had meant so much to the
founders and early workers of their orders, if indeed the great majority of those of the later
day had ever realized the meaning of their office, for the Spanish writers of the time delight
in characterizing them as the meanest of the Spanish peasantry, when not something worse, who
had been "lassoed," taught a few ritualistic prayers, and shipped to the Philippines to be
placed in isolated towns as lords and masters of the native population, with all the power
and prestige over a docile people that the sacredness of their holy office gave them. These
writers treat the matter lightly, seeing in it rather a huge joke on the "miserable Indians,"
and give the friars great credit for "patriotism," a term which in this connection they dragged
from depth to depth until it quite aptly fitted Dr. Johnson's famous definition, "the last
refuge of a scoundrel."

In their conduct the religious corporations, both as societies and as individuals, must be
estimated according to their own standards--the application of any other criterion would be
palpably unfair. They undertook to hold the native in subjection, to regulate the essential
activities of his life according to their ideas, so upon them must fall the responsibility
for the conditions finally attained: to destroy the freedom of the subject and then attempt
to blame him for his conduct is a paradox into which the learned men often fell, perhaps inadvertently
through their deductive logic. They endeavored to shape the lives of their Malay wards not
only in this existence but also in the next. Their vows were poverty, chastity, and obedience.

The vow of poverty was early relegated to the limbo of neglect. Only a few years after the
founding of Manila royal decrees began to issue on the subject of complaints received by the
King over the usurpation of lands on the part of the priests. Using the same methods so familiar
in the heyday of the institution of monasticism in Europe--pious gifts, deathbed bequests,
pilgrims' offerings--the friar orders gradually secured the richest of the arable lands in
the more thickly settled portions of the Philippines, notably the part of Luzon occupied by
the Tagalogs. Not always, however, it must in justice be recorded, were such doubtful means
resorted to, for there were instances where the missionary was the pioneer, gathering about
himself a band of devoted natives and plunging into the unsettled parts to build up a town
with its fields around it, which would later become a friar estate. With the accumulated incomes
from these estates and the fees for religious observances that poured into their treasuries,
the orders in their nature of perpetual corporations became the masters of the situation, the
lords of the country. But this condition was not altogether objectionable; it was in the excess
of their greed that they went astray, for the native peoples had been living under this system
through generations and not until they began to feel that they were not receiving fair treatment
did they question the authority of a power which not only secured them a peaceful existence
in this life but also assured them eternal felicity in the next.

With only the shining exceptions that are produced in any system, no matter how false its premises
or how decadent it may become, to uphold faith in the intrinsic soundness of human nature,
the vow of chastity was never much more than a myth. Through the tremendous influence exerted
over a fanatically religious people, who implicitly followed the teachings of the reverend
fathers, once their confidence had been secured, the curate was seldom to be gainsaid in his
desires. By means of the secret influence in the confessional and the more open political power
wielded by him, the fairest was his to command, and the favored one and her people looked upon
the choice more as an honor than otherwise, for besides the social standing that it gave her
there was the proud prospect of becoming the mother of children who could claim kinship with
the dominant race. The curate's "companion" or the sacristan's wife was a power in the community,
her family was raised to a place of importance and influence among their own people, while
she and her ecclesiastical offspring were well cared for. On the death or removal of the curate,
it was almost invariably found that she had been provided with a husband or protector and a
not inconsiderable amount of property--an arrangement rather appealing to a people among whom
the means of living have ever been so insecure.

That this practise was not particularly offensive to the people among whom they dwelt may explain
the situation, but to claim that it excuses the friars approaches dangerously close to casuistry.
Still, as long as this arrangement was decently and moderately carried out, there seems to
have been no great objection, nor from a worldly point of view, with all the conditions considered,
could there be much. But the old story of excess, of unbridled power turned toward bad ends,
again recurs, at the same time that the ideas brought in by the Spaniards who came each year
in increasing numbers and the principles observed by the young men studying in Europe cast
doubt upon the fitness of such a state of affairs. As they approached their downfall, like
all mankind, the friars became more open, more insolent, more shameless, in their conduct.

The story of Maria Clara, as told in Noli Me Tangere, is by no means an exaggerated instance,
but rather one of the few clean enough to bear the light, and her fate, as depicted in the
epilogue, is said to be based upon an actual occurrence with which the author must have been
familiar.

The vow of obedience--whether considered as to the Pope, their highest religious authority,
or to the King of Spain, their political liege--might not always be so callously disregarded,
but it could be evaded and defied. From the Vatican came bull after bull, from the Escorial
decree after decree, only to be archived in Manila, sometimes after a hollow pretense of compliance.
A large part of the records of Spanish domination is taken up with the wearisome quarrels that
went on between the Archbishop, representing the head of the Church, and the friar orders,
over the questions of the episcopal visitation and the enforcement of the provisions of the
Council of Trent relegating the monks to their original status of missionaries, with the friars
invariably victorious in their contentions. Royal decrees ordering inquiries into the titles
to the estates of the men of poverty and those providing for the education of the natives in
Spanish were merely sneered at and left to molder in harmless quiet. Not without good grounds
for his contention, the friar claimed that the Spanish dominion over the Philippines depended
upon him, and he therefore confidently set himself up as the best judge of how that dominion
should be maintained.

Thus there are presented in the Philippines of the closing quarter of the century just past
the phenomena so frequently met with in modern societies, so disheartening to the people who
must drag out their lives under them, of an old system which has outworn its usefulness and
is being called into question, with forces actively at work disintegrating it, yet with the
unhappy folk bred and reared under it unprepared for a new order of things. The old faith was
breaking down, its forms and beliefs, once so full of life and meaning, were being sharply
examined, doubt and suspicion were the order of the day. Moreover, it must ever be borne in
mind that in the Philippines this unrest, except in the parts where the friars were the landlords,
was not general among the people, the masses of whom were still sunk in their "loved Egyptian
night," but affected only a very small proportion of the population--for the most part young
men who were groping their way toward something better, yet without any very clearly conceived
idea of what that better might be, and among whom was to be found the usual sprinkling of "sunshine
patriots" and omnipresent opportunists ready for any kind of trouble that will afford them
a chance to rise.

Add to the apathy of the masses dragging out their vacant lives amid the shadows of religious
superstition and to the unrest of the few, the fact that the orders were in absolute control
of the political machinery of the country, with the best part of the agrarian wealth amortized
in their hands; add also the ever-present jealousies, petty feuds, and racial hatreds, for
which Manila and the Philippines, with their medley of creeds and races, offer such a fertile
field, all fostered by the governing class for the maintenance of the old Machiavelian principle
of "divide and rule," and the sum is about the most miserable condition under which any portion
of mankind ever tried to fulfill nature's inexorable laws of growth.

II

    And third came she who gives dark creeds their power,
    Silabbat-paramasa, sorceress,
    Draped fair in many lands as lowly Faith,
    But ever juggling souls with rites and prayers;
    The keeper of those keys which lock up Hells
    And open Heavens. "Wilt thou dare," she said,
    "Put by our sacred books, dethrone our gods,
    Unpeople all the temples, shaking down
    That law which feeds the priests and props the realm?"
    But Buddha answered, "What thou bidd'st me keep
    Is form which passes, but the free Truth stands;
    Get thee unto thy darkness."

                            SIR EDWIN ARNOLD, The Light of Asia.

"Ah, simple people, how little do you know the blessing that you enjoy! Neither hunger, nor
nakedness, nor inclemency of the weather troubles you. With the payment of seven reals per
year, you remain free of contributions. You do not have to close your houses with bolts. You
do not fear that the district troopers will come in to lay waste your fields, and trample you
under foot at your own firesides. You call 'father' the one who is in command over you. Perhaps
there will come a time when you will be more civilized, and you will break out in revolution;
and you will wake terrified, at the tumult of the riots, and will see blood flowing through
these quiet fields, and gallows and guillotines erected in these squares, which never yet have
seen an execution." [6] Thus moralized a Spanish traveler in 1842, just as that dolce far niente
was drawing to its close. Already far-seeing men had begun to raise in the Spanish parliament
the question of the future of the Philippines, looking toward some definite program for their
care under modern conditions and for the adjustment of their relations with the mother country.
But these were mere Cassandra-voices--the horologe of time was striking for Rome's successor,
as it did for Rome herself.

Just where will come the outbreak after three centuries of mind-repression and soul-distortion,
of forcing a growing subject into the strait-jacket of medieval thought and action, of natural
selection reversed by the constant elimination of native initiative and leadership, is indeed
a curious study. That there will be an outbreak somewhere is as certain as that the plant will
grow toward the light, even under the most unfavorable conditions, for man's nature is but
the resultant of eternal forces that ceaselessly and irresistibly interplay about and upon
him, and somewhere this resultant will express itself in thought or deed.

After three centuries of Spanish ecclesiastical domination in the Philippines, it was to be
expected that the wards would turn against their mentors the methods that had been used upon
them, nor is it especially remarkable that there was a decided tendency in some parts to revert
to primitive barbarism, but that concurrently a creative genius--a bard or seer--should have
been developed among a people who, as a whole, have hardly passed through the clan or village
stage of society, can be regarded as little less than a psychological phenomenon, and provokes
the perhaps presumptuous inquiry as to whether there may not be some things about our common
human nature that the learned doctors have not yet included in their anthropometric diagrams.

On the western shore of the Lake of Bay in the heart of the Philippines clusters the village
of Kalamba, first established by the Jesuit Fathers in the early days of the conquest, and
upon their expulsion in 1767 taken over by the Crown, which later transferred it to the Dominicans,
under whose care the fertile fields about it became one of the richest of the friar estates.
It can hardly be called a town, even for the Philippines, but is rather a market-village, set
as it is at the outlet of the rich country of northern Batangas on the open waterway to Manila
and the outside world. Around it flourish the green rice-fields, while Mount Makiling towers
majestically near in her moods of cloud and sunshine, overlooking the picturesque curve of
the shore and the rippling waters of the lake. Shadowy to the eastward gleam the purple crests
of Banahao and Cristobal, and but a few miles to the southwestward dim-thundering, seething,
earth-rocking Taal mutters and moans of the world's birth-throes. It is the center of a region
rich in native lore and legend, as it sleeps through the dusty noons when the cacao leaves
droop with the heat and dreams through the silvery nights, waking twice or thrice a week to
the endless babble and ceaseless chatter of an Oriental market where the noisy throngs make
of their trading as much a matter of pleasure and recreation as of business. 

We were not in the brightest of humours ourselves, as this event had considerably lessened our
chances of recruiting at Big Nambas; the chief made us responsible for Bourbaki's death, and asked
an indemnity which we could hardly pay, except with the tusked pigs we demanded here.

We could not stay longer in Tesbel Bay, as our boys were too much frightened, and the natives might
turn against us at any moment. We could hardly get the boys to go
ashore for water and firewood, for fear of an ambush.

José Rizal-Mercado y Alonso, as his name emerges from the confusion of Filipino nomenclature,
was of Malay extraction, with some distant strains of Spanish and Chinese blood. His genealogy
reveals several persons remarkable for intellect and independence of character, notably a Philippine
Eloise and Abelard, who, drawn together by their common enthusiasm for study and learning,
became his maternal grandparents, as well as a great-uncle who was a traveler and student and
who directed the boy's early studies. Thus from the beginning his training was exceptional,
while his mind was stirred by the trouble already brewing in his community, and from the earliest
hours of consciousness he saw about him the wrongs and injustices which overgrown power will
ever develop in dealing with a weaker subject. One fact of his childhood, too, stands out clearly,
well worthy of record: his mother seems to have been a woman of more than ordinary education
for the time and place, and, pleased with the boy's quick intelligence, she taught him to read
Spanish from a copy of the Vulgate in that language, which she had somehow managed to secure
and keep in her possession--the old, old story of the Woman and the Book, repeated often enough
under strange circumstances, but under none stranger than these. The boy's father was well-to-do,
so he was sent at the age of eight to study in the new Jesuit school in Manila, not however
before he had already inspired some awe in his simple neighbors by the facility with which
he composed verses in his native tongue.

He began his studies in a private house while waiting for an opportunity to enter the Ateneo,
as the Jesuit school is called, and while there he saw one of his tutors, Padre Burgos, haled
to an ignominious death on the garrote as a result of the affair of 1872. This made a deep
impression on his childish mind and, in fact, seems to have been one of the principal factors
in molding his ideas and shaping his career. That the effect upon him was lasting and that
his later judgment confirmed him in the belief that a great injustice had been done, are shown
by the fact that his second important work, El Filibusterismo, written about 1891, and miscalled
by himself a "novel," for it is really a series of word-paintings constituting a terrific arraignment
of the whole régime, was dedicated to the three priests executed in 1872, in these words: "Religion,
in refusing to degrade you, has placed in doubt the crime imputed to you; the government, in
surrounding your case with mystery and shadow, gives reason for belief in some error, committed
in fatal moments; and all the Philippines, in venerating your memory and calling you martyrs,
in no way acknowledges your guilt." The only answer he ever received to this was eight Remington
bullets fired into his back.

In the Ateneo he quickly attracted attention and became a general favorite by his application
to his studies, the poetic fervor with which he entered into all the exercises of religious
devotion, and the gentleness of his character. He was from the first considered "peculiar,"
for so the common mind regards everything that fails to fit the old formulas, being of a rather
dreamy and reticent disposition, more inclined to reading Spanish romances than joining in
the games of his schoolmates. And of all the literatures that could be placed in the hands
of an imaginative child, what one would be more productive in a receptive mind of a fervid
love of life and home and country and all that men hold dear, than that of the musical language
of Castile, with its high coloring and passionate character?

