The gates of his alma mater were now closed to Sumner, not only during his life but even long
after that. Such is the fate of revolutionary characters, that they tear asunder old and familiar
bonds in order to contract new ties. In Washington he found a broader and more vigorous life,
if less cultivated, and the Free-soil leaders with whom he now came in contact in his own State
were much more akin to his own nature than Story, and Felton, and Hillard. Sumner was never
popular in Washington, as he had been among the English liberals and Cambridge men of letters;
but he was respected on all sides for his fearlessness, his ability, and the veracity of his
statements. His previous life now proved a great advantage to him in most respects, but he
had become accustomed to dealing and conversing with a certain class of men, and this made
it difficult for him to assimilate himself to a wholly different class. Sumner's ardent temperament
required constant self-control in this new and trying position; and a man who continually reflects
beforehand on his own actions acquires an appearance of greater reserve than a person of really
cold nature.

Seward had thus far been the leader of the Free-soil and Republican parties, not only before
the country at large but in the Senate. It was soon found, however, that Sumner was not only
a more effective speaker, but possessed greater resources for debate. Judge Story had noticed
long before that facts were so carefully and systematically arranged in Sumner's mind that
whatever spring was touched he could always respond to the subject with a full and exact statement.
He was like a librarian who could lay his hand on the book he wanted without having to look
for it in the catalogue,--and this upon a scale which seems almost incredible. Webster possessed
the same faculty, but united it with a sense of artistic beauty which Sumner could not equal.

Sumner, however, was the best orator in Congress at this time, as well as the best legal authority.
On all constitutional questions it was felt that he had Judge Story's support behind him. His
oration on "Freedom National, Slavery Sectional," was a revelation, not only to the opposition,
but to his own party. From that time forth, he became the spokesman of his party on all the
more important questions.

It frequently happens that the essential character of a government changes while its form remains
the same. In 1801 France was nominally a Republic, but its administration was Imperial. In
1853 the United States ceased to be a democracy and became an oligarchy, governed by thirty
thousand slave-holders,--until the people reconquered their rights on the field of battle.
Accustomed to despotic power in their own States for more than two generations, and justifying
themselves always by divine right, the slave-holders possessed all the self-confidence, pretension,
and arrogance of the old French nobility. They were a self-deluded class of men, of all classes
the most difficult to deal with, and Sumner was the Mirabeau who faced them at Washington and
who pricked the bubble of their Olympian pretensions by a most pitiless exposure of their true
character.

Those men had come to believe that the ownership of slaves was equivalent to a patent of nobility,
and they were encouraged in this monarchical illusion by the nobility of Europe. In Disraeli's
"Lothair" an English duke is made to say: "I consider an American with large estates in the
South a genuine aristocrat." The pretension was ridiculous, and the only way to combat it was
to make it appear so. Sumner characterized Butler, of South Carolina, and Douglas, of Illinois,
who was their northern man of business, as the Don Quixote and Sancho Panza of an antiquated
cause. The satire hit its mark only too exactly; and two days later Sumner was assaulted for
it in an assassin-like manner,--struck on the head from behind while writing at his desk, and
left senseless on the floor. Sumner was considered too low in the social scale for the customary
challenge to a duel, and there was no court in Washington that would take cognizance of the
outrage.

The following day, when Wilson made the most eloquent speech of his life in an indignant rebuke
to Butler and Brooks, Butler started from his seat to attack him, but was held back by his
friends. They might as well have allowed him to go, for Wilson was a man of enormous strength
and could easily have handled any Southerner upon the floor.

In "The Crime against Kansas" there are two or three sentences which Sumner afterwards expunged,
and this shows that he regretted having said them; but it is the greatest of his orations,
and Webster's reply to Hayne is the only Congressional address with which it can be compared.
One is in fact the sequence of the other; Webster's is the flower, and Sumner's the fruit;
the former directed against the active principle of sedition, and the latter against its consequences;
and both were directed against South Carolina, where the war originated. Sumner's speech has
not the finely sculptured character of Webster's, but its architectural structure is grand
and impressive. His Baconian division of the various excuses that were made for the Kansas
outrages into "the apology tyrannical, the apology imbecile, the apology absurd, and the apology
infamous," was original and pertinent.

Preston S. Brooks only lived about six months after his assault on Sumner, and some of the
abolitionists thought he died of a guilty conscience. Both in feature and expression he bore
a decided likeness to J. Wilkes Booth, the assassin of President Lincoln. It might have proved
the death of Sumner, but for the devotion of his Boston physician, Dr. Marshall S. Perry, who
went to him without waiting to be telegraphed for. It was also fortunate for him that his brother
George, a very intelligent man, happened to be in America instead of Europe, where he lived
the greater part of his life. The assault on Sumner strengthened the Republican party, and
secured his re-election to the Senate; but it produced nervous irritation of the brain and
spinal cord, a disorder which can only be cured under favorable conditions, and even then is
likely to return if the patient is exposed to a severe mental strain. Sumner's cure by Dr.
Brown-Sequard was considered a remarkable one, and has a place in the history of medicine.
The effect of bromide and ergot was then unknown, and the doctor made such good use of his
cauterizing- iron that on one occasion, at least, Sumner declared that he could not endure
it any longer. Neither could he tell positively whether it was this treatment or the baths
which he afterwards took at Aix-les-Bains that finally cured him. His own calm temperament
and firmness of mind may have contributed to this as much as Dr. Brown-Sequard.

When Sumner returned to Boston, early in 1860, all his friends went to Dr. S. G. Howe to know
if he was really cured, and Howe said: "He is a well man, but he will never be able to make
another two hours' speech." Yet Sumner trained himself and tested his strength so carefully
that in the following spring he delivered his oration on the barbarism of slavery, more than
an hour in length, before the Senate; and in 1863 he made a speech three hours in length, a
herculean effort that has never been equalled, except by Hamilton's address before the Constitutional
Convention of 1787.

I remember Sumner in the summer of 1860 walking under my father's grape trellis, when the vines
were in blossom, with his arms above his head, and saying: "This is like the south of France."
To think of Europe, its art, history, and scenery, was his relaxation from the cares and excitement
of politics; but there were many who did not understand this, and looked upon it as an affectation.
Sumner in his least serious moments was often self-conscious, but never affected. He talked
of himself as an innocent child talks. On all occasions he was thoroughly real and sincere,
and he would sometimes be as much abashed by a genuine compliment as a maiden of seventeen.

At the same time Sumner was so great a man that it was simply impossible to disguise it, and
he made no attempt to do this. The principle that all men are created equal did not apply in
his case. To realize this it was only necessary to see him and Senator Wilson together. Wilson
was also a man of exceptional ability, and yet a stranger, who did not know him by sight, might
have conversed with him on a railway train without suspecting that he was a member of the United
States Senate; but this could not have happened in Sumner's case. Every one stared at him as
he walked the streets; and he could not help becoming conscious of this. That there were moments
when he seemed to reflect with satisfaction on his past life his best friends could not deny;
but the vanity that is born of a frivolous spirit was not in him. He was more like a Homeric
hero than a Sir Philip Sidney, and considering the work he had to do it was better on the whole
that he should be so.

He carried the impracticable theory of social equality to an extent beyond that of most Americans,
and yet he was frequently complained of for his reserve and aristocratic manners. The range
of his acquaintance was the widest of any man of his time. It extended from Lord Brougham to
J. B. Smith, the mulatto caterer of Boston, who, like many of his race, was a person of gentlemanly
deportment, and was always treated by Sumner as a valued friend. As the champion of the colored
race in the Senate this was diplomatically necessary; but to the rank and file of his own party
he was less gracious. He had not grown up among them, but had entered politics at the top,
so that even their faces were unfamiliar to him. The representatives of Massachusetts, who
voted for him at the State House, were sometimes chagrined at the coldness of his recognition,--a
coldness that did not arise from lack of sympathy, but from ignorance of the individual. Before
Sumner could treat a stranger in a friendly manner, he wished to know what sort of a person
he had to deal with. There is a kind of insincerity in universal cordiality,--like that of
the candidate who is seeking to obtain votes.

A recent writer, who complains of Sumner's lack of graciousness, would do well to ask his conscience
what the reason for it was. If he will drop the three last letters of his own name the solution
will be apparent to him.

The more Sumner became absorbed in public affairs the less he seemed to be suited to general
society,--or general society to him. He was always ready to talk on those subjects that interested
him, but in general conversation, in the pleasant give-and-take of wit and anecdote, he did
not feel so much at home as he had in his Cambridge days. His thoughts were too serious, and
the tendency of his mind was argumentative.

Every man is to a certain extent the victim of his occupation; and the formalities of the Senate
were ever tightening their grasp on Sumner's mode of life. One afternoon, as he was leaving
Dr. Howe's garden at South Boston, the doctor's youngest daughter ran out from the house, and
called to him, "Good-bye, Mr. Sumner." His back was already turned, but he faced about like
an officer on parade, and said with formal gravity: "Good evening, child," so that Mrs. Howe
could not avoid laughing at him. Yet Sumner was fond of children in his youth. L. Maria Child
heard of this incident and made good use of it in one of her story-books.

The grand fact in Sumner's character, however, rests beyond dispute that he never aspired to
the Presidency. That lingering Washington malady which victimized Clay, Webster, Calhoun, Seward,
Chase, Sherman, and Blaine, and made them appear almost like sinners in torment, never attacked
Sumner. He had accepted office as a patriotic duty, and, like Washington, he was ready to resign
it whenever his work would be done.

Sumner's speech on the barbarism of slavery, timed as it was to meet the Baltimore convention,
was evidently intended to drive a wedge into the split between the Northern and Southern Democrats,
but it also must have encouraged the secession movement. Sumner, however, can hardly be blamed
for this, after the indignity he had suffered. That a high member of the Government could have
been assaulted with impunity in open day indicated a condition of affairs in the United States
not unlike that of France at the time when Count Toliendal was judicially murdered by Louis
XV. Washington City was an oligarchical despotism.

A dark cloud hung over the Republic during the winter of 1860-'61. The impending danger was
that war would break out before Lincoln could be inaugurated. Such secrecy was observed by
the Republican leaders that even Horace Greeley could not fathom their intentions. Late in
December John A. Andrew and George L. Stearns went to Washington to survey the ground for themselves,
and the latter wrote to William Robinson, "The watchword is, keep quiet." He probably obtained
this from Sumner, and it gives the key to the whole situation.

It demolishes Von Hoist's finely-spun melodramatic theory in regard to that period of our history,
in which he finally compares the condition of the United States to a drowning man who sees
lurid flames before his eyes. In the Republican and Union parties there were all shades of
compromise sentiment,--from those who were ready to sacrifice anything in order to prevent
secession, to Abraham Lincoln, who was only willing to surrender the barren and unpopulated
State of New Mexico to the slaveholders. [Footnote: A not unreasonable proposition.] But Sumner,
Wade, Trumbull, Wilson, and King stood together like a rocky coast against which the successive
waves of compromise dashed without effect. Suppose, for example, it should be found that there
are certain purposes which can in no way whatever--no conceivable way--be answered except by placing
man in a state of trial or probation; suppose the essential nature
of mind shall be found to be such that it could not in any way whatever
exist so as to be capable of the greatest purity and improvement--in
other words, the highest perfection--without having undergone a probation;
or suppose it should be found impossible to communicate certain enjoyments
to rational and sentient beings without having previously subjected
them to certain trials and certain sufferings--as, for instance, the
pleasures derived from a consciousness of perfect security, the certainty
that we can suffer and perish no more--this surely is a possible supposition.

Now, to continue the last example--Whatever pleasure there is in the contrast between ease
and previous vexation or pain, whatever enjoyment we derive from the feeling of absolute security
after the vexation and uncertainty of a precarious state, implies a previous suffering--a previous
state of precarious enjoyment; and not only implies it but necessarily implies it, so that the
power of Omnipotence itself could not convey to us the enjoyment without having given us the previous
suffering.

Then is it not possible that the object of an all powerful and perfectly
benevolent being should be to create like beings, to whom as entire
happiness, as complete and perfect enjoyment, should be given as any
created beings--that is, any being, except the Creator himself--can
by possibility enjoy?

This is certainly not only a very possible supposition, but it appears
to be quite consistent with, if it be not a necessary consequence
of, his being perfectly good as well as powerful and wise.

Now we have shown, therefore, that such being supposed the design of Providence, even Omnipotence
itself could not accomplish this design, as far as one great and
important class of enjoyments is concerned, without the previous existence
of some pain, some misery.

Whatever gratification arises from relief--from contrast--from security succeeding anxiety--from
restoration of lost affections--from renewing severed connections--and many others of a like
kind, could not by any possibility be enjoyed unless the correlative suffering had first been
undergone. Nor will the argument be at all impeached by observing, that one Being may be made
to feel the pleasure of ease and security by seeing others subjected
to suffering and distress; for that assumes the infliction of misery
on those others; it is "alterius spectare laborem" that we are supposing
to be sweet; and this is still partial evil.

As the whole argument respecting evil must, from the nature of the question, resolve itself into
either a proof of some absolute or mathematical necessity not to be removed by infinite power, or
the showing that some such proof may be possible although we have
not yet discovered it, an illustration may naturally be expected to
be attainable from mathematical considerations.

Thus, we have already adverted to the law of periodical irregularities in the solar system. Any one
before it was discovered seemed entitled to expatiate upon the operation of the disturbing
forces arising from mutual attraction, and to charge the system arranged upon the principle of
universal gravitation with want of skill, nay, with leading to inevitable mischief--mischief
or evil of so prodigious an extent as to exceed incalculably all the instances of evil and
of suffering which we see around us in this single planet. Nevertheless, what then appeared so
clearly to be a defect and an evil, is now well known to be the very absolute perfection of the
whole heavenly architecture.

Again, we may derive a similar illustration from a much more limited
instance, but one immediately connected with strict mathematical reasoning,
and founded altogether in the nature of necessary truth.

The problem has been solved by mathematicians, Sir Isaac Newton having first investigated it, of
finding the form of a symmetrical solid, or solid of revolution, which in moving through a fluid shall
experience the least possible resistance. The figure bears a striking resemblance to that of a fish.
Now suppose a fish were formed exactly in this shape, and that some animal endowed with reason
were placed upon a portion of its surface, and able to trace its
form for only a limited extent, say at the narrow part, where the
broad portion or end of the moving body were opposed, or seemed as
if it were opposed, to the surrounding fluid when the fish moved--the
reasoner would at once conclude that the contrivance of the fish's
form was very inconvenient, and that nothing could be much worse adapted
for expeditious or easy movement through the waters.



Lincoln evidently desired to enjoy the sole honor of issuing the Emancipation Proclamation
of 1862, and he deserved to have it; but Sumner thought it might safely have been done after
the battles of Fort Donaldson and Shiloh, and the victories of Foote and Farragut on the Mississippi,
six months before it was issued; and he urged to have it done at that time. Whether his judgment
was correct in this, it is impossible to decide.

Early in July, 1862, he introduced a bill in the Senate for the organization of the "contrabands"
and other negroes into regiments,--a policy suggested by Hamilton in 1780,--and no one can
read President Lincoln's Message to Congress in December, 1864, without recognizing that it
was only with the assistance of negro troops that the Union was finally preserved.

In spite of the continued differences between Sumner and Seward on American questions they
worked together like one man in regard to foreign politics. Sumner's experience in Europe and
his knowledge of public men there was much more extensive than Seward's, and in this line he
was of invaluable assistance to the Secretary of State.

Lowell could make a holiday of six years at the Court of St. James, but during the war it was
a serious matter to be Minister to England. In the summer of 1863 affairs there had reached
a climax. The Alabama and Florida were scaring all American ships from the ocean, and five
ironclad rams, built for the confederate government, were nearly ready to put to sea from English
ports. If this should happen it seemed likely that they would succeed in raising the blockade.
As a final resort Lincoln and Seward sent word to Adams to threaten the British Government
with war unless the rams were detained.

Meanwhile it was necessary to brace up the American people to meet the possible emergency.
On September 10 Sumner addressed an audience of three thousand persons in Cooper Institute,
New York, for three hours on the foreign relations of the United States; and there were few
who left the hall before it was finished. He arraigned the British Government for its inconsistency,
its violation of international law, and its disregard of the rights of navigators. It was not
only a heroic effort, but a self- sacrificing one; for Sumner knew that it would separate him
forever from the larger number of his English friends.

At the same time Minister Adams had an equally difficult task before him. War with England
seemed to be imminent. He held a long consultation with Benjamin Moran, the Secretary of Legation,
and they finally concluded to see if an opinion could be obtained on the confederate rams from
an English legal authority. They went to Sir Robert Colyer, one of the lords of the admiralty,
and asked him if he was willing to give them an opinion. He replied that he considered the
law above politics, and that he wished to do what was right. After investigating the subject
Colyer made a written statement to the effect that the United States was wholly justified in
demanding detention of the rams. Adams then placed this opinion together with Lincoln's notification
before the British Cabinet, but the papers were returned to him with a refusal of compliance.
"There is nothing now," said Adams to Moran, "but for us to pack up and go home"; but Moran
replied, "Let us wait a little; while there is life there is hope"; and the same evening Adams
was notified that Her Majesty's Government still had the subject under consideration. The rams
proved a dead loss.

When Benjamin Moran related this incident to the Philadelphia Hock Club after his return, he
added: "We owe it to our Irish-American citizens as much as to the monitors that we did not
suffer from English interference."

Seward, and also Chase, wished to issue letters of reprisal to privateers to go in search of
the Alabama, but Sumner opposed this in an able speech on the importance of maintaining a high
standard of procedure for the good reputation of the country; and he carried his point.

Sumner's greatest parliamentary feat was occasioned by Trumbull's introduction of a bill for
the reconstruction of Louisiana in the winter of 1864. There were only ten thousand loyal white
voters in the State; and nothing could be more imprudent or prejudicial than such a hasty attempt
at reorganization of the rebellious South, before the war was fairly ended. It was like a man
building an annex to one side of his house while the other side was on fire; yet it was known
to be supported by Seward, and, as was alleged, also by Lincoln. It was thrust upon Congress
at the last moment, evidently in order to prevent an extended debate, and Sumner turned this
to his own advantage. For two days and nights his voice resounded through the Senate chamber,
until, with the assistance of his faithful allies, Wade and Wilson, he succeeded in preventing
the bill from being brought to a vote. It was an extreme instance of human endurance, without
parallel before or since, and may possibly have shortened Sumner's life. Five weeks later President
Lincoln, in his last speech, made the significant proposition of universal amnesty combined
with universal suffrage. Would that he could have lived to see the completion of his work!

Something may be said here of Sumner's influence with Mrs. Lincoln. If Don Piatt is to be trusted,
Mrs. Lincoln came to Washington with a strong feeling of antipathy towards Seward and "those
eastern abolitionists." She was born in a slave state and had remained pro- slavery,--a fact
which did not trouble her husband because he did not allow it to trouble him. Fifteen months
in Washington brought a decided change in her opinions, and Sumner would seem to have been
instrumental in this conversion. It is well known that she preferred his society to that of
others. She had studied French somewhat, and he encouraged her to talk it with him,--which
was looked upon, of course, as an affectation on both sides.

At the time of General McClellan's removal, October, 1862, Mrs. Lincoln was at the Parker House
in Boston. Sumner called on her in the forenoon, and she said at once: "I suppose you have
heard the news, and that you are glad of it. So am I. Mr. Lincoln told me he expected to remove
him before I left Washington."

Sumner resembled Charles XII. of Sweden in this: there is no evidence that he ever was in love.
His devotion to the law in early life, surrounded as he was by interesting friends, may have
been antagonistic to matrimony. The woman he ought to have married was the noble daughter of
his old friend, Cornelius Felton, whom he often met, but whose worth he never recognized. The
marriage which he contracted late in life was not based on enduring principles, and soon came
to a grievous end. It was more like the marriages that princes make than a true republican
courtship. Sumner apparently wanted a handsome wife to preside at his dinner parties in Washington,
but he chose her from among his opponents instead of from among his friends.

Since there has been much foolish talk upon this subject, it may be well to state here that
the true difficulty between Mr. and Mrs. Sumner was owing to the company which he invited to
his house. She only wished to entertain fashionable people, but a large proportion of Sumner's
friends could not be included within these narrow limits. As Senator from Massachusetts that
would not do for him at all. This is the explanation that was given by Mrs. Sumner's brother,
and it is without doubt the correct one; but women in such cases are apt to allege something
different from the true reason.

Sumner's most signal triumph happened on the occasion of President Johnson's first Message
to Congress in January, 1865. He rose from his seat and characterized it as a "whitewashing
document." That day he stood alone, yet within six weeks every Republican Senator was at his side.

Sumner knew how to be silent as well as to talk. On one occasion he was making a speech in
the Senate when he suddenly heard Schuyler Colfax behind him saying, "This is all very good,
Sumner, but here I have the Appropriation bills from the House, and the Democrats know nothing
about them." Sumner instantly resumed his seat, and the bills were acted on without serious
opposition. When he had learned to read he was sent to school, though not with other boys, for his
father thought it better for him to be with girls.

The school was pleasant and quiet, and Friedrich liked the teacher very much. Every morning
the children read from the Bible, and learned sweet songs and hymns which the little boy remembered
all his days.

The life at home grew no happier, as Friedrich grew older; indeed, he seemed to be more in
the way and to get into trouble more often.

When he was ten years old his uncle came to visit them, and seeing Friedrich so unhappy, and fearing
he would not grow up a good boy unless some one cared for him, the good uncle asked to be allowed
to take the child home with him to live.

Now, at last, Friedrich had five happy years!

His uncle lived in a pretty town on the banks of a sparkling little river. Everything was pleasant
in the house, and Friedrich went to school with forty boys of his
own age.

He jumped and ran with them in the playgrounds, he learned to play all kinds of games, and he
was happy everywhere,--at school, at home, at church, playing or working.

When these five pleasant years had gone by, Froebel had finished school, and now he must decide
what he would do to earn his living. He had always loved flowers, since the days when he played
all alone in his father's garden, and he liked to be out-of-doors
and to see things growing; so he made up his mind to be a surveyor,
like our George Washington, you know, and to learn, besides, how to
take care of trees and forests.

He studied and worked very hard at these things, and gained a great deal of knowledge about flowers
and plants and trees and rocks.

By and by he left this work and went to college, where he studied a long time and grew to be
very wise indeed. There were numbers of things he had learned to do: he could measure land,
take care of woods, and draw maps; he could make plans of houses, and show men how to build
them; he knew all about fine stones and minerals, and could sort
and arrange them; but he found, at last, that there was nothing in
the world he liked so well as teaching, for he loved children very
much, and he liked to be with them.

When Froebel was a grown man, thirty years old, a great war broke out in Germany, and he went away
to fight for his country; like our George Washington again, you see. He marched away with the
soldiers, and fought bravely for a year; and then the war was over,
and he went back to his quiet work again.

For the rest of his life Froebel went on teaching all kinds of people,--boys and men, and young
girls and grown-up women; but he never was quite happy or satisfied till he thought of teaching
tiny children, just like you.

He remembered very well how sad and miserable he was when a little boy, with no one to love him,
nobody to play with, and nothing to do; so he thought of the kindergarten, where there are pleasant
playmates, pretty work, happy play for everybody, and teachers who
love little children.

He was an old man when he thought of the kindergarten; but be was never too old to play with
children, and people who went to his country home used to see him,
with the little ones about him, playing the Pigeon House, or the Wheel,
or the Farmer, or some of the games he made for us.

He was often
very poor, and he worked very hard all his life; but he did not care
for this at all, if he could help other people and make children happy.
And when, at last, it was time for him to die, and to go back to God,
who sent him to us, he was quiet and happy through all his sickness,
and almost the last words he said were about the flowers he loved
so well, and about God who had been so good to him.

So this is the
reason, little ones, that we keep Rebel's birthday every year,--because
we want you to remember all he did for little children, and to learn
to love him just as he loved you.

"Come, let us live with our children;
so shall their lives bring peace and joy to us; so shall we begin
to be, and to become wise."-- FROEBEL.
The material of his speeches is of such a vital quality that it possesses a value wholly apart
from the time and occasion of its delivery.

Much the same is true of Sumner, who would have had decidedly the advantage of Burke so far
as personal impressiveness is concerned. His Phi Beta Kappa address of 1845 is so rich in material
that it is even more interesting to read now than when it was first delivered, and his remarks
on Allston in that oration might be considered to advantage by every art critic in the country.
It should always be remembered that a speech, like a play, is written not to be read, but to
be acted; and those discourses which read so finely in the newspapers are not commonly the
ones that sounded the best when they were delivered.

Great men create great antagonisms. The antagonism which Lincoln excited was concentrated in
Booth's pistol shot, and the Montagues and Capulets became reconciled over his bier; but the
antagonism against Sumner still continues to smoke and smoulder like the embers of a dying
conflagration.

CHEVALIER HOWE.

The finest modern statue in Berlin is that of General Ziethen, the great Hussar commander in
the Seven Years' War. [Footnote: Von Schlater's statue of the Great Elector is of course a
more magnificent work of art.] He stands leaning on his sabre in a dreamy, nonchalant attitude,
as if he were in the centre of indifference and life had little interest for him. Yet there
never was a man more ready for action, or more quick to seize upon and solve the nodus of any
new emergency. The Prussian anecdote-books are full of his exploits and hairbreadth escapes,
a number of which are represented around the base of the statue. He combined the intelligence
of the skilful general with the physical dexterity of an acrobat.

Very much such a man was Samuel Gridley Howe, born in Boston November 10, 1801, whom Whittier
has taken as the archetype of an American hero in his tune.

If a transient guest at the Bird Club should have seen Doctor Howe sitting at the table with
his indifferent, nonchalant air, head leaning slightly forward and his grayish-black hair almost
falling into his eyes, he would never have imagined that he was the man who had fought the
Turks hand-to-hand like Cervantes and Sir John Smith; who had been imprisoned in a Prussian
dungeon; who had risked his life in the July Revolution at Paris; and who had taken the lead
in an equally important philanthropic revolution in his own country.

Next to Sumner he is the most distinguished member of the club, even more so than Andrew and
Wilson; a man with a most enviable record. He does not talk much where many are gathered together,
but if he hears an imprudent statement, especially an unjust estimate of character, his eyes
flash out from beneath the bushy brows, and he makes a correction which just hits the nail
on the head. He is fond of his own home and is with difficulty enticed away from it. Once in
awhile he will dash out to Cambridge on horseback to see Longfellow, but the lion-huntresses
of Boston spread their nets in vain for him. He will not even go to the dinner parties for
which Mrs. Howe is in constant demand, but prefers to spend the evening with his children,
helping them about their school lessons, and listening to the stories of their everyday experiences.

There never was a more modest, unostentatious hero; and no one has recorded his hairbreadth
escapes and daring adventures, for those who witnessed them never told the tale, nor would
Doctor Howe willingly speak of them himself. He was of too active a temperament to be much
of a scholar in his youth, although in after life he went through with whatever he undertook
in a thorough and conscientious manner. He went to Brown University, and appears to have lived
much the same kind of life there which Lowell did at Harvard,--full of good spirits, admired
by his classmates, as well as by the young ladies of Providence, and exceptionally fond of
practical jokes; always getting into small difficulties and getting out of them again with
equal facility. He was so amiable and warm-hearted that nobody could help loving him; and so
it continued to the end of his life.

He could not himself explain exactly why he joined the Greek Revolution. He had suffered himself
while at school from the tyranny of older boys, and this strengthened the sense of right and
justice that had been implanted in his nature. He had not the romantic disposition of Byron;
neither could he have gone from a desire to win the laurels of Miltiades, for he never indicated
the least desire for celebrity. It seems more likely that his adventurous disposition urged
him to it, as one man takes to science and another to art.

It was certainly a daring adventure to enlist as a volunteer against the Turks. Byron might
expect that whatever advantage wealth and reputation can obtain for an individual he could
always count upon; but what chances would young Howe have in disaster or defeat? I never heard
that Byron did much fighting, though he spent his fortune freely in the cause; and Doctor Howe,
as it happened, was not called upon to fight in line of battle, though he was engaged in some
pretty hot skirmishes and risked himself freely.

He went to Greece in the summer of 1824 and remained till after the battle of Navarino in 1827.
Greece was saved, but the land was a desert and its people starving. Doctor Howe returned to
America to raise funds and beg provisions for liberated Hellas, in which he was remarkably
successful; but we find also that he published a history of the Greek Revolution, the second
edition of which is dated 1828. For this he must have collected the materials before leaving
Greece; but as it contains an account of the sea-fight of Navarino, it must have been finished
after his return to America. The book was hastily written, and hastily published. To judge
from appearances it was hurried through the press without being revised either by its author
or a competent proofreader; but it is a vigorous, spirited narrative, and the best chronicle
of that period in English. Would there were more such histories, even if the writing be not
always grammatical. Doctor Howe does not sentimentalize over the ruins of Sparta or Plato's
Academy, but he describes Greece as he found it, and its inhabitants as he knew them. He possesses
what so many historians lack, and that is the graphic faculty. He writes in a better style
than either Motley or Bancroft. His book ought to be revised and reprinted.

We quote from it this clearsighted description of the preparation for a Graeco-Turkish sea-fight:

    "Soon the proud fleet of the Capitan Pashaw was seen coming down
    toward Samos, and the Greek vessels advanced to meet it. And here
    one cannot but pause a moment to compare the two parties, and
    wonder at the contrast between them. On one side bore down a long line
    of lofty ships whose very size and weight seemed to give them
    a slow and stately motion; completely furnished at every point for
    war; their decks crowded with splendidly armed soldiers, and their
    sides chequered with double and triple-rows of huge cannon that it
    seemed could belch forth a mass of iron which nothing could resist.
    On the other side came flying along the waves a squadron of light
    brigs and schooners, beautifully modelled, with sails of snowy white,
    and with fancifully painted sides, showing but a single row of
    tiny cannon. There seemed no possibility of a contest; one fleet
    had only to sail upon the other, and by its very weight, bear the
    vessels under water without firing a gun.

    "But the feelings which animated them were very different. The Turks
    were clumsy sailors; they felt ill at ease and as if in a new
    element; but above all, they felt a dread of Greek fire-ships,
    which made them imagine every vessel that approached them to be
    one. The Greeks were at home on the waves,--active and fearless
    mariners, they knew that they could run around a Turkish frigate
    and not be injured; they knew the dread their enemies had of
    fire-ships, and they had their favorite, the daring Kanaris, with
    them."

      *       *       *       *       *

The heroic deeds of the modern Greeks fully equalled those of the ancients; and the death of
Marco Bozzaris was celebrated in all the languages of western Europe. William Muller, the German
poet, composed a volume of fine lyrics upon the incidents of the Greek Revolution; so that
after his death the Greek Government sent a shipload of marble to Germany for the construction
of his monument.

One day Doctor Howe, with a small party of followers, was anchored in a yawl off the Corinthian
coast, when a Turk crept down to the shore and commenced firing at them from behind a large
tree. After he had done this twice, the doctor calculated where he would appear the third time,
and firing at the right moment brought him down with his face to the earth. Doctor Howe often
fired at Turks in action, but this was the only one that he felt sure of having killed; and
he does not appear to have even communicated the fact to his own family.

After Doctor Howe's triumphant return to Greece with a cargo of provisions in 1828 he was appointed
surgeon-general of the Greek navy, and finally, as a reward for all his services, he received
a present of Byron's cavalry helmet,--certainly a rare trophy. [Footnote: This helmet hung
for many years on the hat tree at Dr. Howe's house in South Boston.]

Doctor Howe's mysterious imprisonment in Berlin in 1832 is the more enigmatical since Berlin
has generally been the refuge of the oppressed from other European countries. The Huguenots,
expelled by Louis XIV., went to Berlin in such numbers that they are supposed by Menzel to
have modified the character of its inhabitants. The Salzburg refugees were welcomed in Prussia
by Frederick William I., who had an official hanged for embezzling funds that were intended
for their benefit. In 1770 Frederick the Great gave asylum to the Jesuits who had been expelled
from every Catholic capital in Europe; and when the brothers Grimm and other professors were
banished from Cassel for their liberalism, they were received and given positions by Frederick
William IV. Why then should the Prussian government have interfered with Doctor Howe, after
he had completed his philanthropic mission to the Polish refugees? Why was he not arrested
in the Polish camp when he first arrived there?

The futile and tyrannical character of this proceeding points directly to Metternich, who at
that time might fairly be styled the Tiberias of Germany. The Greek Revolution was hateful
to Metternich, and he did what he could to prevent its success. His intrigues in England certainly
delayed the independence of Greece for two years and more. He foresaw clearly enough that its
independence would be a constant annoyance to the Austrian government,--and so it has proved
down to the present time. Metternich imagined intrigues and revolution in every direction;
and besides, there can be no doubt of the vindictiveness of his nature. The cunning of the
fox is not often combined with the supposed magnanimity of the lion.

The account of his arrest, which Doctor Howe gave George L. Stearns, differs very slightly
from that in Sanborn's biography. According to the former he persuaded the Prussian police,
on the ground of decency, to remain outside his door until he could dress himself. In this
way he gained time to secrete his letters. He tore one up and divided the small pieces in various
places. While he was doing this he noticed a bust of some king of Prussia on top of the high
porcelain stove which forms a part of the furniture of every large room in Berlin. Concluding
it must be hollow he tipped it on edge and inserted the rest of his letters within. The police
never discovered this stratagem, but they searched his room in the most painstaking manner,
collecting all the pieces of the letter he had torn up, so that they read every word of it.
Whether his letters were really of a compromising character, or he was only afraid that they
might be considered so, has never been explained.

The day after his arrest he was brought before a tribunal and asked a multitude of questions,
which he appears to have answered willingly enough; and a week or more later the same examiners
made a different set of inquiries of him, all calculated to throw light upon his former answers.
Doctor Howe admitted afterwards that if he had attempted to deceive them they would certainly
have discovered the fact. He was in prison five weeks, for which the Prussian government had
the impudence to charge him board; and why President Jackson did not demand an apology and
reparation for this outrage on a United States citizen is not the least mysterious part of
the affair.

A good Samaritan does not always find a good Samaritan. After his return to Paris Doctor Howe
went to England, but was taken so severely ill on the way that he did not know what might have
become of him but for an English passenger with whom he had become acquainted and who carried
him to his own house and cared for him until he was fully recovered. This excellent man, name
now forgotten, had a charming daughter who materially assisted in Howe's convalescence, and
he said afterwards that if he had not been strongly opposed to matrimony at that time she would
probably have become his wife. He was not married until ten years later; but he always remembered
this incident as one of the pleasantest in his life.

The true hero never rests on his laurels. Doctor Howe had no sooner returned from Europe than
he set himself to work on a design he had conceived in Paris for the instruction of the blind.
Next to Doctor Morton's discovery of etherization, there has been no undertaking equal to this
for the amelioration of human misery. He brought the best methods from Europe, and improved
upon them. Beginning at first in a small way, and with such means as he could obtain from the
merchants of Boston, he went on to great achievements. He had the most difficulty in dealing
with legislative appropriations and enactments, for as he was not acquainted with the ruling
class in Massachusetts, they consequently looked upon him with suspicion. He not only made
the plan, but he carried it out; he organized the institution at South Boston and set the machinery
in motion.

The story of Laura Bridgman is a tale told in many languages. The deaf and blind girl whom
Doctor Howe taught to read and to think soon became as celebrated as Franklin or Webster. She
was between seven and eight years old when he first discovered her near Hanover, N. H., and
for five years and a half she had neither seen nor heard. It is possible that she could remember
the external world in a dim kind of way, and she must have learned to speak a few words before
she lost her hearing. Doctor Howe taught her the names of different objects by pasting them
in raised letters on the objects about her, and he taught her to spell by means of separate
blocks with the letters upon them. She then was taught to read after the usual method of instructing
the blind, and communicated with her fingers after the manner of deaf mutes.

Finally she was educated in the meaning of the simplest abstract terms like right and wrong,
happy and sad, crooked and straight, and in this she evinced great intelligence, for she described
being alone as all one, and being together all two,--the original meaning of alone and altogether,
which few persons think of. In trying to express herself where she found some difficulty she
made use of agglutinative forms of speech. [Footnote: Like the Aztecs, Kanackers and other
primitive races.]

The education of Laura has rare value as a psychological study; for it proves incontestably
that mind is a thing in itself, and not merely a combination of material forces, as the philosophers
of our time would have us believe. Laura Bridgman's mind was there, though wholly unable to
express itself, and so soon as the magic key was turned, she developed as rapidly and intelligently
as other girls of her age. She soon became much more intelligent than the best trained dog
who has all his senses in an acute condition; and she developed a sensibility toward those
about her such as Indian or Hottentot girls of the same age would not have done at all. She
soon began to indicate that sense of order which is the first step on the stairway of civilization.
If these qualities had not been in her they never could have come out.

Why is it that so many superior women remain unmarried, and why do men of superior intellect
and exceptional character so often mate themselves with weak or narrow-minded women? That a
diffident man, with a taste for playing on the flute, should be captured by a virago, is not
so remarkable,--that is his natural weakness; but it is also true that the worthiest man often
chooses indifferently. This thing they call matrimony is in fact like diving for pearls: you
bring up the oyster, but what it contains does not appear until afterward. A friend of Sumner,
who imagined his wife had a beautiful nature because she was fond of wild- flowers, discovered
too late that she cared more for botany than for her husband.

Chevalier Howe met with better fortune. He waited long and to good purpose. It was fitting
that such a man should marry a poetess; and he found her, not in her rose-garden or some romantic
sylvan retreat, but in the city of New York. Miss Julia Ward was the daughter, as she once
styled herself, of the Bank of Commerce, but her mind was not bent on money or a fashionable
life. She was graceful, witty and charming in the drawing-room; but there was also a serious
vein in her nature which could only be satisfied by earnest thought and study. She went from
one book to another through the whole range of critical scholarship, disdaining everything
that was not of the best quality. She soon knew so much that the young men became afraid of
her, but she cared less for their admiration than for her favorite authors. Above all, the
deep religious vein in her nature, which never left her, served as a balance to her romantic
disposition. Her first admirer is said to have been an eloquent preacher who came to New York
while Miss Ward was in her teens.

Another man might have crossed Julia Ward's path and only have remembered her as a Sumner friend.
Doctor Howe recognized the opportunity, and had no intention of letting it slip. His reputation
and exceptional character attracted her; and he wooed and won her with the same courage that
he fought the Greeks. Her sister married Crawford, the best sculptor of his time, whom Sumner
helped to fame and fortune.

Doctor Howe's wedding journey, which included a complete tour of Europe, seems to have been
the first rest that he had taken in twenty years. Such wedding journeys are frequent enough
now, but it is a rare bride that finds the doors of distinguished houses opened to her husband
from Edinburgh to Athens. Was it not a sufficient reward for any man's service to humanity?

For that matter Doctor Howe's lifelong work received comparatively slight recognition or reward.
A few medals were sent to him from Europe,--a gold one from the King of Prussia,--and he was
always looked upon in Boston as a distinguished citizen; but his vocation at the Blind Asylum
withdrew him from the public eye, and the public soon forgets what happened yesterday. What
a blaze of enthusiasm there was for Admiral Dewey in 1899, and how coldly his name was received
as a presidential candidate one year later!

Doctor Howe was once nominated for Congress as a forlorn hope, and his name was thrice urged
unavailingly for foreign appointments. He certainly deserved to be made Minister to Greece,
but President Johnson looked upon him as a very "ultra man",--the real objection being no doubt
that he was a friend of Sumner, and the second attempt made by Sumner himself was defeated
by Hamilton Fish. Doctor Howe was fully qualified at any time to be Minister to France, and
as well qualified as James Russell Lowell for the English Mission; but the appointment of such
men as Lowell and Howe has proved to be a happy accident rather than according to the natural
order of events. What reward did Doctor Morton ever obtain, until twenty- five years after
his death his name was emblazoned in memorial hall of Boston State House! It is an old story.

Yet Doctor Howe may well be considered one of the most fortunate Americans of his time. Lack
of public appreciation is the least evil that can befall a man of truly great spirit,--unless
indeed it impairs the usefulness of his work, and Edward Everett, who had sympathized so cordially
with Doctor Howe's efforts in behalf of the Greeks, could also have told him sympathetically
that domestic happiness was fully as valuable as public honor. Fortunate is the man who has
wandered much over the earth and seen great sights, only the better to appreciate the quiet
and repose of his own hearth-stone! The storm and stress period of Doctor Howe's life was over,
and henceforth it was to be all blue sky and smooth sailing.

Sumner expressed a kind of regret at Doctor Howe's marriage,--a regret for his own loneliness;
but he found afterwards that instead of losing one friend he had made another. His visits to
South Boston were as frequent as ever, and he often brought distinguished guests with him,--
English, French, and German. There was no lady in Boston whom he liked to converse with so
well as Mrs. Howe; and if he met her on the street he would almost invariably stop to speak
with her a few minutes. He sometimes suffered from the keen sallies of her wit, but he accepted
this as part of the entertainment, and once informed her that if she were president of the
Senate it would be much better for the procedure of the public business.

George Sumner also came; like his brother, a man much above the average in general ability,
and considered quite equal to the Delivery of a Fourth of July oration. He was the more entertaining
talker of the two, and in other respects very much like Tom Appleton,--better known on the
Paris boulevards than in his native country. Instead of being witty like Appleton he was brilliantly
encyclopaedic; and they both carried their statements to the verge of credibility.

Doctor Howe organized the blind asylum so that it almost ran itself without his oversight,
and as always happens in such cases he was idolized by those who were under his direction.
There was something exceedingly kind in his tone of voice,--a voice accustomed to command and
yet much subdued. His manner towards children was particularly charming and attractive. He
exemplified the lines in Emerson's "Wood-notes":

  "Grave, chaste, contented though retired,
  And of all other men desired,"

applied to Doctor Howe more completely than to the person for whom they were originally intended;
for Thoreau's bachelor habits and isolated mode of life prevented him from being an attractive
person to the generality of mankind.

It was said of James G. Blaine that he left every man he met with the impression that he was
his best friend. This may have been well intended, but it has the effect of insincerity, for
the thing is practically impossible. The true gentleman has always a kind manner, but he does
not treat the man whom he has just been introduced to as a friend; he waits for that until
he shall know him better. It is said of Americans generally that they are generous and philanthropic,
but that they do not make good friends,--that their idea of friendship depends too much on
association and the influence of mutual interests, instead of the underlying sense of spiritual
relationship. When they cease to have mutual interests the friendship is at an end, or only
continues to exist on paper. Doctor Howe was as warm-hearted as he was firm-hearted, but he
never gave his full confidence to any one until he had read him through to the backbone. His
friends were so fond of him that they would go any distance to see him. His idea of friendship
seemed to be like that of the friends in the sacred band of Thebes, whose motto was either
to avenge their comrades on the field of battle or to die with them.

He did not like a hypocritical morality, which he said too often resulted in the hypocritical
sort. He complained of this in Emerson's teaching, which he thought led his readers to scrutinize
themselves too closely as well as to be too censorious of others; and he respected Emerson
more for his manly attitude on the Kansas question than for anything he wrote.

He always continued to be the chevalier. He was like Hawthorne's gray- haired champion, who
always came to the front in a public emergency, and then disappeared, no one knew whither.
When the Bond Street riot took place in 1837, there was Doctor Howe succoring the oppressed;
in 1844 he joined the Conscience Whigs and was one of the foremost among them; he helped materially
toward the election of Sumner in 1851, and for years afterwards was a leader in the vigilance
committee organized to resist the Fugitive Slave law. He stood shoulder to shoulder with George
L. Stearns in organizing resistance to the invasions of Kansas by the Missourians; and again
in 1862 when Harvard University made its last desperate political effort in opposition to Lincoln's
Emancipation Proclamation; but when his friends and his party came into power Howe neither
asked nor hinted at any reward for his brilliant services.

Edward L. Pierce, the biographer of Sumner, was not above exhibiting his prejudices as to certain
members of the Bird Club, both by what he has written and what he neglected to write. The lady
wrung her hands in genuine grief over the handsome youth thus torn away. She had welcomed his
presence as means of escape from her own difficulties. But a few hours before the master of the
Uedaya had announced her sale and transfer to a wealthy farmer of
Chiba.

Ransomed by this country magnate she was to leave the gay life and glitter of the Yoshiwara, for
a country life and the veiled hardships of a farm. In exchange for the twenty years of Masajiro[u]--she
obtained this settlement and a master passing fifty odd. She was in despair. The brilliant beauty,
thus to sink in a few year's course into a farm wench, felt the sacrifice too great. Finding
no aid in the boy lover, long she lay weeping, her head on his knees, hands pressed against
her temples.

Masajiro[u] was at no happier pass. "Up to the arrow point in love" his idea at bottom had been of a temporary
separation. To find another Kogiku, a petted oiran, whose fame and beauty flattered any lover, was a
stroke of good fortune not likely to occur. His own expression showed how little real idea of separation
was in his mind. She noted it. Looking steadily in his face--"Constant the vows of this Kogiku,
met by the love of Masa San. No matter how remote the prospect, the
bond is that of husband and wife.

With this old suburban drake Kogiku pollutes not her charms. Condescend to agree to a mutual
suicide. Thus the obligation is avoided. Together the lovers pass to Meido (Hades) to wander its
shades until the next and happier existence unites them in the flesh." In amazement and discomfiture
Masajiro[u] hung down his head. He would conceal the shock to his boyish timidity this proposal
gave. His mind was full of such stories. He knew the earnestness of Kogiku. Then and there would
she not draw her dagger to accomplish the deed? He was dreadfully frightened. Never would he have
sought her presence, if such result had been anticipated. Now he must accompany her in death,
or endure her grudge if successful in escaping her insistence. He temporized. Pointing to his
plain disordered garb--"As to that--heartily agreed. But there is a seemliness about such procedure.
A more befitting, a holiday costume, is to be sought. Then together, as on a joyful occasion,
Masajiro[u] and the Oiran will consummate the vows of husband and
wife in a joint death."

She looked him over, and was easily pacified by the evident truth and good sense. Again herself,
in prospect of this avoidance of the unpleasant future she sought to entertain her lover with
all the skill and charm she was so noted for. At midnight he left her, to secure an interview
with Sho[u]bei on plea of forgotten needs; then he would return in more fitting garb.

His course lay through the now silent precincts of the great temple. More than the sun's circuit
passed in these excesses, physical and mental, weighed upon him.

He would rest a moment and consider his course amid the holy surroundings. Yakushi? The god
was the physical healer in his theology and his services the strong and healthy youth did
not need. Jizo[u] Sama, or the six Jizo[u] Sama, but a little way off? Probably the gentle divinity
no longer regarded him as under tutelage. But the Lady Merciful--Kwannon Sama--why not make his petition
to her? It was an inspiration, and earnest was the prayer which followed it--"Lady of Mercy,
deign to regard with pity the unfortunate lovers.

Grant that some exit be found for their woes, less harsh than the severance of the vital knot,
offence to the Lord Buddha. Kwannon Sama! Kwannon Sama!... may the Buddha's will be done!" As he spoke
a heavy object fell from above, to graze his shoulder and land at his feet. He stooped and picked
it up.

With astonished delight he noted the glittering coin within the bag. Ah! Ah! Away with all
ideas of self destruction. Here was the means to escape the guilty
consequence. Here was the ransom of Kogiku. He had shuddered at thought
of return to the side of that woman, in death to wander the paths
of Shidéyama (in Hell) with the unhappy ghost--bald headed!

One of the best of her witty poems describes Boston on a rainy day, and is called "Expluvior,"
an innocent parody on Longfellow's "Excelsior," which, by the way, ought to have been called
Excelsius.

  "The butcher came a walking flood,
  Drenching the kitchen where he stood.
  'Deucalion, is your name?' I pray.
  'Moses,' he choked and slid away.
                              Expluvior,"

is one of the most characteristic verses; but in the last stanza she wishes to construct a
dam at the foot of Beacon Hill and cause a flood that would sweep the rebel sympathizers out
of Boston.

The office of the Blind Asylum was formerly near the middle of Bromfield Street on the southern
side. This is now historic ground. Between 1850 and 1870 some of the most important national
councils were held there in Dr. Howe's private office. It was the first place that Sumner went
to in the morning and the last place that Governor Andrew stopped before returning to his home
at night. There Dr. Howe and George L. Stearns consulted with John Brown concerning measures
for the defence of Kansas; and there Howe, Stearns, and Bird concerted plans for the election
of Andrew in 1860, and for the re-election of Sumner in 1862. It was a quiet, retired spot
in the midst of a hustling city, where a celebrated man could go without attracting public
attention.

Chevalier Howe outlived Sumner just one year, and Wilson followed him not long after.

THE WAR GOVERNOR.

Sebago is one of the most beautiful of the New England lakes, and has been celebrated in Longfellow's
verse for its curiously winding river between the upper and the lower portion, as well as for
the Indian traditions connected with it. John A. Andrew's grandfather, like Hawthorne's father,
lived in Salem and both families emigrated to Sebago, the former locating himself in the small
town of Windham. At the time when Hawthorne was sailing his little boat on the lake, at the
age of fourteen, John Andrew was in his nurse's arms,--born May 31, 1818. Like Hawthorne and
Longfellow he went to Bowdoin College, but did not distinguish himself there as a scholar,--had
no honors at commencement. We are still in ignorance concerning his college life, what his
interests were, and how he spent his time; but Andrew never cared much for anything which had
not an immediate and practical value. Greek and Latin, merely for their own sake as ancient
languages, did not appeal to him; nor did the desiccated history and cramping philosophy of
those days attract him more strongly. Yet he ultimately developed one of the finest of American
intellects.

He was admitted to the Suffolk bar at the age of twenty-two. He had already formed decided
opinions on the slavery question. The practitioner with whom he studied was precisely the opposite
of Andrew,--a brilliant scholar, but formal and unsympathetic. Although a young man of fine
promise he was soon excelled by his less learned but more energetic pupil. At the age of twenty-six
we find Andrew presiding at a convention of Free-soilers, the same which nominated Dr. S. G.
Howe for Congress. Why he did not appear in politics between 1844 and 1859 is something of
a mystery, which may be explained either by his devotion to his profession or his unwillingness
to make politics a profession. He was in constant communication with Charles Francis Adams,
Frank W. Bird, and other leading independents, and played a part in the election of Sumner
as well as at various nominating conventions; but he apparently neither sought office nor was
sought for it. It may have been a modest conscientiousness of his own value, which prevented
the acceptance of public honors until he was prepared to claim the best; but the fact is difficult
to account for on any supposition.

Neither was his success at the bar remarkable. He never earned a large income, and died comparatively
poor. There were few who cared to meet him in debate, yet his legal scholarship was not exceptional,
and his political opinions may have proved an impediment to him in a city which was still devoted
to Webster and Winthrop. Moreover, his kindness of heart prompted him to undertake a large
number of cases for which he received little or no remuneration. As late as 1856 he was known
as the poor man's lawyer rather than as a distinguished pleader. One cannot help reflecting
what might have been John A. Andrew's fortune if he had been born in Ohio or Illinois. In the
latter State he would have proved a most important political factor; for he was fully as able
a speaker as Douglas, and he combined with this a large proportion of those estimable qualities
which we all admire in Abraham Lincoln. He had not the wit of Lincoln, nor his immense fund
of anecdote, which helped so much to make him popular, but the cordial manners and manly frankness
of Andrew were very captivating. He would have told Douglas to his face that he was a demagogue,
as Mirabeau did to Robespierre, and would have carried the audience with him. It certainly
seems as if he would have risen to distinction there more rapidly than in old-fashioned, conventional
Boston.

Governor Andrew was an inch shorter than the average height of man, and much resembled Professor
Child in personal appearance. He was a larger man than Professor Child, and his hair was darker,
but he had the same round, good-humored face, with keen penetrating eyes beneath a brow as
finely sculptured as that of a Greek statue, and closely curling hair above it. He was broad-shouldered,
remarkably so, and had a strong figure but not a strong constitution. His hands were soft and
as white as a woman's; and though his step was quick and elastic he disliked to walk long distances,
and was averse to physical exercise generally.

He also resembled Professor Child in character,--frank without bluntness; sincere both formally
and intellectually,--full to the brim of moral courage. He was not only kind-hearted, but very
tender-hearted, so that his lips would quiver on occasions and his eyes fill with tears,--what
doctors improperly call a lachrymose nature; but in regard to a question of principle or public
necessity he was as firm as Plymouth Rock. Neither did he deceive himself, as kindly persons
are too apt to do, in regard to the true conditions of the case in hand. He would interrogate
an applicant for assistance in as judicious a manner as he would a witness in a court room.
He never degenerated into the professed philanthropist, who makes a disagreeable and pernicious
habit of one of the noblest attributes of man. "A mechanical virtue," he would say, "is no
virtue at all."

The impressions of youth are much stronger and more enduring than those of middle life, and
I still remember Andrew as he appeared presiding at the meeting for the benefit of John Brown's
wife and daughters in November, 1859. This was his first notable appearance before the public,
and nothing could have been more daring or more likely to make him unpopular; and yet within
twelve months he was elected Governor. His attitude and his whole appearance was resolute and
intrepid. He had set his foot down, and no power on earth could induce him to withdraw it.
A clergyman who had been invited to speak at the meeting had at first accepted, but being informed
by some of his parishioners that the thing would not do, declined with the excuse that he had
supposed there would be two sides to the question. "As if," said Andrew, "there could be two
sides to the question whether John Brown's wife and daughters should be permitted to starve."
Thomas Russell, Judge of the Superior Court, sat close under the platform, clapping his hands
like pistol shots.

John A. Andrew's testimony before the Harper's Ferry investigating committee has a historical
value which Hay and Nicolay, Wilson, and Von Holst would have done well to have taken into
consideration; but the definitive history of the war period is yet to be written. There was
no reason why Andrew should have been summoned. He had never met John Brown but once--at a
lady's house in Boston--and had given him twenty-five dollars without knowing what was to be
done with it. Jefferson Davis and the other Southern members of the committee evidently sent
for him to make capital against the Republican party, but the result was different from what
they anticipated. Andrew told them squarely that the Harper's Ferry invasion was the inevitable
consequence of their attempt to force slavery on Kansas against the will of its inhabitants,
and that the Pottawatomie massacre, whether John Brown was connected with it or not, was not
so bad in its moral effect as the assault on Sumner. It was what they might expect from attempting
to tyrannize over frontier farmers. It is not to be supposed that such men will be governed
by the nice sense of justice of an eastern law court.

His testimony in regard to the personal magnetism of John Brown is of great value; but he also
admitted that there was something about the old man which he could not quite understand,--a
mental peculiarity which may have resulted from his hard, barren life, or the fixedness of
his purpose.

Andrew had already been elected to the Legislature, and had taken his seat there in January,
1860. Almost in an instant he became the leader of his party in the House. Always ready to
seize the right moment, he united the two essential qualities of a debater, a good set speech
and a pertinent reply. Perfectly fearless and independent, he was exactly the man to guide
his party through a critical period. There were few in the house who cared to interfere with him.

Andrew was chairman of the Massachusetts delegation at the Chicago Convention in May, and although
he voted for Seward he was directly instrumental in the nomination of Lincoln. It is said to
have been at his suggestion that the Massachusetts delegation called together the delegations
of those States that defeated Fremont in 1856, and inquired of them which of the candidates
would be most certain to carry their constituencies; and with one accord they all answered
Lincoln. Thus Lincoln's nomination was practically assured before the voting began.

It has been repeatedly asserted that the nomination of Andrew for Governor was the result of
a general popular movement; but this was simply impossible. He was chiefly known to the voters
of the State at that time as the presiding officer of a John Brown meeting, and that was quite
as likely to retard as to advance his interests. He had, however, become a popular leader in
the Legislature, and the fact that Governor Banks was opposed to him and cast his influence
in favor of a Pittsfield candidate, left a sort of political vacuum in the more populous portion
of the State, which Frank W. Bird and Henry L. Pierce took advantage of to bring his name forward.
Sumner and Wilson threw their weight into the scales, and Andrew was easily nominated; but
he owed this to Frank W. Bird more than to any other supporter.

In the New York Herald of December 20, 1860, there was the following item: "Governor-elect
Andrew, of Massachusetts, and George L. Stearns have gone to Washington together, and it is
said that the object of their visit is to brace up weak-kneed Republicans." This was one object
of their journey, but they also went to survey the ground and see what was the true state of
affairs at the Capital. Stearns wrote from Washington to the Bird Club: "The watchword here
is 'Keep quiet,'" a sentence full of significance for the interpretation of the policy pursued
by the Republican leaders that winter. Andrew returned with the conviction that war was imminent
and could not be prevented. His celebrated order in regard to the equipment of the State militia
followed immediately, and after the bombardment of Fort Sumter this was looked upon as a true
prophecy. He foresaw the difficulty at Baltimore, and had already chartered steamships to convey
regiments to Washington, in case there should be a general uprising in Maryland.

Both Sumner and Wilson opposed the appointment of General Butler to the command of the Massachusetts
Volunteers, and preferred Caleb Gushing, who afterwards proved to be a more satisfactory member
of the Republican party than Butler; but, on the whole, Andrew would seem to have acted judiciously.
They were both bold, ingenious and quick-witted men, but it is doubtful if Gushing possessed
the dash and intrepidity which Butler showed in dealing with the situation at Baltimore. That
portion of his military career was certainly a good success, and how far he should be held
responsible for the corrupt proceedings of his brother at New Orleans I do not undertake to decide.

It is likely that Governor Andrew regretted his choice three weeks later, when General Butler
offered his services to the Governor of Maryland to suppress a slave insurrection which never
took place, and of which there was no danger then or afterwards. A sharp correspondence followed
between the Governor and the General, in which the latter nearly reached the point of insubordination.
For excellent reasons this was not made public at the time, and is little known at the present
day; but General Butler owed his prominence in the war wholly to Governor Andrew's appointment.

Another little-known incident was Andrew's action in regard to the meeting in memory of John
Brown, which was held on December 2, 1861, by Wendell Phillips, F. B. Sanborn and others, who
were mobbed exactly as Garrison was mobbed thirty years earlier. The Mayor would do nothing
to protect them, and when Wendell Phillips went to seek assistance from Andrew the latter declined
to interfere. It would be a serious matter to interfere with the Mayor, and he did not feel
that the occasion demanded it. O'Tsugi at once took to flight, somewhat in derision. The old woman followed
her with eyes of suspicion. Then she marched straight up to Nishioka--"An impudent jade! Shintaro[u]
is to place no confidence in her or her words. She brings nothing but shame, and perhaps worse.
There is not a serving man in the yashiki who does not know her.
And remember this well.

It is this Saku who holds the string of her ladyship's favour. O'Hagi Dono is not so far enamoured
as not to accept a substitute at Saku's hands.... But he is a fine figure of a man! Too fine
to be spoiled by his lordship's hand." To avoid the threatening lascivious gleam in the eyes
of this withered branch Nishioka made pretence of trouble with a knot in his girdle. The whispered
invitation grazed a negligent ear, to be interrupted by the sound of her ladyship's voice. O'Saku
was in no haste to leave or to say more. O'Han was the last to appear. There were anger and
tears in her eyes as the girl stopped a few feet from him. She spoke half turned away, as ready
to take flight at expected interruption.

"Nishioka Dono keeps faith with her ladyship! Does he keep faith with Han? Earnest was the promise
that at all events Han should share his favour with O'Hagi Dono. Nearly a month has passed since
he has deigned a visit. Surely her ladyship is not so exacting. Give fair answer. Is will or power
lacking?" She waited the reply, eyes cast down on the tatami, for she at least had some remains of
modesty. Thus the almost despairing gesture of Shintaro[u] escaped her. He spoke in low voice,
with emphasis, to this fairest of his bevy of fair ones--"As for the okugata, O'Han knows her almost
as well as this Shintaro[u].

What would be the fate of both if their treachery were suspected? Deign to be patient. The
fountain of plenty has not run dry. Shintaro[u] would go but so far. In this horde of women
he must look to himself. The dependence now is on her ladyship and O'Saku Dono. Shu[u]zen Sama is cajoled
by having thought for nothing. The karo[u] now is very old. This Shintaro[u] surely will take
his place. A break then with her ladyship finds punishment in exile to Ko[u]shu[u]. Then comes
the time for O'Han openly to join Shintaro[u], for the happy bond of two lives." The girl's
lips barely moved. Both were startled at peremptory call from the neighbouring room. She spoke
rapidly--"'Tis small matter, even with her ladyship. But from time to time a visit to this Han?
Condescend it."--"Agreed!" was the impatient answer.

"But with O'Hagi Dono, O'Tsugi, O'Han.... O'Saku, the occasions must be limited." He suddenly seized
her in his arms and silenced her protest in an embrace. Then with hasty steps he passed to her
ladyship's bed-chamber, leaving O'Han with wide staring eyes which shifted from the room of
the lovers to the door through which she had witnessed the old woman's departure.

Such was the vileness of the life in which was engaged Nishioka Shintaro[u]. A week had barely
elapsed. There was occasion to make purchases for the yashiki. The chu[u]gen Jisuké remained
respectfully prostrate before the officer. Nishioka again ran over the list required. "These are to
be got at the Owariya in Mikawacho[u]. The month's settlement is yet far off. The order stands
sufficient. Now off with you." The man did not budge. Rising to a sitting posture he looked
fixedly in the face of Nishioka. "What now?" grumbled the yo[u]nin.
Answered the chu[u]gen with respect--"Something of a tip will be well."--"A
tip!" said Nishioka in astonishment.

Meanwhile the Massachusetts Legislature had passed an act to make good the deficiency of five
dollars a month to the Massachusetts colored regiments, but the private soldiers, with a magnanimity
that should never be forgotten, refused to accept from the State what they considered due them
from the National Government. At last Governor Andrew applied to Congress for redress, declaring
that if he did not live to see justice done to his soldiers in this world he would carry his
appeal "before the Tribunal of Infinite Justice."

Thaddeus Stevens introduced a bill for the purpose June 4,1864, and after waiting a whole year
the colored soldiers received their dues. Andrew declared in his message to Congress that this
affair was a disgrace to the National Government; and I fear we shall have to agree with him.
[Footnote: At this time there were not less than five thousand officers drawing pay in the
Union armies above the requisite proportion of one officer to twenty-two privates.]

Sixty years ago Macaulay noticed the injurious effects on oratory of newspaper publication.
Parliamentary speeches were written to be read rather than to be listened to. It was a peculiarity
of Andrew, however, that he wrote his letters and even his messages to the Legislature as if
he were making a speech. In conversation he was plain, sensible and kindly.

He made no pretensions to oratory in his public addresses, but his delivery was easy, clear,
and emphatic. At times he spoke rather rapidly, but not so much so as to create a confused
impression. I never knew him to make an argumentum ad hominem, nor to indulge in those rhetorical
tricks which even Webster and Everett were not wholly free from. He convinced his hearers as
much by the fairness of his manner as by anything that he said.

The finest passage in his speeches, as we read them now, is his tribute to Lincoln's character
in his address to the Legislature, following upon Lincoln's assassination. After describing
him as the man who had added "martyrdom itself to his other and scarcely less emphatic claims
to human veneration, gratitude and love," he continued thus: "I desire on this grave occasion
to record my sincere testimony to the unaffected simplicity of his manly purpose, to the constancy
with which he devoted himself to his duty, to the grand fidelity with which he subordinated
himself to his country, to the clearness, robustness, and sagacity of his understanding, to
his sincere love of truth, his undeviating progress in its faithful pursuit, and to the confidence
which he could not fail to inspire in the singular integrity of his virtues and the conspicuously
judicial quality of his intellect."

Could any closer and more comprehensive description be given of Andrew's own character; and
is there another statement so appreciative in the various biographies of Lincoln?

The instances of his kindness and helpfulness were multitudinous, but have now mostly lapsed
into oblivion. During his five years in office it seemed as if every distressed man, woman,
and child came to the Governor for assistance. William G. Russell, who declined the position
of Chief Justice, once said of him: "There was no better recommendation to Andrew's favor than
for a man to have been in the State's prison, if it could only be shown that he had been there
longer than he deserved."

Andrew considered the saving of a human soul more important than rescuing a human life. That
he was often foiled, deceived, and disappointed in these reformatory attempts is perfectly
true; but was it not better so than never to have made them? For a long time he had charge
of an intemperate nephew, who even sold his overcoat to purchase drink; but the Governor never
deserted the fellow and cared for him as well as he could.

This is the more significant on account of Andrew's strong argument against prohibitory legislation,
which was the last important act of his life.

In February, 1864, there was a military ball at Concord for the benefit of the Thirty-second
Massachusetts Regiment. Governor Andrew was present, and seeing the son of an old friend sitting
in a corner and looking much neglected while his brother was dancing and having a fine time,
the Governor went to him, took him by the arm and marched several times around the hall with
him. He then went to Mrs. Hawthorne, inquired what her husband was writing, and explained the
battle of Gettysburg to her, drawing a diagram of it on a letter which he took from his coat
pocket. Years afterwards Mrs. Hawthorne spoke of this as one of the pleasantest interviews
of her life.

He would come in late to dinner at the Bird Club, looking so full of force that he seemed as
much like a steam-engine as a man. They usually applauded him, but he paid no attention to
it. "Waiter, bring me some minced fish with carrots and beets," he would say. His fish-dinner
became proverbial, but he complained that they could not serve it at fine hotels in the way
our grandmothers made it. He said it did not taste the same.

His private secretary states that Governor Andrew's favorite sans souci was to take a drive
into the country with some friend, and after he had passed the thickly settled suburbs to talk,
laugh and jest as young men do on a yachting excursion,--but his talk was always refined. There
was no recreation that Professor Francis J. Child liked better than this.

Andrew's valedictory address on January 5, 1865, which was chiefly concerned with the reconstruction
of the Southern States, was little understood at the time even by his friends; and in truth
he did not make out his scheme as clearly as he might have done. He considered negro suffrage
the first essential of reconstruction, but he did not believe in enfranchising the colored
people and disfranchising the whites. He foresaw that this could only end in disaster; and
he advised that the rebellious States should remain under military government until the white
people of the South should rescind their acts of secession and adopt negro suffrage of their
own accord. There would have been certain advantages in this over the plan that was afterwards
adopted--that is, Sumner's plan--but it included the danger that the Southern States might
have adopted universal suffrage and negro citizenship for the sake of Congressional representation,
and afterwards have converted it into a dead letter, as it is at present. Andrew considered
Lincoln's attempts at reconstruction as premature, and therefore injudicious.

For nearly twenty-five years John A. Andrew was a parishioner of Rev. James Freeman Clarke,
who preached in Indiana Place Chapel. In 1848 Rev. Mr. Clarke desired to exchange with Theodore
Parker, but older members of his parish strenuously opposed it. Andrew, then only twenty-seven
years old, came forward in support of his pastor, and argued the case vigorously, not because
he agreed with Parker's theological opinions, but because he considered the opposition illiberal.
After this both Andrew and Clarke would seem to have become gradually more conservative, for
when the latter delivered a sermon or lecture in 1866 in opposition to Emerson's philosophy,
the ex-Governor printed a public letter requesting him to repeat it. It is easy to trace the
influence of James Freeman Clarke in Governor Andrew's religious opinions and Andrew's influence
on Rev. Mr. Clarke's politics. Each was a firm believer in the other.

The movement to supersede Sumner with Andrew as United States Senator, in 1869, originated
in what is called the Back Bay district. It was not because they loved Andrew there, but because
they hated Sumner, who represented to their minds the loss of political power which they had
enjoyed from the foundation of the Republic until his election in 1850, and have never recovered
it since. Andrew's political record and his democratic manners could hardly have been to their
liking.

The Boston aristocracy counted for success on the support of the Grand Army veterans, who were
full of enthusiasm for Andrew; but it is not probable that the ex-Governor would have been
willing to lead a movement which his best friends disapproved of, and which originated with
the same class of men who tried so hard to defeat him in 1862. Moreover, they would have found
a very sturdy opponent in Senator Wilson. It was Wilson who had made Sumner a Senator, and
for fifteen years they had fought side by side without the shadow of a misunderstanding between
them. Under such conditions men cannot help feeling a strong affection for one another. Besides
this, Wilson would have been influenced by interested motives. Sumner cared nothing for the
minor Government offices--the classified service--except so far as to assist occasionally some
unfortunate person who had been crowded out of the regular lines; and this afforded Wilson
a fine opportunity of extending his influence. If Andrew were chosen Senator in the way that
was anticipated Wilson knew well enough that this patronage would have to be divided between them.

Andrew could not have replaced Sumner in the Senate. He lacked the physical strength as well
as the experience, and that extensive range of legal and historical knowledge which so often
disconcerted Sumner's opponents. He had a genius for the executive, and the right position
for him would have been in President Grant's cabinet. That he would have been offered such
a place can hardly be doubted.

But Governor Andrew's span of life was over. He might have lived longer if he had taken more
physical exercise; but the great Civil War proved more fatal to the statesmen who were engaged
in it than to the generals in the field. None of the great leaders of the Republican party
lasted very long after this.

Andrew's friends always felt that the man was greater than his position, and that he really
missed the opportunity to develop his ability to its full extent. His position was not so difficult
as that of Governor Morgan, of New York, or Governor Morton, of Indiana; for he was supported
by one of the wealthiest and most patriotic of the States. It was his clear insight into the
political problems of his time and the fearlessness with which he attacked them that gave him
such influence among his contemporaries, and made him felt as a moral force to the utmost limits
of the Union. No public man has ever left a more stainless reputation, and we only regret that
he was not as considerate of himself as he was of others.

THE COLORED REGIMENTS

The first colored regiment in the Civil War was organized by General Hunter at Beaufort, S.
C., in May, 1862, without permission from the Government; and some said, perhaps unjustly,
that he was removed from his command on that account. It was reorganized by General Saxton
the following August, and accepted by the Secretary of War a short time afterwards. Rev. T.
W. Higginson, who had led the attack on Boston Court House in the attempt to rescue Anthony
Burns, was commissioned as its Colonel.

In August also George L. Stearns, being aware that Senator Sumner was preparing a speech to
be delivered at the Republican State convention, went to his house on Hancock Street and urged
that he should advocate in it the general enlistment of colored troops; but Sumner said decisively,
"No, I do not consider it advisable to agitate that question until the Proclamation of Emancipation
has become a fact. Then we will take another step in advance." At a town meeting held in Medford,
in December, Mr. Stearns made a speech on the same subject, and was hissed for his pains by
the same men who were afterwards saved from the conscription of 1863 by the negroes whom he
recruited. 

He had passed from here some little distance, to the turning of the wall, when hasty steps and the hard
breathing of one who had just breasted the hill struck his ear. Shu[u]zen standing at the corner was
almost knocked down by the dark bulk which bounded out of the shadow. Both parties sprang back
in attitude of watchfulness. Shu[u]zen had never seen such a fellow. At least seven feet in
height, hairy of arms and legs and face, his eyes shone like bright
mirrors.

Bulging forth these made him like to the ghost of some huge dragon fly. Did he not have an
eye in the middle of his forehead? Shu[u]zen could not have denied it. Of size to inspire fear,
decidedly the rascal was to be suspected. Shu[u]zen was the first to question. "Who and where
from? Answer at once, or this Aoyama deigns the death cut." The man, or monster, merely opened
and shut the plate like eye holes. Then with a roaring derisive lip--"Ha!
Ha!

This is Tanuki-baké, come hither to find and fetch Aoyama."

"Ya! Ya!" Aoyama was in a great rage. In the act of drawing his sword he would cut the rascal
down. Thus to insult a hatamoto of the land, lord of twelve hundred koku! "Make ready!" Apparition
or not, at a bound the man was some ten feet off. Then followed a space, during which Shu[u]zen made
every effort known to the fencing room. He would have impaled a real dragon fly more readily.
Without attempt to flee the object merely darted hither and thither. Shu[u]zen was dripping with perspiration.
He felt badly and discouraged. For a moment he would rest--"To see this Aoyama?" He grunted.
"Just so," was the reply.

"Fools at close quarters give entertainment. Aoyama is not the clever one to cut down the
tanuki-baké (badger-ghost). Get you hence to your quilts, good sir; to your fool companions
who wear summer garb in depth of winter, and triple garments in the heats of the sixth and seventh
months; stuff themselves with hot food and wine in summer, and freeze the viands and saké in
winter. Get you hence to your companions of the Gaman Kwai (Endurance Society). Make report to
them of Aoyama's venture, and bray and brag to them of spending a night outside the sheets." Shu[u]zen
strove to be calm on receipt of these insults to his kind. In haughty condescension he explained--"Those
of the Gaman Kwai wear katabira (light summer wear) in winter, triple
gear in summer, to undergo the hardships of the battlefield.

In war one regards not heat or cold. He drinks from the puddle on the field, and cooks the
rice straw for food in his helmet. This is the great time of peace. The experiences and the
hardships of the battlefield are lacking. It is as substitute for these...." He was interrupted
by a mighty burst of impolite merriment from the heavy man, who held his sides as like to split
from laughter. "Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Naruhodo! These chitterlings; stuffed sausages! 'Sufferings
of the battlefield; hardships'! They are not to encountered in such childish sport. He who would
face these must practise the art of the inner belly (mind). It is by hardening the belly that
the trials of war are met. You fellows practise but the outer cult. Of the inner and secret
precepts you are ignorant. Degraded fools (bakéyaro[u])!"--"Shut
up!" roared Shu[u]zen. Only three months ago I was hissed
in a town meeting for proposing the enlistment of colored troops; and now here we are! I have
no doubt that before six months a number of colored officers will be commissioned." His speech
was received with applause; but when he asked, "Now who will volunteer?" there was a prolonged
silence. At length a sturdy-looking fellow arose and said: "I would enlist if I felt sure that
my wife and children would not suffer for it." "I will look after your family," said Mr. Stearns,
"and see that they want for nothing; but it is a favor I cannot promise again." After this
ten or twelve more enrolled themselves, and having provided for their maintenance until they
could be transported to the camp at Readville, he went over to Niagara, on the Canada side,
to see what might be effected in that vicinity.

In less than a week he was again in Buffalo arranging a recruiting bureau, with agencies in
Canada and the Western States as far as St. Louis--where there were a large number of refugees
who had lately been liberated by Grant's campaign at Vicksburg. Mr. Lucian B. Eaton, an old
lawyer and prominent politician of the city, accepted the agency there as a work of patriotic
devotion. Among Mr. Stearns's most successful agents were the Langston brothers, colored scions
of a noble Virginia family,-- both excellent men and influential among their people. All his
agents were required to write a letter to him every evening, giving an account of their day's
work, and every week to send him an account of their expenses. Thus Mr. Stearns sat at his
desk and directed their movements by telegraph as easily as pieces on a chess-board. The appropriation
for transportation had already passed the Massachusetts Legislature, but where this did not
suffice to meet an emergency he drew freely on his own resources.

By the last of April recruits were coming in at the rate of thirty or forty a day, and Mr.
Stearns telegraphed to the Governor: "I can fill up another regiment for you in less than six
weeks,"--a hint which resulted in the Massachusetts Fifty-fifth, with Norwood P. Hallowell,
a gallant officer who had been wounded at Antietam, for its commander.

The Governor, however, appears to have suddenly changed his mind, for on May 7th Mr. Stearns
wrote to his wife:

"Yesterday at noon I learned from Governor Andrew by telegram that he did not intend to raise
another regiment. I was thunderstruck. My work for three weeks would nearly, or quite, fall
to the ground. I telegraphed in reply: 'You told me to take all the men I could get without
regard to regiments. Have two hundred men on the way; what shall I do with them?' The reply
came simultaneously with your letter: 'Considering your telegraph and Wild's advice, another
regiment may proceed, expecting it full in four weeks. Present want of troops will probably
prevent my being opposed.' I replied: 'I thank God for your telegram received this morning.
You shall have the men in four weeks.' Now all is right."

The Surgeon-General had detailed one Dr. Browne for duty at Buffalo to examine Mr. Stearns's
recruits, and if found fit for service by him there was presumably no need of a second examination.
This, however, did not suit the medical examiner at Readville, who either from ill will or
from some unknown motive, insisted on rejecting every sixth man sent there from the West. Thus
there was entailed on Mr. Stearns an immense expense which he had no funds to meet, and he
was obliged to make a private loan of ten thousand dollars without knowing in the least how
or where he was to be reimbursed.

Finally, on May 8, Mr. Stearns made a remonstrance against this abuse to Governor Andrew in
a letter in which he also gave this account of himself:

    "I have worked every day, Sunday included, for more than two months
    and from fourteen to sixteen hours a day; I have filled the West with
    my agents; I have compelled the railroads to accept lower terms of
    transportation than the Government rates; I have filled a letter-book
    of five hundred pages, most of it closely written."

This letter is now in the archives of the State House at Boston, and on the back of it Governor
Andrew has written:

    "This letter is respy. referred to Surgeon-General Dole with the
    request that he would confer with Surgeon Stone and Lieutenant-Colonel
    Hallowell. It is surprising, and not fair nor fit, that a man trying
    as Mr. Stearns is, to serve the country at a risk, should suffer thus
    by such disagreement of opinion.

"JOHN A. ANDREW."

Shortly after this Mr. Stearns returned to Boston for a brief visit, and was met in the street
by a philanthropic lady, Mrs. E. D. Cheney, who asked: "Where have you been all this time,
Mr. Stearns? I supposed you were going to help us organize the colored regiment? You will be
glad to know that it is doing well. We have nearly a thousand men." Mr. Stearns made no reply,
but bowed and passed on. This is the more surprising, as Mrs. Cheney was president of a society
of ladies who had presented the Fifty-fourth Regiment with a flag; but the fault would seem
to have been more that of others than her own. At the celebration which took place on the departure
of the regiment for South Carolina, however, Wendell Phillips said: "We owe it chiefly to a
private citizen, to George L. Stearns, of Medford, that these heroic men are mustered into
the service,"--a statement which astonished a good many. [Footnote: The statement made by Governor
Andrew's private secretary concerning the colored regiments in his memoir of the Governor would
seem to have been intentionally misleading.]

The Governors of the Western States had never considered their colored population as of any
importance, but now, when it was being drained off to fill up the quota of Massachusetts troops
they began to think differently. The Governor of Ohio advised Governor Andrew that no more
recruiting could be permitted in his State unless the recruits were assigned to the Ohio quota.
Andrew replied that the Governor of Ohio was at liberty to recruit colored regiments of his
own; but the Massachusetts Fifty-fifth, having now a complement, it was decided not to continue
the business any further, and Mr. Stearns's labors at Buffalo were thus brought to an end about
the middle of June. He had recruited fully one- half of the Fifty-fourth, and nearly the whole
of the Fifty-fifth regiments.

He now conceived the idea of making his recruiting bureau serviceable by placing it in the
hands of the Government. He therefore went to Washington and meeting his friend, Mr. Fred Law
Olmstead, at Willard's Hotel, the latter offered to go with him to the War Department and introduce
him to Secretary Stanton. They found Stanton fully alive to the occasion, and in reply to Mr.
Stearns's offer he said:

"I have heard of your recruiting bureau, and I think you would be the best man to run the machine
you have constructed. I will make you an Assistant Adjutant-General with the rank of Major,
and I will give you authority to recruit colored regiments all over the country."

Stearns thanked him, and replied that there was nothing which he had so much at heart as enlisting
the black men on a large scale; for no people could be said to be secure in their freedom unless
they were also soldiers; but his wife was unwell, and had suffered much from his absence already,
and he did not feel that he ought to accept the offer without her consent. In answer to the
question how funds for recruiting were to be obtained without any appropriation by Congress,
Mr. Stanton said they could be supplied from the Secret Service fund.

When Mr. Stearns and Mr. Olmstead were alone on the street again, the latter said: "Mr. Stearns,
go to your room and sleep if you can."

Having returned to Boston, to arrange his affairs for a prolonged absence, and having obtained
his wife's consent, Mr. Stearns ordered his recruiting bureau to report at Philadelphia, where
he soon after followed it.

The battle of Gettysburg had stirred Philadelphia to its foundations, and its citizens were
prepared to welcome anything that promised a vigorous prosecution of the war. Major Stearns
was at once enrolled among the members of the Union League Club, the parent of all the union
leagues in the country, and was invited to the meetings of various other clubs and fashionable
entertainments. A recruiting committee was formed from among the most prominent men in the
city. Camp William Penn, while the colored regiment was being drilled, became a fashionable
resort, and fine equipages filled the road thither every after-noon. By the middle of July
the first regiment was nearly full. Such an action could only be excused on the ground of extreme
necessity. The Massachusetts Legislature promptly voted to pay the deficiency to the Fifty-fourth
and Fifty-fifth regiments; but the one at Philadelphia was in organization, and Mr. Stearns
found himself in the position of a man who has made promises which he is unable to fulfil.

Hon. William D. Kelley and two other gentlemen of the committee went with Major Stearns to
Washington to see Stanton, and endeavored to persuade him to revoke the order. Kelley was one
of the most persistent debaters who ever sat in Congress, and he argued the question with the
Secretary of War for more than an hour,--to the great disgust of the latter,--but Stanton was
as firm as Napoleon ever was. Major Stearns never had another pleasant interview with him.

The Secretary's argument was that some white regiments had complained of being placed on an
equality with negroes, and that it interfered with recruiting white soldiers. There was doubtless
some reason in this; but the same result might have been obtained by a smaller reduction.

The next morning some one remarked to Major Stearns that it was exceedingly hot weather, even
for Washington, and his reply was: "Yes, but the fever within is worse than the heat without."
He talked of resigning; but finally said, decisively, "I will go and consult with Olmstead."

He found Mr. Olmstead friendly and sympathetic. He spoke of Secretary Stanton in no complimentary
terms, but he advised Mr. Stearns to continue with his work, and endure all that he could for
the good of the cause,-- not to be worried by evils for which he was in no way responsible.
Mr. Stearns returned to Willard's with a more cheerful countenance.

In the afternoon Judge Kelley came in with the news of the repulse of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts
regiment at Fort Wagner and the death of Colonel Shaw.

There was a colored regiment in process of formation at Baltimore, and another was supposed
to be organizing at Fortress Monroe.

Both were nominally under Mr. Stearns's supervision, and he inspected the former on his return
trip to Philadelphia, and sent his son to investigate and report on the latter. Not the trace
of a colored regiment could be discovered at Fortress Monroe, but there were scores of Union
officers lounging and smoking on the piazza of the Hygeia Hotel. Mr. Stearns thought that business
economy had better begin by reducing the number of officers rather than the pay of the soldiers.
On July 28 Major Stearns wrote from Baltimore:

    "I am still perplexed as to the mode in which I can best carry out the
    work intrusted to me. It is so difficult to adjust my mode of rapid
    working to the slow routine of the Department that I sometimes almost
    despair of the task and want to abandon it."

No private business could succeed if carried on after the manner of the National Government
at that time, and this was not the fault of Lincoln's administration at all, but of the whole
course of Jackson democracy from 1829 to 1861. The clerks in the various departments did not
hold their positions from the heads of those departments, but from outside politicians who
had no connection with the Government business, and as a consequence they were saucy and insubordinate.
They found it to their interest to delay and obstruct the procedure of business in order to
give the impression that they were overworked, and in that way make their positions more secure
and if possible of greater importance.

Major Stearns had found himself continually embarrassed in his Government service from lack
of sufficient funds, and the continual delay in having his accounts audited. The auditors of
the War Department repeatedly took exception to expenditures that were absolutely necessary,
and he was obliged to advance large sums from his own capital in order to provide the current
expenses of his agents. In this emergency he returned to Boston and held a conference with
Mr. John M. Forbes and other friends; and they all agreed that he ought to be better supported
in the work of recruiting than he had been. A subscription was immediately set on foot, and
in a few days a recruiting fund of about thirty thousand dollars was raised and placed in charge
of Mr. R. P. Hallowell.

On September 1, Secretary Stanton transferred Major Stearns to Nashville, where he could obtain
recruits in large numbers, not only from Tennessee but from the adjoining States. Fugitives
flocked to his standard from Alabama, Mississippi, and Kentucky. For the succeeding five months
he organized colored regiments so rapidly that it was with difficulty the General commanding
at Nashville could supply the necessary quota of officers for them. His letter-writing alone
rarely came to less than twenty pages a day, and besides this he was obliged to attend personally
to innumerable details which were constantly interfering with more important affairs. Serious
questions concerning the rights and legal position of the freedmen were continually arising,
and these required a cool head and a clear understanding for their solution.

Edward J. Bartlett, of Concord, who was one of his staff in Nashville, stated afterwards that
he never saw a man who could despatch so much business in a day as George L. Stearns. He says:

    "I shall never forget the fine appearance of the first regiment we
    sent off. They were all picked men, and felt a just pride in wearing
    the blue. As fast as we obtained enough recruits they were formed
    into regiments, officered and sent to the front. When men became
    scarce in the city we made trips into the country, often going beyond
    the Union picket line, and generally reaping a harvest of slaves.
    These expeditions brought an element of danger into our lives, for
    our forage parties were fired into by the enemy more than once, but we
    always succeeded in bringing back our men with us. The black regiments
    did valuable service for the Union, leaving their dead on many a
    southern battle-field. Mr. Stearns was a noble man, courteous, with
    great executive ability, and grandly fitted for the work he was
    engaged in."

At this time Major Stearns's friend, General Wilde, was recruiting a colored brigade in North
Carolina, and General Ullman was organizing colored regiments in Louisiana.

Major Stearns's labors were brought to a close in February, 1864, by the eccentric conduct
of Secretary Stanton,--the reason for which has never been explained. He obtained leave of
absence to return to Boston at Christmas time, and after a brief visit to his family went to
Washington and called upon the Secretary of War, who declined to see him three days in succession.
On the evening of the fourth day he met Mr. Stanton at an evening party and Stanton said to
him in his roughest manner: "Major Stearns, why are you not in Tennessee?" This was a breach
of official etiquette on the part of the Secretary of War and Major Stearns sent in his resignation
at once. His reason for doing so, however, was not so much on account of this personal slight
as from the conclusion that he had accomplished all that was essential to be done in this line.
His chief assistant at Nashville, Capt. R. D. Muzzey, was an able man and perfectly competent
to run the machine which Mr. Stearns had constructed.

The importance of his work cannot readily be measured. It was no longer easy to obtain white
volunteers. With a population ten millions less than that of France, the Northern States were
maintaining an army much larger than the one which accompanied Napoleon to Moscow. General
Thomas's right wing, at the battle of Nashville, was formed almost entirely of colored regiments.
They were ordered to make a feint attack on the enemy, so as to withdraw attention from the
flanking movement of his veterans on the left; but when the charge had once begun their officers
were unable to keep them in check--the feint was changed into a real attack and contributed
largely to the most decisive victory of the whole war.

In his last annual Message President Lincoln congratulated Congress on the success of the Government's
policy in raising negro regiments, and on the efficiency of the troops organized in this way.
It seems very doubtful if the war could have been brought to a successful termination without them. 

'Tis Kiku alone who remains the object, all others are mere lay figures. You are a woman, and
by nature know of such things. Is not this truly love? Consent to become the concubine of Shu[u]zen.
Let this very night seal the union."

He attempted to draw her close to him, but she shrank away in confusion
and fright.

Shu[u]zen was amazed--"What! You refuse?... Ah! Then it is hate of this Shu[u]zen which is felt.
Most unreasonable hate, for he acted but as bugyo[u] of the land.

It is a disloyal hate." In his mad and thwarted lust his lips trembled. The girl humbly remained
prostrate--"Condescend the honoured forbearance. Such could not be the case. Great the favour
of Heaven, of your lordship as its agent, in saving this Kiku from the final punishment, the
coarse assault of menials. But deign to consider. Kiku is the daughter of Jinnai. She is a reprieved
criminal in the land, can be naught else but of lowest status. Kind the honoured words, great
the gratitude inspired; but is not the summons unseemly. Deign forbearance; add not to the offence
of Kiku." In her mind was the last scene with her father Jinnai; the tortured, distorted, suffering
body of the condemned bandit. Pollute her body with this man who had thus played with the one
to whom she owed life and duty; to the man who had sent the father to the execution ground? She would
have used her dagger first on herself, rather than on him. His words did inspire uncertainty. He was the
officer in the land, the representative of the suzerain, hence guiltless. But that made not
the idea of his embraces less repulsive, though she wavered in thoughts of vendetta--between filial
duty and loyal service to the suzerain. Her attitude puzzled Aoyama.
The unusualness of his proposition he put aside. As early as 1855 the
Emigrant Aid Society was formed; and in 1856 he organized the Massachusetts State Kansas Committee,
by means of which a large amount of money was obtained for the 'free-State men,' at times of
the greatest need. He was the more engaged to this cause by making in 1857 the acquaintance
of Captain John Brown, who was not only an extraordinary man, but one who had a rare magnetism
for men of character, and attached some of the best and noblest to him, on very short acquaintance,
by lasting ties. Mr. Stearns made himself at once necessary to Captain Brown as one who respected
his inspirations, and had the magnanimity to trust him entirely, and to arm his hands with
all needed help.

"For the relief of Kansas, in 1856-57, his own contributions were the largest and the first.
He never asked any one to give so much as he himself gave, and his interest was so manifestly
pure and sincere that he easily obtained eager offerings in quarters where other petitioners
failed. He did not hesitate to become the banker of his clients, and to furnish them money
and arms in advance of the subscriptions which he obtained. Deign to enter Meido, be wholly purified
of wickedness, and in a second birth, if in human form, be of a virtuous House. For present and
past sins atonement is to be made. For those still living Bankei holds not his lips silent.
 In 1862, on the President's first or preliminary Proclamation of Emancipation,
he took the first steps for organizing the Freedman's Bureau,--a department which has since
grown to great proportions. In 1863, he began to recruit colored soldiers in Buffalo; then
at Philadelphia and Nashville. But these were only parts of his work. He passed his time in
incessant consultations with all men whom he could reach, to suggest and urge the measures
needed for the hour. And there are few men of real or supposed influence, North or South, with
whom he has not at some time communicated. Every important patriotic measure in this region
has had his sympathy, and of many he has been the prime mover. He gave to each his strong support,
but uniformly shunned to appear in public. For himself or his friends he asked no reward: for
himself, he asked only to do the hard work. His transparent singleness of purpose, his freedom
from all by-ends, his plain good sense, courage, adherence, and his romantic generosity disarmed
first or last all gainsayers. His examination before the United States Senate Committee on
the Harper's Ferry Invasion, in January, 1860, as reported in the public documents, is a chapter
well worth reading, as a shining example of the manner in which a truth- speaker baffles all
statecraft, and extorts at last a reluctant homage from the bitterest adversaries. 

The true and the safe conclusion would be to suspend an opinion which could only be unsatisfactorily
formed upon imperfect data; and to rest in the humble hope and belief that one day all would appear
for the best.
THE END.

