By this time the Mississippi Valley had grown in population and political power so that it
ranked with the older sections. The next indication of its significance in American history
which I shall mention is its position in shaping the economic and political course of the nation
between the close of the War of 1812 and the slavery struggle. In 1790 the Mississippi Valley
had a population of about a hundred thousand, or one-fortieth of that of the United States
as a whole; by 1810 it had over a million, or one-seventh; by 1830 it had three and two-thirds
millions, or over one-fourth; by 1840 over six millions, more than one-third. While the Atlantic
coast increased only a million and a half souls between 1830 and 1840, the Mississippi Valley
gained nearly three millions. Ohio (virgin wilderness in 1790) was, half a century later, nearly
as populous as Pennsylvania and twice as populous as Massachusetts. While Virginia, North Carolina,
and South Carolina were gaining 60,000 souls between 1830 and 1840, Illinois gained 318,000.
Indeed, the growth of this State alone excelled that of the entire South Atlantic States.

These figures show the significance of the Mississippi Valley in its pressure upon the older
section by the competition of its cheap lands, its abundant harvests, and its drainage of the
labor supply. All of these things meant an upward lift to the Eastern wage earner. But they
meant also an increase of political power in the Valley. Before the War of 1812 the Mississippi
Valley had six senators, New England ten, the Middle States ten, and the South eight. By 1840
the Mississippi Valley had twenty-two senators, double those of the Middle States and New England
combined, and nearly three times as many as the Old South; while in the House of Representatives
the Mississippi Valley outweighed any one of the old sections. In 1810 it had less than one-third
the power of New England and the South together in the House. In 1840 it outweighed them both
combined and because of its special circumstances it held the balance of power.

While the Mississippi Valley thus rose to superior political power as compared with any of
the old sections, its economic development made it the inciting factor in the industrial life
of the nation. After the War of 1812 the steamboat revolutionized the transportation facilities
of the Mississippi Valley. In each economic area a surplus formed, demanding an outlet and
demanding returns in manufactures. The spread of cotton into the lower Mississippi Valley and
the Gulf Plains had a double significance. This transfer of the center of cotton production
away from the Atlantic South not only brought increasing hardship and increasing unrest to
the East as the competition of the virgin soils depressed Atlantic land values and made Eastern
labor increasingly dear, but the price of cotton fell also in due proportion to the increase
in production by the Mississippi Valley. While the transfer of economic power from the Seaboard
South to the Cotton Kingdom of the lower Mississippi Valley was in progress, the upper Mississippi
Valley was leaping forward, partly under the stimulus of a market for its surplus in the plantations
of the South, where almost exclusive cultivation of the great staples resulted in a lack of
foodstuffs and livestock.

At the same time the great river and its affluents became the highway of a commerce that reached
to the West Indies, the Atlantic Coast, Europe, and South America. The Mississippi Valley was
an industrial entity, from Pittsburgh and Santa Fé to New Orleans. It became the most important
influence in American politics and industry. Washington had declared in 1784 that it was the
part of wisdom for Virginia to bind the West to the East by ties of interest through internal
improvement thereby taking advantage of the extensive and valuable trade of a rising empire.

This realization of the fact that an economic empire was growing up beyond the mountains stimulated
rival cities, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, to engage in a struggle to supply the
West with goods and receive its products. This resulted in an attempt to break down the barrier
of the Alleghanies by internal improvements. The movement became especially active after the
War of 1812, when New York carried out De Witt Clinton's vast conception of making by the Erie
Canal a greater Hudson which should drain to the port of New York all the basin of the Great
Lakes, and by means of other canals even divert the traffic from the tributaries of the Mississippi.
New York City's commercial ascendancy dates from this connection with interior New York and
the Mississippi Valley. A writer in Hunt's Merchants' Magazine in 1869 makes the significance
of this clearer by these words:

     There was a period in the history of the seaboard cities when
     there was no West; and when the Alleghany Mountains formed the
     frontier of settlement and agricultural production. During
     that epoch the seaboard cities, North and South, grew in
     proportion to the extent and fertility of the country in their
     rear; and as Maryland, Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia
     were more productive in staples valuable to commerce than the
     colonies north of them, the cities of Baltimore, Norfolk,
     Charleston, and Savannah enjoyed a greater trade and
     experienced a larger growth than those on the northern
     seaboard.

He, then, classifies the periods of city development into three: (1) the provincial, limited
to the Atlantic seaboard; (2) that of canal and turnpike connected with the Mississippi Valley;
and (3) that of railroad connection. Thus he was able to show how Norfolk, for example, was
shut off from the enriching currents of interior trade and was outstripped by New York. The
efforts of Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, and Savannah to divert the trade of the Mississippi
system to their own ports on the Atlantic, and the rise or fall of these cities in proportion
as they succeeded are a sufficient indication of the meaning of the Mississippi Valley in American
industrial life. What colonial empire has been for London that the Mississippi Valley is to
the seaboard cities of the United States, awakening visions of industrial empire, systematic
control of vast spaces, producing the American type of the captain of industry.

It was not alone city rivalry that converged upon the Mississippi Valley and sought its alliance.
Sectional rivalry likewise saw that the balance of power possessed by the interior furnished
an opportunity for combinations. This was a fundamental feature of Calhoun's policy when he
urged the seaboard South to complete a railroad system to tap the Northwest. As Washington
had hoped to make western trade seek its outlet in Virginia and build up the industrial power
of the Old Dominion by enriching intercourse with the Mississippi Valley, as Monroe wished
to bind the West to Virginia's political interests; and as De Witt Clinton wished to attach
it to New York, so Calhoun and Hayne would make "Georgia and Carolina the commercial center
of the Union, and the two most powerful and influential members of the confederacy," by draining
the Mississippi Valley to their ports. "I believe," said Calhoun, "that the success of a connection
of the West is of the last importance to us politically and commercially. . . . I do verily
believe that Charleston has more advantages in her position for the Western trade, than any
city on the Atlantic, but to develop them we ought to look to the Tennessee instead of the
Ohio, and much farther to the West than Cincinnati or Lexington."

This was the secret of Calhoun's advocacy in 1836 and 1837 both of the distribution of the
surplus revenue and of the cession of the public lands to the States in which they lay, as
an inducement to the West to ally itself with Southern policies; and it is the key to the readiness
of Calhoun, even after he lost his nationalism, to promote internal improvements which would
foster the southward current of trade on the Mississippi.

Without going into details, I may simply call your attention to the fact that Clay's whole
system of internal improvements and tariff was based upon the place of the Mississippi Valley
in American life. It was the upper part of the Valley, and especially the Ohio Valley, that
furnished the votes which carried the tariffs of 1816, 1824, and 1828. Its interests profoundly
influenced the details of those tariffs and its need of internal improvement constituted a
basis for sectional bargaining in all the constructive legislation after the War of 1812. New
England, the Middle Region, and the South each sought alliance with the growing section beyond
the mountains. American legislation bears the enduring evidence of these alliances. Even the
National Bank found in this Valley the main sphere of its business. The nation had turned its
energies to internal exploitation, and sections contended for the economic and political power
derived from connection with the interior.

But already the Mississippi Valley was beginning to stratify, both socially and geographically.
As the railroads pushed across the mountains, the tide of New England and New York colonists
and German immigrants sought the basin of the Great Lakes and the Upper Mississippi. A distinct
zone, industrially and socially connected with New England, was forming. The railroad reinforced
the Erie Canal and, as De Bow put it, turned back the tide of the Father of Waters so that
its outlet was in New York instead of New Orleans for a large part of the Valley. Below the
Northern zone was the border zone of the Upland South, the region of compromise, including
both banks of the Ohio and the Missouri and reaching down to the hills on the north of the
Gulf Plains. The Cotton Kingdom based on slavery found its center in the fertile soils along
the Lower Mississippi and the black prairies of Georgia and Alabama, and was settled largely
by planters from the old cotton lands of the Atlantic States. The Mississippi Valley had rejuvenated
slavery, had given it an aggressive tone characteristic of Western life.

Thus the Valley found itself in the midst of the slavery struggle at the very time when its
own society had lost homogeneity. Let us allow two leaders, one of the South and one of the
North, to describe the situation; and, first, let the South speak. Said Hammond, of South Carolina,[198:1]
in a speech in the Senate on March 4, 1858:

     I think it not improper that I should attempt to bring the
     North and South face to face, and see what resources each of
     us might have in the contingency of separate organizations.

     Through the heart of our country runs the great Mississippi,
     the father of waters, into whose bosom are poured thirty-six
     thousand miles of tributary streams; and beyond we have the
     desert prairie wastes to protect us in our rear. Can you hem
     in such a territory as that? You talk of putting up a wall of
     fire around eight hundred and fifty thousand miles so
     situated! How absurd.

     But in this territory lies the great valley of the
     Mississippi, now the real and soon to be the acknowledged seat
     of the empire of the world. The sway of that valley will be as
     great as ever the Nile knew in the earlier ages of mankind.
     We own the most of it. The most valuable part of it belongs to
     us now; and although those who have settled above us are now
     opposed to us, another generation will tell a different tale.
     They are ours by all the laws of nature; slave labor will go
     to every foot of this great valley where it will be found
     profitable to use it, and some of those who may not use it are
     soon to be united with us by such ties as will make us one and
     inseparable. The iron horse will soon be clattering over the
     sunny plains of the South to bear the products of its upper
     tributaries to our Atlantic ports, as it now does through the
     ice-bound North. There is the great Mississippi, bond of union
     made by nature herself. She will maintain it forever.

As the Seaboard South had transferred the mantle of leadership to Tennessee and then to the
Cotton Kingdom of the Lower Mississippi, so New England and New York resigned their command
to the northern half of the Mississippi Valley and the basin of the Great Lakes. Seward, the
old-time leader of the Eastern Whigs who had just lost the Republican nomination for the presidency
to Lincoln, may rightfully speak for the Northeast. In the fall of 1860, addressing an audience
at Madison, Wisconsin, he declared:[199:1]

     The empire established at Washington is of less than a hundred
     years' formation. It was the empire of thirteen Atlantic
     states. Still, practically, the mission of that empire is
     fulfilled. The power that directs it is ready to pass away
     from those thirteen states, and although held and exercised
     under the same constitution and national form of government,
     yet it is now in the very act of being transferred from the
     thirteen states east of the Alleghany mountains and on the
     coast of the Atlantic ocean, to the twenty states that lie
     west of the Alleghanies, and stretch away from their base to
     the base of the Rocky mountains on the West, and you are the
     heirs to it. When the next census shall reveal your power, you
     will be found to be the masters of the United States of
     America, and through them the dominating political power of
     the world.

Appealing to the Northwest on the slavery issue Seward declared:

     The whole responsibility rests henceforth directly or
     indirectly on the people of the Northwest. . . . There can be
     no virtue in commercial and manufacturing communities to
     maintain a democracy, when the democracy themselves do not
     want a democracy. There is no virtue in Pearl street, in Wall
     street, in Court street, in Chestnut street, in any other
     street of great commercial cities, that can save the great
     democratic government of ours, when you cease to uphold it
     with your intelligent votes, your strong and mighty hands. You
     must, therefore, lead us as we heretofore reserved and
     prepared the way for you.

When we survey the course of the slavery struggle in the United States it is clear that the
form the question took was due to the Mississippi Valley. The Ordinance of 1787, the Missouri
Compromise, the Texas question, the Free Soil agitation, the Compromise of 1850, the Kansas-Nebraska
bill, the Dred Scott decision, "bleeding Kansas"--these are all Mississippi Valley questions,
and the mere enumeration makes it plain that it was the Mississippi Valley as an area for expansion
which gave the slavery issue its significance in American history. But for this field of expansion,
slavery might have fulfilled the expectation of the fathers and gradually died away.

Of the significance of the Mississippi Valley in the Civil War, it is unnecessary that I should
speak. Illinois gave to the North its President; Mississippi gave to the South its President.
Lincoln and Davis were both born in Kentucky. Grant and Sherman, the northern generals, came
from the Mississippi Valley; and both of them believed that when Vicksburg fell the cause of
the South was lost, and so it must have been if the Confederacy had been unable, after victories
in the East, to regain the Father of Waters; for, as General Sherman said: "Whatever power
holds that river can govern this continent."

With the close of the war political power passed for many years to the northern half of the
Mississippi Valley, as the names of Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Harrison, and McKinley indicate.
The population of the Valley grew from about fifteen millions in 1860 to over forty millions
in 1900--over half the total population of the United States. The significance of its industrial
growth is not likely to be overestimated or overlooked. On its northern border, from near Minnesota's
boundary line, through the Great Lakes to Pittsburgh, on its eastern edge, runs a huge movement
of iron from mine to factory. This industry is basal in American life, and it has revolutionized
the industry of the world. The United States produces pig iron and steel in amount equal to
her two greatest competitors combined, and the iron ores for this product are chiefly in the
Mississippi Valley. It is the chief producer of coal, thereby enabling the United States almost
to equal the combined production of Germany and Great Britain; and great oil fields of the
nation are in its midst. Its huge crops of wheat and corn and its cattle are the main resources
for the United States and are drawn upon by Europe. Its cotton furnishes two-thirds of the
world's factory supply. Its railroad system constitutes the greatest transportation network
in the world. Again it is seeking industrial consolidation by demanding improvement of its
vast water system as a unit. If this design, favored by Roosevelt, shall at some time be accomplished,
again the bulk of the commerce of the Valley may flow along the old routes to New Orleans;
and to Galveston by the development of southern railroad outlets after the building of the
Panama Canal. For the development and exploitation of these and of the transportation and trade
interests of the Middle West, Eastern capital has been consolidated into huge corporations,
trusts, and combinations. With the influx of capital, and the rise of cities and manufactures,
portions of the Mississippi Valley have become assimilated with the East. With the end of the
era of free lands the basis of its democratic society is passing away.

The final topic on which I shall briefly comment in this discussion of the significance of
the Mississippi Valley in American history is a corollary of this condition. Has the Mississippi
Valley a permanent contribution to make to American society, or is it to be adjusted into a
type characteristically Eastern and European? In other words, has the United States itself
an original contribution to make to the history of society? This is what it comes to. The most
significant fact in the Mississippi Valley is its ideals. Here has been developed, not by revolutionary
theory, but by growth among free opportunities, the conception of a vast democracy made up
of mobile ascending individuals, conscious of their power and their responsibilities. Can these
ideals of individualism and democracy be reconciled and applied to the twentieth century type
of civilization?

Other nations have been rich and prosperous and powerful, art-loving and empire-building. No
other nation on a vast scale has been controlled by a self-conscious, self-restrained democracy
in the interests of progress and freedom, industrial as well as political. It is in the vast
and level spaces of the Mississippi Valley, if anywhere, that the forces of social transformation
and the modification of its democratic ideals may be arrested.

Beginning with competitive individualism, as well as with belief in equality, the farmers of
the Mississippi Valley gradually learned that unrestrained competition and combination meant
the triumph of the strongest, the seizure in the interest of a dominant class of the strategic
points of the nation's life. They learned that between the ideal of individualism, unrestrained
by society, and the ideal of democracy, was an innate conflict; that their very ambitions and
forcefulness had endangered their democracy. The significance of the Mississippi Valley in
American history has lain partly in the fact that it was a region of revolt. Here have arisen
varied, sometimes ill-considered, but always devoted, movements for ameliorating the lot of
the common man in the interests of democracy. Out of the Mississippi Valley have come successive
and related tidal waves of popular demand for real or imagined legislative safeguards to their
rights and their social ideals. The Granger movement, the Greenback movement, the Populist
movement, Bryan Democracy, and Roosevelt Republicanism all found their greatest strength in
the Mississippi Valley. They were Mississippi Valley ideals in action. Its people were learning
by experiment and experience how to grapple with the fundamental problem of creating a just
social order that shall sustain the free, progressive, individual in a real democracy. The
Mississippi Valley is asking, "What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose
his own soul?"

The Mississippi Valley has furnished a new social order to America. Its universities have set
new types of institutions for social service and for the elevation of the plain people. Its
historians should recount its old ambitions, and inventory its ideals, as well as its resources,
for the information of the present age, to the end that building on its past, the mighty Valley
may have a significance in the life of the nation even more profound than any which I have
recounted.

FOOTNOTES:

[177:1] Proceedings of the Mississippi Valley Historical Association for 1909-10. Reprinted
with the permission of the Association.

[177:2] Harper's Magazine, February, 1900, p. 413.

[178:1] Roosevelt, "The Northwest in the Nation," in "Proceedings of the Wisconsin Historical
Society," Fortieth Annual Meeting, p. 92.

[182:1] "Franklin's Works," iv, p. 141.

[186:1] [See the author's paper in American Historical Review, x, p. 245.]

[187:1] Cutler's "Cutler," ii, p. 372.

[188:1] "Jefferson's Works," iv, p. 431.

[189:1] [See on the Cotton Kingdom, U. B. Phillips, "History of Slavery"; W. G. Brown, "Lower
South"; W. E. Dodd, "Expansion and Conflict"; F. J. Turner, "New West."]

[198:1] "Congressional Globe," 35th Congress, First Session, Appendix, p. 70.

[199:1] "Seward's Works" (Boston, 1884), iv, p. 319.

VII

THE PROBLEM OF THE WEST[205:1]

The problem of the West is nothing less than the problem of American development. A glance
at the map of the United States reveals the truth. To write of a "Western sectionalism," bounded
on the east by the Alleghanies, is, in itself, to proclaim the writer a provincial. What is
the West? What has it been in American life? To have the answers to these questions, is to
understand the most significant features of the United States of to-day.

The West, at bottom, is a form of society, rather than an area. It is the term applied to the
region whose social conditions result from the application of older institutions and ideas
to the transforming influences of free land. By this application, a new environment is suddenly
entered, freedom of opportunity is opened, the cake of custom is broken, and new activities,
new lines of growth, new institutions and new ideals, are brought into existence. The wilderness
disappears, the "West" proper passes on to a new frontier, and in the former area, a new society
has emerged from its contact with the backwoods. Gradually this society loses its primitive
conditions, and assimilates itself to the type of the older social conditions of the East;
but it bears within it enduring and distinguishing survivals of its frontier experience. Decade
after decade, West after West, this rebirth of American society has gone on, has left its traces
behind it, and has reacted on the East. The history of our political institutions, our democracy,
is not a history of imitation, of simple borrowing; it is a history of the evolution and adaptation
of organs in response to changed environment, a history of the origin of new political species.
In this sense, therefore, the West has been a constructive force of the highest significance
in our life. To use the words of that acute and widely informed observer, Mr. Bryce, "The West
is the most American part of America. . . . What Europe is to Asia, what America is to England,
that the Western States and Territories are to the Atlantic States."

       *       *       *       *       *

The West, as a phase of social organization, began with the Atlantic coast, and passed across
the continent. But the colonial tide-water area was in close touch with the Old World, and
soon lost its Western aspects. In the middle of the eighteenth century, the newer social conditions
appeared along the upper waters of the tributaries of the Atlantic. Here it was that the West
took on its distinguishing features, and transmitted frontier traits and ideals to this area
in later days. On the coast, were the fishermen and skippers, the merchants and planters, with
eyes turned toward Europe. Beyond the falls of the rivers were the pioneer farmers, largely
of non-English stock, Scotch-Irish and German. They constituted a distinct people, and may
be regarded as an expansion of the social and economic life of the middle region into the back
country of the South. These frontiersmen were the ancestors of Boone, Andrew Jackson, Calhoun,
Clay, and Lincoln. Washington and Jefferson were profoundly affected by these frontier conditions.
The forest clearings have been the seed plots of American character.

In the Revolutionary days, the settlers crossed the Alleghanies and put a barrier between them
and the coast. They became, to use their phrases, "the men of the Western waters," the heirs
of the "Western world." In this era, the backwoodsmen, all along the western slopes of the
mountains, with a keen sense of the difference between them and the dwellers on the coast,
demanded organization into independent States of the Union. Self-government was their ideal.
Said one of their rude, but energetic petitions for statehood: "Some of our fellow-citizens
may think we are not able to conduct our affairs and consult our interests; but if our society
is rude, much wisdom is not necessary to supply our wants, and a fool can sometimes put on
his clothes better than a wise man can do it for him." This forest philosophy is the philosophy
of American democracy. But the men of the coast were not ready to admit its implications. They
apportioned the State legislatures so that the property-holding minority of the tide-water
lands were able to outvote the more populous back countries. A similar system was proposed
by Federalists in the constitutional convention of 1787. Gouverneur Morris, arguing in favor
of basing representation on property as well as numbers, declared that "he looked forward,
also, to that range of new States which would soon be formed in the West. He thought the rule
of representation ought to be so fixed, as to secure to the Atlantic States a prevalence in
the national councils." "The new States," said he, "will know less of the public interest than
these; will have an interest in many respects different; in particular will be little scrupulous
of involving the community in wars, the burdens and operations of which would fall chiefly
on the maritime States. Provision ought, therefore, to be made to prevent the maritime States
from being hereafter outvoted by them." He added that the Western country "would not be able
to furnish men equally enlightened to share in the administration of our common interests.
The busy haunts of men, not the remote wilderness, was the proper school of political talents.
If the Western people get power into their hands, they will ruin the Atlantic interest. The
back members are always most averse to the best measures." Add to these utterances of Gouverneur
Morris the impassioned protest of Josiah Quincy, of Massachusetts, in the debates in the House
of Representatives, on the admission of Louisiana. Referring to the discussion over the slave
votes and the West in the constitutional convention, he declared, "Suppose, then, that it had
been distinctly foreseen that, in addition to the effect of this weight, the whole population
of a world beyond the Mississippi was to be brought into this and the other branch of the legislature,
to form our laws, control our rights, and decide our destiny. Sir, can it be pretended that
the patriots of that day would for one moment have listened to it? . . . They had not taken
degrees at the hospital of idiocy. . . . Why, sir, I have already heard of six States, and
some say there will be, at no great distant time, more. I have also heard that the mouth of
the Ohio will be far to the east of the center of the contemplated empire. . . . Do you suppose
the people of the Northern and Atlantic States will, or ought to, look on with patience and
see Representatives and Senators from the Red River and Missouri, pouring themselves upon this
and the other floor, managing the concerns of a seaboard fifteen hundred miles, at least, from
their residence; and having a preponderancy in councils into which, constitutionally, they
could never have been admitted?"

Like an echo from the fears expressed by the East at the close of the eighteenth century come
the words of an eminent Eastern man of letters[208:1] at the end of the nineteenth century,
in warning against the West: "Materialized in their temper; with few ideals of an ennobling
sort; little instructed in the lessons of history; safe from exposure to the direct calamities
and physical horrors of war; with undeveloped imaginations and sympathies--they form a community
unfortunate and dangerous from the possession of power without a due sense of its corresponding
responsibilities; a community in which the passion for war may easily be excited as the fancied
means by which its greatness may be convincingly exhibited, and its ambitions gratified. .
. . Some chance spark may fire the prairie."

Here, then, is the problem of the West, as it looked to New England leaders of thought in the
beginning and at the end of this century. From the first, it was recognized that a new type
was growing up beyond the seaboard, and that the time would come when the destiny of the nation
would be in Western hands. The divergence of these societies became clear in the struggle over
the ratification of the federal constitution. The up-country agricultural regions, the communities
that were in debt and desired paper money, with some Western exceptions, opposed the instrument;
but the areas of intercourse and property carried the day.

It is important to understand, therefore, what were some of the ideals of this early Western
democracy. How did the frontiersman differ from the man of the coast?

The most obvious fact regarding the man of the Western Waters is that he had placed himself
under influences destructive to many of the gains of civilization. Remote from the opportunity
for systematic education, substituting a log hut in the forest-clearing for the social comforts
of the town, he suffered hardships and privations, and reverted in many ways to primitive conditions
of life. Engaged in a struggle to subdue the forest, working as an individual, and with little
specie or capital, his interests were with the debtor class. At each stage of its advance,
the West has favored an expansion of the currency. The pioneer had boundless confidence in
the future of his own community, and when seasons of financial contraction and depression occurred,
he, who had staked his all on confidence in Western development, and had fought the savage
for his home, was inclined to reproach the conservative sections and classes. To explain this
antagonism requires more than denunciation of dishonesty, ignorance, and boorishness as fundamental
Western traits. Legislation in the United States has had to deal with two distinct social conditions.
In some portions of the country there was, and is, an aggregation of property, and vested rights
are in the foreground: in others, capital is lacking, more primitive conditions prevail, with
different economic and social ideals, and the contentment of the average individual is placed
in the foreground. That in the conflict between these two ideals an even hand has always been
held by the government would be difficult to show.

The separation of the Western man from the seaboard, and his environment, made him in a large
degree free from European precedents and forces. He looked at things independently and with
small regard or appreciation for the best Old World experience. He had no ideal of a philosophical,
eclectic nation, that should advance civilization by "intercourse with foreigners and familiarity
with their point of view, and readiness to adopt whatever is best and most suitable in their
ideas, manners, and customs." His was rather the ideal of conserving and developing what was
original and valuable in this new country. The entrance of old society upon free lands meant
to him opportunity for a new type of democracy and new popular ideals. The West was not conservative:
buoyant self-confidence and self-assertion were distinguishing traits in its composition. It
saw in its growth nothing less than a new order of society and state. In this conception were
elements of evil and elements of good.

But the fundamental fact in regard to this new society was its relation to land. Professor
Boutmy has said of the United States, "Their one primary and predominant object is to cultivate
and settle these prairies, forests, and vast waste lands. The striking and peculiar characteristic
of American society is that it is not so much a democracy as a huge commercial company for
the discovery, cultivation, and capitalization of its enormous territory. The United States
are primarily a commercial society, and only secondarily a nation." Of course, this involves
a serious misapprehension. By the very fact of the task here set forth, far-reaching ideals
of the state and of society have been evolved in the West, accompanied by loyalty to the nation
representative of these ideals. But M. Boutmy's description hits the substantial fact, that
the fundamental traits of the man of the interior were due to the free lands of the West. These
turned his attention to the great task of subduing them to the purposes of civilization, and
to the task of advancing his economic and social status in the new democracy which he was helping
to create. Art, literature, refinement, scientific administration, all had to give way to this
Titanic labor. Energy, incessant activity, became the lot of this new American. Says a traveler
of the time of Andrew Jackson, "America is like a vast workshop, over the door of which is
printed in blazing characters, 'No admittance here, except on business.'" The West of our own
day reminds Mr. Bryce "of the crowd which Vathek found in the hall of Eblis, each darting hither
and thither with swift steps and unquiet mien, driven to and fro by a fire in the heart. Time
seems too short for what they have to do, and the result always to come short of their desire."

But free lands and the consciousness of working out their social destiny did more than turn
the Westerner to material interests and devote him to a restless existence. They promoted equality
among the Western settlers, and reacted as a check on the aristocratic influences of the East.
Where everybody could have a farm, almost for taking it, economic equality easily resulted,
and this involved political equality. Not without a struggle would the Western man abandon
this ideal, and it goes far to explain the unrest in the remote West to-day.

Western democracy included individual liberty, as well as equality. The frontiersman was impatient
of restraints. He knew how to preserve order, even in the absence of legal authority. If there
were cattle thieves, lynch law was sudden and effective: the regulators of the Carolinas were
the predecessors of the claims associations of Iowa and the vigilance committees of California.
But the individual was not ready to submit to complex regulations. Population was sparse, there
was no multitude of jostling interests, as in older settlements, demanding an elaborate system
of personal restraints. Society became atomic. There was a reproduction of the primitive idea
of the personality of the law, a crime was more an offense against the victim than a violation
of the law of the land. Substantial justice, secured in the most direct way, was the ideal
of the backwoodsman. He had little patience with finely drawn distinctions or scruples of method.
If the thing was one proper to be done, then the most immediate, rough and ready, effective
way was the best way.

It followed from the lack of organized political life, from the atomic conditions of the backwoods
society, that the individual was exalted and given free play. The West was another name for
opportunity. Here were mines to be seized, fertile valleys to be preëmpted, all the natural
resources open to the shrewdest and the boldest. The United States is unique in the extent
to which the individual has been given an open field, unchecked by restraints of an old social
order, or of scientific administration of government. The self-made man was the Western man's
ideal, was the kind of man that all men might become. Out of his wilderness experience, out
of the freedom of his opportunities, he fashioned a formula for social regeneration,--the freedom
of the individual to seek his own. He did not consider that his conditions were exceptional
and temporary.

Under such conditions, leadership easily develops,--a leadership based on the possession of
the qualities most serviceable to the young society. In the history of Western settlement,
we see each forted village following its local hero. Clay, Jackson, Harrison, Lincoln, were
illustrations of this tendency in periods when the Western hero rose to the dignity of national
hero.

