And Lucy seemed to have her wish all at once, for she and Amina stood in her own schoolroom,
but with no one else there.  The first thing Amina did was to scream, "Oh, what shocking windows!
even men can see in; shut them up."  She rolled herself up in her veil, and Lucy could only
satisfy her by pulling down all the blinds, after which she ventured to look about a little.
"What have you to sit on?" she asked with great disgust.

"Chairs and stools," said Lucy, laughing and showing them.

"These little tables with four legs!  How can you sit on them?"

Lucy sat down and showed her.  "That is not sitting," she said, and she tried to curl herself
up cross-legged.

"Our teacher always makes us write a long grammar lesson if she sees us sitting with our legs
crossed," said Lucy, laughing with much amusement at Amina's attempts to wriggle herself up
on the stool from which she nearly fell.

"Ah, I will never have a governess!" cried Amina.  "I will cry and cry, and give Selim Bey
no rest till he promises to let me alone.  What a dreadful place this is!  Where can you sleep?"

"In bed, to be sure," said Lucy.

"I see no cushions to lie on."

"No; we have bedrooms, and beds there.  We should not think of taking off our clothes here."

"What should you undress for?"

"To sleep, of course."

"How horrible!  We sleep in all our clothes wherever we like to lie down.  We never undress
but for the bath.  Do you go to the bath?"

"I have a bath every morning, when I get up, in my own room."

"Bathe at home!  Then you never see your friends?  We meet at the bath, and talk and play and
laugh."

"Meet bathing!  No, indeed!  We meet at home, and out of doors," said Lucy; "my friend Annie
and I walk together."

"Walk together! what, in the street?  Shocking!  You cannot be a lady."

"Indeed I am," said Lucy, coloring up.  "My papa is a gentleman.  And see how many books we
have, and how much we have to learn!  French, and music, and sums, and grammar, and history,
and geography."

"I WILL not be a Frank!  No, no!  I will not learn," said the alarmed Amina on hearing this
catalogue poured forth.

"Geography is very nice," said Lucy; "here are our maps.  I will show you where you live. 
This is Constantinople."

"I live at Stamboul," said Amina, scornfully.

"There is Stamboul in little letters below--look."

"That Stamboul!  The Frank girl is false; Stamboul is a large, large, beautiful place; not
a little black speck.  I can see it from my lattice.  White houses and mosques in the sun,
and the blue Golden Horn, with the little vessels gliding along."

Before Lucy could explain, the door opened, and one of her brothers put in his head.  At once
Amina began to scream and roll herself in the window curtain.  "A man in the harem!  Oh! oh!
oh!  Were there no slippers at the door?"  And her screaming awoke Lucy, who found herself
at her Uncle Joe's again.

CHAPTER XI.

SWITZERLAND.

"I liked the mountain girl best of all," thought Lucy.  "I wonder whether I shall ever get
among the mountains again.  There's a great stick in the corner that Uncle Joe calls his alpenstock.
I'll go and read the names upon it.  They are the names of all the mountains where he has used it."

She read Mount Blanc, Mount Cenis, the Wengern, and so on; and of course as she read and sung
them over to herself, they lulled her off into her wonderful dreams, and brought her this time
into a meadow, steep and sloping, but full of flowers, the loveliest flowers, of all kinds,
growing among the long grass that waved over them.  The fresh, clear air was so delicious that
she almost hoped she was back in her dear Tyrol; but the hills were not the same.  She saw
upon the slope quantities of cows, goats, and sheep, feeding just as on the Tyrolese Alps;
but beyond was a dark row of pines, and above, in the sky as it were, rose all round great
sharp points--like clouds for their whiteness, but not in their straight, jagged outlines.
And here and there the deep gray clefts between seemed to spread into white rivers, or over
the ruddy purple of the half-distance came sharp white lines darting downwards.

As she sat up in the grass and looked about her, a bark startled her.  A dog began to growl,
bark, and dance round her, so that she would have been much frightened if the next moment a
voice had not called him off--"Fie, Brilliant, down; let the little girl alone. He is good,
Madamoiselle, never fear.  He helps me keep the cows."

"Who are you, then?"

"I am Maurice, the little herd-boy.  I live with my grandmother, and work for her."

"What, in keeping cows?"

"Yes; and look here!"

"Oh, the delicious little cottage!  It has eaves and windows, and balconies, and a door, and
little cows and sheep, and men and women, all in pretty white wood!  You did not make it, Maurice?"

"Yes, truly I did; I cut it out with my knife, all myself."

"How clever you must be.  And what shall you do with it?"

"I shall watch for a carriage with ladies winding up that long road; and then I shall stand
and take off my hat, and hold out my cottage. Perhaps they will buy it, and then I shall have
enough to get grandmother a warm gown for the winter.  When I grow bigger I will be a guide,
like my father."

"A guide?"

"Yes, to lead travellers up to the mountain-tops.  There is nowhere you English will not go. Yes.
I think we can work it as far as that goes. But one’s always heard that Spanish roads are impossible.”

“They’ll
be no worse for us than for Carmona,” I argued. “Besides, most of the best known books about
Spain are out of date.  It was in one of them my
father was swallowed up."

"Ah! then how can you love them?" said Lucy.

"Because they are so grand and so beautiful," said Maurice.  "No other place has the like,
and they make one's heart swell with wonder, and joy in the God who made them."

And Maurice's eyes sparkled, and Lucy looked at the clear, stern glory of the mountain points,
and felt as if she understood him.

CHAPTER XII.

THE COSSACK.

Caper, caper; dance, dance.  What a wonderful dance it was, just as if the little fellow had
been made of cork, so high did he bound the moment he touched the ground; while he jerked out
his arms and legs as if they were pulled by strings, like the Marionettes that had once performed
in front of the window.  Only, his face was all fun and life, and he did look so proud and
delighted to show what he could do; and it was all in clear, fresh, open air, the whole extent
covered with short, green grass, upon which were grazing herds of small lean horses, and flocks
of sheep without tails, but with their wool puffed out behind into a sort of bustle or panier.
There was a cluster of clean, white-looking houses in the distance; and Lucy knew that she
was in the great plains called the Steppes, that lie between the rivers Volga and Don.

"Do you live there?" she asked, by way of beginning the conversation.

"Yes; my father is the hetman of the Stantitza, and these are my holidays.  I go to school
at Tcherkask the greater part of the year."

"Tcherkask!  Oh, what a funny name!"

"And you would think it a funny town if you were there.  It is built on a great bog by the
side of the river Volga; all the houses stand on piles of timber, and in the spring the streets
are full of water, and one has to sail about in boats."

"Oh! that must be delicious."

"I don't like it as much as coming home and riding.  See!" and as he whistled, one of the horses
came whinnying up, and put his nose over the boy's shoulder.

"Good fellow!  But your horses are thin; they look little."

