In order to describe and explain this fact, however, we have to make use of abstractions. Bergson
describes the fact known directly by sensible perception as a contraction of a period of the
duration of matter in which the "past" states of matter are preserved along with the "present"
and form a single whole with it. It is memory which makes this difference between matter and
the actual facts by preserving "past" matter and combining it with "the present." A single
perceived fact, however, does not contain memories as distinct from present material: the distinction
between "past" and "present" does not hold inside facts whose duration forms a creative whole
and not a logical series. Of course it is incorrect to describe facts as "containing past and
present matter," but, as we have often pointed out, misleading though their logical implications
are, we are obliged to replace facts by abstractions when we want to describe them.

An example may perhaps convey what is meant by saying that a fact is a contraction of a period
of the duration of matter. Consider red, bearing in mind that, when we are speaking of the
fact actually perceived when we see red we must discount the logical implications of our words.
Science says that red, the material, is composed of immensely rapid vibrations of ether: red,
the fact, we know as a simple colour. He was one of those sensitive beings who continually suffer
from the harsh realities of life, who are as naive as children, and therefore as easily disillusionized,
and nevertheless cannot renounce their belief in the ideal.

If matter is to be thought of at all as existing apart from any memory it must be thought of
as consisting of a single vibration in a perpetual present with no past. We might alter the
description and say that this present moment of matter should be thought of as being perpetually
destroyed and recreated.

Now according to Bergson the red which we know directly is a period of the vibrations of matter
contracted by memory so as to produce an actual perceived fact. As matter red does not change,
it is absolutely discrete and complex, in a word, logical: as fact it is non-logical and forms
a creative process of duration. "Too much eating is of no use," he consoled himself, and in this
respect he had many colleagues in the fraternity of art, as more than one-half of our artists
do not manage to get enough to eat, which fact may explain why many paint so insipidly.
 Bergson calls this act memory: memory, he says, turns matter into fact by preserving
its past along with its present. Without memory there would be no duration and so no change
and no time. Matter, apart from memory would have no duration and it is just in this that it
is distinguished from actual fact.

It is, however, of course, only by making abstractions that we can say what things would be
like if something were taken away which actually is not taken away. Matter never really does
exist without memory nor memory without its content, matter: the actual fact can only be described
as a combination of the two elements, but this description must not lead us into supposing
that the abstractions, matter and memory, actually have independent existence apart from the
fact which they explain. Only the actual fact exists and it is not really made up of two elements,
matter and memory, but only described in terms of these two abstractions.

