AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF ANDREW DICKSON WHITE

WITH PORTRAITS

VOLUME I

NEW YORK THE CENTURY CO. 1905

Copyright, 1904, 1905, by THE CENTURY CO. ---- Published March, 1905

THE DE VINNE PRESS

TO MY OLD STUDENTS THIS RECORD OF MY LIFE IS INSCRIBED WITH MOST KINDLY RECOLLECTIONS AND BEST
WISHES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART I--ENVIRONMENT AND EDUCATION CHAPTER I. BOYHOOD IN CENTRAL NEW YORK--1832-1850

The ``Military Tract'' of New York.  A settlement on the headwaters of the Susquehanna.  Arrival
of my grandfathers and grandmothers. Growth of the new settlement.  First recollections of
it. Here honor compels me, and I will satisfy it; whether fate afterward show itself propitious or
adverse, perishing glorious I shall perish content.
I will tell thee further, but under confidence, the sect of Christians
is not what it is thought to be.  Joseph Allen and Professor Root; their influence; moral
side of the education thus obtained.  General education outside the school.  Removal to a ``classical
school''; a catastrophe.  James W. Hoyt and his influence.  My early love for classical studies.
Discovery of Scott's novels.  ``The Gallery of British Artists.''  Effect of sundry conventions,
public meetings, and lectures.  Am sent to Geneva College; treatment of faculty by students.
A ``Second Adventist'' meeting; Howell and Clark; my first meeting with Judge Folger. Philosophy
of student dissipation at that place and time.

CHAPTER II. YALE AND EUROPE--1850-1857

My coup d'<e'>tat.  Removal to Yale.  New energy in study and reading.  Influence of Emerson,
Carlyle, and Ruskin.  Yale in 1850.  My disappointment at the instruction; character of president
and professors; perfunctory methods in lower-class rooms; ``gerund-grinding'' vs. literature;
James Hadley--his abilities and influence, other professors; influence of President Woolsey,
Professors Porter, Silliman, and Dana; absence of literary instruction; character of that period
from a literary point of view; influences from fellow-students.  Importance of political questions
at that time.  Sundry successes in essay writing.  Physical education at Yale; boating.  Life
abroad after graduation; visit to Oxford; studies at the Sorbonne and Coll<e!>ge de France;
afternoons at the Invalides; tramps through western and central France.  Studies at St. Petersburg.
Studies at Berlin.  Journey in Italy; meeting with James Russell Lowell at Venice.  Frieze,
Fishburne, and studies in Rome.  Excursions through the south of France.  Return to America.
Influence of Buckle, Lecky, and Draper.  The atmosphere of Darwin and Spencer. Educational
environment at the University of Michigan. 

PART II--POLITICAL LIFE CHAPTER III. FROM JACKSON TO FILLMORE--1832-1851

Political division in my family; differences between my father and grandfather; election of
Andrew Jackson.  First recollections of American politics, Martin Van Buren.  Campaign of 1840;
campaign songs and follies.  Efforts by the Democrats; General Crary of Michigan; Corwin's
speech.  The Ogle gold-spoon speech.  The Sub-Treasury Question.  Election of General Harrison;
his death.  Disappointment in President Tyler.  Carelessness of nominating conventions as to
the second place upon the ticket. Campaign of 1844.  Clay, Birney, and Polk.  Growth of anti-slavery
feeling.  Senator Hale's lecture.  Henry Clay's proposal, The campaign of 1848; General Taylor
vs. General Cass.  My recollections of them both.  State Conventions at this period. Governor
Bouck; his civility to Bishop Hughes.  Fernando Wood; his method of breaking up a State Convention.
Charles O'Conor and John Van Buren; boyish adhesion to Martin Van Buren against General Taylor;
Taylor's election; his death.  My recollections of Millard Fillmore. The Fugitive Slave Law.

CHAPTER IV.  EARLY MANHOOD--1851-1857

``Jerry'', his sudden fame.  Speeches of Daniel Webster and Henry Clay at Syracuse on the Fugitive
Slave Law ; their prophecies.  The ``Jerry Rescue.''  Trials of the rescuers.  My attendance
at one of them.  Bishop Loguen's prayer and Gerrit Smith's speech.  Characteristics of Gerrit
Smith. Severus reproaches Felix for his cruelty, and threatens him with his own enmity. Felix undergoes
instantaneous conversion,--a miracle of grace which, under the circumstances provided by Corneille,
we may excuse Voltaire for laughing at.  Pro-slavery tendencies at Yale.
Stand against these taken by President Woolsey and Leonard Bacon.  My candidacy or editorship
of the ``Yale Literary Magazine.''  Opposition on account of my anti-Slavery ideas.  My election.
Temptations to palter with my conscience; victory over them.  Professor Hadley's view of duty
to the Fugitive Slave Law.  Lack of opportunity to present my ideas.  My chance on Commencement
Day.  ``Modern Oracles.''  Effect of my speech on Governor Seymour.  Invitation to his legation
at St. Petersburg after my graduation.  Effect upon me of Governor Seymour's ideas regarding
Jefferson. Difficulties in discussing the slavery question.  My first discovery as to the value
of political criticism in newspapers.  Return to America.  Presidential campaign of 1856. 
Nomination of Fr<e'>mont.  My acquaintance with the Democratic nominee Mr Buchanan.  My first
vote.  Argument made for the ``American Party.''  Election of Buchanan.  My first visit to
Washington.  President Pierce at the White House.  Inauguration of the new President.  Effect
upon me of his speech and of a first sight of the United States Senate.  Impression made by
the Supreme Court.  General impression made by Washington.  My first public lecture--``Civilization
in Russia''; its political bearing; attacks upon it and vindications of it.  Its later history.

CHAPTER V.  THE CIVIL WAR PERIOD--1857-1864.

My arrival at the University of Michigan.  Political side of professorial life.  General purpose
of my lectures in the university and throughout the State.  My articles in the ``Atlantic Monthly.''
President Buchanan, John Brown Stephen A. Douglas, and others.  The Chicago Convention. Nomination
of Lincoln.  Disappointment of my New York friends.  Speeches by Carl Schurz.  Election of
Lincoln.  Beginnings of Civil War.  My advice to students.  Reverses; Bull Run.  George Sumner's
view.  Preparation for the conflict.  Depth of feeling.  Pouring out of my students into the
army.  Kirby Smith.  Conduct of the British Government.  Break in my health.  Thurlow Weed's
advice to me.  My work in London.  Discouragements there.  My published answer to Dr. Russell.
Experiences in Ireland and France.  My horror of the French Emperor.  Effort to influence opinion
in Germany.  William Walton Murphy; his interview with Baron Rothschild.  Fourth of July celebration
at Heidelberg in 1863.  Turning of the contest in favor of the United States.  My election
to the Senate of the State of New York.

CHAPTER VI.  SENATORSHIP AT ALBANY--1864-1865

