The first part opens with a reflection sung by double chorus, "Come, ye Daughters, weep for
Anguish," the first exhorting believers to weep over the sinful world, the second responding
with brief interrogations, and at last taking part in the sorrowful strains of the first. Interwoven
with these is an independent instrumental melody, the whole crowned with a magnificent chorale
sung by the sopranos, "O Lamb of God all blameless!" followed by still another, "Say, sweetest
Jesus," which reappears in other parts of the work variously harmonized. The double chorus
and chorales form the introduction, and are followed by recitative and a chorale, "Thou dear
Redeemer," and a pathetic aria for contralto, "Grief and Pain," relating the incident of the
woman anointing the feet of Jesus. The next number is an aria for soprano, "Only bleed, Thou
dearest Heart," which follows the acceptance by Judas of the thirty pieces of silver, and which
serves to intensify the grief in the aria preceding it. The scene of the Last Supper ensues,
and to this number Bach has given a character of sweetness and gentleness, though its coloring
is sad. As the disciples ask, "Lord, is it I?" another chorale is sung, "'Tis I! my Sins betray
me." The celebrated Captain Thunder ruled in the southern counties, and his business seemed to
be to procure wives for gentlemen who had not sufficient means to please the parents of the young
ladies; or, perhaps, had not time for a long and intricate courtship. After
further recitative and the chorale, "I will stay here beside Thee," we are introduced to the
scene in the Garden of Gethsemane, which is characterized by a number of extraordinary beauty
and strength in its construction. It is introduced by a short instrumental prelude, Zion, represented
by the tenor voice, and the Believers by the chorus, coming in after a few bars and alternating
with extraordinary vocal effect. It calls for the highest dramatic power, and in its musical
development is a web of wonderful harmonies such as we may look for only in the works of the
mighty master of counterpoint. It fitly prepares the way for the two great movements which
close the first part, an aria for soprano and alto, "Alas! my Jesus now is taken," and a double
chorus, "Ye Lightnings, ye Thunders!" The two solo voices join in a lament of a most touching
nature, accompanied by the chorus exclaiming in short, hurried phrases, "Let Him go! Hold!
Bind Him not!" until at last the double chorus bursts in like a tempest, accompanied with the
full power of the instruments, expressing the world's indignation at the deed which is to be
committed, in the words:--

  "Ye lightnings, ye thunders, in clouds are ye vanished!
  Burst open, O fierce flaming caverns of hell!
  Ingulf them, destroy them in wrathfullest mood!
  Oh, blast the betrayer, the murderous brood!"

and the first part concludes with a chorale, "O Man, bewail thy great Sin!"

The second part, originally sung after the sermon, opens with an aria for contralto, full of
the deepest feeling, "Alas! now is my Jesus gone," and one of the most beautiful numbers in
the oratorio, wherein Zion, or the Church, mourns her great loss. The trial scene before Caiaphas
and the threefold denial of Peter follow, leading up to the beautiful aria for alto, with violin
obligato, "Oh, pardon me, my God!" Macfarren, in his admirable analysis, says of this aria,--

  "The deep, deep grief of a tormented conscience finds here an utterance
  which fulfils the purport and far transcends the expression of the
  words. One might suppose the power of the artist to have been
  concentrated upon this one incident, so infinite is its beauty,--one
  might suppose Bach to have regarded the situation it illustrates as
  more significant than others of man's relation to Deity in his sense of
  sin and need for mercy, and as requiring, therefore, peculiar
  prominence in the total impression the oratorio should convey. If this
  was his aim, it is all accomplished. The penitential feeling embodied
  in the song is that which will longest linger in a remembrance of the
  work. The soft tone of the contralto voice, and the keenness of that of
  the violin, are accessories to the effect which the master well knew
  how to handle; but these judicious means are little to be considered in
  comparison with the musical idea of which they are the adjuncts."

The work now rapidly progresses to its beautiful finale. The soprano recitative in response
to Pilate's question, "He hath done only good to all," the aria for soprano, "From love unbounded,"
the powerful contralto recitative, "Look down, O God," the chorale, "O Head all bruised and
wounded!" the contralto aria with chorus, "Look where Jesus beckoning stands," and the peaceful,
soothing recitative for bass, "At Eventide, cool Hour of Rest," are the principal numbers that
occur as we approach the last sad but beautiful double chorus of the Apostles, "Around Thy
Tomb here sit we weeping,"--a close as peaceful as the setting of the sun; for the tomb is
but the couch on which Jesus is reposing, and the music dies away in a slumber-song of most
exalted beauty. This brief sketch could not better close than with the beautiful description
which Mr. Dwight gives of this scene in the notes which he prepared when the work was performed
at the Triennial Festival of the Handel and Haydn Society of Boston:--

  "How full of grief, of tender, spiritual love, of faith and peace, of
  the heart's heaven smiling through tears, is this tone-elegy! So should
  the passion-music close, and not with fugue of praise and triumph like
  an oratorio. How sweetly, evenly, the harmony flows on,--a broad, rich,
  deep, pellucid river, swollen as by countless rills from all the
  loving, bleeding, and believing hearts in a redeemed humanity! How full
  of a sweet, secret comfort, even triumph, is this heavenly farewell: It
  is 'the peace which passeth understanding.' 'Rest Thee softly' is the
  burden of the song. One chorus sings it, and the other echoes 'Softly
  rest;' then both together swell the strain. Many times as this recurs,
  not only in the voices, but in the introduction and frequent interludes
  of the exceedingly full orchestra, which sounds as human as if it too
  had breath and conscious feeling, you still crave more of it; for it is
  as if your soul were bathed in new life inexhaustible. No chorus ever
  sung is surer to enlist the singers' hearts."

                          The Magnificat in D.

The Magnificat in D--known as the "Great Magnificat," to distinguish it from the smaller--is
considered one of the grandest illustrations of Bach's genius. It was composed for Christmas
Day, 1723. Spitta says:--

  "The performance of the cantata 'Christen, ätzet diesen Tag,' with its
  attendant 'Sanctus,' took place during the morning service, and was
  sung by the first choir in the Nikolaikirche. In the evening the
  cantata was repeated by the same choir in the Thomaskirche; and after
  the sermon the Hymn of the Virgin was sung, set in its Latin form, and
  in an elaborate style. For this purpose Bach wrote his great
  'Magnificat.'"

For the occasion of this festival he expanded the Biblical text into four vocal numbers; but
in describing the work it is only necessary to give it as it is now generally sung.

The work is written for a five-part chorus, with organ and orchestral accompaniment. After
a concerted introduction, foreshadowing the general character of the music, it opens with the
chorus, "Magnificat anima mea," in fugal form, worked up with that wonderful power of construction
for which Bach is so renowned among all composers. It is followed by an aria for second soprano
("Et exultavit spiritus meus: in Deo salutari meo"), which is in the same key and has the same
general feeling as the opening chorus, that of Christmas rejoicing. It in turn is followed
by an aria for first soprano ("Quia respexit humilitatem ancillæ suæ"), of which Spitta says:
"Scarcely ever has the idea of virgin purity, simplicity, and humble happiness found more perfect
expression than in this German picture of the Madonna, translated as it were into musical language."
It leads directly to the chorus which takes up the unfinished words of the soprano ("Omnes
generationes"), each part overlaying the other as it enters, and closing in canon form in grave
and colossal harmony. Its next number is an aria for bass ("Quia fecit mihi magna"), of a simple
and joyous character. It is followed by a melodious duet for alto and tenor ("Et misericordia"),
with violin and flute accompaniment, setting forth the mercy of God, in contrast with which
the powerful and energetic chorus ("Fecit potentiam") which succeeds it, is very striking in
its effect. Two beautiful arias for tenor ("Deposuit potentes de sede") and alto ("Esurientes
implevit bonis") follow, the latter being exquisitely tender in its expression, and lead to
the terzetto ("Suscepit Israel puerum suum: recordatus misericordiæ suæ"), arranged in chorale
form, and very plaintive and even melancholy in style. Its mourning is soon lost, however,
in the stupendous five-part fugue ("Sicut locutus est") which follows it and which leads to
the triumphant "Gloria," closing the work,--a chorus of extraordinary majesty and power. Spitta,
in his exhaustive analysis of Bach's music, says of this "Magnificat":--

  "It is emphatically distinct from the rest of Bach's grand church
  compositions by the compactness and concentrated power of the separate
  numbers,--particularly of the choruses,--by the lavish use of the means
  at command, and by its vividly emotional and yet not too agitating
  variety. It stands at the entrance of a new path and a fresh period of
  his productivity, at once full of significance in itself and of promise
  for the future development of the perennial genius which could always
  re-create itself from its own elements."

                               BEETHOVEN.

A general sketch of the life and musical accomplishments of Beethoven has already appeared
in the companion to this work, "The Standard Operas." In this connection, however, it seems
eminently fitting that some attention should be paid to the religious sentiments of the great
composer and the sacred works which he produced. Although not to be distinguished for their general
beauty or appearance, yet they are calculated to afford the student the best plants for comparison, and
for that reason I have arranged them according to the Linnaean System.
DIANDRIA MONOGYNIA. A writer in "Macmillan's Magazine" some years ago very clearly defined his
religious position in the statement that his faith rested on a pantheistic abstraction which
he called "Love." He interpreted everything by the light of this sentiment, which took the
form of an endless longing, sometimes deeply sad, at others rising to the highest exaltation.
An illustration of this in its widest sense may be found in the choral part of the Ninth Symphony.
He at times attempted to give verbal expression to this ecstatic faith which filled him, and
at such times he reminds us of the Mystics. The following passages, which he took from the
inscription on the temple of the Egyptian goddess Neith at Sais, and called his creed, explain
this: "I am that which is. I am all that is, that was, and that shall be. No mortal man hath
lifted my veil. He is alone by Himself, and to Him alone do all things owe their being." With
all this mysticism his theology was practical, as is shown by his criticism of the words which
Moscheles appended to his arrangement of "Fidelio." The latter wrote at the close of his work:
"Fine, with God's help." Beethoven added: "O man! help thyself." That he was deeply religious
by nature, however, is constantly shown in his letters. Wandering alone at evening among the
mountains, he sketched a hymn to the words, "God alone is our Lord." In the extraordinary letter
which he wrote to his brothers, Carl and Johann, he says: "God looks into my heart. He searches
it, and knows that love for man and feelings of benevolence have their abode there." In a letter
to Bettina von Arnim, he writes: "If I am spared for some years to come, I will thank the Omniscient,
the Omnipotent, for the boon, as I do for all other weal and woe." In Spohr's album his inscription
is a musical setting of the words, "Short is the pain, eternal is the joy." In a letter to
the Archduke Rudolph, written in 1817, he gives no uncertain expression to his divine trust.
He says: "My confidence is placed in Providence, who will vouchsafe to hear my prayer, and
one day set me free from all my troubles; for I have served him faithfully from my childhood,
and done good whenever it was in my power. So my trust is in him alone, and I feel that the
Almighty will not allow me to be utterly crushed by all my manifold trials." Even in a business
letter he says: "I assure you on my honor--which, next to God, is what I prize most--that I
authorized no one to accept commissions from me." His letters indeed abound in references to
his constant reliance upon a higher Power. The oratorio, "Christ on the Mount of Olives," six
sacred songs set to poems of Gellert, the Mass in C written for Prince Esterhazy, and the Grand
Mass in D written for the Archduke Rudolph, one of the grandest and most impressive works in
the entire realm of sacred music, attest the depth and fervency of his religious nature.

                          The Mount of Olives.

Beethoven wrote but one oratorio, "Christus am Oelberg" ("Christ on the Mount of Olives").
That he had others in contemplation, however, at different periods of his life is shown by
his letters. In 1809 he wrote to Freiherr von Hammer-Purgstall, a famous Oriental scholar,
appointing an interview for the discussion of the latter's poem on the subject of the deluge,
with reference to its fitness for treatment as an oratorio. Again, in 1824, he writes to Vincenz
Hauschka, of Vienna, that he has decided to write an oratorio on the text furnished by Bernard,
the subject being "The Victory of the Cross." This work, however, owing to his extreme physical
sufferings at that period, was never begun, and the world thereby has suffered a great musical
loss; for, judging from his great Mass in D, no one can doubt how majestic and impressive the
"Victory of the Cross" would have been, as compared with the "Mount of Olives," written in
his earlier period, and before any of his masterpieces had appeared.

