Lucia lay back in her chair, wondering, not at Edith, but at herself. Her cousin's visit had
been so far effectual that it had made her aware of the attitude of her own mind. If she had
been told beforehand that she could be happy in a Bloomsbury boarding-house, or within any
reasonable distance of such people as Miss Bishop and Mr. Soper, the thing would have appeared
to her absurd. And yet it was so. She was happy among these dreadful people, as she had not
been happy at Hampstead among the cultured and refined. But when she came to examine into the
nature of this happiness she found that it contained no positive element; that it consisted
mainly of relief, relief from the strain of an incessant anxiety and uncertainty. That the
strain had been divided between her and Horace had only made it worse, for she had had the
larger share of the anxiety, he of the uncertainty. Not that he was more uncertain than in
the old days at Harmouth. He was less so. But she had never been anxious then. For after all
they had understood each other; and apparently it was the understanding now that failed. Yet
Horace had been right when he told himself that Lucia would never imply anything, infer anything,
claim anything, take anything for granted on the sanction of that understanding. She would
not have hurried by a look or word the slow movements of the love which somehow he had led
her to believe in. Love between man and woman to her mind was a sort of genius; and genius,
as she said long ago to poor Rickman, must always have about it a divine uncertainty. Yes,
love too was the wind of the divine spirit blowing where it listeth, the kindling of the divine
fire. She had waited for it patiently, reverently, not altogether humbly, but with a superb
possession of her soul. Better to wait for years than rush to meet it, and so be tossed by
the wind and shrivelled by the fire. Then, when the crash came five years ago, though she could
hardly conceive it as altering her cousin's attitude, she knew that it must alter hers. The
understanding had been partly a family affair; and her side of the family was now involved
in debt and poverty and dishonour. When the debts were paid off, and the poverty reduced and
the honour redeemed, it would be time to re-consider the understanding. But, as it was just
possible that Horace, if not exactly fascinated by her debts and all the rest of it, might
feel that these very things bound him, challenged him in some sort to protection, Lucia withdrew
herself from the reach of the chivalrous delivering arm. She took her stand, not quite outside
the circle of the cousinly relation, but on the uttermost fringe and verge of it, where she
entered more and more into her own possession. They met; they wrote long letters to each other
all about art and literature and philosophy, those ancient unimpassioned themes; for, if Lucia
assumed nothing herself she allowed Horace to assume that whatever interested him must necessarily
interest her. In short, perceiving the horrible situation in which poor Horace had been left
by that premature understanding, she did everything she could to help him out of it.

And she succeeded beyond her own or Horace's expectation.

After three years' hard work, when all the debts were paid, and she was independent, Lucia
thought she might now trust herself to stay with Horace in his house at Hampstead. She had
stayed there already with Edith when Horace was away, but that was different. And at first
all was well; that is to say, there was no anxiety and no uncertainty. The calm and successful
critic of The Museion knew his own mind; and Lucia said to herself that she knew hers. The
understanding between them was perfect now. They were simply first cousins; each was the other's
best friend; and they could never be anything else. She stood very much nearer to the heart
of the circle, in a place where it was warm and comfortable and safe. If Horace could only
have let her stay there, all would have been well still. But a mature Lucia, a Lucia entirely
self-possessed, calm and successful, too, in her lesser way; a Lucia without any drawbacks,
and almost to his mind as uncertain as himself; a Lucia who might be carried off any day before
his eyes by some one of the many brilliant young men whom it was impossible not to introduce
to her, proved fatally disturbing to Horace Jewdwine. And it was then that the anxiety and
uncertainty began.

They were at their height in the sixth year, when Lucia broke down and came to Hampstead to
recover. My camp was at the mouth of the principal inlet, and my most frequented hunting route up
along its bank. On my excursions up that river, I had often noticed a deeply-wooded, rough, and
singularly-shaped mountain, which, at the distance of four or five miles from the nearest point
of the stream, westward, reared its shaggy sides over the surrounding wilderness, and which I
thought must make one of the best haunts for bear and moose that I had seen in that region.
 And if the awful reflection visited her
that this step might prove to be a more importunate appeal than any, to be a positive forcing
of his hand, Edith had dissipated it by showing very plainly that the appeal was to their pride
and not their pity.

Lucia did not consider herself by any means an object of pity. She was happy. The absence of
intolerable tension was enough to make her so. As for the society she was thrown with, after
the wear of incessant subtleties and uncertainties there was something positively soothing
in straightforward uninspired vulgarity. These people knew their own minds, if their minds
were not worth knowing; and that was something. It seemed to her that her own mind was growing
healthier every day; till, by the time Edith visited her, there was no need to feign recovery,
for recovery had come. And with it had come many benign and salutary things; the old delicious
joy of giving pleasure; a new sense of the redeeming and atoning pathos of the world; all manner
of sweet compunctions and tender tolerances; the divine chance, she told herself, for all the
charities in which she might have failed. There had come Sophie. And there had come, at last,
in spite of everything, Keith Rickman.

As for Keith Rickman, her interest in him was not only a strong personal matter, but it had
been part of the cool intellectual game she had played, for Horace's distraction and her own
deception; a game which Horace, with his subterfuges and suppressions, had not played fair.
But when, seeking to excuse him, she began to consider the possible motives of her cousin's
behaviour, Lucia was profoundly disturbed.

It had come to this: if Horace had cared for her he might have had a right to interfere. But
he did not care. Therefore, no interference, she vowed, should come between her and her friendship
for the poet who had honoured her by trusting her. She could not help feeling a little bitter
with Horace for the harm he had done her, or rather, might have done her in Keith Rickman's eyes.

For all that she had now to make amends.

CHAPTER LVIII

