First, by a vivid conception that cooperation is designed, provided for, and expected.  We
are children of God; there can be but one great end through the ages in the universe.  There
should be cooperation of every force.  There have been thousands of evident cooperations--waters
divided and burned by celestial fire, Pharaohs rebuked, Ninevehs warned, exiles recalled, Jerusalems
rebuilded, Luthers upheld, preachers of today changed from waning, not desired, half-over-the-dead-line
ministers into vigorous, flaming heralds of the Gospel, who possessed tenfold power to what
they had before; we ourselves personally helped in manifest and undeniable instances, and so
have come to believe that God can do anything, anywhere, if he can get the right kind of a
man. Promises of aid are abundant.  Heaven and earth shall pass away sooner than one jot or
tittle of these words fail.  We are invited to test them: "Come now, and prove me herewith,
and see if I will not open the windows of heaven once more, as at the deluge, and pour you
out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it."

Second, select some definite work too great for us to do alone, as the preparation of a sermon
that shall have unusual power of persuasion to change action, the conduct of a prayer meeting
of remarkable interest, the casting out of some devil of evil speech or action, the conversion
of one individual, the raising of more money for some of God's purposes, and then go about
the work, not alone, but in such a way that God can lead and we help.  Let the fasting and
prayer not be lacking. When the right direction comes let Jonathan take his armor-bearer and
climb up on his hands and knees against the Philistines, let Paul go to Macedonia, Peter to
Cornelius, Wesley send help to America.  Bishop Foss said, in regard to several crises in a
most serious sickness, that Christ always arrived before it came.  So in regard to work to
be done. The Lord was in Nineveh before Jonah, in Caesarea before Peter, and will be in the
heart of every sinner we seek to get converted before we arrive.  Any man who wants to do an
immense business should seek a good partner.  We are workers together with God.  What is being
done worthy of the copartnership?

WHEN THIS WORLD IS NOT*

*Reprinted from the Methodist Review.

What is there after that?

To this question there are three answers:

I. There are left all of what may be called natural forces that there were before the world
was created.  They are not dependent on it.  The sea is not lost when one bubble or a thousand
break on the rocky shore. The world is not the main thing in the universe.  It is only a temporary
contrivance, a mere scaffolding for a special purpose.  When that purpose is fulfilled it is
natural that it should pass away.  We already have a kingdom that cannot be moved.  "The things
which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal."

It should not be supposed that the space away from the world is an empty desert.  God is everywhere,
and creative energy is omnipresent. Not merely is a millionth of space occupied where the worlds
are, but all space is full of God and his manifestations of wisdom and power. David could think
of no place of hiding from that presence.  The first word of revelation is, "In the beginning
God created the heaven." The lesions may be gummatous, ulcerative, or inflammatory, or there
may be compressive granulomatous masses. Hemoptysis may have its origin from a luetic ulceration.
Excision of fungations or of a portion of the margin of the ulceration for biopsy is advisable.
  Poets, the true seers, recognize this.  When Longfellow died one of
them, remembering the heartbreaking hunt of Gabriel for Evangeline, and their passing each
other on opposite sides of an island in the Mississippi, makes him say of his wife long since
gone before:

  And now I shall seek her once more,
    On some Mississippi's vast tide
  That flows the whole universe through,
    Than earth's widest rivers more wide.

  Evangeline I shall not miss
    Though we wander the dim starry sheen,
  On opposite sides of rivers so vast
    That islands of worlds intervene.

But what is there in space?  There is the great ceaseless force of gravitation.  Though the
weakest of natural forces, yet when displayed in world-masses its might is measureless by man's
arithmetic.  Tie an apple or a stone to one end of a string, and taking the other end whirl
it around your finger, noting its pull.  That depends on the weight of the whirling ball, the
length of the string, and the swiftness of the whirl.  The stone let loose from David's finger
flies crashing into the head of Goliath.  But suppose the stone is eight thousand miles in
diameter, the string ninety-two million five hundred thousand miles long, and the swiftness
one thousand miles a minute, what needs be the tensile strength of the string?  If we covered
the whole side of the earth next the sun, from pole to pole and from side to side, with steel
wires attaching the earth to the sun, thus representing the tension of gravitation, the wires
would need to be so many that a mouse could not run around among them.

There swings the moon above us.  Its best service is not its light, though lovers prize that
highly.  Its gravitative work is its best.  It lifts the sea and pours it into every river
and fiord of the coast. Our universal tug-boat is in the sky.  It saves millions of dollars
in towage to London alone every year.  And this world would not be habitable without the moon
to wash out every festering swamp and deposit of sewage along the shore.

Gravitation reaches every place, whether worlds be there or not.  This force is universally
present and effective.  In the possibilities of a no-world condition a spirit may be able to
so relate itself to matter that gravitation would impart its incredible swiftness of transference
to a soul thus temporarily relating itself to matter.  What gravitation does in the absence
of the kind of matter we know it is difficult to assert.  But as will be seen in our second
division there is still ample room for its exercise when worlds as such have ceased to be.

In space empty of worlds there is light.  It flies or runs one hundred and eighty-six thousand
miles a second.  There must be somewhat on which its wing-beat shall fall, stepping stones
for its hurrying feet. We call it ether, not knowing what we mean.  But in this space is the
play of intensest force and quickest activity.  There are hundreds of millions of millions
of wing-beats or footfalls in a second. Mathematical necessities surpass mental conceptions.
In a cubic mile of space there are demonstrably seventy millions of foot tons of power. Steam
and lightning have nothing comparable to the activity and power of the celestial ether.  Sir
William Thompson thinks he has proved that a cubic mile of celestial ether may have as little
as one billionth of a pound of ponderable matter.  It is too fine for our experimentation,
too strong for our measurement.  We must get rid of our thumby fingers first.

What is light doing in space?  That has greatly puzzled all philosophers.  Without question
there is inexpressible power.  It is seen in velocity.  But what is it doing?  The law of conservation
of force forbids the thought that it can be wasted.  On the earth its power long ages ago was
turned into coal.  The power was reservoired in mountains ready for man.  It is so great that
a piece of coal that weighs the same as a silver dollar carries a ton's weight a mile at sea.
But what is the thousand million times more light than ever struck the earth doing in space?
That is among the things we want to find out when we get there.  There will be ample opportunity,
space, time, and light enough.

It is biblically asserted and scientifically demonstrable that space is full of causes of sound.
To anyone capable of turning these causes to effects this sound is not dull and monotonous,
but richly varied into songful music.  Light makes its impression of color by its different
number of vibrations.  So music sounds its keys.  We know the number of vibrations necessary
for the note C of the soprano scale, and the number that runs the pitch up to inaudibility.
We know the number of vibrations of light necessary to give us a sensation of red or violet.
These, apprehended by a sufficiently sensitive ear, pour not only light to one organ, but tuneful
harmonies to another.  The morning stars do sing together, and when worlds are gone, and heavy
ears of clay laid down, we may be able to hear them

          Singing as they shine,
  "The hand that made us is divine."

There are places where this music is so fine that the soft and soul-like sounds of a zephyr
in the pines would be like a storm in comparison, and places where the fierce intensity of
light in a congeries of suns would make it seem as if all the stops of being from piccolo to
sub-bass had been drawn.  No angel flying interstellar spaces, no soul fallen overboard and
left behind by a swift-sailing world, need fear being left in awful silences.

There seems to be good evidence that electrical disturbances in the sun are almost instantly
reported and effective on the earth.  It is evident that the destructive force in cyclones
is not wind, but electricity.  It is altogether likely that it is generated in the sun, and
that all the space between it and us thrills with this unknown power.[1]  All astronomers except
Faye admit the connection between sun spots and the condition of the earth's magnetic elements.
The parallelism between auroral and sun-spot frequency is almost perfect. That between sun
spots and cyclones is as confidently asserted, but not quite so demonstrable.  Enough proof
exists to make this clear, that space may be full of higher Andes and Alps, rivers broader
than Gulf Streams, skies brighter than the Milky Way, more beautiful than the rainbow.  Occasionally
some scoffer who thinks he is smart and does not know that he is mistaken asks with an air
of a Socrates putting his last question: "You say that 'heaven is above us.'  But if one dies
at noon and another at midnight, one goes toward Orion and the other toward Hercules; or an
Eskimo goes toward Polaris and a Patagonian toward the coal-black hole in the sky near the
south pole.  Where is your heaven anyhow?"  O sapient, sapient questioner!  Heaven is above
us, you especially; but going in different directions from such a little world as this is no
more than a bee's leaving different sides of a bruised pear exuding honey.  Up or down he is
in the same fragrant garden, warm, light, redolent of roses, tremulous with bird song, amid
a thousand caves of honeysuckles, "illuminate seclusions swung in air" to which his open sesame
gives entrance at will.

II.  But there will be in space what the world has become.  It is nowhere intimated that matter
had been annihilated.  Worlds shall perish as worlds.  They shall wax old as doth a garment.
They will be folded up as a vesture, and they "shall be changed."  The motto with which this
article began says heavens pass away, elements melt, earth and its works are burned up.  But
always after the heaven and earth pass away we are to look for "new heavens and a new earth." If
this rule be followed it will always be possible to tell by the position of the handle exactly where the
blades are situated; whereas, if the jaws themselves are turned, confusion is sure to result.
The forward-grasping forceps are always so adjusted that the jaws open in an up-and-down direction.
On rare occasions it may be deemed desirable to turn the stylet of either forceps in some other
direction relative to the handle.

[FIG. 18.--The author's forward
grasping tube forceps.  The weight
of the jar and contents is just the same after the burning as before.  A burned-up candle as
big as the world will not be annihilated.  It will be "changed."

It is necessary for us to get familiar with some of the protean metamorphoses of matter.  Up
at New Almaden, above the writer, is a vast mass of porous lava rock into which has been infiltrated
a great deal of mercury.  How shall we get it out?  You can jar out numberless minute globules
by hand.  This metal, be it remembered, is liquid, and so heavy that solid iron floats in it
as cork does in water.  Now, to get it out of the rock we apply fire, and the mercury exhales
away in the smoke.  The real task of scientific painstaking is to get that heavy stuff out
of the smoke again.  It is changed, volatilized, and it likes that state so well that it is
very difficult to persuade it to come back to heaviness again.

Take a great mass of marble.  It was not always a mountain.  It floated invisibly in the sea.
Invisible animals took it up, particle by particle, to build a testudo, a traveling house,
for themselves.  The ephemeral life departing, there was a rain of dead shells to make limestone
masses at the bottom of the sea.  It will not always remain rock.  Air and water disintegrate
it once more.  Little rootlets seize upon it and it goes coursing in the veins of plants. 
It becomes fiber to the tree, color to the rose, and fragrance to the violet.  But, whether
floating invisibly in the water, shell of infusoria in the seas, marble asleep in the Pentelican
hills, constituting the sparkle and fizz of soda water, claiming the world's admiration as
the Venus de Milo, or giving beauty and meaning to the most fitting symbol that goes between
lovers, it is still the same matter.  It may be diffused as gas or concentrated as a world,
but it is still the same matter.

Matter is worthy of God's creation.  Astronomy is awe-full; microscopy is no less so.  Astronomy
means immensity, bulk; atoms mean individuality.  The essence of matter seems to be spirit,
personality. It seems to be able to count, or at least to be cognizant of certain exact quantities.
An atom of bromine will combine with one of hydrogen; one of oxygen with two of hydrogen; one
of nitrogen with three of hydrogen; one of silicon with four of hydrogen, etc.  They marry
without thought of divorce.  A group of atoms married by affinity is called a molecule.  Two
atoms of hydrogen joined to one of oxygen make water.  Water molecules are like a mass of shot,
with large interstices between.  Drive the atoms of water apart by heat till the water becomes
steam, till they are as three marbles a larger distance apart, yet the molecule is not destroyed,
the union is still indissoluble.  It is asserted that millions of cubic miles of some comets
tails would not make a cubic inch of matter solid as iron.  Now, when earth and oceans are
"changed" to this sort of tenuity creations will be more easy.  We shall not be obliged to
hew out our material with broadaxes, nor blast it out with dynamite.  Let us not fear that
these creations will not be permanent; they will be enough so for our purpose.  We can then
afford to waste more worlds in a day than dull stupidity can count in a lifetime.

We are getting used to this sort of work already.  When we reduce common air in a bulb to one
one-thousandth of its normal density at the sea we get the possibility of continuous incandescent
electric light by the vibration of platinum wire.  When we reduce it to a tenuity of one millionth
of the normal density we get the possibility of the X rays by vibrations of itself without
any platinum wire.  The greater the tenuity the greater the creative results.  For example,
water in freezing exerts an expansive, thrusting force of thirty thousand pounds to the square
inch, over two thousand tons to the square foot; an incomprehensible force, but applicable
in nature to little besides splitting rocks.  On the other hand, when water is rarefied into
steam its power is vastly more versatile, tractable, and serviceable in a thousand ways.  Take
a bit of metal called zinc.  It is heavy, subject to gravitation, solid, subject to cohesion.
But cause it to be burned, to pass away, and be changed.  To do this we use fire, not the ordinary
kind, but liquid that we keep in a bottle and call acid.  The zinc is burned up.  What becomes
of it?  It becomes electricity.  How changed! It is no longer solid, but is a live fire that
rings bells in our houses, picks up our thought and pours it into the ear of a friend miles
away by the telephone, or thousands of miles away by the telegraph.  Burning up is only the
means of a new and higher life.  Ah, delicate Ariel, tricksy sprite, the only way to get you
is to burn up the solid body.

The possibility of rare creation depends on rare material, on spirit-like tenuity.  And that
is what the world goes into.  There is a substance called nitrite of amyl, known to many as
a medicine for heart disease.  It is applied by inhaling its odor--a style of very much rarefied
application.  Fill a tube with its vapor.  It is invisible as ordinary air in daylight.  But
pour a beam of direct sunlight from end to end along its major axis.  A dense cloud forms along
the path of the sunbeam; creation is going on.  What the sun may do in the thinner vapors the
world goes into when burned up will be for us to find out when we get there.  Standing on Popocatepetl
we have seen a sea of clouds below, white as the light of transfiguration, tossed into waves
a mile high by the touch of the sunbeam.  Creative ordering was observed in actual process.
It is done under our eyes to show us how easy it is.  Would it be any less glorious if there
were no Popocatepetl?  A thrush among vines outside is just now showing us how easy it is to
create an ecstasy of music out of silence.  She has only to open her mouth and the innate aptitudes
of air rush in to actualize her creative wish.  Not only is it easy for the bird, but she is
even provoked to this love and good works by the creation of a rainbow on the retreating blackness
of a storm yonder.  Thunder is the sub-bass nature furnishes her, and thus invites her to add
the complementary notes.

Some one may think that all this tenuity is as vaporous as the stuff that dreams are made of,
and call for solid rocks for foundations. Perhaps we may so call while we have material bodies
of two hundred pounds' weight.  Yet even these bodies are delicate enough to be valuable to
us solely because they have the utmost chemical stability. We are burning up their substance
with every breath in order to have delicacy of feeling and thought.  What were a wooden body
worth? Substances are valuable to us according to their fineness and facility of change.  Even
iron is mobile in all its particles.  We call it solid, but it is not.  We lift our eyes from
this writing and behold the tumbling surf of the great Pacific sea.  Line after line of its
billows are charging on the shore and tumbling in utmost confusion and roar of advancing and
refluent waves.  So the iron of the telephone wire.  You often hold the receiver to your ear
listening, not to the voice of business or friendship of men, but to the gentle hum of the
rolling surf in the wire's own substance.  And, in order that we may know the essential stability
of things that are fine, we are told that the city which hath enduring foundations is in the
spirit world, not this kind of material.  The whole new Jerusalem to come down "out of heaven,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband," is as movable as a train of cars is movable here.
There may still be rainbows and rivers of life if there are no more rocks.  There is a real
realm of "scientific imagination."  But all our imaginings fall far short of realities.  Some
men do not desire this realm, and demand solid rocks to walk on.  But a bird does not.  He
oars himself along the upper fields and rides on air.  So does a bicyclist and balloonist.
Some men have a sort of contempt for aeronauts and workers at flying machines. That feeling
is a testimony to their depravity and groveling tendencies.  Aeronautics and nautics are an
effort toward angelhood. Men can walk water who are willing to take a boat for an overshoe. Well-planned,
careful, external operation (laryngofissure) followed by painstaking after-care is the only absolute
cure so far known for malignant neoplasms of the larynx; and it is a cure only in those intrinsic
cases in which the growth is small, and is located in the anterior two-thirds of the intrinsic
area. By limiting operations strictly to this class of case, eighty-five per cent of cures may
be obtained.* In determining the nature of the growth and its operability the limits of the
usefulness of direct endoscopy are reached.  The great marvels of the world are not so
much in matter as in man.  We were meant to be more sensitive to finer influences than we are.
We are far more so than we think.  Take your child into the street.  Another child coughs at
a window on the other side, and your child has three months of terrific whooping-cough.  All
such diseases are taken by homeopathic doses of the millionth dilution.  Many people feel "in
their bones" the coming of storms days before their arrival.  We knew a man who ate honey with
delight till he was twenty-five years old, and then could do so no more.  This peculiarity
he inherited from his father.  One man has an insatiable desire for drink because some ancestor
of his, back in the third or fourth generation, bequeathed him that curse.  In the South you
can go a mile in the face of the wind and find that peerless blossom of a magnolia by following
the drift of its far-reaching odor. Who has not received a letter and knew before opening it
that it had violets within?  It had atmosphered itself with rich perfume, and something far
richer, for three thousand miles.  The first influences which came over the Atlantic cable
were so feeble that a sleeping infant's breath were a whirlwind in comparison.  But they were
read. It is no wonder that the old astrologers thought that men's whole lives were influenced
by the stars.  Every vegetable life, from the meanest flower that blows to the largest tree,
has its whole existence shaped by the sun.  Doubtless man's body was meant to be an Aeolian
(how the vowels and liquids flow into the very name!) harp of a thousand strings over which
a thousand delicate influences might breathe.  Soul was meant to be sensitive to the influences
of the Spirit.  This capability has been somewhat lost in our deterioration.  To recover these
finer faculties men are required to die.  And for the field of exercising them the world must
be changed.  Paul understood this.  He associated some sort of perfection with the resurrection,
with the buying back of the powers of the body.  And the whole creation waiteth for the apocalypse
of the full-sized sons of God.

Does one fear the change from gross to fine, from force of freezing to the winged energy of
steam, from solid zinc to lightning?  Our whole desire for education is a desire for refining
influences.  We know there is a higher love for country than that begotten by the fanfare of
the Fourth of July.  There is a smile of joy at our country's education and purity finer than
the guffaws provoked by hearing the howls of a dog and the explosions of firecrackers when
the two are inextricably mixed.  There is a flame of religious love when the heart sacrifices
itself in humble realization of the joy of its adorable love purer than the fierce fire of
the hating heart that applies the torch to the martyr's pyre.  We give our lives to seeking
these higher refinements because they are stronger and more like God.

Does one fear to leave bodily appetites and passions for spiritual aptitudes fitted to finer
surroundings?  He should not.  Man has had two modes of life already--one, slightly conscious,
closely confined, peculiarly nourished, in the dark, without the possible exercise of any one
of the five senses.  That is prenatal.  He comes into the next life.  At once he breathes,
often vociferously, looks about with eyes of wonder, nourishes himself with avidity, is fitted
to his new surroundings, his immensely wider life, and finds his superior companions and surroundings
fitted to him, even to his finest need for love.  Why hesitate for a third mode of life?  He
loses modes of nourishment; so he has before.  He loses relations to former life; so he has
before.  He comes into new companionships and surroundings; so he has before.  But each time
and in every respect his powers, possibilities, and field have been immensely enlarged.

  O the hour when this material
    Shall have vanished like a cloud,
  When amid the wide ethereal
    All the invisible shall crowd.
  In that sudden, strange transition,
    By what new and finer sense
  Shall we grasp the mighty vision,
    And receive the influence?

Knowledge of the third state of man is not so difficult to attain in the second as knowledge
of the second was in the first.  If a fit intelligence should study a specimen of man about
to emerge from its first stage of existence, it could judge much of the conditions of the second.
Feet suggest solid land; lungs suggest liquid air; eyes, light; hands, acquisitiveness, and
hence dominion; tongue, talk, and hence companions, etc.  What fore-gleams have we of the future
life? They are from two sources--revelation and present aptitudes not yet realized.  What feet
have we for undiscovered continents, what wings for wider and finer airs, what eyes for diviner
light?  Everything tells us that such aptitudes have fit field for development.  The water
fowl flies through night and storm, lone wandering but not lost, straight to the south with
instinct for mild airs, food, and a nest among the rushes.  It is not disappointed.

Man has an instinct for dominion which cannot be gratified here.  He weeps for more worlds
to conquer.  He is only a boy yet, getting a grip on the hilt of the sword of conquest, feeling
for some Prospero's wand that is able to command the tempest.  When he gets the proper pitch
of power, take away his body, and he is, as Richter says, no more afraid, and he is also free
from the binding effect of gravitation.  Then there are worlds enough, and every one a lighthouse
to guide him to its harbor.  They all seek a Columbus with more allurements than America did
hers.  Dominion over ten cities is the reward for faithfulness in the use of a single talent.

Man has an instinct for travel and speed.  To travel a couple of months is a sufficient reward
for a thousand toilful days.  He earnestly desires speed, develops race horses and bicycles
to surpass them, yachts, and engines.  Not satisfied with this, he harnesses lightning that
takes his mind, his thought, to the ends of the earth in a twinkling.  But he is stopped there.
How he yearns to go to the moon, the sun, and stars!  But he could not take his present body
through the temperatures of space three or four hundred degrees below zero.  So he must find
a way of disembodying and of attachment to some force swift as lightning, of which there are
plenty in the spaces when the world has ceased to be a world.  It is all provided for by death.

Man has an instinct for knowledge not gratified nor gratifiable in the present narrow bounds
that hedge him in like walls of hewn stone.  A thousand questions he cannot solve about himself,
his relations to others and to the world about him, beset him here.  There he shall know even
as he is known by perfect intelligence.

Here he has an instinct for love that is unsunderable.  But the wails of separation have filled
the air since Eve shrieked over Abel. Husbands and fathers are ever crying:

  Immortal?  I feel it and know it.
    Who doubts of such as she?
  But that's the pang's very essence,
    Immortal away from me.

But there, in finer realms, shall be a knitting of severed friendships up to be sundered no
more forever. 

Against admitting Bell to the caucus - Bates, Bills, Burnett, Estudillo, Finn, Hartman, Hurd, Leavitt,
Lewis, Martinelli, McCartney, Price, Weed, Willis, Wolfe, Wright - 16.
The Bell matter out of the way, the real work of organizing the Senate
was taken up.  Moses, in the broadest of visions, material, historic, prophetic,
says to God, "Show me thy glory."  And common men have always turned the high places of earth
to altar piles, and blackened the heavens with the smoke of their sacrifices.  But the means
of knowing God are to be increased.  The very essence of life eternal is to know the true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.  Great pains have been taken to manifest forth God to dull
senses and to oxlike thoughts here; greater pains, with better results, shall be taken there.
Every reader of the Apocalypse notices with joy, if not rapture, that when the book that was
sealed with seven seals, which no man in heaven, nor earth, was able to reveal, nor open, nor
even look upon, was finally opened by the Lamb, and its marvelous panoramas, charades, and
symbolic significances had to be carefully explained to John, the man best able of any to understand
them--we observe with rapture that the regular inhabitants of that hitherto unseen world understood
all at once, and broke into shouts like the sound of these many waters in a storm.  Above all
these superior manifestations in finer realms the pure in heart shall see God.

III. But there is in space what there was before the world began. Philosophy asserts that the
invisible universe is a perfect fluid in which not even atoms exist, and atoms are produced
therefrom by the First Great Cause by creation, not by development.  This conception is full
of difficulties to thought.  We cannot even agree whether creation was in time or eternity.
But all agree in this, that the invisible is rapidly absorbing all the force at least of the
visible universe, and that when force is gone the corpse will not remain unburied.  Indeed,
when the range of seeing puts the size of an atom at less than one two-hundred-and-twenty-four-thousandth
of an inch, and when the range of thinking puts it at less than one six-millionth of an inch,
many prefer to consider an atom as a center of force and not as a material entity at all. 
But, amid uncertainties, this is certain, that the forces of the visible worlds are extraneous.
They come out of the invisible.  They are all also returning to the invisible; that is what
light is doing in space, previously referred to.  This incredibly high-class energy is not
banking up coal in the celestial ether as it did on the earth, but is returning to the quick,
mobile forces of the invisible worlds.  One thing more is certain, that the origin of all the
forces of the invisible is in personality; for the atom, it is agreed, bears all the marks
of being a manufactured article. Different-sized shot could not have greater uniformity of
structure and constitution.  And their whole behavior shows that they are controlled by an
admirable wisdom past finding out.

That these forces exist and are necessarily active there are three proofs.  Worlds have been
made, not of things and forces that do appear.  They were abundantly displayed in the physical
miracles of Christ and others; and these forces, independently of the physical miracles at
various times, have continuously helped men.

(1) Concerning the first fact--that worlds have been made--nothing need be said except that
these forces, being personal, cannot be supposed to be exhausted, and hence creations can go
on continuously.  We are assured that they do.  And the personal element more and more relates
itself to personalities.  "I go to prepare a place for you," to fit up a mansion according
to tastes, needs, and enjoyments of the future occupant.

(2) This is the place to assert, not to prove, that this visible world has always been subject
to the forces of the invisible world.  It does not matter whether these forces are personal
or personally directed. Its waters divide, gravitation at that point being overcome; they harden
for a path, or bodies are levitated; they burn by a fire as fierce as that which plays between
two electric poles.  These forces are not the ordinary endowments of matter; they step out
of the realm of the greater invisible, execute their mission, and, like an angel's sudden appearance,
disappear.  Who knows how frequently they come?  We, for whose sake all nature stands "and
stars their courses move," may need more frequent motherly attentions than the infant knows
of.  They will not be lacking, even if not sufficiently evident to the infant to be cried for.
"Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things."

(3) It is here designed to be asserted that the forces of the invisible seek to be continually
in full play on the intellectual and moral natures of man.  Our unique Christian Scriptures
have this thought for their whole significance.  It begins with God's walking with Adam in
the garden, and goes on till it is said, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you," in the invisible, and by the invisible, from before the foundation of the
visible world.  It includes all time and opportunity between and after; we need specify only
to intensify the conception of the fact.  Paul says, "Having therefore obtained help of God,
I continue unto this day," when otherwise oppressive circumstances and hate of men seeking
to kill him would have prevented his continuing in life.  It is possible for all who believe
to be given power, out of the invisible, to become sons of God.  It has been said that there
is power and continuousness enough in the tides, winds, rotating and revolving worlds for man
to make a machine for perpetual motion.  The only difficulty is to belt on.  The great object
of life in the visible should be to belt on to the invisible.  Our great Example who did this
made his ordinary doing better than common men's best, his parentheses of thought richer than
other men's paragraphs and volumes.  And he left on record for us promises of greater works
than these, at which we stagger through unbelief.  We should not; for men who have lived by
the evidence of things not seen, and sought a city that received Jesus out of sight, have found
that "God is not ashamed to be called their God."  They have wrought marvels that men tell
over like a rosary of what is possible to men.  It is beyond the belief of all who have not
been touched by the power of an endless life.  But what they do is chiefly valuable as evidence
of what they are.  It is little that men quench the violence of fire, and receive their dead
raised to life again.  It is great that they are able to do it.  That they hold the hand that
holds the world is something.  But that they have eyes to see, a wisdom to choose, and will
to execute the best, is more.  Fire may kindle again and the resurrected die, but the great
personality survives.

These forces are not discontinuous, connected with this temporary world, and liable to cease
when it fails.  They belong to the permanent, invisible order of things.  Suppose one loses
his body. Then there is no force whereby earth can hold its child any longer to its breast.
It flies on at terrific speed, dwindling to a speck in unknown distances, and leaving the man
amid infinitudes alone.  But there are other attractions. Assembly I - Leeds moved that Senate
Bill 220 removing the party circle from the election ballot be denied
second reading.

  The motion prevailed by a vote of thirty-six for,
  to thirty-five against.
  
  Assembly K - Vote on the Judicial Column bill.

It is hoped that the object of this writing is accomplished--to widen our view of the great
principle of continuity in the universe.  It is not sought to dwarf the earth, but to fit it
rightly into its place as a part of a great whole.  It is better for a state to be a part of
a glorious union than to be independent; better for a man to belong to the entirety of creation
than to be Robinson Crusoe on his island.  We belong to more than this earth.  It is not of
the greatest importance whether we lose it or it lose itself.  We look for a "new heavens and
a new earth."  We are, or should be, used to their forces, and at home among their personalities.
This universe is a unity.  It is not made up of separate, catastrophic movements, but it all
flows on like the sweetly blended notes of a psalm.  "Therefore will not we fear, though the
earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;" though the
heavens be "rolled together as a scroll," the stars fall, "even as a fig tree casteth her untimely
figs," when it is shaken with the wind, and though our bodies are whelmed in the removal of
things that can be shaken.  For even then we may find the calm force that shakes the earth
is the force that is from everlasting to everlasting; may find that it is personal and loving.
It says, "Lo, it is I; be not afraid."

Whatever comes, whether one sail the spaces in the great ship we call the world, or fall overboard
into Mississippis and Amazons of power in which worlds are mere drifting islands, he will be
at peace and at home anywhere.  He will ever say:

  "The winds that o'er my ocean run
  Blow from all worlds, beyond the sun;
  Through life, through death, through faith, through time,
  Great breaths of God, they sweep sublime,
  Eternal trades that cannot veer,
  And blowing, teach us how to steer;
  And well for him whose joy, whose care,
  Is but to keep before them fair.

  "O thou, God's mariner, heart of mine,
  Spread canvas to these airs divine.
  Spread sail and let thy past life be
  Forgotten in thy destiny."

[1]The action that drives off the material of a comet's tail proves that other forces besides
gravitation are operative in the interplanetary space.--The Sun, C. A. Young, p. 156.

[2]See Recreations in Astronomy, p. 357.