"All right, then. What is the power that's in a candle and in a match?"

"It's the fire."

"It's the same in both, then?"

"Yes, just the same in both."

"All right. Suppose I set fire to a carpenter shop with a match, what will happen to that carpenter
shop?"

"She'll burn up."

"And suppose I set fire to this pyramid with a candle--will she burn up?"

"Of course she won't."

"All right. Now the fire's the same, both times. WHY does the shop burn, and the pyramid don't?"

"Because the pyramid CAN'T burn."

"Aha! and A HORSE CAN'T FLY!"

"My lan', ef Huck ain't got him ag'in! Huck's landed him high en dry dis time, I tell you!
Hit's de smartes' trap I ever see a body walk inter--en ef I--"

But Jim was so full of laugh he got to strangling and couldn't go on, and Tom was that mad
to see how neat I had floored him, and turned his own argument ag'in him and knocked him all
to rags and flinders with it, that all he could manage to say was that whenever he heard me
and Jim try to argue it made him ashamed of the human race. I never said nothing; I was feeling
pretty well satisfied. When I have got the best of a person that way, it ain't my way to go
around crowing about it the way some people does, for I consider that if I was in his place
I wouldn't wish him to crow over me. It's better to be generous, that's what I think.

CHAPTER XIII. GOING FOR TOM'S PIPE:

BY AND BY we left Jim to float around up there in the neighborhood of the pyramids, and we
clumb down to the hole where you go into the tunnel, and went in with some Arabs and candles,
and away in there in the middle of the pyramid we found a room and a big stone box in it where
they used to keep that king, just as the man in the Sunday-school said; but he was gone, now;
somebody had got him. But I didn't take no interest in the place, because there could be ghosts
there, of course; not fresh ones, but I don't like no kind.

So then we come out and got some little donkeys and rode a piece, and then went in a boat another
piece, and then more donkeys, and got to Cairo; and all the way the road was as smooth and
beautiful a road as ever I see, and had tall date-pa'ms on both sides, and naked children everywhere,
and the men was as red as copper, and fine and strong and handsome. And the city was a curiosity.
Such narrow streets--why, they were just lanes, and crowded with people with turbans, and women
with veils, and everybody rigged out in blazing bright clothes and all sorts of colors, and
you wondered how the camels and the people got by each other in such narrow little cracks,
but they done it--a perfect jam, you see, and everybody noisy. The stores warn't big enough
to turn around in, but you didn't have to go in; the storekeeper sat tailor fashion on his
counter, smoking his snaky long pipe, and had his things where he could reach them to sell,
and he was just as good as in the street, for the camel-loads brushed him as they went by.

Now and then a grand person flew by in a carriage with fancy dressed men running and yelling
in front of it and whacking anybody with a long rod that didn't get out of the way. And by
and by along comes the Sultan riding horseback at the head of a procession, and fairly took
your breath away his clothes was so splendid; and everybody fell flat and laid on his stomach
while he went by. I forgot, but a feller helped me to remember. He was one that had a rod and
run in front.

There was churches, but they don't know enough to keep Sunday; they keep Friday and break the
Sabbath. You have to take off your shoes when you go in. There was crowds of men and boys in
the church, setting in groups on the stone floor and making no end of noise--getting their
lessons by heart, Tom said, out of the Koran, which they think is a Bible, and people that
knows better knows enough to not let on. I never see such a big church in my life before, and
most awful high, it was; it made you dizzy to look up; our village church at home ain't a circumstance
to it; if you was to put it in there, people would think it was a drygoods box.

What I wanted to see was a dervish, because I was interested in dervishes on accounts of the
one that played the trick on the camel-driver. So we found a lot in a kind of a church, and
they called themselves Whirling Dervishes; and they did whirl, too. I never see anything like
it. They had tall sugar-loaf hats on, and linen petticoats; and they spun and spun and spun,
round and round like tops, and the petticoats stood out on a slant, and it was the prettiest
thing I ever see, and made me drunk to look at it. They was all Moslems, Tom said, and when
I asked him what a Moslem was, he said it was a person that wasn't a Presbyterian. So there
is plenty of them in Missouri, though I didn't know it before.

We didn't see half there was to see in Cairo, because Tom was in such a sweat to hunt out places
that was celebrated in history. We had a most tiresome time to find the granary where Joseph
stored up the grain before the famine, and when we found it it warn't worth much to look at,
being such an old tumble-down wreck; but Tom was satisfied, and made more fuss over it than
I would make if I stuck a nail in my foot. How he ever found that place was too many for me.
We passed as much as forty just like it before we come to it, and any of them would 'a' done
for me, but none but just the right one would suit him; I never see anybody so particular as
Tom Sawyer. The minute he struck the right one he reconnized it as easy as I would reconnize
my other shirt if I had one, but how he done it he couldn't any more tell than he could fly;
he said so himself.

Then we hunted a long time for the house where the boy lived that learned the cadi how to try
the case of the old olives and the new ones, and said it was out of the Arabian Nights, and
he would tell me and Jim about it when he got time. Well, we hunted and hunted till I was ready
to drop, and I wanted Tom to give it up and come next day and git somebody that knowed the
town and could talk Missourian and could go straight to the place; but no, he wanted to find
it himself, and nothing else would answer. So on we went. Then at last the remarkablest thing
happened I ever see. The house was gone--gone hundreds of years ago--every last rag of it gone
but just one mud brick. Now a person wouldn't ever believe that a backwoods Missouri boy that
hadn't ever been in that town before could go and hunt that place over and find that brick,
but Tom Sawyer done it. I know he done it, because I see him do it. I was right by his very
side at the time, and see him see the brick and see him reconnize it. Well, I says to myself,
how DOES he do it? Is it knowledge, or is it instink?

Now there's the facts, just as they happened: let everybody explain it their own way. I've
ciphered over it a good deal, and it's my opinion that some of it is knowledge but the main
bulk of it is instink. The reason is this: Tom put the brick in his pocket to give to a museum
with his name on it and the facts when he went home, and I slipped it out and put another brick
considerable like it in its place, and he didn't know the difference--but there was a difference,
you see. I think that settles it--it's mostly instink, not knowledge. Instink tells him where
the exact PLACE is for the brick to be in, and so he reconnizes it by the place it's in, not
by the look of the brick. If it was knowledge, not instink, he would know the brick again by
the look of it the next time he seen it--which he didn't. So it shows that for all the brag
you hear about knowledge being such a wonderful thing, instink is worth forty of it for real
unerringness. Jim says the same.

