What builders they were, these men of antiquity!  The massive arches of some of these ruins
rest upon piers that are fifteen feet square and built entirely of solid blocks of marble,
some of which are as large as a Saratoga trunk, and some the size of a boarding-house sofa.
They are not shells or shafts of stone filled inside with rubbish, but the whole pier is a
mass of solid masonry.  Vast arches, that may have been the gates of the city, are built in
the same way.  They have braved the storms and sieges of three thousand years, and have been
shaken by many an earthquake, but still they stand.  When they dig alongside of them, they
find ranges of ponderous masonry that are as perfect in every detail as they were the day those
old Cyclopian giants finished them.  An English Company is going to excavate Ephesus--and then!

And now am I reminded of--

                    THE LEGEND OF THE SEVEN SLEEPERS.

In the Mount of Pion, yonder, is the Cave of the Seven Sleepers.  Once upon a time, about fifteen
hundred years ago, seven young men lived near each other in Ephesus, who belonged to the despised
sect of the Christians.  It came to pass that the good King Maximilianus, (I am telling this
story for nice little boys and girls,) it came to pass, I say, that the good King Maximilianus
fell to persecuting the Christians, and as time rolled on he made it very warm for them.  So
the seven young men said one to the other, let us get up and travel.  And they got up and traveled.
They tarried not to bid their fathers and mothers good-bye, or any friend they knew.  They
only took certain moneys which their parents had, and garments that belonged unto their friends,
whereby they might remember them when far away; and they took also the dog Ketmehr, which was
the property of their neighbor Malchus, because the beast did run his head into a noose which
one of the young men was carrying carelessly, and they had not time to release him; and they
took also certain chickens that seemed lonely in the neighboring coops, and likewise some bottles
of curious liquors that stood near the grocer's window; and then they departed from the city.
By-and-by they came to a marvelous cave in the Hill of Pion and entered into it and feasted,
and presently they hurried on again.  But they forgot the bottles of curious liquors, and left
them behind.  They traveled in many lands, and had many strange adventures. They were virtuous
young men, and lost no opportunity that fell in their way to make their livelihood.  Their
motto was in these words, namely, "Procrastination is the thief of time."  And so, whenever
they did come upon a man who was alone, they said, Behold, this person hath the wherewithal--let
us go through him.  And they went through him.  At the end of five years they had waxed tired
of travel and adventure, and longed to revisit their old home again and hear the voices and
see the faces that were dear unto their youth.  Therefore they went through such parties as
fell in their way where they sojourned at that time, and journeyed back toward Ephesus again.
For the good King Maximilianus was become converted unto the new faith, and the Christians
rejoiced because they were no longer persecuted.  One day as the sun went down, they came to
the cave in the Mount of Pion, and they said, each to his fellow, Let us sleep here, and go
and feast and make merry with our friends when the morning cometh.  And each of the seven lifted
up his voice and said, It is a whiz.  So they went in, and lo, where they had put them, there
lay the bottles of strange liquors, and they judged that age had not impaired their excellence.
Wherein the wanderers were right, and the heads of the same were level.  So each of the young
men drank six bottles, and behold they felt very tired, then, and lay down and slept soundly.

When they awoke, one of them, Johannes--surnamed Smithianus--said, We are naked.  And it was
so.  Their raiment was all gone, and the money which they had gotten from a stranger whom they
had proceeded through as they approached the city, was lying upon the ground, corroded and
rusted and defaced.  Likewise the dog Ketmehr was gone, and nothing save the brass that was
upon his collar remained.  They wondered much at these things. But they took the money, and
they wrapped about their bodies some leaves, and came up to the top of the hill.  Then were
they perplexed.  The wonderful temple of Diana was gone; many grand edifices they had never
seen before stood in the city; men in strange garbs moved about the streets, and every thing
was changed.

Johannes said, It hardly seems like Ephesus.  Yet here is the great gymnasium; here is the
mighty theatre, wherein I have seen seventy thousand men assembled; here is the Agora; there
is the font where the sainted John the Baptist immersed the converts; yonder is the prison
of the good St. Paul, where we all did use to go to touch the ancient chains that bound him
and be cured of our distempers; I see the tomb of the disciple Luke, and afar off is the church
wherein repose the ashes of the holy John, where the Christians of Ephesus go twice a year
to gather the dust from the tomb, which is able to make bodies whole again that are corrupted
by disease, and cleanse the soul from sin; but see how the wharves encroach upon the sea, and
what multitudes of ships are anchored in the bay; see, also, how the city hath stretched abroad,
far over the valley behind Pion, and even unto the walls of Ayassalook; and lo, all the hills
are white with palaces and ribbed with colonnades of marble. How mighty is Ephesus become!

And wondering at what their eyes had seen, they went down into the city and purchased garments
and clothed themselves.  And when they would have passed on, the merchant bit the coins which
they had given him, with his teeth, and turned them about and looked curiously upon them, and
cast them upon his counter, and listened if they rang; and then he said, These be bogus.  And
they said, Depart thou to Hades, and went their way.  When they were come to their houses,
they recognized them, albeit they seemed old and mean; and they rejoiced, and were glad.  They
ran to the doors, and knocked, and strangers opened, and looked inquiringly upon them.  And
they said, with great excitement, while their hearts beat high, and the color in their faces
came and went, Where is my father?  Where is my mother?  Where are Dionysius and Serapion,
and Pericles, and Decius?  And the strangers that opened said, We know not these.  The Seven
said, How, you know them not?  How long have ye dwelt here, and whither are they gone that
dwelt here before ye?  And the strangers said, Ye play upon us with a jest, young men; we and
our fathers have sojourned under these roofs these six generations; the names ye utter rot
upon the tombs, and they that bore them have run their brief race, have laughed and sung, have
borne the sorrows and the weariness that were allotted them, and are at rest; for nine-score
years the summers have come and gone, and the autumn leaves have fallen, since the roses faded
out of their cheeks and they laid them to sleep with the dead.

