It was because of these conceptions that Persia dreamed of conquering the West. At Marathon
and at Salamis that illusion was looted. History tells of the cohorts that descended there.
It relates further what they did. But of what they thought there is no record. It was, perhaps,
too obvious. Ormuzd, god of light and, in the Orient, god of the day, was, in the darker and
duller Occident, menaced there also by Ahriman. Politically the expedition is not very explicable.
Considered from a religious standpoint the motive is clear. But though the Persian forces could
not uphold their light in Greece, higher forces projected it far beyond, to the remote north,
to a south that was still remoter.

Originally the light was Vedic. It was identical with that of Agni, of Indra and of Varuna.
But while these, without subsidence, passed, absorbed by Brahm, the light of Iran, deflecting,
persisted, and so potently that it lit the Teutonic sky, glows still in Christendom, after
refracting perhaps in Inca temples. Its revelation is due to Zarathrustra.

Zarathrustra, commonly written Zoroaster, is a name translatable into "star of gold" and also
into "keeper of old camels." Probably it was first employed to designate an imaginary prophet,
and then a series of spiritual though actual successors by whom, in the course of centuries,
the Avesta was evolved. Otherwise Zarathrustra and Gotama are brothers in Brahmanaspati. Both
had virgin mothers. In the lives of both miracles are common. The advent of Zarathrustra was
accounted the ruin of demons. When he was born he laughed aloud. As a child he slept in flames.
As a man he walked on water. Before prodigies such as these fiends fell like autumn leaves.
Hence, on the part of the devil, an attempt to seduce him from the divine. Mairya, the demon
of death, offered him, as Mara offered Gotama, as Satan offered Jesus, the empire of the earth.
Zarathrustra rebuked the devil first with stones, then with pious words. From him, as from
the Buddha and the Christ, abashed the tempter retreated.[9]

[Footnote 9: Darmestetter: Ormazd et Ahriman.]

That victory over evil, the Parsis to-day regard as the capital event in the history of the
world. It was the immediate prelude to the revelation of the Law which Ormuzd vouchsafed to
his prophet.

The revelation occurred on a mountain, in the course of conversations, during which Zarathrustra
questioned and Ormuzd, in the voice of heaven, replied. So was the Law proclaimed in India.
There Mithra and Varuna sang it through the sky.[10] The expression is notable, for the song
of the sky is thunder and the theophany that of Sinai. There is another rapprochement in Babylonian
lore and a third in the Eddas, where it is related that to Sigurd the secret of the runes was sung.

[Footnote 10: Rig-Veda, i. 151.]

Meanwhile, the revelation completed and proclaimed, Zarathrustra died as miraculously as he
was born, foretelling, as he went, the coming of a messiah, his own son, Coshyos--the delayed
fruit of an immaculate hymen that is not to be fecund until the end of time--but who, at the
consummation of the ages, will rejuvenate the world, affranchise it from death, vanquish Ahriman,
terminate the struggle between good and evil, purify hell and fill it full with glory. Then
the dead shall rise and immortality be universal.[11]

[Footnote 11: Zamyad Yasht. xix. 89 sq.]

Zoroaster is obviously mythical. The Buddha is also. But precisely as the Buddhist scriptures
exist, so also do the Zoroastrian. They do more. Frequently they enlighten, occasionally they
exalt. Written in gold on perfumed leather, the original edition, limited to two copies, was
so sacred that it was sullied if seen. Burned with the palace of Persepolis--which Alexander,
the Great Sinner, in a drunken orgy, destroyed--only fragments of the fargards remain. These
tell of creation, effected in six epochs, and of a pairi-daêza.

Delitzsch voluminously asked: Wo lag das Paradies? There it is. There is the primal paradise.
In it Ormuzd put Mashya, the first man, and Mashyana, the first woman, whom Ahriman, in the
form of a serpent, seduced. Thereafter ensued the struggle in which all have or will participate,
one that, extending beyond the limits of the visible world, arrays seasons and spirits and
the senses of man in a conflict of good and evil that can end only when, from the depths of
the dawn, radiant in the vermillion sky, Coshyos, hero of the resurrection, triumphantly appears.

The parallel between this romance and subsequent poetry is curious. In Chaldea, before the
fargards were, the story of Creation, of Eden, and of the fall had been told. In Egypt, before
the Avesta was written, the resurrection and the life were known. Similar legends and prospects
may or may not represent an autonomous development of Iranian thought. The successors of the
problematic Zarathrustra, the line of magi who wrote and taught in his name, may have gathered
the tales and theories elsewhere. In the creed which they instituted there is a trinity. India
had one, Egypt another, Babylonia a third. Babylonia had even three of them. But in Mithra,
Iran had a redeemer that no other creed possessed. In Coshyos was a saviour, virgin born, who
nowhere else was imagined. In Mara, Buddhism had a Satan. The Persian Ahriman is Satan himself.
Babylon had angels and cherubs. In Iran there were guardian angels, there were archangels with
flaming swords, there were fairies, there were goblins, the celestial, the poetic, the demoniac
combined. Zoroasterism may or may not have had a past, it is perhaps evident that it had a future.

An inscription chiselled in the red granite of Ekbatana describes Ormuzd as creator of heaven
and earth. In the Veda the description of Indra is identical.[12] It was applied equally to
Jahveh in Judea. But above Jahveh, Kabbalists discerned En Soph. Above Indra metaphysicians
discovered Brahma. Similarly the Persian magi found that Ormuzd, however perfect, was not perfect
enough and, from the depths of the ideal, they disclosed Zervan Akerene, the Eternal, from
whom all things come and to whom all return.

[Footnote 12: R. V. x. 3. "Indra created heaven and earth."]

That conception is not reached in the Avesta. It is in the Bundahish, a work which, while much
later, is based on earlier traditions, memories it may be, of antediluvian legends brought
from the summits of upper Asia by Djemschid, the fabulous Abraham of the Persians of whom Zarathrustra
was the Moses. But in default of the Eternal, the Avesta contains pictures of enduring charm.

Among these is a highly poetic pastel that displays the soul of man surprised in the first
post-mortem ambuscades. There a figure, beautiful or revolting, cries at him: "I am thyself,
the image of thine earthly life."

If that life has been beautiful, the soul of man, led by itself, is conducted to heaven. Otherwise,
led still by itself, it descended to Drûjô-demâna, the House of Destruction, where, fed on
insults and offal, it waited till its sins were destroyed. The waiting might be long. It was
not everlasting. There was Mithra to intercede. Besides, evil was regarded but as a shadow
on the surface of things. In the seventh epoch of creation, a period yet to be, the age which
Coshyos is to usher, the shadow will fade. The wicked, purified of their wickedness, will be
received among the blessed. Even Ahriman is to be converted. In that definite triumph of light
over darkness is the resurrection and the life, life in Garô-demâna, literally House of Hymns,
a pre-Christian heaven, yet strictly Christian, where, to the trumpetings of angels, hosannahs
are ceaselessly sung.[13]

[Footnote 13: Yasht. xxviii. 10, xxxiv. 2.]

