Spring-shoots multinodal. Bark formation early, the branches and upper trunk rough. Cones from
7 to 14 cm. long, in verticillate clusters, sessile, reflexed, ovate or oblong, oblique, serotinous;
apophyses nut-brown, lustrous, tumid in various degrees, the posterior scales abruptly larger
and very prominent, the umbo bearing the minute prickle or its remnant.

  A tall tree with rich green foliage, growing on a strip of coast south
  of San Francisco, particularly in Monterey County. It grows also on
  the islands forming the Santa Barbara Channel and on the Island of
  Guadeloupe, Lower California. It is remarkably successful in the
  warmer climates of Europe and of Australasia. The species is distinct
  in its peculiar cone with rounded apophyses.

    Plate XXXVII.

    Figs. 319, 320, Cones. Fig. 321, Leaf-fascicle and magnified
    leaf-section. Fig. 322, Leaf-section from a binate fascicle. Fig.
    323, Magnified dermal tissues of the leaf.

=XIII. MACROCARPAE=

Pits of the ray-cells small. Wing-blade of the seed thick. Cones large. Leaves long and stout.

This group is remarkable for the size of leaf, conelet, and cone. The peculiar thick seed-wing
is more or less obscurely present among the species of the Insignes, but never attains the
development that differentiates this group from all other Pines. The leaf-section is notable
for the large amount of hypoderm and for the presence of both thick and thin outer walls of
the endoderm-cells, both forms appearing in the same leaf.

    Wing-blade with a short membranous extension.
      Leaves in fascicles of 5                            64. Torreyana
      Leaves in fascicles of 3                            65. Sabiniana
    Wing-blade with a long membranous extension, leaves
        in fascicles of 3                                 66. Coulteri

64. PINUS TORREYANA

    1855 P. Torreyana Parry ex Carrière, Trait. Conif. 326.
    1860 P. lophosperma Lindley in Gard. Chron. 46.

Spring-shoots uninodal, pruinose. Leaves in fascicles of 5, from 20 to 33 cm. long, very stout;
resin-ducts medial, hypoderm uniform or somewhat multiform and of many cells. Conelets large,
mucronate. Cones from 10 to 15 cm. long, on stout peduncles, broad-ovate, symmetrical, somewhat
persistent; apophyses chocolate-brown, prominently pyramidal, the umbo salient and capped with
a small mucro; seed-wing short, very thick, the dorsal surface of the nut spotted with the
black remnants of the spermoderm.

  A tree 10 or 12 metres high, often semi-prostrate in exposed
  positions, confined to a restricted area on the coast north of San
  Diego, California, and to the Island of Santa Rosa. This species
  resembles P. Sabiniana in the length of its seed-wing and in the color
  of its cone, but is distinct in the short triangular umbo, in its
  pentamerous leaf-fascicles and in the mottled dorsal surface of its
  nut.

    Plate XXXVIII.

    Fig. 324, Cone and seed. Fig. 325, Magnified leaf-section.

65. PINUS SABINIANA

    1833 P. Sabiniana Douglas in Trans. Linn. Soc. xvi. 747.

Spring-shoots multinodal, pruinose. Leaves in fascicles of 3, from 20 to 30 cm. long; resin-ducts
medial, hypoderm multiform. Conelets large, their scales tapering to a sharp point. Cones from
15 to 25 cm. long, reflexed, ovate, slightly oblique, persistent; apophyses chocolate-brown,
very prominent, the curved umbo confluent with the apophysis and with it forming a very large
talon-like armature with a sharp apex and a broad thick base; seed-wing very thick, with a
short membranous margin, the dorsal surface of the nut uniform in color.

