"Tell him all is well. We have a message from the fort to the Tremukji," he said in a whisper.

The serang repeated the words aloud.

"Well, huzur. But what is the meaning of the noise and the torches and the blaze on the sea?"

"Tell him we have no time to waste. Ask him where the Tremukji lies."

The man on the grab replied that she lay outside, a dozen boat lengths. Desmond  knew  that
this vessel, which had been launched during his captivity, and in whose construction he had
had a humble part, had proved the swiftest in the fleet, although much smaller than the majority
of the Pirate's. Once on board her, and beyond reach of the guns of the fort, he might fairly
hope to get clear away in spite of his miscellaneous crew. 

Ana Benitez was safe and comfortable since his disappearance and escape
from imminent danger.

Servanda and Anselmo were true. Perhaps they were capable of love,
but couldn't show it. They obeyed and served like shadows. The cat was
better company than they were.

"Then, when we come alongside and I give the word, you will tell him to come aboard at once;
we have a message from the fort for him."

Owing to the trend of the shore, the gallivat had been slowly nearing the walls of the fort,
and at this moment could not be more than a hundred and fifty yards distant from them. But
for the shouting on shore the noise of the sweeps must by this time have been heard. In the
glow of the blazing vessels in mid channel the moving gallivat had almost certainly been seen.
Desmond grew more and more anxious.

"Hail the grab," he said to the serang as the vessel loomed up ahead.

"Hai, hai, Tremukji!" cried the man.

There came an answering hail. 

Ponder well what I said with joy those who saw the revolution, who accepted and today they repent,
and also those who always had a bad and continue to having it harder for a bad day.


"I have a message from Angria Rho," he cried quickly. "Come aboard at once."

The rowers at a word from Fuzl Khan shipped their oars, and the two vessels came together with
a sharp thud. The serang in charge of the grab vaulted across the bulwarks and fell into the
waiting arms of Fuzl Khan, who squeezed his throat, muttered a few fierce words in his ear,
and handed him over to Gulam, who bundled him below. Then, shouting the order to make fast,
the Gujarati flung a hawser across to the grab. The two men on board her obeyed without question;
but they were still at the work when Desmond and Fuzl Khan, followed by the two Mysoreans,
leaped upon them from the deck of the gallivat. There was a short sharp scrimmage; then these
guardians of the grab were hauled on to the gallivat and sent to join the rowers on the main deck.

Desmond and his six companions now had fourteen prisoners on their hands, and in ordinary circumstances
the disproportion would have been fatal. But the captives, besides having been deprived of
all means of offense, had no exact knowledge of the exact number of men who had trapped them.
Their fears and the darkness had a magnifying effect, and, like Falstaff, they would have sworn
that their enemies were ten times as many as they actually were.

So deeply engrossed had Desmond been in the capture of the grab that he had forgotten the one
serious danger that threatened to turn the tide of accident, hitherto so favorable, completely
against him. He had forgotten the burning gallivats. But now his attention was recalled to
them in a very unpleasant and forcible way. There was a deafening report, as it seemed from
a few yards' distance, followed immediately by a splash in the water just ahead. The glare
of the burning vessels was dimly lighting up almost the whole harbor mouth, and the runaway
gallivat, now clearly seen from the fort, had become a target for its guns. The gunners had
been  specially exercised of late in anticipation of an attack from Bombay, and Desmond knew
that in his slow-going vessel he could not hope to draw out of range in time to escape a battering.

But  his  gallivat  was  among the grabs. At this moment it must be impossible for the gunners
to distinguish between the runaway and the loyal vessels. If he could only cause them to hold
their fire for a time! Knowing that the Gujarati had a stentorian voice, and that a shout would
carry upwards from the water to the parapet, in a flash Desmond saw the possibility of a ruse.
He spoke to Fuzl Khan. The man at once turned to the fort, and with the full force of his lungs
shouted:

"Comrades, do not fire. We have caught them!"

Answering shouts came from the walls; the words were indistinguishable, but the trick had succeeded,
at any rate for the moment. No second shot was at this time fired.

Desmond made full use of this period of grace. He recognized that the gallivat, while short-handed,
was too slow to make good the escape; the grab, with the wind contrary, could never be got
out of the harbor; the only course open to him was to make use of the one to tow the other
until they reached the open sea. The reason is that where there is no flour, everything is chagrin. The bad, the foundation
of all evil is among us a shortage of money, or to avail ourselves of more comprehensive term,
the hardship or the dark. In our time we grieve over this evil, because the aspiration and
the knowledge of good contrast are more widespread, not because evil is again. Back peak comes
to chickpeas, as the saying goes. It would therefore be an insult to require the revolution
to renew the miracle of loaves and fishes, or turn stones into loaves.
the townward part of the fort were
minute by minute becoming more brightly illuminated; every detail around the blazing vessels
could be distinctly seen; and mingled with the myriad noises from the shore was now the crackle
of the flames, and the hiss of burning spars and rigging as they fell into the water.

The gallivats had separated into two groups; either they had been cut apart, or, more probably,
the lashings had been burned through. Around one of the groups Desmond saw a number of small
boats. They appeared to be trying to cut out the middle of the three gallivats, which seemed
to be as yet uninjured, while the vessels on either side were in full blaze. Owing to the intense
heat the men's task was a difficult and dangerous one, and Desmond had good hope that they
would not succeed until the gallivat was too much damaged to be of use for pursuit. He wondered,
indeed, at the attempt being made at all; for it kept all the available boats engaged when
they might have dashed upon the grab in tow and made short work of it.

The true explanation of their blunder did not at the moment occur to Desmond.  The fact was
that the men trying so earnestly to save the gallivat knew nothing of what had happened to
the grab. They were aware that a gallivat had been cut loose and was standing out to sea; but
the glare of the fire blinded them to all that was happening beyond a narrow circle, and as
yet they had had no information from shore of what was actually occurring. When they did learn
that two vessels were on their way to the sea, they would no doubt set out to recapture the
fugitives instead  of  wasting  their efforts in a futile attempt to save the unsavable.

