But among the most illustrious and renowned painters of the territory of Friuli, the rarest
and most famous in our day--since he has surpassed those mentioned above by a great measure
in the invention of scenes, in draughtsmanship, in boldness, in mastery over colour, in fresco
work, in swiftness of execution, in strength of relief, and in every other department of our
arts--is Giovanni Antonio Licinio, called by some Cuticello. This master was born at Pordenone,
a township in Friuli, twenty-five miles from Udine; and since he was endowed by nature with
a beautiful genius and an inclination for painting, he devoted himself without any teacher
to the study of natural objects, imitating the style of Giorgione da Castelfranco, because
that manner, seen by him many times in Venice, had pleased him much. Now, having learnt the
rudiments of art, he was forced, in order to save his life from a pestilence that had fallen
upon his native place, to take to flight; and thus, passing many months in the surrounding
country, he executed various works in fresco for a number of peasants, gaining at their expense
experience of using colour on plaster. Wherefore, since the surest and best method of learning
is practice and a sufficiency of work, it came to pass that he became a well-practised and
judicious master of that kind of painting, and learned to make colours produce the desired
effect when used in a fluid state, which is done on account of the white, which dries the plaster
and produces a brightness that ruins all softness. And so, having mastered the nature of colours,
and having learnt by long practice to work very well in fresco, he returned to Udine, where
he painted for the altar of the Nunziata, in the Convent of S. Pietro Martire, a panel-picture
in oils containing the Madonna at the moment of receiving the Salutation from the Angel Gabriel;
and in the sky he made a God the Father surrounded by many little boys, who is sending down
the Holy Spirit. This work, which is executed with good drawing, grace, vivacity, and relief,
is held by all craftsmen of judgment to be the best that he ever painted.

In the Duomo of the same city, on the balustrade of the organ, below the doors already painted
by Pellegrino, he painted a story of S. Ermacora and Fortunatus, also in oils, graceful and
well designed. In the same city, in order to gain the friendship of the Signori Tinghi, he
painted in fresco the façade of their palace; in which work, wishing to make himself known
and to prove what a master he was of architectural invention and of working in fresco, he made
a series of compartments and groups of varied ornaments full of figures in niches; and in three
great spaces in the centre of the work he painted scenes with figures in colours, two spaces,
high and narrow, being on either side, and one square in shape in the middle; and in the latter
he painted a Corinthian column planted with its base in the sea, with a Siren on the right
hand, holding the column upright, and a nude Neptune on the left supporting it on the other
side; while above the capital of the column there is a Cardinal's hat, the device, so it is
said, of Pompeo Colonna, who was much the friend of the owners of that palace. Bright inmate!
How did it run?'

'Bother your verses!' cried the boy with utter contempt. 'Shy at it, you duffer! Oh, what a Butterfly!
Get her into the teapot. Blockhead!'
This last disdainfully to himself, for he had hurled the ancient
and valuable teapot at Mab, who was flying to a higher branch, and
the teapot had missed.

'Rash boy!' cried the Palæonto-theologist,
shaking him angrily, 'you have broken my grandfather's teapot.'

'Run
for the butterfly-net,' returned the boy unabashed.

At Spelimbergo, a large place fifteen miles above Udine, the balustrade and the doors of the
organ in the great church are painted by the hand of the same master; on the outer side of
one door is the Assumption of Our Lady, and on the inner side S. Peter and S. Paul before Nero,
gazing at Simon Magus in the air above; while on the other door there is the Conversion of
S. Paul, and on the balustrade the Nativity of Christ.

Through this work, which is very beautiful, and many others, Pordenone came into repute and
fame, and was summoned to Vicenza, whence, after having executed some works there, he made
his way to Mantua, where he coloured a façade in fresco with marvellous grace for M. Paris,
a gentleman of that city. Among other beautiful inventions which are in that work, much praise
is due to a frieze of antique letters, one braccio and a half in height, at the top, below
the cornice, among which, passing in and out of them, are many little children in various attitudes,
all most beautiful.

That work finished, he returned in great credit to Vicenza, and there, besides many other works,
he painted the whole of the tribune of S. Maria di Campagna, although by reason of his departure
a part remained unfinished, which was afterwards finished with great diligence by Maestro Bernardo
da Vercelli. In the same church he painted two chapels in fresco: one with stories of S. Catherine,
and the other with the Nativity of Christ and the Adoration of the Magi, both being worthy
of the highest praise. He then painted some poetical pictures in the beautiful garden of M.
Barnaba dal Pozzo, a doctor; and, in the said Church of S. Maria di Campagna, the picture of
S. Augustine, which is on the left hand as one enters the church. All these most beautiful
works brought it about that the gentlemen of that city persuaded him to take a wife there,
and always held him in vast veneration.

Going afterwards to Venice, where he had formerly executed some works, he painted a wall of
S. Geremia, on the Grand Canal, and a panel-picture in oils for the Madonna del Orto, with
many figures, making a particular effort to prove his worth in the S. John the Baptist. He
also painted many scenes in fresco on the façade of the house of Martin d'Anna on the same
Grand Canal; in particular, a Curtius on horseback in foreshortening, which has the appearance
of being wholly in the round, like the Mercury flying freely through the air, not to speak
of many other things that all prove his ability. That work pleased the whole city of Venice
beyond measure, and Pordenone was therefore extolled more highly than any other man who had
ever worked in the city up to that time.

Among other reasons that caused him to give an incredible amount of effort to all his works,
was his rivalry with the most excellent Tiziano; since, setting himself to compete with him,
he hoped by means of continual study and by a bold and resolute method of working in fresco
to wrest from the hands of Tiziano that sovereignty which he had gained with so many beautiful
works; employing, also, unusual methods outside the field of art, such as that of being obliging
and courteous and associating continually and of set purpose with great persons, making his
interests universal, and taking a hand in everything. And, in truth, this rivalry was a great
assistance to him, for it caused him to devote the greatest zeal and diligence in his power
to all his works, so that they proved worthy of eternal praise.

For these reasons, then, he was commissioned by the Wardens of S. Rocco to paint in fresco
the chapel of that church, with all the tribune. Setting his hand, therefore, to this work,
he painted a God the Father in the tribune, with a vast number of children in various beautiful
attitudes, radiating from Him. In the frieze of the same tribune he painted eight figures from
the Old Testament, with the four Evangelists in the angles, and the Transfiguration of Christ
over the high-altar; and in the two lunettes at the sides are the four Doctors of the Church.
By the hand of the same master are two large pictures in the middle of the church: in one is
Christ healing an endless number of the sick, all very well painted, and in the other is S.
Christopher carrying Jesus Christ on his shoulders. On the wooden tabernacle of the same church,
wherein the vessels of silver are kept, he painted a S. Martin on horseback, with many beggars
who are bringing votive offerings, in a building in perspective.

This work, which was much extolled and brought him honour and profit, was the reason that M.
Jacopo Soranzo, having become his intimate friend, caused him to be commissioned to paint the
Sala de' Pregai in competition with Tiziano; and there he executed many pictures with figures
seen foreshortened from below, which are very beautiful, together with a frieze of marine monsters
painted in oils round that hall. These works made him so dear to the Senate, that as long as
he lived he always received an honourable salary from them. And since, out of rivalry, he always
sought to do work in places where Tiziano had also worked, he painted for S. Giovanni di Rialto
a S. John, as Almoner, giving alms to beggars, and also placed on an altar a picture of S.
Sebastian, S. Rocco, and other saints, which was very beautiful, but yet not equal to the work
of Tiziano, although many, more out of malignity than out of a love for the truth, exalted
that of Giovanni Antonio. The same master painted in the cloister of S. Stefano many scenes
in fresco from the Old Testament, and one from the New, divided one from another by various
Virtues; and in these figures he displayed amazing foreshortenings, in which method of painting
he always delighted, seeking to introduce them into his every composition with no fear of difficulties,
and making them more ornate than any other painter.

Prince Doria had built a palace on the seashore in Genoa, and had commissioned Perino del Vaga,
a very celebrated painter, to paint halls, apartments, and ante-chambers both in oils and in
fresco, which are quite marvellous for the richness and beauty of the paintings. But seeing
that Perino was not then giving much attention to the work, and wishing to make him do by the
spur of emulation what he was not doing by himself, he sent for Pordenone, who began with an
open terrace, wherein, following his usual manner, he executed a frieze of children, who are
hurrying about in very beautiful attitudes and unloading a barque full of merchandise. He also
painted a large scene of Jason asking leave from his uncle to go in search of the Golden Fleece.
But the Prince, seeing the difference that there was between the work of Perino and that of
Pordenone, dismissed the latter, and summoned in his place Domenico Beccafumi of Siena, an
excellent painter and a rarer master than Pordenone. And he, glad to serve so great a Prince,
did not scruple to leave his native city of Siena, where there are so many marvellous works
by his hand; but he did not paint more than one single scene in that palace, because Perino
brought everything to completion by himself.

Giovanni Antonio then returned to Venice, where he was given to understand that Ercole, Duke
of Ferrara, had brought a great number of masters from Germany, and had caused them to begin
to make fabrics in silk, gold, floss-silk, and wool, for his own use and pleasure, but that
he had no good designers of figures in Ferrara, since Girolamo da Ferrara had more ability
for portraits and separate things than for difficult and complicated scenes, which called for
great power of art and design; and that he should enter the service of that Prince. Whereupon,
desiring to gain fame no less than riches, he departed from Venice, and on reaching Ferrara
was received with great warmth by the Duke. But a little time after his arrival, being attacked
by a most grievous affliction of the chest, he took to his bed with the doom of death upon
him, and, growing continually worse and finding no remedy, within three days or little more
he finished the course of his life, at the age of fifty-six. This seemed a strange thing to
the Duke, and also to Pordenone's friends; and there were not wanting men who for many months
believed that he had died of poison. The body of Giovanni Antonio was buried with honour, and
his death was a grief to many, particularly in Venice, for the reason that he was ready of
speech and the friend and companion of many, and delighted in music; and his readiness and
grace of speech came from his having given attention to the study of Latin. He always made
his figures grand, and was very rich in invention, and so versatile that he could imitate everything
very well; but he was, above all, resolute and most facile in works in fresco.

A disciple of Pordenone was Pomponio Amalteo of San Vito, who won by his good qualities the
honour of becoming the son-in-law of his master. This Pomponio, always following that master
in matters of art, has acquitted himself very well in all his works, as may be seen at Udine
from the doors of the new organ, painted in oils, on the outer side of which is Christ driving
the traders from the Temple, and on the inner side the story of the Pool of Bethesda and the
Resurrection of Lazarus. In the Church of S. Francesco, in the same city, there is a panel-picture
in oils by the hand of the same man, of S. Francis receiving the Stigmata, with some very beautiful
landscapes, and with a sunrise from which, in the midst of some rays of the greatest splendour,
there radiates the celestial light, which pierces the hands, feet, and side of S. Francis,
who, kneeling devoutly and full of love, receives it, while his companion lies on the ground,
in foreshortening, all overcome with amazement. Pomponio also painted in fresco for the Friars
of La Vigna, at the end of their refectory, Jesus Christ between the two disciples at Emmaus.
In the township of San Vito, his native place, twenty miles distant from Udine, he painted
in fresco the Chapel of the Madonna in the Church of S. Maria, in so beautiful a manner, and
so much to the satisfaction of all, that he has won from the most reverend Cardinal Maria Grimani,
Patriarch of Aquileia and Lord of San Vito, the honour of being enrolled among the nobles of
that place.

I have thought it right in this Life of Pordenone to make mention of these excellent craftsmen
of Friuli, both because it appears to me that their talents deserve it, and to the end that
it may be recognized in the account to be given later how much more excellent are those who,
after such a beginning, have lived since that day, as will be related in the Life of Giovanni
Ricamatori of Udine, to whom our age owes a very great obligation for his works in stucco and
his grotesques.

But returning to Pordenone; after the works mentioned above as having been executed by him
at Venice in the time of the most illustrious Gritti, he died, as has been related, in the
year 1540. And because he was one of the most able men that our age has possessed, and for
the reason, above all, that his figures seem to be in the round and detached from their walls,
and almost in relief, he can be numbered among those who have rendered assistance to art and
benefit to the world.

FOOTNOTE:

[11] I.e., singular or rare.

GIOVANNI ANTONIO SOGLIANI

LIFE OF GIOVANNI ANTONIO SOGLIANI

PAINTER OF FLORENCE

Very often do we see in the sciences of learning and in the more liberal of the manual arts,
that those men who are melancholy are the most assiduous in their studies and show the greatest
patience in supporting the burden of their labours; so that there are few of that disposition
who do not become excellent in such professions. Even so did Giovanni Antonio Sogliani, a painter
of Florence, whose cast of countenance was so cold and woeful that he looked like the image
of melancholy; and such was the power of this humour over him that he gave little thought to
anything but matters of art, with the exception of his household cares, through which he endured
most grievous anxieties, although he had enough to live in comfort. He worked at the art of
painting under Lorenzo di Credi for four-and-twenty years, living with him, honouring him always,
and rendering him every sort of service. Having become during that time a very good painter,
he showed afterwards in all his works that he was a most faithful disciple of his master and
a close imitator of his manner. This was seen from his first paintings, in the Church of the
Osservanza on the hill of San Miniato without Florence, for which he painted a panel-picture
copied from the one that Lorenzo had executed for the Nuns of S. Chiara, containing the Nativity
of Christ, and no less excellent than the one of Lorenzo.

Afterwards, having left his master, he painted for the Church of S. Michele in Orto, at the
commission of the Guild of Vintners, a S. Martin in oils, robed as a Bishop, which gave him
the name of a very good master. But so keen was the judgment and so delicate the touch of the warrior
that it never once shipped water.

"Wonderful fellows, those Indians," said Colonel de Peyster. "How they do handle a canoe! It is
almost like magic! I verily believe the fellow is showing off for our benefit."

"Maybe," said Henry.

"And it is a good show, too.

Ah, I thought he would go that time; but look how quickly and delicately he righted himself.
Such skill is truly marvelous!"

"It is," said Henry, who was watching the canoe and its occupant with an interest even greater
than that of de Peyster. Up at the far corner of the palisade a sentinel was walking back and
forth, his rifle on his shoulder, and at the other end another was
doing likewise. Three or four officers off duty had also mounted the
palisade and were watching the Indian's exhibition of skill.

Suddenly
the warrior turned the canoe in toward the palisade at the point where
the unfinished pier ran out toward the river. Raising himself on the
canoe he uttered the long weird cry of the wolf, the same that had
come more than once from the depths of the Canadian woods.

Then an
extraordinary thing occurred. De Peyster was standing on the platform
nearest the unfinished pier. Henry suddenly seized him by the shoulders,
thrust him down as if he were shot, ran along the platform and down
the unfinished pier at his utmost speed. De Peyster was on his feet
in an instant, and both sentinels on the alert, raised their rifles
to take aim. This work, which was painted with much diligence, and executed with good judgment
in the colouring and in the heads, which are very lifelike, was placed in the above-mentioned
Camaldolite Church; but that monastery was taken on account of the siege of Florence from those
Eremite Fathers, who used devoutly to celebrate the Divine offices in the church, and was afterwards
given to the Nuns of S. Giovannino, of the Order of the Knights of Jerusalem, and finally destroyed;
and the picture, being one which may be numbered among the best works that Sogliani painted,
was placed by order of the Lord Duke Cosimo in one of the chapels of the Medici family in S.
Lorenzo.

The same master executed for the Nuns of the Crocetta a Last Supper coloured in oils, which
was much extolled at that time. And in a shrine in the Via de' Ginori, he painted in fresco
for Taddeo Taddei a Crucifix with Our Lady and S. John at the foot, and in the sky some angels
lamenting Christ, very lifelike--a picture truly worthy of praise, and a well-executed example
of work in fresco. By the hand of Sogliani, also, is a Crucifix in the Refectory of the Abbey
of the Black Friars in Florence, with angels flying about and weeping with much grace; and
at the foot the Madonna, S. John, S. Benedict, S. Scholastica, and other figures. For the Nuns
of the Spirito Santo, on the hill of San Giorgio, he painted two pictures that are in their
church, one of S. Francis, and the other of S. Elizabeth, Queen of Hungary and a sister of
that Order. For the Company of the Ceppo he painted the banner for carrying in processions,
which is very beautiful, representing on the front of it the Visitation of Our Lady, and on
the other side S. Niccolò the Bishop, with two children dressed as Flagellants, one of whom
holds his book and the other the three balls of gold. On a panel in S. Jacopo sopra Arno he
painted the Trinity, with an endless number of little boys, S. Mary Magdalene kneeling, S.
Catherine, S. James, and two figures in fresco standing at the sides, S. Jerome in Penitence
and S. John; and in the predella he made his assistant, Sandrino del Calzolaio, execute three
scenes, which won no little praise.

On the end wall of the Oratory of a Company in the township of Anghiari, he executed on panel
a Last Supper in oils, with figures of the size of life; and on one of the two adjoining walls
(namely, the sides) he painted Christ washing the feet of the Apostles, and on the other a
servant bringing two vessels of water. The work is held in great veneration in that place,
for it is indeed a rare thing, and one that brought him both honour and profit. A picture that
he executed of a Judith who had cut off the head of Holofernes, being a very beautiful work,
was sent to Hungary. And likewise another, in which was the Beheading of S. John the Baptist,
with a building in perspective for which he had copied the exterior of the Chapter-house of
the Pazzi, which is in the first cloister of S. Croce, was sent as a most beautiful work to
Naples by Paolo da Terrarossa, who had given the commission for it. For one of the Bernardi,
also, Sogliani executed two other pictures, which were placed in a chapel in the Church of
the Osservanza at San Miniato, containing two lifesize figures in oils--S. John the Baptist
and S. Anthony of Padua. But as for the panel that was to stand between them, Giovanni Antonio,
being dilatory by nature and leisurely over his work, lingered over it so long that he who
had given the commission died: wherefore that panel, which was to contain a Christ lying dead
in the lap of His Mother, remained unfinished.

