THE TEACHER.

       *       *       *       *       *

MORAL INFLUENCES

EMPLOYED IN

THE INSTRUCTION AND GOVERNMENT

OF

THE YOUNG.

A NEW AND REVISED EDITION.

BY JACOB ABBOTT.

With Engravings.

1873.

This book is intended to detail, in a familiar and practical manner, a system of arrangements
for the organization and management of a school, based on the employment, so far as is practicable,
of Moral Influences, as a means of effecting the objects in view. Its design is, not to bring
forward new theories or new plans, but to develop and explain, and to carry out to their practical
applications such principles as, among all skillful and experienced teachers, are generally
admitted and acted upon. Of course it is not designed for the skillful and experienced themselves,
but it is intended to embody what they already know, and to present it in a practical form
for the use of those who are beginning the work, and who wish to avail themselves of the experience
which others have acquired.

Although moral influences are the chief foundations on which the power of the teacher over
the minds and hearts of his pupils is, according to this treatise, to rest, still it must not
be imagined that the system here recommended is one of persuasion. It is a system of authority--supreme
and unlimited authority--a point essential in all plans for the supervision of the young; but
it is authority secured and maintained as far as possible by moral measures. There will be
no dispute about the propriety of making the most of this class of means. Whatever difference
of opinion there may be on the question whether physical force is necessary at all, every one
will agree that, if ever employed, it must be only as a last resort, and that no teacher ought
to make war upon the body, unless it is proved that he can not conquer through the medium of
the mind.

In regard to the anecdotes and narratives which are very freely introduced to illustrate principles
in this work, the writer ought to state that, though they are all substantially true--that
is, all except those which are expressly introduced as mere suppositions, he has not hesitated
to alter very freely, for obvious reasons, the unimportant circumstances connected with them. I'll
see Lieutenant Breckinridge and the colonel. I won't be back until after taps. Cover the fire, but
wait up for me."

He and Allan went out together. Tullius restored the coffee berries to the tin box, and the box to
the cupboard, sat down by the fire, and fell again into a nodding dream of Three Oaks, of the garden,
and of his grandchildren in the quarter.

CHAPTER X
LIEUTENANT McNEIL

The Williamsport ferry-boat came slowly across
the Potomac, from the Maryland to the Virginia side. The clear, deep
water lay faintly blue beneath the winter sky, and the woods came
so close that long branches of sycamore swept the flood. In that mild
season every leaf had not fallen; up and down the river here the dull
red of an oak met the eye, and there the faded gold of a willow. It is essential, however, that
they should be written by experienced teachers, who have for some years been actively engaged
and specially interested in the work; that they should be written in a very practical and familiar
style, and that they should exhibit principles which are unquestionably true, and generally
admitted by good teachers, and not the new theories peculiar to the writer himself. In a word,
utility and practical effect should be the only aim.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I. INTEREST IN TEACHING. Source of enjoyment in teaching.--The boy and the steam-engine.--His
contrivance.--His pleasure, and the source of it.--Firing at the mark.--Plan of clearing the
galleries in the British House of Commons.--Pleasure of experimenting, and exercising intellectual
and moral power.--The indifferent and inactive teacher.--His subsequent experiments; means
of awakening interest.--Offenses of pupils. --Different ways of regarding them.

Teaching really attended with peculiar trials and difficulties.--1. Moral responsibility for
the conduct of pupils.--2. Multiplicity of the objects of attention.

CHAPTER II. GENERAL ARRANGEMENTS. Objects to be aimed at in the general arrangements.--Systematizing
the teacher's work.--Necessity of having only one thing to attend to at a time.

1. Whispering and leaving seats.--An experiment.--Method of regulating this.--Introduction
of the new plan.--Difficulties.--Dialogue with pupils.--Study-card.--Construction and use.
2. Mending pens.--Unnecessary trouble from this source.--Degree of importance to be attached
to good pens.--Plan for providing them. 3. Answering questions.--Evils.--Each pupil's fair
proportion of time.--Questions about lessons.--When the teacher should refuse to answer them.--Rendering
assistance.--When to be refused. 4. Hearing recitations.--Regular arrangement of them.--Punctuality.--Plan
and schedule.--General exercises.--Subjects to be attended to at them.

General arrangements of government.--Power to be delegated to pupils.--Gardiner Lyceum.--Its
government.--The trial.--Real republican government impracticable in schools.--Delegated power.--Experiment
with the writing-books.--Quarrel about the nail.--Offices for pupils.--Cautions.--Danger of
insubordination.--New plans to be introduced gradually.

CHAPTER III. INSTRUCTION. The three important branches.--The objects which are really most
important.--Advanced scholars.--Examination of school and scholars at the outset.--Acting on
numbers.--Extent to which it may be carried.--Recitation and Instruction.

1. Recitation.--Its object.--Importance of a thorough examination of the class.--Various modes.--Perfect
regularity and order necessary. --Example.--Story of the pencils.--Time wasted by too minute
an attention to individuals.--Example.--Answers given simultaneously to save time.--Excuses.--Dangers
in simultaneous recitation.--Means of avoiding them.--Advantages of this mode.--Examples.--Written
answers. 2. Instruction.--Means of exciting interest.--Variety.--Examples.--Showing the connection
between the studies of school and the business of life.--Example from the controversy between
general and state governments.--Mode of illustrating it.--Proper way of meeting difficulties.--Leading
pupils to surmount them.--True way to encourage the young to meet difficulties.--The boy and
the wheel-barrow.--Difficult examples in arithmetic.

Proper way of rendering assistance.--(1.) Simply analyzing intricate subjects.--Dialogue on
longitude.--(2.) Making previous truths perfectly familiar.--Experiment with the multiplication
table.--Latin Grammar lesson.--Geometry.

3. General cautions.--Doing work for the scholar.--Dullness.--Interest in all the pupils.--Making
all alike.--Faults of pupils.--The teacher's own mental habits.--False pretensions.

CHAPTER IV. MORAL DISCIPLINE. First impressions.--Story.--Danger of devoting too much attention
to individual instances.--The profane boy.--Case described.--Confession of the boys.--Success.--The
untidy desk.--Measures in consequence. --Interesting the scholars in the good order of the
school.--Securing a majority.--Example.--Reports about the desks.--The new College building.--Modes
of interesting the boys.--The irregular class.--Two ways of remedying the evil.--Boys' love
of system and regularity. --Object of securing a majority, and particular means of doing it.--Making
school pleasant.--Discipline should generally be private.--In all cases that are brought before
the school, public opinion in the teacher's favor should be secured.--Story of the rescue.--Feelings
of displeasure against what is wrong.--The teacher under moral obligation, and governed, himself,
by law.--Description of the Moral Exercise.--Prejudice.--The scholars' written remarks, and
the teacher's comments.--The spider.--List of subjects.--Anonymous writing.--Specimens.--Marks
of a bad scholar.--Consequences of being behindhand.--New scholars.--A satirical spirit.--Variety.

Treatment of individual offenders.--Ascertaining who they are.--Studying their characters.--Securing
their personal attachment.--Asking assistance.--The whistle.--Open, frank dealing.--Example.--Dialogue
with James.--Communications in writing.

CHAPTER V. RELIGIOUS INFLUENCE. The American mechanic at Paris.--A Congregational teacher among
Quakers.--Parents have the ultimate right to decide how their children shall be educated.

Agreement in religious opinion in this country.--Principle which is to guide the teacher on
this subject.--Limits and restrictions to religious influence in school.--Religious truths
which are generally admitted in this country.--The existence of God.--Human responsibility.--Immortality
of the soul.--A revelation.--Nature of piety.--Salvation by Christ.--Teacher to do nothing
on this subject but what he may do by the common consent of his employers.--Reasons for explaining
distinctly these limits.

Particular measures proposed.--Opening exercises.--Prayer.--Singing. --Direct instruction.--Mode
of giving it.--Example; arrangement of the Epistles in the New Testament.--Dialogue.--Another
example; scene in the woods.--Cautions.--Affected simplicity of language.--Evils of it.--Minute
details.--Example; motives to study.--Dialogue.--Mingling religious influence with the direct
discipline of the school.--Fallacious indications of piety.--Sincerity of the teacher.

CHAPTER VI. MOUNT VERNON SCHOOL. Reason for inserting the description.--Advantage of visiting
schools, and of reading descriptions of them.--Addressed to a new scholar.--Her personal duty.--Study-card.--Rule.--But
one rule.--Cases when this rule maybe waived.--1. At the direction of teachers.--2. On extraordinary
emergencies.--Reasons for the rule.--Anecdote.--Punishments.--Incidents described.--Confession.

2. Order of daily exercises.--Opening of the school.--Schedules.--Hours of study and recess.--General
exercises.--Business.--Examples.--Sections.

3. Instruction and supervision of pupils.--Classes.--Organization.--Sections.--Duties of superintendents.

4. Officers.--Design in appointing them.--Their names and duties.--Example of the operation
of the system.

5. The court.--Its plan and design.--A trial described.

6. Religious instruction.--Principles inculcated.--Measures.--Religious exercises in school.--Meeting
on Saturday afternoon.--Concluding remarks.

CHAPTER VII. SCHEMING. Time lost upon fruitless schemes.--Proper province of ingenuity and
enterprise.--Cautions.--Case supposed.--The spelling class; an experiment with it; its success
and its consequences.--System of literary institutions in this country.--Directions to a young
teacher on the subject of forming new plans.--New institutions; new schoolbooks.--Ingenuity
and enterprise very useful, within proper limits.--Ways of making known new plans.--Periodicals.--Family
newspapers.--Teachers' meetings.

Rights of committees, trustees, or patrons, in the control of the school.--Principle which
ought to govern.--Case supposed.--Extent to which the teacher is bound by the wishes of his
employers.

CHAPTER VIII. REPORTS OF CASES. Plan of the chapter.--Hats and bonnets.--Injury to clothes.--Mistakes
which are not censurable.--Tardiness; plan for punishing it.--Helen's lesson.--Firmness in
measures united with mildness of manner.--Insincere confession: scene in a class.--Court.--Trial
of a case.--Teacher's personal character.--The way to elevate the character of the employment.--Six
hours only to be devoted to school.--The chestnut burr.--Scene in the wood.--Dialogue in school.--An
experiment.--Series of lessons in writing.--The correspondence.--Two kinds of management.--Plan
of weekly reports.--The shopping exercise. --Example.--Artifices in recitations.--Keeping resolution
notes of teacher's lecture.--Topics.--Plan and illustration of the exercise. --Introduction
of music.--Tabu.--Mental analysis.--Scene in a class.

CHAPTER IX. THE TEACHER'S FIRST DAY. Embarrassments of young teachers in first entering upon
their duties.--Preliminary information to be acquired in respect to the school.--Visits to
the parents.--Making acquaintance with the scholars.--Opening the school.--Mode of setting
the scholars at work on the first day.--No sudden changes to be made.--Misconduct.--Mode of
disposing of the cases of it.--Conclusion.

THE TEACHER.

CHAPTER I.

INTEREST IN TEACHING.

A most singular contrariety of opinion prevails in the community in regard to the pleasantness
of the business of teaching. Some teachers go to their daily task merely upon compulsion; they
regard it as intolerable drudgery. Others love the work: they hover around the school-room
as long as they can, and never cease to think, and seldom to talk, of their delightful labors.

Unfortunately, there are too many of the former class, and the first object which, in this
work, I shall attempt to accomplish, is to show my readers, especially those who have been
accustomed to look upon the business of teaching as a weary and heartless toil, how it happens
that it is, in any case, so pleasant. The human mind is always essentially the same. That which
is tedious and joyless to one, will be so to another, if pursued in the same way, and under
the same circumstances. And teaching, if it is pleasant, animating, and exciting to one, may
be so to all.

I am met, however, at the outset, in my effort to show why it is that teaching is ever a pleasant
work, by the want of a name for a certain faculty or capacity of the human mind, through which
most of the enjoyment of teaching finds its avenue. Every mind is so constituted as to take
a positive pleasure in the exercise of ingenuity in adapting means to an end, and in watching
the operation of them--in accomplishing by the intervention of instruments what we could not
accomplish without--in devising (when we see an object to be effected which is too great for
our direct and immediate power) and setting at work some instrumentality which may be sufficient
to accomplish it.

It is said that when the steam-engine was first put into operation, such was the imperfection
of the machinery, that a boy was necessarily stationed at it to open and shut alternately the
cock by which the steam was now admitted and now shut out from the cylinder. One such boy,
after patiently doing his work for many days, contrived to connect this stop-cock with some
of the moving parts of the engine by a wire, in such a manner that the engine itself did the
work which had been intrusted to him; and after seeing that the whole business would go regularly
forward, he left the wire in charge, and went away to play.

Such is the story. Now if it is true, how much pleasure the boy must have experienced in devising
and witnessing the successful operation of his scheme. I do not mean the pleasure of relieving
himself from a dull and wearisome duty; I do not mean the pleasure of anticipated play; but
I mean the strong interest he must have taken in contriving and executing his plan. When, wearied
out with his dull, monotonous work, he first noticed those movements of the machinery which
he thought adapted to his purpose, and the plan flashed into his mind, how must his eye have
brightened, and how quick must the weary listlessness of his employment have vanished. While
he was maturing his plan and carrying it into execution--while adjusting his wires, fitting
them to the exact length and to the exact position--and especially when, at last, he began
to watch the first successful operation of his contrivance, he must have enjoyed a pleasure
which very few even of the joyous sports of childhood could have supplied.

It is not, however, exactly the pleasure of exercising ingenuity in contrivance that I refer
to here; for the teacher has not, after all, a great deal of absolute contriving to do, or,
rather, his principal business is not contriving. The greatest and most permanent source of
pleasure to the boy, in such a case as I have described, is his feeling that he is accomplishing
a great effect by a slight effort of his own; the feeling of power; acting through the intervention
of instrumentality, so as to multiply his power. So great would be this satisfaction, that
he would almost wish to have some other similar work assigned him, that he might have another
opportunity to contrive some plan for its easy accomplishment.

Looking at an object to be accomplished, or an evil to be remedied, then studying its nature
and extent, and devising and executing some means for effecting the purpose desired, is, in
all cases, a source of pleasure; especially when, by the process, we bring to view or into
operation new powers, or powers heretofore hidden, whether they are our own powers, or those
of objects upon which we act. Experimenting has a sort of magical fascination for all. Some
do not like the trouble of making preparations, but all are eager to see the results. Contrive
a new machine, and every body will be interested to witness or to hear of its operation. Develop
any heretofore unknown properties of matter, or secure some new useful effect from laws which
men have not hitherto employed for their purposes, and the interest of all around you will
be excited to observe your results; and, especially, you will yourself take a deep and permanent
pleasure in guiding and controlling the power you have thus obtained.

This is peculiarly the case with experiments upon mind, or experiments for producing effects
through the medium of voluntary acts of others, making it necessary that the contriver should
take into consideration the laws of mind in forming his plans. To illustrate this by rather
a childish case: I once knew a boy who was employed by his father to remove all the loose small
stones, which, from the peculiar nature of the ground, had accumulated in the road before the
house. The boy was set at work by his father to take them up, and throw them over into the
pasture across the way. He soon got tired of picking up the stones one by one, and so he sat
down upon the bank to try to devise some better means of accomplishing his work. He at length
conceived and adopted the following plan: He set up in the pasture a narrow board for a target,
or, as boys would call it, a mark, and then, collecting all the boys of the neighborhood, he
proposed to them an amusement which boys are always ready for--firing at a mark. The stones
in the road furnished the ammunition, and, of course, in a very short time the road was cleared;
the boys working for the accomplishment of their leader's task, when they supposed they were
only finding amusement for themselves.

Here, now, is experimenting upon the mind--the production of useful effect with rapidity and
ease by the intervention of proper instrumentality--the conversion, by means of a little knowledge
of human nature, of that which would have otherwise been dull and fatiguing labor into a most
animating sport, giving pleasure to twenty instead of tedious labor to one. Now the contrivance
and execution of such plans is a source of positive pleasure. They had no need to spare ammunition,
and so they fired recklessly, cannon, carbine, and revolvers into the night after the grey,
retiring squadrons.

Stafford, no great favourite with the mass of the men, but well liked by some, rode beside a
fellow officer. This was a man genial and shrewd, who played the game of war as he played that
of whist, eyes half closed and memory holding every card. He spoke cheerfully. "Shenandoah beautifully
swollen! Don't believe Fremont has pontoons. He's out of the reckoning for at least a day and
a night--probably longer. Nice for us all!"

"It has been a remarkable campaign."

"'Remarkable'! Tell you what it's like, Stafford. It's like 1796--Napoleon's Italian campaign."

"You think so? Well, it may be true. Hear the wind in the pines!"

"Tell you what you lack, Stafford. You lack interest in the war. You are too damned perfunctory.
You take orders like an automaton, and you go execute them like an automaton. I don't say that
they're not beautifully executed; they are. But the soul's not there. The other day at Tom's Brook
I watched you walk your horse up to the muzzle of that fellow Wyndham's guns, and, by God! I
don't believe you knew any more than an automaton that the guns were there!"

"Yes, I did--"

"Well, you may have known it with one half of your brain. You didn't with the other half. To a
certain extent, I can read your hand. You've got a big war of your own, in a country of your own--eh?"

"Perhaps
you are not altogether wrong. Such things happen sometimes."

"Yes, they do. But I think it a pity! This war"--he jerked his head toward the environing night--"is
big enough, with horribly big stakes. If I were you, I'd drum the individual out of camp."

"Think
only of the general? I wish I could!"

"Well, can't you?"

"No, not yet."

"There are only two things--barring disease--which can so split the brain in two--send the
biggest part off, knight-errant or Saracen, into some No-Man's Country, and keep the other piece
here in Virginia to crack invaders' skulls! One's love and one's hate--"

"Never both?"

"Knight-errant and Saracen in one? That's difficult."

"Nothing is so difficult as life, nor so strange. And, perhaps, love and hate are both illnesses.
Sometimes I think so."

"A happy recovery then! You are too good a fellow--"

"I am not a good fellow."

"You are not at least an amiable one to-night! Don't let the fever get too high!"

"Will you listen," said Stafford, "to the wind in the pines? and did you ever see the automatic
chess-player?"

Two days later, Fremont, having bridged the Shenandoah, crossed, and pushed his cavalry with an infantry
support southward by the pike. About three in the afternoon of the sixth, Ashby's horses were
grazing in the green fields south of Harrisonburg, on the Port Republic road. To the west stretched
a belt of woodland, eastward rose a low ridge clad with beech and oak. The green valley lay between.
The air, to-day, was soft and sweet, the long billows of the Blue Ridge seen dreamily, through
an amethyst haze.

The men lay among dandelions. Some watched the horses; others read letters from home, or, haversack
for desk, wrote some vivid, short-sentenced scrawl. A number were engaged by the rim of the
clear pool. Naked to the waist, they knelt like washerwomen, and rubbed the soapless linen
against smooth stones, or wrung it wrathfully, or turning, spread it, grey-white, upon the grass
to dry. Four played poker beneath a tree, one read a Greek New Testament, six had found a small
turtle, and with the happy importance of boys were preparing a brushwood fire and the camp kettle.
Others slept, head pillowed on arm, soft felt hat drawn over eyes. The rolling woodland toward
Harrisonburg and Fremont was heavily picketed. A man rose from beside the pool, straightened
himself, and holding up the shirt he had been washing looked at it critically. Apparently it passed
muster, for he painstakingly stretched it upon the grass and taking
a pair of cotton drawers turned again to the water.

A blue-eyed Loudoun youth whistling "Swanee River" brought a brimming bucket from the stream
that made the pool and poured it gleefully into the kettle. A Prince Edward man, lying chest
downward, blew the fire, another lifted the turtle. The horses moved toward what seemed lusher
grass, one of the poker players said "Damn!" the reader turned a leaf of the Greek Testament.
One of the sleepers sat up. "I thought I heard a shot--"

Perhaps he had heard one; at any rate he now heard many. Down the road and out from under the
great trees of the forest in front burst the pickets driven in by a sudden, well-directed onslaught
of blue cavalry--Fremont's advance with a brigade of infantry behind. In a moment all was haste
and noise in the green vale. Men leaped to their feet, left their washing, left the turtle simmering
in the pot, the gay cards upon the greensward, put up the Greek Testament, the home letters,
snatched belt and carbine, caught the horses, saddled them with speed,
swung themselves up, and trotted into line, eyes front--Ashby's men.

The pickets had their tale to tell. "Burst out of the wood--the damned Briton again, sir, with
his squadrons from New Jersey! Rode us down--John Ferrar killed--Gilbert captured--You can
see from the hilltop there. They are forming for a charge. There's infantry behind--Blinker's
Dutch from the looks of them!"

"Blinker's Dutch," said the troopers. "'Hooney,' 'Nix furstay,' 'Bag Jackson,' 'Kiss und steal,'
'Hide under bed,' 'Rifle bureau drawers,' 'Take lockets und rings'--Blinker's
Dutch!

We should have dog whips!"

To the rear was the little ridge clothed with beech and oak. The road wound up and over it. Ashby's
bugle sounded. "Right face. Trot! March!" The road went gently up, grass on either side with
here and there a clump of small pines. Butterflies fluttered; all was gay and sweet in the June
sunshine. Ashby rode before on the bay stallion. The Horse Artillery came also from the meadow
where it had been camped--Captain Chew, aged nineteen, and his three guns and his threescore men,
four of them among the best gunners in the whole army. All mounted the ridge, halted and deployed.
The guns were posted advantageously, the 6th, the 7th, and the 2d Virginia Cavalry in two
ranks along the ridge. Wide-spreading beech boughs, growing low, small oak scrub and branchy dogwood
made a screen of the best; they looked down, hidden, upon a gentle slope and the Port Republic
road. Ashby's post was in front of the silver bole of a great beech. With one gauntleted hand
he held the bay stallion quiet, with the other he shaded his eyes and gazed at the westerly wood
into which ran the road. Chew, to his right, touched the Blakeley lovingly. Gunner number 1
handed the powder. Number 2 rammed it home, took the shell from Number 1 and put it in. All along
the ridge the horsemen handled their carbines, spoke each in a quiet, genial tone to his horse. Sound
of the approaching force made itself heard and increased.

"About a thousand, shouldn't you think, sir?" asked an aide.

"No. Between seven and eight hundred. Do you remember in 'Ivanhoe'--"

Out of the western wood, in order of charge, issued a body of horse. It was yet a little distant,
horses at a trot, the declining sun making a stirring picture. Rapidly crescent to eye and ear, they
came on. Their colours flew, the sound of their bugles raised the blood. Their pace changed to a
gallop. The thundering hoofs, the braying trumpets, shook the air. Colours and guidons grew
large.

"By God, sir, Wyndham is coming to eat you up! This time he knows he's caught the hare."

"Do all John Bulls ride like that? Shades of the Revolution! did we all ride like that before we
came to Virginia?"

"God! what a noise!"

Ashby spoke. "Don't fire till you see the whites of their eyes."

The charge began to swallow up the gentle slope, the sunny road, the green grass to either hand.
The bugles blew at height, the sabres gleamed, the tall man in front rode rising in his stirrups,
his sabre overhead. "Huzzah! huzzah! huzzah!" shouted the blue cavalry.

"Are you ready, Captain Chew?" demanded Ashby. "Very well, then, let them have it!"

The Blakeley and the two Parrott guns spoke in one breath.

While the echoes were yet thundering, burst a fierce volley from all the Confederate short rifles.
Down went the Federal colour-bearer, down went other troopers in the front rank, down went
the great gaunt horse beneath the Englishman! Those behind could not at once check their headlong
gallop; they surged upon and over the fallen. The Blakeley blazed again and the grey carbines
rang. The Englishman was on his feet, had a trooper's horse and was shouting like a savage, urging
the squadrons on and up. For the third time the woods flamed and
rang.

The blue lines wavered. Some horsemen turned. "Damn you! On!" raged Wyndham.

Ashby put his bugle to his lips. Clear and sweet rose the notes, a silver tempest. "Ashby! Ashby!"
shouted the grey lines and charged. "Ashby! Ashby!" Out of the woods and down the hill they
came like undyked waters. The two tides met and clashed. There followed a wild melee, a shouting,
an unconscious putting forth of great muscular energy, a seeing as through red glasses besmirched
with powder smoke, a poisonous odour, a sense of cotton in the mouth, a feeling as of struggle on
a turret, far, far up, with empty space around and below. The grey prevailed, the blue turned and fled.
For a moment it seemed as though they were flying through the air,
falling, falling! the grey had a sense of dizziness as they struck
spur in flank and pursued headlong.

All seemed to be sinking through the air, then, suddenly, they felt ground, exhaled breath, and
went thundering up the Port Republic road, toward Harrisonburg. In front strained the blue,
presently reaching the wood. A gun boomed from a slope beyond. Ashby checked the pursuit and
listened to the report of a vedette. "Fremont pushing forward. Horse and guns and the German
division. Hm!" He sat the bay stallion, looking about him, then, "Cuninghame, you go back to
General Ewell. Rear guard can't be more than three miles away. Tell General Ewell about the
Germans and ask him to give me a little infantry.

Hurry now, and if he gives them, bring them up quickly!"

The vedette galloped eastward. Ashby and his men rode back to the ridge, the Horse Artillery,
the dead, the wounded, and the prisoners. The latter numbered four officers and forty men. They
were all in a group in the sunshine, which lay with softness upon the short grass and the little
pine trees. The dead lay huddled, while over them flitted the butterflies. Ashby's surgeons
were busy with the wounded. A man with a shattered jaw was making signs, deliberately talking in
the deaf-and-dumb alphabet, which perhaps he had learned for some friend or relative's sake. A
younger man, his hand clenched over a wound in the breast, said monotonously, over and over
again, "I am from Trenton, New Jersey, I am from Trenton, New Jersey." A third with glazing
eyes made the sign of the cross, drew himself out of the sun, under
one of the little pine trees, and died.

Some of the prisoners were silent. Others talked with bravado to their captors. "Salisbury, North
Carolina! That's not far. Five hundred miles not far--Besides, Fremont will make a rescue presently.
And if he doesn't, Shields will to-morrow! Then off you fellows go to Johnson's Island!" The
officer who had led the charge sat on a bank above the road. In the onset he had raged like a Berserker,
now he sat imperturbable, ruddy and stolid, an English philosopher
on a fallen pine.

Ashby came back to the road, dismounting, and leading the bay stallion, advanced. "Good-day,
Colonel Wyndham."

"Good-day, General Ashby. War's a game. Somebody's got to lose. Only way to stop loss is to stop war.
You held the trumps--Damn me! You played them well, too." His sword lay across his knees. He
took it up and held it out. Ashby made a gesture of refusal. "No. I don't want it. I am about to
send you to the rear. If there is anything I can do for you--"

"Thank you, general, there is nothing. Soldier of fortune. Fortune of war. Bad place for a charge.
Ought to have been more wary. Served me right. You've got Bob Wheat with you? Know Bob Wheat.
Find him in the rear?"

"Yes. With General Ewell. And now as I am somewhat in haste--"

"You must bid me good-day! See you are caring for my wounded. Much obliged. Dead will take care
of themselves. Pretty little place! Flowers, butterflies--large bronze one on your hat.--This
our escort? Perfectly true you'll have a fight presently. There's the New York cavalry as well
as the New Jersey--plenty of infantry--Pennsylvania Bucktails and so forth. Wish I could see
the scrimmage! Curious world! Can't wish you good luck. Must wish you ill. However, good luck's
wrapped up in all kinds of curious bundles. Ready, men! General Ashby, may I present Major
Markham, Captain Bondurant, Captain Schmidt, Lieutenant Colter? They will wish to remember having
met you.--Now, gentlemen, at your service!"

Prisoners and escort vanished over the hill. Ashby, remounting, proceeded to make his dispositions,
beginning with the Horse Artillery which he posted on a rise of ground, behind a mask of black thorn
and dogwood. From the east arose the strains of fife and drum. "Maryland Line," said the 6th,
the 7th, and the 2d Virginia Cavalry. She breathes! She burns! she'll come! she'll come--

"Oh! here's the 58th, too! Give them a cheer, boys! Hurrah! 58th Virginia! Hurrah! The Maryland
Line!"

The two infantry regiments came forward at a double-quick, bright and brisk, rifle barrels and
bayonets gleaming in the now late sunshine, their regimental flags azure and white, and beside them
streaming the red battle-flag with the blue cross. As they approached there also began to show,
at the edge of the forest which cut the western horizon, the Federal
horse and foot.

Before these was a space of rolling fields, then a ragged line of timber, a straggling copse
of underbrush and tall trees cresting a wave of earth. A body of blue cavalry started out of
the wood, across the field. At once Chew opened with the Blakeley and the two Parrotts. There
ensued confusion and the horse fell back. A blue infantry regiment issued at a run, crossed the open
and attained the cover of the coppice which commanded the road and the eastern stretch of fields.
A second prepared to follow. The Maryland Line swung through the woods with orders to flank
this movement. Ashby galloped to the 58th. "Forward, 58th, and clear that wood!" He rode on to
Munford at the head of the squadrons. "I am going to dislodge them from that cover. The moment
they leave it sound the charge!"

The 58th advanced steadily over the open. When it was almost upon the coppice it fired, then
fixed bayonets. The discharge had been aimed at the wood merely. The shadows were lengthening, the
undergrowth was thick; they could not see their opponents. Suddenly the coppice blazed, a well-directed
and fatal volley. The regiment that held this wood had a good record and meant to-day to better
it. Its target was visible enough, and close, full before it in the last golden light. A grey
officer fell, the sword that he had brandished described a shining curve before it plunged
into a clump of sumach. Five men lay upon the earth; the colour-bearer reeled, then pitched
forward. The man behind him caught the colours. The 58th fired again, then, desperately, continued
its advance. Smoke and flame burst again from the coppice. A voice of Stentor was heard. "Now
Pennsylvania Bucktails, you're making history! Do your durndest!"

"Close ranks!" shouted the officer of the 58th. "Close ranks! Forward!" There came a withering
volley. The second colour-bearer sank; a third seized the standard. Another officer was down;
there were gaps in the ranks and under feet the wounded. The regiment wavered.

From the left came a bay stallion, devouring the earth, legs and head one tawny line, distended
nostril and red-lit eye. The rider loosened from his shoulders a scarlet-lined cloak, lifted
and shook it in the air. It flared out with the wind of his coming,
like a banner, or a torch.

He sent his voice before him, "Charge, men, charge!"

Spasmodically the 58th started forward. The copse, all dim and smoky, flowered again, three hundred
red points of fire. The sound was crushing, startling, beating at the ear drum. The Bucktails
were shouting, "Come on, Johnny Reb! Go back, Johnny Reb! Don't know what you want to do, do
you, Johnny Reb?"

Ashby and the bay reached the front of the regiment. There was disorder, wavering, from underfoot
groans and cries.

So wrapped in smoke was the scene, so dusk, with the ragged and mournful woods hiding the low sun,
that it was hard to distinguish the wounded.

It seemed as though it was the earth herself complaining.

"On, on, men!" cried Ashby.

"Help's coming--the Maryland Line!" There was a wavering answer, half cheer, half-wailing cry,
"Ashby! Ashby!" Two balls pierced the bay stallion. He reared, screamed loudly, and fell backward.
Before he touched the earth the great horseman of the Valley was
clear of him.

In the smoke and din Ashby leaped forward, waving the red-lined cloak above his head. "Charge,
men!" he cried. "For God's sake, charge!" A bullet found his heart. He fell without a groan,
his hand and arm wrapped in the red folds.

From rank to rank there passed something like a sobbing cry. The 58th
charged. Bradley Johnson with the Maryland Line dislodged the Bucktails,
captured their colonel and many others, killed and wounded many. The
coppice, from soaked mould to smoky treetop, hung in the twilight
like a wood in Hades. It was full dusk when Fremont's advance drew
back, retreating sullenly to its camp at Harrisonburg. The stars were
all out when, having placed the body on a litter, Ashby's men carried
Ashby to Port Republic.

He lay at midnight in a room of an old house
of the place. They had laid him upon a narrow bed, an old, single
four-poster, with tester and valance. The white canopy above, the
fall of the white below had an effect of sculptured stone. The whole
looked like an old tomb in some dim abbey. The room was half in light,
half in darkness. The village women had brought flowers; of these
there was no lack. All the blossoms of June were heaped about him.
He lay in uniform, upon the red-lined cloak, his plumed hat beside
him, his sword in his hand. His staff watched in the room, seated
with bowed heads beside the open window. An hour before dawn some
one spoke to the sentry without the door, then gently turned the handle
and entered the chamber. The watchers arose, stood at salute. "Kindly
leave General Ashby and me alone together for a little while, gentlemen,"
said the visitor. The officers filed out. The last one turning softly
to close the door saw Jackson kneel.

CHAPTER XXVI

THE BRIDGE AT
PORT REPUBLIC

The seventh of June was passed by the Army of the Valley
in a quiet that seemed unnatural. For fifteen days, north from Front
Royal to Harper's Ferry, south from Harper's Ferry to Port Republic,
cannon had thundered, musketry rattled. Battle here and battle there,
and endless skirmishing! "One male and three foights a day," said
Wheat's Irishmen. But this Saturday there was no fighting. The cavalry
watched both flanks of the Massanuttons. The main army rested in the
rich woods that covered the hills above the North Fork of the Shenandoah.
Headquarters were in the village across the river, spanned by a covered
bridge. Three miles to the northwest Ewell's division was strongly
posted near the hamlet of Cross Keys. From the great south peak of
the Massanuttons a signal party looked down upon Fremont's road from
Harrisonburg, and upon the road by which Shields must emerge from
the Luray Valley. The signal officer, looking through his glass, saw
also a road that ran from Port Republic by Brown's Gap over the Blue
Ridge into Albemarle, and along this road moved a cortege--soldiers
with the body of Ashby. The dead general's mother was in Winchester.
They would have taken him there, but could not, for Fremont's army
was between. So, as seemed next most fit, they carried him across
the mountains into Albemarle, to the University of Virginia. Up on
Massanutton the signal officer's hand shook. He lowered his glass
and cleared his throat: "War's a short word to say all it says--"

Fremont
rested at Harrisonburg after yesterday's repulse. On the other side
of Massanutton was Shields, moving south from Luray under the remarkable
impression that Jackson was at Rude's Hill and Fremont effectively
dealing with the "demoralized rebels." On the sixth he began to concentrate
his troops near where had been Columbia Bridge. On the seventh he
issued instructions to his advance guard.

"The enemy passed New Market
on the 5th. Benker's Division in pursuit. The enemy has flung away
everything, and their stragglers fill the mountains.

In chase of
this so beautiful a chance Shields set forth down the eastern side
of Massanutton, with intent to round the mountain at Port Republic,
turn north again, and somewhere on the Valley pike make that will-o'-the-wisp
junction with Fremont and stamp out rebellion. But of late it had
rained much, and the roads were muddy and the streams swollen. His
army was split into sections; here a brigade and there a brigade,
the advance south of Conrad's Store, the rear yet at Luray. He had,
however, the advantage of moving through leagues of forest, heavy,
shaggy, dense. It was not easy to observe the details of his operations.

Sunday
morning dawned. A pearly mist wrapped the North Fork and the South
Fork of the Shenandoah, and clung to the shingle roofs and bowery
trees of the village between. The South Fork was shallow and could
be forded. The North Fork was deep and strong and crossed by a covered
bridge. Toward the bridge now, winding down from the near-by height
on which the brigade had camped, came a detail from the 65th--twenty
men led by Sergeant Mathew Coffin. They were chiefly Company A men,
and they were going to relieve the pickets along the South Fork. Thanks
to Mr. Commissary Banks, they had breakfasted well. The men were happy,
not hilariously so, but in a placid, equable fashion. As they came
down, over the wet grass, from the bluff, they talked. "Mist over
the Shenandoah's just like mist over the James"--"No, 'tisn't! Nothing's
like mist over the James."--"Well, the bridge's like the bridge at
home, anyway!"--"'Tisn't much like it. Hasn't got sidewalks inside."--"Yes,
it has!"--"No, it hasn't!"--"I know better, I've been through it."--"I've
been through it twice't--was through it after Elk Run, a month ago!"--"Well,
it hasn't got sidewalks, anyway,"--"I tell you it has."--"You 're
mistaken!"--"I'm not."--"You never did see straight nohow!"--"If I
was at home I'd thrash you!"

Mathew Coffin turned his head. The other brings all his ingenuity and enterprise into the field to accomplish
a steady purpose by means ever varying, and depends for his power on his knowledge of human
nature, and on the adroit adaptation of plans to her fixed and uniform tendencies.

I am very sorry, however, to be obliged to say that probably the latter class of teachers are
decidedly in the minority. To practice the art in such a way as to make it an agreeable employment
is difficult, and it requires much knowledge of human nature, much attention and skill. And,
after all, there are some circumstances necessarily attending the work which constitute a heavy
drawback on the pleasures which it might otherwise afford. The almost universal impression
that the business of teaching is attended with peculiar trials and difficulties proves this.

There must be some cause for an impression so general. It is not right to call it a prejudice,
for, although a single individual may conceive a prejudice, whole communities very seldom do,
unless in some case which is presented at once to the whole, so that, looking at it through
a common medium, all judge wrong together. But the general opinion in regard to teaching is
composed of a vast number of separate and independent judgments, and there must be some good
ground for the universal result.

It is best, therefore, if there are any real and peculiar sources of trial and difficulty in
this pursuit, that they should be distinctly known and acknowledged at the outset. Count the
cost before going to war. It is even better policy to overrate than to underrate it. Let us
see, then, what the real difficulties of teaching are.

It is not, however, as is generally supposed, the confinement. A teacher is confined, it is
true, but not more than men of other professions and employments; not more than a merchant,
and probably not as much. A physician is confined in a different way, but more closely than
a teacher: he can never leave home: he knows generally no vacation, and nothing but accidental
rest.

The lawyer is confined as much. It is true there are not throughout the year exact hours which
he must keep, but, considering the imperious demands of his business, his personal liberty
is probably restrained as much by it as that of the teacher. So with all the other professions.
Although the nature of the confinement may vary, it amounts to about the same in all. On the
other hand, the teacher enjoys, in reference to this subject of confinement, an advantage which
scarcely any other class of men does or can enjoy. I mean vacations. A man in any other business
may force himself away from it for a time, but the cares and anxieties of his business will
follow him wherever he goes. It seems to be reserved for the teacher to enjoy alone the periodical
luxury of a real and entire release from business and care. On the whole, as to confinement,
it seems to me that the teacher has little ground of complaint.

There are, however, some real and serious difficulties which always have, and, it is to be
feared, always will, cluster around this employment; and which must, for a long time, at least,
lead most men to desire some other employment for the business of life. There may perhaps be
some who, by their peculiar skill, can overcome or avoid them, and perhaps the science of teaching
may, at some future day, be so far improved that all may avoid them. As I describe them, however,
now, most of the teachers into whose hands this treatise may fall will probably find that their
own experience corresponds, in this respect, with mine.

1. The first great difficulty which the teacher feels is a sort of moral responsibility for
the conduct of others. If his pupils do wrong, he feels almost personal responsibility for
it. As he walks out some afternoon, wearied with his labors, and endeavoring to forget, for
a little time, all his cares, he comes upon a group of boys in rude and noisy quarrels, or
engaged in mischief of some sort, and his heart sinks within him. It is hard enough for any
one to witness their bad conduct with a spirit unruffled and undisturbed, but for their teacher
it is perhaps impossible. He feels responsible; in fact, he is responsible. If his scholars
are disorderly, or negligent, or idle, or quarrelsome, he feels condemned himself almost as
if he were himself the actual transgressor.

This difficulty is, in a great degree, peculiar to a teacher. A physician is called upon to
prescribe for a patient; he examines the case, and writes his prescription. When this is done
his duty is ended; and whether the patient obeys the prescription and lives, or neglects it
and dies, the physician feels exonerated from all responsibility. He may, and in some cases
does, feel anxious concern, and may regret the infatuation by which, in some unhappy case,
a valuable life may be hazarded or destroyed. But he feels no moral responsibility for another's
guilt.

It is so with all the other employments in life. They do, indeed, often bring men into collision
with other men. But, though sometimes vexed and irritated by the conduct of a neighbor, a client,
or a patient, they feel not half the bitterness of the solicitude and anxiety which come to
the teacher through the criminality of his pupil. In ordinary cases he not only feels responsible
for efforts, but for their results; and when, notwithstanding all his efforts, his pupils will
do wrong, his spirit sinks with an intensity of anxious despondency which none but a teacher
can understand.

This feeling of something very like moral accountability for the guilt of other persons is
a continual burden. The teacher in the presence of the pupil never is free from it. It links
him to them by a bond which perhaps he ought not to sunder, and which he can not sunder if
he would. And sometimes, when those committed to his charge are idle, or faithless, or unprincipled,
it wears away his spirits and his health together. I think there is nothing analogous to this
moral connection between teacher and pupil unless it be in the case of a parent and child.
And here, on account of the comparative smallness of the number under the parent's care, the
evil is so much diminished that it is easily borne.

2. The second great difficulty of the teacher's employments is the immense multiplicity of
the objects of his attention and care during the time he is employed in his business. His scholars
are individuals, and notwithstanding all that the most systematic can do in the way of classification,
they must be attended to in a great measure as individuals. A merchant keeps his commodities
together, and looks upon a cargo composed of ten thousand articles, and worth a hundred thousand
dollars, as one; he speaks of it as one; and there is, in many cases, no more perplexity in
planning its destination than if it were a single box of raisins. A lawyer may have a great
many important cases, but he has only one at a time; that is, he attends to but one at a time.
The one may be intricate, involving many facts, and requiring to be examined in many aspects
and relations. But he looks at but few of these facts and regards but few of these relations
at a time. The points which demand his attention come one after another in regular succession.
His mind may thus be kept calm. He avoids confusion and perplexity. But no skill or classification
will turn the poor teacher's hundred scholars into one, or enable him, except to a very limited
extent, and for a very limited purpose, to regard them as one. He has a distinct and, in many
respects, a different work to do for every one of the crowd before him. Difficulties must be
explained in detail, questions must be answered one by one, and each scholar's own conduct
must be considered by itself. His work is thus made up of a thousand minute particulars, which
are all crowding upon his attention at once, and which he can not group together, or combine,
or simplify. He must, by some means or other, attend to them in all their distracting individuality.
And, in a large and complicated school, the endless multiplicity and variety of objects of
attention and care impose a task under which few intellects can long stand.

I have said that this endless multiplicity and variety can not be reduced and simplified by
classification. I mean, of course, that this can be done only to a very limited extent compared
with what may be effected in the other pursuits of mankind. Were it not for the art of classification
and system, no school could have more than ten scholars, as I intend hereafter to show. The
great reliance of the teacher is upon this art, to reduce to some tolerable order what would
otherwise be the inextricable confusion of his business. He must be systematic. He must classify
and arrange; but, after he has done all that he can, he must still expect that his daily business
will continue to consist of a vast multitude of minute particulars, from one to another of
which the mind must turn with a rapidity which few of the other employments of life ever demand.

These are the essential sources of difficulty with which the teacher has to contend; but, as
I shall endeavor to show in succeeding chapters, though they can not be entirely removed, they
can be so far mitigated by the appropriate means as to render the employment a happy one. I
have thought it best, however, as this work will doubtless be read by many who, when they read
it, are yet to begin their labors, to describe frankly and fully to them the difficulties which
beset the path they are about to enter. "The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way."
It is often wisdom to understand it beforehand.

CHAPTER II.

GENERAL ARRANGEMENTS.

The distraction and perplexity of the teacher's life are, as was explained in the last chapter,
almost proverbial. There are other pressing and exhausting pursuits, which wear away the spirit
by the ceaseless care which they impose, or perplex and bewilder the intellect by the multiplicity
and intricacy of their details; but the business of teaching, by a pre-eminence not very enviable,
stands, almost by common consent, at the head of the catalogue.

I have already alluded to this subject in the preceding chapter, and probably the majority
of actual teachers will admit the truth of the view there presented. Some will, however, doubtless
say that they do not find the business of teaching so perplexing and exhausting an employment.
They take things calmly. They do one thing at a time, and that without useless solicitude and
anxiety. So that teaching, with them, though it has, indeed, its solicitudes and cares, as
every other responsible employment must necessarily have, is, after all, a calm and quiet pursuit,
which they follow from month to month, and from year to year, without any extraordinary agitations,
or any unusual burdens of anxiety and care.

There are, indeed, such cases, but they are exceptions, and unquestionably a considerable majority,
especially of those who are beginners in the work, find it such as I have described. I think
it need not be so, or, rather, I think the evil may be avoided to a very great degree. In this
chapter I shall endeavor to show how order may be produced out of that almost inextricable
mass of confusion into which so many teachers, on commencing their labors, find themselves plunged.

The objects, then, to be aimed at in the general arrangements of schools are twofold:

  1. That the teacher may be left uninterrupted, to attend to one thing
  at a time.

  2. That the individual scholars may have constant employment, and such
  an amount and such kinds of study as shall be suited to the
  circumstances and capacities of each.

I shall examine each in their order.

  1. The following are the principal things which, in a vast number of
  schools, are all the time pressing upon the teacher; or, rather, they
  are the things which must every where press upon the teacher, except so
  far as, by the skill of his arrangements, he contrives to remove them.

  1. Giving leave to whisper or to leave seats.
  2. Distributing and changing pens.
  3. Answering questions in regard to studies.
  4. Hearing recitations.
  5. Watching the behavior of the scholars.
  6. Administering reproof and punishment for offenses as they occur.

A pretty large number of objects of attention and care, one would say, to be pressing upon
the mind of the teacher at one and the same time--and all the time too! Hundreds and hundreds
of teachers in every part of our country, there is no doubt, have all these crowding upon them
from morning to night, with no cessation, except perhaps some accidental and momentary respite.
During the winter months, while the principal common schools in our country are in operation,
it is sad to reflect how many teachers come home every evening with bewildered and aching heads,
having been vainly trying all the day to do six things at a time, while He who made the human
mind has determined that it shall do but one. How many become discouraged and disheartened
by what they consider the unavoidable trials of a teacher's life, and give up in despair, just
because their faculties will not sustain a six-fold task. There are multitudes who, in early
life, attempted teaching, and, after having been worried, almost to distraction, by the simultaneous
pressure of these multifarious cares, gave up the employment in disgust, and now unceasingly
wonder how any body can like teaching. I know multitudes of persons to whom the above description
will exactly apply.

I once heard a teacher who had been very successful, even in large schools, say that he could
hear two classes recite, mend pens, and watch his school all at the same time, and that without
any distraction of mind or any unusual fatigue. Of course the recitations in such a case must
be from memory. There are very few minds, however, which can thus perform triple or quadruple
work, and probably none which can safely be tasked so severely. For my part, I can do but one
thing at a time; and I have no question that the true policy for all is to learn not to do
every thing at once, but so to classify and arrange their work that they shall have but one
thing at once to do. Instead of vainly attempting to attend simultaneously to a dozen things,
they should so plan their work that only one will demand attention.

Let us, then, examine the various particulars above mentioned in succession, and see how each
can be disposed of, so as not to be a constant source of interruption and derangement.

1. Whispering and leaving seats. In regard to this subject there are very different methods
now in practice in different schools. In some, especially in very small schools, the teacher
allows the pupils to act according to their own discretion. They whisper and leave their seats
whenever they think it necessary. This plan may possibly be admissible in a very small school,
that is, in one of ten or twelve pupils. I am convinced, however, that it is a very bad plan
even here. No vigilant watch which it is possible for any teacher to exert will prevent a vast
amount of mere talk entirely foreign to the business of the school. I tried this plan very
thoroughly, with high ideas of the dependence which might be placed upon conscience and a sense
of duty, if these principles are properly brought out to action in an effort to sustain the
system. I was told by distinguished teachers that it would not be found to answer. But predictions
of failure in such cases only prompt to greater exertions, and I persevered. But I was forced
at last to give up the point, and adopt another plan. My pupils would make resolutions enough;
they understood their duty well enough. They were allowed to leave their seats and whisper
to their companions whenever, in their honest judgment, it was necessary for the prosecution
of their studies. I knew that it sometimes would be necessary, and I was desirous to adopt
this plan to save myself the constant interruption of hearing and replying to requests. But
it would not do. Whenever, from time to time, I called them to account, I found that a large
majority, according to their own confession, were in the habit of holding daily and deliberate
communication with each other on subjects entirely foreign to the business of the school. A
more experienced teacher would have predicted this result; but I had very high ideas of the
power of cultivated conscience, and, in fact, still have. But then, like most other persons
who become possessed of a good idea, I could not be satisfied without carrying it to an extreme.

Still it is necessary, in ordinary schools, to give pupils sometimes the opportunity to whisper
and leave seats.[1] Cases occur where this is unavoidable. It can not, therefore, be forbidden
altogether. How, then, you will ask, can the teacher regulate this practice, so as to prevent
the evils which will otherwise flow from it, without being continually interrupted by the request
for permission?

[Footnote 1: There are some large and peculiarly-organized schools in cities and large towns
to which this remark may perhaps not apply.]

By a very simple method. Appropriate particular times at which all this business is to be done,
and forbid it altogether at every other time. It is well, on other accounts, to give the pupils
of a school a little respite, at least every hour; and if this is done, an intermission of
study for two minutes each time will be sufficient. During this time general permission should
be given for the pupils to speak to each other, or to leave their seats, provided they do nothing
at such a time to disturb the studies of others. This plan I have myself very thoroughly tested,
and no arrangement which I ever made operated for so long a time so uninterruptedly and so
entirely to my satisfaction as this. It of course will require some little time, and no little
firmness, to establish the new order of things where a school has been accustomed to another
course; but where this is once done, I know no one plan so simple and so easily put into execution
which will do so much toward relieving the teacher of the distraction and perplexity of his
pursuits.

In making the change, however, it is of fundamental importance that the pupils should themselves
be interested in it. Their co-operation, or, rather, the co-operation of the majority, which
it is very easy to obtain, is absolutely essential to success. I say this is very easily obtained.
Let us suppose that some teacher, who has been accustomed to require his pupils to ask and
obtain permission every time they wish to speak to a companion, is induced by these remarks
to introduce this plan. He says, accordingly, to his school,

"You know that you are now accustomed to ask me whenever you wish to obtain permission to whisper
to a companion or to leave your seats; now I have been thinking of a plan which will be better
for both you and me. By our present plan you are sometimes obliged to wait before I can attend
to your request. Sometimes I think it is unnecessary, and deny you, when perhaps I was mistaken,
and it was really necessary. At other times, I think it very probable that when it is quite
desirable for you to leave your seat you do not ask, because you think you may not obtain permission,
and you do not wish to ask and be refused. Do you, or not, experience these inconveniences
from our present plans?"

The pupils would undoubtedly answer in the affirmative.

"I myself experience great inconvenience too. I am very frequently interrupted when busily
engaged, and it also occupies a great portion of my time and attention to consider and answer
your requests for permission to speak to one another and to leave your seats. It requires as
much mental effort to consider and decide whether I ought to allow a pupil to leave his seat,
as it would to determine a much more important question; therefore I do not like our present
plan, and I have another to propose."

The pupils are now all attention to know what the new plan is. It will always be of great advantage
to the school for the teacher to propose his new plans from time to time to his pupils in such
a way as this. It interests them in the improvement of the school, exercises their judgment,
establishes a common feeling between teacher and pupil, and in many other ways assists very
much in promoting the welfare of the school.

"My plan," continues the teacher, "is this: to allow you all, besides the recess, a short time,
two or three minutes perhaps, every hour" (or every half hour, according to the character of
the school, the age of the pupils, or other circumstances, to be judged of by the teacher),
"during which you may all whisper or leave your seats without asking permission."

Instead of deciding the question of the frequency of this general permission, the teacher may,
if he pleases, leave it to the pupils to decide. It is often useful to leave the decision of
such a question to them. On this subject, however, I shall speak in another place. It is only
necessary here to say that this point may be safely left to them, since the time is so small
which is to be thus appropriated. Even if they vote to have the general permission to whisper
every half hour, it will make but eight minutes in the forenoon. There being six half hours
in the forenoon, and one of them ending at the close of school, and another at the recess,
only four of these rests, as a military man would call them, would be necessary; and four,
of two minutes each, would make eight minutes. If the teacher thinks that evil would result
from the interruption of the studies so often, he may offer the pupils three minutes rest every
hour instead of two minutes every half hour, and let them take their choice; or he may decide
the case altogether himself.

Such a change, from particular permission on individual requests to general permission at stated
times, would unquestionably be popular in every school, if the teacher managed the business
properly. And by presenting it as an object of common interest, an arrangement proposed for
the common convenience of teacher and pupils, the latter may be much interested in carrying
the plan into effect. We must not rely, however, entirely upon their interest in it. All that
we can expect from such an effort to interest them, as I have described and recommended, is
to get a majority on our side, so that we may have only a small minority to deal with by other
measures. Still, we must calculate on having this minority, and form our plans accordingly,
or we shall be greatly disappointed. I shall, however, in another place, speak of this principle
of interesting the pupils in our plans for the purpose of securing a majority in our favor,
and explain the methods by which the minority is then to be governed. I only mean here to say
that, by such means, the teacher may easily interest a large proportion of the scholars in
carrying his plans into effect, and that he must expect to be prepared with other measures
for those who will not be governed by these.

You can not reasonably expect, however, that, immediately after having explained your plan,
it will at once go into full and complete operation. Even those who are firmly determined to
keep the rule will, from inadvertence, for a day or two, make communication with each other.
They must be trained, not by threatening and punishment, but by your good-humored assistance,
to their new duties. When I first adopted this plan in my school, something like the following
proceedings took place.

"Do you suppose that you will perfectly keep this rule from this time?"

"No, sir," was the answer.

"I suppose you will not. Some, I am afraid, may not really be determined to keep it, and others
will forget. Now I wish that every one of you would keep an exact account to-day of all the
instances in which you speak to another person, or leave your seat, out of the regular times,
and be prepared to report them at the close of the school. Of course, there will be no punishment;
but it will very much assist you to watch yourselves, if you expect to make a report at the
end of the forenoon. Do you like this plan?"

"Yes, sir," was the answer; and all seemed to enter into it with spirit.

In order to mark more definitely the times for communication, I wrote, in large letters, on
a piece of pasteboard, "STUDY HOURS," and making a hole over the centre of it, I hung it upon
a nail over my desk. At the close of each half hour a little bell was to be struck, and this
card was to be taken down. When it was up, they were, on no occasion whatever (except some
such extraordinary occurrence as sickness, or my sending one of them on a message to another,
or something clearly out of the common course) to speak to each other; but were to wait, whatever
they wanted, until the Study Card, as they called it, was taken down.

"Suppose now," said I, "that a young lady has come into school, and has accidentally left her
book in the entry--the book from which she is to study during the first half hour of the school.
She sits near the door, and she might, in a moment, slip out and obtain it. If she does not,
she must spend the half hour in idleness, and be unprepared in her lesson. What is it her duty
to do?"

"To go," "Not to go," answered the scholars, simultaneously.

"It would be her duty not to go; but I suppose it will be very difficult for me to convince
you of it.

"The reason is this," I continued; "if the one case I have supposed were the only one which
would be likely to occur, it would undoubtedly be better for her to go; but if it is understood
that in such cases the rule may be dispensed with, that understanding will tend very much to
cause such cases to occur. Scholars will differ in regard to the degree of inconvenience which
they must submit to rather than break the rule. They will gradually do it on slighter and slighter
occasions, until at last the rule will be disregarded entirely. We must therefore draw a precise
line, and individuals must submit to a little inconvenience sometimes to promote the general good."

At the close of the day I requested all in the school to rise. While they were standing, I
called them to account in the following manner:

"Now it is very probable that some have, from inadvertence or from design, omitted to keep
an account of the number of transgressions of the rule which they have committed during the
day; others, perhaps, do not wish to make a report of themselves. Now as this is a common and
voluntary effort, I wish to have none render assistance who do not, of their own accord, desire
to do so. All those, therefore, who are not able to make a report, from not having been correct
in keeping it, and all those who are unwilling to report themselves, may sit."

A very small number hesitatingly took their seats.

"I am afraid that all do not sit who really wish not to report themselves. Now I am honest
in saying I wish you to do just as you please. If a great majority of the school really wish
to assist me in accomplishing the object, why, of course, I am glad; still, I shall not call
upon any for such assistance unless it is freely and voluntarily rendered."

One or two more took their seats while these things were saying. Among such there would generally
be some who would refuse to have any thing to do with the measure simply from a desire to thwart
and impede the plans of the teacher. If so, it is best to take no notice of them. If the teacher
can contrive to obtain a great majority upon his side, so as to let them see that any opposition
which they can raise is of no consequence and is not even noticed, they will soon be ashamed of it.

The reports, then, of those who remained standing were called for; first, those who had whispered
only once were requested to sit, then those who had whispered more than once and less than
five times, and so on, until at last all were down. In such a case the pupils might, if thought
expedient, again be requested to rise for the purpose of asking some other questions with reference
to ascertaining whether they had spoken most in the former or latter part of the forenoon.
The number who had spoken inadvertently, and the number who had done it by design, might be
ascertained. These inquiries accustom the pupils to render honest and faithful accounts themselves.
They become, by such means, familiarized to the practice, and by means of it the teacher can
many times receive most important assistance.

In all this, however, the teacher should speak in a pleasant tone, and maintain a pleasant
and cheerful air. The acknowledgments should be considered by the pupils not as confessions
of guilt for which they are to be rebuked or punished, but as voluntary and free reports of
the result of an experiment in which all were interested.

Some will have been dishonest in their reports: to diminish the number of these, the teacher
may say, after the report is concluded,

"We will drop the subject here to-day. To-morrow we will make another effort, when we shall
be more successful. I have taken your reports as you have offered them without any inquiry,
because I had no doubt that a great majority of this school would be honest at all hazards.
They would not, I am confident, make a false report even if, by a true one, they were to bring
upon themselves punishment; so that I think I may have confidence that nearly all these reports
have been faithful. Still it is very probable that among so large a number some may have made
a report which, they are now aware, was not perfectly fair and honest. I do not wish to know
who they are; if there are any such cases, I only wish to say to the rest how much pleasanter
it is for you that you have been honest and open. The business is now all ended; you have done
your duty; and, though you reported a little larger number than you would if you had been disposed
to conceal your faults, yet you go away from school with a quiet conscience. On the other hand,
how miserable must any boy feel, if he has any nobleness of mind whatever, to go away from
school to-day thinking that he has not been honest; that he has been trying to conceal his
faults, and thus to obtain a credit which he did not justly deserve. Always be honest, let
the consequence be what it may."

The reader will understand that the object of such measures is simply to secure as large a
majority as possible to make voluntary efforts to observe the rule. I do not expect that by
such measures universal obedience can be exacted. The teacher must follow up the plan after
a few days by other measures for those pupils who will not yield to such inducements as these.
Upon this subject, however, I shall speak more particularly at a future time.

In my own school it required two or three weeks to exclude whispering and communication by
signs. The period necessary to effect the revolution will be longer or shorter, according to
the circumstances of the school and the dexterity of the teacher; and, after all, the teacher
must not hope entirely to exclude it. Approximation to excellence is all that we can expect;
for unprincipled and deceiving characters will perhaps always be found, and no system whatever
can prevent their existence. Proper treatment may indeed be the means of their reformation,
but before this process has arrived at a successful result, others similar in character will
have entered the school, so that the teacher can never expect perfection in the operation of
any of his plans.

I found so much relief from the change which this plan introduced, that I soon took measures
for rendering it permanent; and though I am not much in favor of efforts to bring all teachers
and all schools to the same plans, this principle of whispering at limited and prescribed times
alone seems to me well suited to universal adoption.

The following simple apparatus has been used in several schools where this principle has been
adopted. A drawing and description of it is inserted here, as by this means some teachers,
who may like to try the course here recommended, may be saved the time and trouble of contriving
something of the kind themselves.

The figure a a a a on the next page is a board about 18 inches by 12, to which the other parts
of the apparatus are to be attached, and which is to be secured to the wall at the height of
about 8 feet, and b c d c is a plate of tin or brass, 8 inches by 12, of the form represented
in the drawing. At c c, the lower extremities of the parts at the sides, the metal is bent
round, so as to clasp a wire which runs from c to c, the ends of which wire are bent at right
angles, and run into the board. The plate will consequently turn on this axis as on a hinge.
At the top of the plate, d, a small projection of the tin turns inward, and to this one end
of the cord, m m, is attached. This cord passes back from d to a small pulley at the upper
part of the board, and at the lower end of it a tassel, loaded so as to be an exact counterpoise
to the card, is attached. By raising the tassel, the plate will of course fall over forward
till it is stopped by the part b striking the board, when it will be in a horizontal position.
On the other hand, by pulling down the tassel, the plate will be raised and drawn upward against
the board, so as to present its convex surface, with the words STUDY HOURS upon it, distinctly
to the school. In the drawing it is represented in an inclined position, being not quite drawn
up, that the parts might more easily be seen. At d there is a small projection of the tin upward,
which touches the clapper of the bell suspended above every time the plate passes up or down,
and thus gives notice of its motions.

Of course the construction may be varied very much, and it may be more or less expensive, according
to the wishes of the teacher. In the first apparatus of this kind which I used, the plate was
simply a card of pasteboard, from which the machine took its name. This was cut out with a
penknife, and, after being covered with marble-paper, a strip of white paper was pasted along
the middle with the inscription upon it. The wire c c, and a similar one at the top of the
plate, were passed through a perforation in the pasteboard, and then passed into the board.
Instead of a pulley, the cord, which was a piece of twine, was passed through a little staple
made of wire and driven into the board. The whole was made in one or two recesses in school,
with such tools and materials as I could then command. The bell was a common table bell, with
a wire passing through the handle. The whole was attached to such a piece of pine board as
I could get on the occasion. This coarse contrivance was, for more than a year, the grand regulator
of all the movements of the school.

I afterward caused one to be made in a better manner. The plate was of tin, gilded, the border
and the letters of the inscription being black. A parlor bell-rope was carried over a brass
pulley, and then passed downward in a groove made in the mahogany board to which the card was
attached.

A little reflection will, however, show the teacher that the form and construction of the apparatus
for marking the times of study and of rest may be greatly varied. The chief point is simply
to secure the principle of whispering at definite and limited times, and at those alone. If
such an arrangement is adopted, and carried faithfully into effect, it will be found to relieve
the teacher of more than half of the confusion and perplexity which would otherwise be his
hourly lot. I have detailed thus particularly the method to be pursued in carrying this principle
into effect, because I am convinced of its importance, and the incalculable assistance which
such an arrangement will afford to the teacher in all his plans. Of course, I would not be
understood to recommend its adoption in those cases where teachers, from their own experience,
have devised and adopted other plans which accomplish as effectually the same purpose. All
that I mean is to insist upon the absolute necessity of some plan, to remove this very common
source of interruption and confusion, and I recommend this mode where a better is not known.

2. The second of the sources of interruption, as I have enumerated them, is the distribution
of pens and of stationery. This business ought, if possible, to have a specific time assigned
to it. Scholars are, in general, far too particular in regard to their pens. The teacher ought
to explain to them that, in the transaction of the ordinary business of life, they can not
always have exactly such a pen as they would like. They must learn to write with various kinds
of pens, and when furnished with one that the teacher himself would consider suitable to write
a letter to a friend with, he must be content. They should understand that the form of the
letters is what is important in learning to write, not the smoothness and clearness of the
hair lines; and that though writing looks better when executed with a perfect pen, a person
may learn to write nearly as well with one which is not absolutely perfect. So certain is this,
though often overlooked, that a person would perhaps learn faster with chalk, upon a black
board, than with the best goose-quill ever sharpened.

I do not make these remarks to show that it is of no consequence whether scholars have good
or bad pens, but only that this subject deserves very much less of the time and attention of
the teacher than it usually receives. When the scholars are allowed, as they very often are,
to come when they please to change their pens, breaking in upon any business--interrupting
any classes--perplexing and embarrassing the teacher, however he may be employed, there is
a very serious obstruction to the progress of the scholars, which is by no means repaid by
the improvement in this branch.

To guard against these evils, a regular and well-considered system should be adopted for the
distribution of pens and stationary, and when adopted it should be strictly and steadily adhered
to.

3. Answering questions about studies. A teacher who does not adopt some system in regard to
this subject will be always at the mercy of his scholars. One boy will want to know how to
parse a word, another where the lesson is, another to have a sum explained, and a fourth will
wish to show his work to see if it is right. The teacher does not like to discourage such inquiries.
Each one, as it comes up, seems necessary; each one, too, is answered in a moment; but the
endless number and the continual repetition of them consume his time and exhaust his patience.

There is another view of the subject which ought to be taken. Perhaps it would not be far from
the truth to estimate the average number of scholars in the schools in our country at fifty.
At any rate, this will be near enough for our present purpose. There are three hours in each
session, according to the usual arrangement, making one hundred and eighty minutes, which,
divided among fifty, give about three minutes and a half to each individual. If the reader
has, in his own school, a greater or a less number, he can easily correct the above calculation,
so as to adapt it to his own case, and ascertain the portion which may justly be appropriated
to each pupil. It will probably vary from two to four minutes. Now a period of four minutes
slips away very fast while a man is looking over perplexing figures on a slate, and if he exceeds
that time at all in individual attention to any one scholar, he is doing injustice to his other
pupils. I do not mean that a man is to confine himself rigidly to the principle suggested by
this calculation of cautiously appropriating no more time to any one of his pupils than such
a calculation would assign to each, but simply that this is a point which should be kept in
view, and should have a very strong influence in deciding how far it is right to devote attention
exclusively to individuals. It seems to me that it shows very clearly that one ought to teach
his pupils, as much as possible, in masses, and as little as possible by private attention
to individual cases.

The following directions will help the teacher to carry these principles into effect. When
you assign a lesson, glance over it yourself, and consider what difficulties are likely to
arise. You know the progress which your pupils have made, and can easily anticipate their difficulties.
Tell them all together, in the class, what their difficulties will be, and how they may surmount
them. Give them directions how they are to act in the emergencies which will be likely to occur.
This simple step will remove a vast number of the questions which would otherwise become occasions
for interrupting you. With regard to other difficulties, which can not be foreseen and guarded
against, direct the pupils to bring them to the class at the next recitation. Half a dozen
of the class might, and very probably would, meet with the same difficulty. If they bring this
difficulty to you one by one, you have to explain it over and over again, whereas, when it
is brought to the class, one explanation answers for all.

As to all questions about the lesson--where it is, what it is, and how long it is--never answer
them. Require each pupil to remember for himself, and if he was absent when the lesson was
assigned, let him ask his class-mate in a rest.

You may refuse to give particular individuals the private assistance they ask for in such a
way as to discourage and irritate them, but this is by no means necessary. It can be done in
such a manner that the pupil will see the propriety of it, and acquiesce pleasantly in it.

A child comes to you, for example, and says,

"Will you tell me, sir, where the next lesson is?"

"Were you not in the class at the time?"

"Yes, sir; but I have forgotten."

"Well, I have forgotten too. I have a great many classes to hear, and, of course, great many
lessons to assign, and I never remember them. It is not necessary for me to remember."

"May I speak to one of the class to ask about it?"

"You can not speak, you know, till the Study Card is down; you may then."

"But I want to get my lesson now."

"I don't know what you will do, then. I am sorry you don't remember.

"Besides," continues the teacher, looking pleasantly, however, while he says it, "if I knew,
I think I ought not to tell you."

"Why, sir?"

"Because, you know, I have said I wish the scholars to remember where the lessons are, and
not come to me. You know it would be very unwise for me, after assigning a lesson once for
all in the class, to spend my time here at my desk in assigning it over again to each individual
one by one. Now if I should tell you where the lesson is now, I should have to tell others,
and thus should adopt a practice which I have condemned."

Take another case. You assign to a class of little girls a subject of composition, requesting
them to copy their writing upon a sheet of paper, leaving a margin an inch wide at the top,
and one of half an inch at the sides and bottom. The class take their seats, and, after a short
time, one of them comes to you, saying she does not know how long an inch is.

"Don't you know any thing about it?"

"No, sir, not much."

"Should you think that is more or less than an inch?" (pointing to a space on a piece of paper
much too large).

"More."

"Then you know something about it. Now I did not tell you to make the margins exactly an inch
and half an inch, but only as near as you could judge?"

"Would that be about right?" asks the girl, showing a distance.

"I must not tell you, because, you know, I never in such cases help individuals; if that is
as near as you can get it, you may make it so."

It may be well, after assigning a lesson to a class, to say that all those who do not distinctly
understand what they have to do may remain after the class have taken their seats, and ask:
the task may then be distinctly assigned again, and the difficulties, so far as they can be
foreseen, explained.

By such means these sources of interruption and difficulty may, like the others, be almost
entirely removed. Perhaps not altogether, for many cases may occur where the teacher may choose
to give a particular class permission to come to him for help. Such permission, however, ought
never to be given unless it is absolutely necessary, and should never be allowed to be taken
unless it is distinctly given.

4. Hearing recitations. I am aware that many attempt to do something else at the same time
that they are hearing a recitation, and there may perhaps be some individuals who can succeed
in this. If the exercise to which the teacher is attending consists merely in listening to
the reciting word for word some passage committed to memory, it can be done. I hope, however,
to show in a future chapter that there are other and far higher objects which every teacher
ought to have in view in his recitations, and he who understands these objects, and aims at
accomplishing them--who endeavors to instruct his class, to enlarge and elevate their ideas,
to awaken a deep and paramount interest in the subject which they are examining, will find
that his time must be his own, and his attention uninterrupted while he is presiding at a class.
All the other exercises and arrangements of the school are, in fact, preparatory and subsidiary
to this. Here, that is, in the classes, the real business of teaching is to be done. Here the
teacher comes in contact with his scholars mind with mind, and here, consequently, he must
be uninterrupted and undisturbed. I shall speak more particularly on this subject hereafter
under the head of instruction; all I wish to secure in this place is that the teacher should
make such arrangements that he can devote his exclusive attention to his classes while he is
actually engaged with them.

Each recitation, too, should have its specified time, which should be adhered to with rigid
accuracy. If any thing like the plan I have suggested for allowing rests of a minute or two
every half hour should be adopted, it will mark off the forenoon into parts which ought to
be precisely and carefully observed. I was formerly accustomed to think that I could not limit
the time for my recitations without great inconvenience, and occasionally allowed one exercise
to encroach upon the succeeding, and this upon the next, and thus sometimes the last was excluded
altogether. But such a lax and irregular method of procedure is ruinous to the discipline of
a school. On perceiving it at last, I put the bell into the hands of a pupil, commissioning
her to ring regularly, having myself fixed the times, saying that I would show my pupils that
I could be confined myself to system as well as they. At first I experienced a little inconvenience;
but this soon disappeared, and at last the hours and half hours of our artificial division
entirely superseded, in the school-room, the divisions of the clock face. I found, too, that
it exerted an extremely favorable influence upon the scholars in respect to their willingness
to submit readily to the necessary restrictions imposed upon them in school, to show them that
the teacher was subject to law as well as they.

But, in order that I may be specific and definite, I will draw up a plan for the regular division
of time, for a common school, not to be adopted, but to be imitated; that is, I do not recommend
exactly this plan, but that some plan, precise and specific, should be determined upon, and
exhibited to the school by a diagram like the following:

FORENOON. IX.       X.               XI.        XII. +---------+---------+---+---+------------+
|READING. |WRITING. |R. |G. |ARITHMETIC. | +----+----+----+----+---+---+-----+------+ |   
|    |    |    |   |   |     |      | |    |    |    |    |   |   |     |      | |    |   
|    |    |   |   |     |      | |    |    |    |    |   |   |     |      | +----+----+----+----+---+---+-----+------+

AFTERNOON.

II.      III.              IV.         V. +-----------+---------+---+---+----------+ |GEOGRAPHY.
|WRITING. |R. |G. |GRAMMAR.  | +-----+-----+----+----+---+---+----+-----+ |     |     |   
|    |   |   |    |     | |     |     |    |    |   |   |    |     | |     |     |    |   
|   |   |    |     | |     |     |    |    |   |   |    |     | +-----+-----+----+----+---+---+----+-----+
A drawing on a large sheet, made by some of the older scholars (for a teacher should never
do any thing of this kind which his scholars can do for him), should be made and pasted up
to view, the names of the classes being inserted in the columns under their respective heads.
At the double lines at ten and three, there might be a rest of two minutes, an officer appointed
for the purpose ringing a bell at each of the periods marked on the plan, and making the signal
for the rest, whatever signal might be determined upon. It is a good plan to have the bell
touched five minutes before each half hour expires, and then exactly at its close. The first
bell would notify the teacher or teachers, if there are more than one in the school, that the
time for their respective recitations is drawing to a close. At the second bell the new classes
should take their places without waiting to be called for. The scholars will thus see that
the arrangements of the school are based upon system, to which the teacher himself conforms,
and not subjected to his own varying will. They will thus not only go on more regularly, but
they will themselves yield more easily and pleasantly to the necessary arrangements.

The fact is, children love system and regularity. Each one is sometimes a little uneasy under
the restraint which it imposes upon him individually, but they all love to see its operation
upon others, and they are generally very willing to submit to its laws, if the rest of the
community are required to submit too. They show this in their love of military parade; what
allures them is chiefly the order of it; and even a little child creeping upon the floor will
be pleased when he gets his playthings in a row. A teacher may turn this principle to most
useful account in forming his plans for his school, in observing that the teacher is governed
by them too as well as they.

It will be seen by reference to the foregoing plan that I have marked the time for the recesses
by the letter R. at the top. Immediately after them, both in the forenoon and in the afternoon,
twenty minutes are left, marked G., the initial standing for general exercise. They are intended
to denote periods during which all the scholars are in their seats, with their work laid aside,
ready to attend to whatever the teacher may desire to bring before the whole school. There
are so many occasions on which it is necessary to address the whole school, that it is very
desirable to appropriate a particular time for it. In most of the best schools I believe this
plan is adopted. I will mention some of the subjects which would come up at such a time.

1. There are some studies which can be advantageously attended to by the whole school together,
such as Punctuation, and, to some extent, Spelling.

2. Cases of discipline which it is necessary to bring before the whole school ought to come
up at a regularly-appointed time. By attending to them here, there will be a greater importance
attached to them. Whatever the teacher does will seem to be more deliberate, and, in fact,
will be more deliberate.

3. General remarks, bringing up classes of faults which prevail; also general directions, which
may at any time be needed; and, in fact, any business relating to the general arrangements
of the school.

4. Familiar lectures from the teacher on various subjects. These lectures, though necessarily
brief and quite familiar in their form, may still be very exact and thorough in respect to
the knowledge conveyed. When they are upon scientific subjects they may sometimes be illustrated
by experiments, more or less imposing, according to the ingenuity of the teacher, the capacity
of the older scholars to assist him in the preparations, or the means and facilities at his
command.[2]

[Footnote 2: In some of the larger institutions of the country the teacher will have convenient
apparatus at his disposal, and a room specially adapted to the purpose of experiments. The
engraving represents a room at the Spingler Institute at New York. But let not the teacher
suppose that these special facilities are essential to enable him to give instruction to his
pupils in such a way. I have known a much larger balloon than the one represented in the engraving
to be constructed by the teacher and pupils of a common country school from directions in Rees's
Cyclopedia, and sent up in the open air. The aeronaut that accompanied it was a hen--poor thing!]
The design of such lectures should be to extend the general knowledge of the pupils in regard
to those subjects on which they will need information in their progress through life. In regard
to each of these particulars I shall speak more particularly hereafter, in the chapters to
which they respectively belong. My only object here is to show, in the general arrangements
of the school, how a place is to be found for them. My practice has been to have two periods
of short duration, each day, appropriated to these objects: the first to the business of the
school, and the second to such studies or lectures as could be most profitably attended to
at such a time.

We come now to one of the most important subjects which present themselves to the teacher's
attention in settling the principles upon which he shall govern his school. I mean the degree
of influence which the boys themselves shall have in the management of its affairs. Shall the
government of school be a monarchy or a republic? To this question, after much inquiry and
many experiments, I answer, a monarchy; an absolute, unlimited monarchy; the teacher possessing
exclusive power as far as the pupils are concerned, though strictly responsible to the committee
or to the trustees under whom he holds his office.

While, however, it is thus distinctly understood that the power of the teacher is supreme,
that all the power rests in him, and that he alone is responsible for its exercise, there ought
to be a very free and continual delegation of power to the pupils. As much business as is possible
should be committed to them. They should be interested as much as possible in the affairs of
the school, and led to take an active part in carrying them forward; though they should, all
the time, distinctly understand that it is only delegated power which they exercise, and that
the teacher can, at any time, revoke what he has granted, and alter or annul at pleasure any
of their decisions. By this plan we have the responsibility resting where it ought to rest,
and yet the boys are trained to business, and led to take an active interest in the welfare
of the school. Trust is reposed in them, which may be greater or less, as they are able to
bear. All the good effects of reposing trust and confidence, and committing the management
of important business to the pupils will be secured, without the dangers which would result
from the entire surrender of the management of the institution into their hands.

There have been, in several cases, experiments made with reference to ascertaining how far
a government strictly republican would be admissible in a school. A very fair experiment of
this kind was made some years since at the Gardiner Lyceum, in Maine. At the time of its establishment,
nothing was said of the mode of government which it was intended to adopt. For some time the
attention of the instructors was occupied in arranging the course of study, and attending to
the other concerns of the institution; and, in the infant state of the Lyceum, few cases of
discipline occurred, and no regular system of government was necessary.

Before long, however, complaints were made that the students at the Lyceum were guilty of breaking
windows in an old building used as a town-house. The principal called the students together,
mentioned the reports, and said that he did not know, and did not wish to know who were the
guilty individuals. It was necessary, however, that the thing should be examined into, and
that restitution should be made, and, relying on their faithfulness and ability, he should
leave them to manage the business alone. For this purpose, he nominated one of the students
as judge, some others as jurymen, and appointed the other officers necessary in the same manner.
He told them that, in order to give them time to make a thorough investigation, they were excused
from farther exercises during the day.

The principal then left them, and they entered on the trial. The result was that they discovered
the guilty individuals, ascertained the amount of mischief done by each, and sent to the selectmen
a message, by which they agreed to pay a sum equal to three times the value of the injury sustained.

The students were soon after informed that this mode of bringing offenders to justice would
hereafter be always pursued, and arrangements were made for organizing a regular republican
government among the young men. By this government all laws which related to the internal police
of the institution were to be made, all officers were appointed, and all criminal cases were
to be tried. The students finding the part of a judge too difficult for them to sustain, one
of the professors was appointed to hold that office, and, for similar reasons, another of the
professors was made president of the legislative assembly. The principal was the executive,
with power to pardon, but not to sentence, or even accuse.

Some time after this a student was indicted for profane swearing; he was tried, convicted,
and punished. After this he evinced a strong hostility to the government. He made great exertions
to bring it into contempt, and when the next trial came on, he endeavored to persuade the witnesses
that giving evidence was dishonorable, and he so far succeeded that the defendant was acquitted
for want of evidence, when it was generally understood that there was proof of his guilt, which
would have been satisfactory if it could have been brought forward. For some time after this
the prospect was rather unfavorable, though many of the students themselves opposed with great
earnestness these efforts, and were much alarmed lest they should lose their free government
through the perverseness of one of their number. The attorney general, at this juncture, conceived
the idea of indicting the individual alluded to for an attempt to overturn the government.
He obtained the approbation of the principal, and the grand jury found a bill. The court, as
the case was so important, invited some of the trustees, who were in town, to attend the trial.
The parent of the defendant was also informed of the circumstances and requested to be present,
and he accordingly attended. The prisoner was tried, found guilty, and sentenced, if I mistake
not, to expulsion. At his earnest request, however, to be permitted to remain in the Lyceum
and redeem his character, he was pardoned and restored, and from that time he became perfectly
exemplary in his conduct and character. After this occurrence the system went on in successful
operation for some time.

The legislative power was vested in the hands of a general committee, consisting of eight or
ten, chosen by the students from their own number. They met about once a week to transact such
business as appointing officers, making and repealing regulations, and inquiring into the state
of the Lyceum. The instructors had a negative upon all their proceedings, but no direct and
positive power. They could pardon, but they could assign no punishments, nor make laws inflicting
any.

Now such a plan as this may succeed for a short time, and under very favorable circumstances;
and the circumstance which it is chiefly important should be favorable is, that the man who
is called to preside over such an association should possess such talents of generalship that
he can really manage the institution himself, while the power is nominally and apparently in
the hands of the boys. Should this not be the case, or should the teacher, from any cause,
lose his personal influence in the school, so that the institution should really be surrendered
into the hands of the pupils, things must be on a very unstable footing. And, accordingly,
where such a plan has been adopted, it has, I believe, in every instance, been ultimately abandoned.

Real self-government is an experiment sufficiently hazardous among men, though Providence,
in making a daily supply of food necessary for every human being, has imposed a most powerful
check upon the tendency to anarchy and confusion. Let the populace of Paris or of London materially
interrupt the order and break in upon the arrangements of the community, and in eight-and-forty
hours nearly the whole of the mighty mass will be in the hands of the devourer, hunger, and
they will be soon brought to submission. On the other hand, a month's anarchy and confusion
in a college or an academy would be delight to half the students, or else times have greatly
changed since I was within college walls.

Although it is thus evident that the important concerns of a literary institution can not be
safely committed into the hands of the students, very great benefits will result from calling
upon them to act upon and to decide questions relative to the school within such limits and
under such restrictions as are safe and proper. Such a practice will assist the teacher very
much if he manages it with any degree of dexterity; for it will interest his pupils in the
success of the school, and secure, to a very considerable extent, their co-operation in the
government of it. It will teach them self-control and self-government, and will accustom them
to submit to the majority--that lesson which, of all others, it is important for a republican
to learn.

In endeavoring to interest the pupils of a school in the work of co-operating with the teacher
in its administration, no little dexterity will be necessary at the outset. In all probability,
the formal announcement of this principle, and the endeavor to introduce it by a sudden revolution,
would totally fail. Boys, like men, must be gradually prepared for; power, and they must exercise
it only so far as they are prepared. This, however, can very easily be done. The teacher should
say nothing of his general design, but, when some suitable opportunity presents, he should
endeavor to lead his pupils to co-operate with him in some particular instance.

For example, let us suppose that he has been accustomed to distribute the writing-books with
his own hand when the writing-hour arrives, and that he concludes to delegate this simple business
first to his scholars. He accordingly states to them, just before the writing exercise of the
day on which he proposes the experiment, as follows:

"I have thought that time will be saved if you will help me distribute the books, and I will
accordingly appoint four distributors, one for each division of the seats, who may come to
me and receive the books, and distribute them each to his own division. Are you willing to
adopt this plan?"

The boys answer "Yes, sir," and the teacher then looks carefully around the room, and selects
four pleasant and popular boys--boys who he knows would gladly assist him, and who would, at
the same time, be agreeable to their school-mates. This latter point is necessary in order
to secure the popularity and success of the plan.

Unless the boys are very different from any I have ever met with, they will be pleased with
the duty thus assigned them. They will learn system and regularity by being taught to perform
this simple duty in a proper manner. After a week, the teacher may consider their term of service
as having expired, and thanking them in public for the assistance they have rendered him, he
may ask the scholars if they are willing to continue the plan, and if the vote is in favor
of it, as it unquestionably would be, each boy probably hoping that he should be appointed
to the office, the teacher may nominate four others, including, perhaps, upon the list, some
boy popular among his companions, but whom he has suspected to be not very friendly to himself
or the school. I think the most scrupulous statesman would not object to securing influence
by conferring office in such a case. If difficulties arise from the operation of such a measure,
the plan can easily be modified to avoid or correct them. If it is successful, it may be continued,
and the principle may be extended, so as in the end to affect very considerably all the arrangements
and the whole management of the school.

Or, let us imagine the following scene to have been the commencement of the introduction of
the principle of limited self-government into a school.

The preceptor of an academy was sitting at his desk, at the close of school, while the pupils
were putting up their books and leaving the room. A boy came in with angry looks, and, with
his hat in his hands bruised and dusty, advanced to the master's desk, and complained that
one of his companions had thrown down his hat upon the floor, and had almost spoiled it.

The teacher looked calmly at the mischief, and then asked how it happened.

"I don't know, sir. I hung it on my nail, and he pulled it down."

"I wish you would ask him to come here," said the teacher. "Ask him pleasantly."

The accused soon came in, and the two boys stood together before the master.

"There seems to be some difficulty between you boys about a nail to hang your hats upon. I
suppose each of you think it is your own nail."

"Yes, sir," said both the boys.

"It will be more convenient for me to talk with you about this to-morrow than to-night, if
you are willing to wait. Besides, we can examine it more calmly then. But if we put it off
till then, you must not talk about it in the mean time, blaming one another, and keeping up
the irritation that you feel. Are you both willing to leave it just where it is till to-morrow,
and try to forget all about it till then? I expect I shall find you both a little to blame."

The boys rather reluctantly consented. The next day the master heard the case, and settled
it so far as it related to the two boys. It was easily settled in the morning, for they had
had time to get calm, and were, after sleeping away their anger, rather ashamed of the whole
affair, and very desirous to have it forgotten.

That day, when the hour for the transaction of general business came, the teacher stated to
the school that it was necessary to take some measures to provide each boy with a nail for
his hat. In order to show that it was necessary, he related the circumstances of the quarrel
which had occurred the day before. He did this, not with such an air and manner as to convey
the impression that his object was to find fault with the boys, or to expose their misconduct,
but to show the necessity of doing something to remedy the evil which had been the cause of
so unpleasant an occurrence. Still, though he said nothing in the way of reproof or reprehension,
and did not name the boys, but merely gave a cool and impartial narrative of the facts, the
effect, very evidently, was to bring such quarrels into discredit. A calm review of misconduct,
after the excitement has gone by, will do more to bring it into disgrace than the most violent
invectives and reproaches directed against the individuals guilty of it at the time.

"Now, boys," continued the master, "will you assist me in making arrangements to prevent the
recurrence of all temptations of this kind hereafter? It is plain that every boy ought to have
a nail appropriated expressly to his use. The first thing to be done is to ascertain whether
there are enough for all. I should like, therefore, to have two committees appointed: one to
count and report the number of nails in the entry, and also how much room there is for more;
the other to ascertain the number of scholars in school. They can count all who are here, and,
by observing the vacant desks, they can ascertain the number absent. When this investigation
is made, I will tell you what to do next."

The boys seemed pleased with the plan, and the committees were appointed, two members on each.
The master took care to give the quarrelers some share in the work, apparently forgetting,
from this time, the unpleasant occurrence which had brought up the subject.

When the boys came to inform him of the result of their inquiries, he asked them to make a
little memorandum of it in writing, as he might forget the numbers, he said, before the time
came for reading them. The boys brought him, presently, a rough scrap of paper, with the figures
marked upon it. He told them he should forget which was the number of nails, and which the
number of scholars, unless they wrote it down.

"It is the custom among men," said he, "to make out their report, in such a case, fully, so
that it would explain itself; and I should like to have you, if you are willing, make out yours
a little more distinctly."

Accordingly, after a little additional explanation, the boys made another attempt, and presently
returned with something like the following:

"The committee for counting the nails report as follows:
    Number of nails. . . . 35
    Room for more  . . . . 15."

The other report was very similar, though somewhat rudely written and expressed, and both were
perfectly satisfactory to the preceptor, as he plainly showed by the manner in which he received
them.

I need not finish the description of this case by narrating particularly the reading of the
reports, the appointment of a committee to assign the nails, and to paste up the names of the
scholars, one to each. The work, in such a case, might be done in recesses, and out of school
hours; and though, at first, the teacher will find that it is as much trouble to accomplish
business in this way as it would be to attend to it directly himself, yet, after a very little
experience, he will find that his pupils will acquire dexterity and readiness, and will be
able to render him very material assistance in the accomplishment of his plans.

This, however--the assistance rendered to the teacher--is not the main object of the adoption
of such measures as this. The main design is to interest the pupils in the management and the
welfare of the school--to identify them, as it were, with it. And such measures as the above
will accomplish this object; and every teacher who will try the experiment, and carry it into
effect with any tolerable degree of skill, will find that it will, in a short time, change
the whole aspect of the school in regard to the feelings subsisting between himself and his pupils.

Each teacher who tries such an experiment will find himself insensibly repeating it, and after
a time he may have quite a number of officers and committees who are intrusted with various
departments of business. He will have a secretary, chosen by ballot by the scholars, to keep
a record of all the important transactions in the school for each day. At first he will dictate
to the secretary, thus directing him precisely what to say, or even writing it for him, and
then merely requiring him to copy it into the book provided for the purpose. Afterward he will
give the pupil less and less assistance, till he can keep the record properly himself. The
record of each day will be read on the succeeding day at the hour for business. The teacher
will perhaps have a committee to take care of the fire, and another to see that the room is
constantly in good order. He will have distributors for each division of seats, to distribute
books, and compositions, and pens, and to collect votes. And thus, in a short time, his school
will become regularly organized as a society or legislative assembly. The boys will learn submission
to the majority in such unimportant things as may be committed to them; they will learn system
and regularity, and every thing else, indeed, that belongs to the science of political self-government.

There are dangers, however. What useful practice has not its dangers? One of these is, that
the teacher will allow these arrangements to take up too much time. He must guard against this.
I have found from experience that fifteen minutes each day, with a school of 135, is enough.
This ought never to be exceeded.

Another danger is, that the boys will be so engaged in the duties of their offices as to neglect
their studies. This would be, and ought to be, fatal to the whole plan. This danger may be
avoided in the following manner. State publicly that you will not appoint any to office who
are not good scholars, always punctual, and always prepared; and when any boy who holds an
office is going behindhand in his studies, say to him kindly, "You have not time to get your
lessons, and I am afraid it is owing to the fact that you spend so much time in helping me.
Now if you wish to resign your office, so as to have more time for your lessons, you can. In
fact, I think you ought to do it. You may try it for a day or two, and I will notice how you
recite, and then we can decide."

Such a communication will generally be found to have a powerful effect. If it does not remedy
the evil, the resignation must be insisted on. A few decided cases of this kind will effectually
remove the evil I am considering.

Another difficulty which is likely to attend the plan of allowing the pupils of a school to
take some part in this way in the administration of it is that it may tend to make them insubordinate,
so that they will, in many instances, submit with less good humor to such decisions as you
may consider necessary. I do not mean that this will be the case with all, but that there will
be a few who will be ungenerous enough, if you allow them to decide sometimes what shall be
done, to endeavor to make trouble, or at least to show symptoms of impatience and vexation
because you do not allow them always to decide.

Sometimes this feeling may show itself by the discontented looks, or gestures, or even words
with which some unwelcome regulation or order on the part of the teacher will be received.
Such a spirit should be immediately and decidedly checked whenever it appears. It will not
be difficult to check, and even entirely to remove it. On one occasion when, after learning
the wish of the scholars on some subject which had been brought before them, I decided contrary
to it, there arose a murmur of discontent all over the room. This was the more distinct, because
I have always accustomed my pupils to answer questions asked, and to express their wishes and
feelings on any subject I may present to them with great freedom.

I asked all those who had expressed their dissatisfaction to rise.

About one third of the scholars arose.

"Perhaps you understood that when I put the question to vote I meant to abide by your decision,
and that, consequently, I ought not to have reversed it, as I did afterward?"

"Yes, sir," "Yes, sir," they replied.

Do you suppose it would be safe to leave the decision of important questions to the scholars
in this school?"

"Yes, sir;" "No, sir." The majority were, however, in the affirmative.

Thus far, only those who were standing had answered. I told them that, as they were divided
in opinion, they might sit, and I would put the question to the whole school.

"You know," I continued, addressing the whole, "what sort of persons the girls who compose
this school are. You know about how many are governed habitually by steady principle, and how
many by impulse and feeling. You know, too, what proportion have judgment and foresight necessary
to consider and decide independently such questions as continually arise in the management
of a school. Now suppose I should resign the school into your own hands as to its management,
and only come in to give instruction to the classes, leaving all general control of its arrangements
with you, would it go on safely or not?"

As might have been foreseen, there was, when the question was fairly proposed, scarcely a solitary
vote in favor of government by scholars. They seemed to see clearly the absurdity of such a scheme.

"Besides," I continued, "the trustees of this school have committed it to my charge; they hold
me responsible; the public hold me responsible, not you. Now if I should surrender it into
your hands, and you, from any cause, should manage the trust unfaithfully or unskillfully,
I should necessarily be held accountable. I could never shift the responsibility upon you.
Now it plainly is not just or right that one party should hold the power, and another be held
accountable for its exercise. It is clear, therefore, in every view of the subject, that I
should retain the management of this school in my own hands. Are you not satisfied that it is?"

The scholars universally answered "Yes, sir." They seemed satisfied, and doubtless were.

It was then stated to them that the object in asking them to vote was, in some cases, to obtain
an expression of their opinion or their wishes in order to help me decide, and only in those
cases where it was expressly stated did I mean to give the final decision to them.

Still, however, if cases are often referred to them, the feeling will gradually creep in that
the school is managed on republican principles, as they call it, and they will, unless this
point is specially guarded, gradually lose that spirit of entire and cordial subordination
so necessary for the success of any school. It should often be distinctly explained to them
that a republican government is one where the power essentially resides in the community, and
is exercised by a ruler only so far as the community delegates it to him, whereas in the school
the government is based on the principle that the power, primarily and essentially, resides
in the teacher, the scholars exercising only such as he may delegate to them.

With these limitations and restrictions, and with this express understanding in regard to what
is, in all cases, the ultimate authority, I think there will be no danger in throwing a very
large share of the business which will, from time to time, come up in the school, upon the
scholars themselves for decision. In my own experience this plan has been adopted with the
happiest results. In the Mount Vernon School a small red morocco wrapper lies constantly on
a little shelf, accessible to all. By its side is a little pile of papers, about one inch by
six, on which any one may write her motion, or her proposition, as the scholars call it, whatever
it may be, and when written it is inclosed in the wrapper, to be brought to me at the appointed
time for attending to the general business of the school. Through this wrapper all questions
are asked, all complaints entered, all proposals made. Is there discontent in the school? It
shows itself by "propositions" in the wrapper. Is any body aggrieved or injured? I learn it
through the wrapper. In fact, it is a little safety-valve, which lets off what, if confined,
might threaten explosion---an index--a thermometer, which reveals to me, from day to day, more
of the state of public opinion in the little community than any thing beside.

These propositions are generally read aloud. Some cases are referred to the scholars for decision;
some I decide myself; others are laid aside without notice of any kind; others still, merely
suggest remarks on the subjects to which they allude.

The principles, then, which this chapter has been intended to establish, are simply these:
in making your general arrangements, look carefully over your ground, consider all the objects
which you have to accomplish, and the proper degree of time and attention which each deserves.
Then act upon system. Let the mass of particulars which would otherwise crowd upon you in promiscuous
confusion be arranged and classified. Let each be assigned to its proper time and place, so
that your time may be your own, under your own command, and not, as is too often the case,
at the mercy of the thousand accidental circumstances which may occur.

In a word, be, in the government of your school, yourself supreme, and let your supremacy be
that of authority; but delegate power, as freely as possible, to those under your care. Show
them that you are desirous of reposing trust in them just so far as they show themselves capable
of exercising it. Thus interest them in your plans, and make them feel that they participate
in the honor or the disgrace of success or failure.

I have gone much into detail in this chapter, proposing definite measures by which the principles
I have recommended may be carried into effect. I wish, however, that it may be distinctly understood
that all I contend for is the principles themselves, no matter what the particular measures
are by which they are secured. Every good school must be systematic, but all need not be on
precisely the same system. As this work is intended almost exclusively for beginners, much
detail has been admitted, and many of the specific measures here proposed may perhaps be safely
adopted where no others are established. There may also, perhaps, be cases where teachers,
whose schools are already in successful operation, may ingraft upon their own plans some things
which are here proposed. If they should attempt it, it must be done cautiously and gradually.
There is no other way by which they can be safely introduced, or even introduced at all. This
is a point of so much importance, that I must devote a paragraph to it before closing the chapter.

Let a teacher propose to his pupils, formally, from his desk, the plan of writing propositions,
for example, as explained above, and procure his wrapper, and put it in its place, and what
would be the result? Why, not a single paper, probably, could he get, from one end of the week
to the other. But let him, on the other hand, when a boy comes to him to ask some question,
the answer to which many in the school would equally wish to hear, say to the inquirer,

"Will you be so good as to write that question, and put it on my desk, and then, at the regular
time, I will answer it to all the school."

When he reads it, let him state that it was written at his request, and give the other boys
permission to leave their proposals or questions on his desk in the same way. In a few days
he will have another, and thus the plan may be gently and gradually introduced.

So with officers. They should be appointed among the scholars only as fast as they are actually
needed, and the plan should thus be cautiously carried only so far as it proves good on trial.
Be always cautious about innovations and changes. Make no rash experiments on a large scale,
but always test your principle in the small way, and then, if it proves good, gradually extend
its operation as circumstances seem to require.

By thus cautiously and slowly introducing plans, founded on the systematic principles here
brought to view, a very considerable degree of quiet, and order, and regularity may be introduced
into the largest and most miscellaneous schools. And this order and quiet are absolutely necessary
to enable the teacher to find that interest and enjoyment in his work which were exhibited
in the last chapter; the pleasure of directing and controlling mind, and doing it, not by useless
and anxious complaints, or stern threats and painful punishments, but by regarding the scene
of labor in its true light, as a community of intellectual and moral beings, and governing
it by moral and intellectual power. It is, in fact, the pleasure of exercising power. I do
not mean arbitrary, personal authority, but the power to produce, by successful but quiet contrivance,
extensive and happy results; the pleasure of calmly considering every difficulty, and, without
irritation or anger, devising the proper moral means to remedy the moral evil; and then the
interest and pleasure of witnessing its effects.

CHAPTER III.

INSTRUCTION.

We come now to consider the subject of Instruction.

There are three kinds of human knowledge which stand strikingly distinct from all the rest.
They lie at the foundation. They constitute the roots of the tree. In other words, they are
the means by which all other knowledge is attained. I need not say that I mean Reading, Writing,
and Calculation.

Teachers do not perhaps always consider how entirely and essentially distinct these three branches
of learning are from all the rest. They are arts; the acquisition of them is not to be considered
as knowledge, so much as the means by which knowledge may be obtained. A child who is studying
Geography, or History, or Natural Science, is learning facts--gaining information; on the other
hand, the one who is learning to write, or to read, or to calculate, may be adding little or
nothing to his stock of knowledge. He is acquiring skill, which, at some future time, he may
make the means of increasing his knowledge to any extent.

This distinction ought to be kept constantly in view, and the teacher should feel that these
three fundamental branches stand by themselves, and stand first in importance. I do not mean
to undervalue the others, but only to insist upon the superior value and importance of these.
Teaching a pupil to read before he enters upon the active business of life is like giving a
new settler an axe as he goes to seek his new home in the forest. Teaching him a lesson in
history is, on the other hand, only cutting down a tree or two for him. A knowledge of natural
history is like a few bushels of grain gratuitously placed in his barn; but the art of ready
reckoning is the plow which will remain by him for years, and help him to draw out from the
soil a new treasure every year of his life.

The great object, then, of the common schools in our country is to teach the whole population
to read, to write, and to calculate. In fact, so essential is it that the accomplishment of
these objects should be secured, that it is even a question whether common schools should not
be confined to them. I say it is a question, for it is sometimes made so, though public opinion
has decided that some portion of attention, at least, should be paid to the acquisition of
additional knowledge. But, after all, the amount of knowledge which is actually acquired at
schools is very small. It must be very small. The true policy is to aim at making all the pupils
good readers, writers, and calculators, and to consider the other studies of the school important
chiefly as practice in turning these arts to useful account. In other words, the scholars should
be taught these arts thoroughly first of all, and in the other studies the main design should
be to show them how to use, and interest them in using, the arts they have thus acquired.

A great many teachers feel a much stronger interest in the one or two scholars they may have
in Surveying or in Latin than they do in the large classes in the elementary branches which
fill the school. But a moment's reflection will show that such a preference is founded on a
very mistaken view. Leading forward one or two minds from step to step in an advanced study
is certainly far inferior in real dignity and importance to opening all the stores of written
knowledge to fifty or a hundred. The man who neglects the interests of his school in these
great branches to devote his time to two or three, or half a dozen older scholars, is unjust
both to his employers and to himself.

It is the duty, therefore, of every teacher who commences a common district school for a single
season to make, when he commences, an estimate of the state of his pupils in reference to these
three branches. How do they all write? How do they all read? How do they calculate? It would
be well if he would make a careful examination of the school in this respect. Let them all
write a specimen. Let all read, and let him make a memorandum of the manner, noticing how many
read fluently, how many with difficulty, how many know only their letters, and how many are
to be taught these. Let him ascertain, also, what progress they have made in arithmetic--how
many can readily perform the elementary processes, and what number need instruction in these.
After thus surveying the ground, let him form his plan, and lay out his whole strength in carrying
forward as rapidly as possible the whole school in these studies. By this means he is acting
most directly and powerfully on the intelligence of the whole future community in that place.
He is opening to fifty or a hundred minds stores of knowledge which they will go on exploring
for years to come. What a descent now from such a work as this to the mere hearing of the recitation
of two or three boys in Trigonometry!

I repeat it, that a thorough and enlightened survey of the whole school should be taken, and
plans formed for elevating the whole mass in those great branches of knowledge which are to
be of immediate practical use to them in future life.

If the school is one more advanced in respect to the age and studies of the pupils, the teacher
should, in the same manner, before he forms his plans, consider well what are the great objects
which he has to accomplish. He should ascertain what is the existing state of his school both
as to knowledge and character; how long, generally, his pupils are to remain under his care;
what are to be their future stations and conditions in life, and what objects he can reasonably
hope to effect for them while they remain under his influence. By means of this forethought
and consideration he will be enabled to work understandingly.

It is desirable, too, that what I have recommended in reference to the whole school should
be done in respect to the case of each individual. When a new pupil comes under your charge,
ascertain (by other means, however, than formal examination) to what stage his education has
advanced, and deliberately consider what objects you can reasonably expect to effect for him
while he remains under your care. You can not, indeed, always form your plans to suit so exactly
your general views in regard to the school and to individuals as you could wish. But these
general views will, in a thousand cases, modify your plans, or affect in a greater or less
degree all your arrangements. They will keep you to a steady purpose, and your work will go
on far more systematically and regularly than it would do if, as in fact many teachers do,
you were to come headlong into your school, take things just as you find them, and carry them
forward at random without end or aim.

This survey of your field being made, you are prepared to commence definite operations, and
the great difficulty in carrying your plans into effect is how to act more efficiently on the
greatest numbers at a time. The whole business of public instruction, if it goes on at all,
must go on by the teacher's skill in multiplying his power, by acting on numbers at once. In
most books on education we are taught, almost exclusively, how to operate on the individual.
It is the error into which theoretic writers almost always fall. We meet in every periodical,
and in every treatise, and, in fact, in almost every conversation on the subject, with remarks
which sound very well by the fireside, but they are totally inefficient and useless in school,
from their being apparently based upon the supposition that the teacher has but one pupil to
attend to at a time. The great question in the management of schools is not how you can take
one scholar, and lead him forward most rapidly in a prescribed course, but how you can classify
and arrange numbers, comprising every possible variety both as to knowledge and capacity, so
as to carry them all forward effectually together.

The extent to which a teacher may multiply his power by acting on numbers at a time is very
great. In order to estimate it, we must consider carefully what it is when carried to the greatest
extent to which it is capable of being carried under the most favorable circumstances. Now
it is possible for a teacher to speak so as to be easily heard by three hundred persons, and
three hundred pupils can be easily so seated as to see his illustrations or diagrams. Now suppose
that three hundred pupils, all ignorant of the method of reducing fractions to a common denominator,
and yet all old enough to learn, are collected in one room. Suppose they are all attentive
and desirous of learning, it is very plain that the process may be explained to the whole at
once, so that half an hour spent in that exercise would enable a very large proportion of them
to understand the subject. So, if a teacher is explaining to a class in Grammar the difference
between a noun and verb, the explanation would do as well for several hundred as for the dozen
who constitute the class, if arrangements could only be made to have the hundreds hear it;
but there are, perhaps, only a hundred pupils in the school, and of these a large part understand
already the point to be explained, and another large part are too young to attend to it. I
wish the object of these remarks not to be misunderstood. I do not recommend the attempt to
teach on so extensive a scale; I admit that it is impracticable; I only mean to show in what
the impracticability consists, namely, in the difficulty of making such arrangements as to
derive the full benefit from the instructions rendered. The instructions of the teacher are,
in the nature of things, available to the extent I have represented, but in actual practice
the full benefit can not be derived. Now, so far as we thus fall short of this full benefit,
so far there is, of course, waste; and it is difficult or impossible to make such arrangements
as will avoid the waste, in this manner, of a large portion of every effort which the teacher
makes.

A very small class instructed by an able teacher is like a factory of a hundred spindles, with
a water-wheel of power sufficient for a thousand. In such a case, even if the owner, from want
of capital or any other cause, can not add the other nine hundred, he ought to know how much
of his power is in fact unemployed, and make arrangements to bring it into useful exercise
as soon as he can. The teacher, in the same manner, should understand what is the full beneficial
effect which it is possible, in theory, to derive from his instructions. He should understand,
too, that just so far as he falls short of this full effect there is waste. It may be unavoidable;
part of it unquestionably is, like the friction of machinery, unavoidable. Still, it is waste;
and it ought to be so understood, that, by the gradual perfection of the machinery, it may
be more and more fully prevented.

Always bear in mind, then, when you are devoting your time to two or three individuals in a
class, that your are losing a large part of your labor. Your instructions are conducive to
good effect only to the one tenth or one twentieth of the extent to which, under more favorable
circumstances, they might be made available. And though you can not always avoid this loss,
you ought to be aware of it, and so to shape your measures as to diminish it as much as possible.

We come now to consider the particular measures to be adopted in giving instruction.

The objects which are to be secured in the management of the classes are twofold:

1. Recitation. 2. Instruction.

These two objects are, it is plain, entirely distinct. Under the latter is included all the
explanation, and assistance, and additional information which the teacher may give his pupils,
and under the former, such an examination of individuals as is necessary to secure their careful
attention to their lessons. It is unsafe to neglect either of these points. If the class meetings
are mere recitations, they soon become dull and mechanical; the pupils generally take little
interest in their studies, and imbibe no literary spirit. Their intellectual progress will,
accordingly, suddenly cease the moment they leave school, and so cease to be called upon to
recite lessons. On the other hand, if instruction is all that is aimed at, and recitation (by
which I mean, as above explained, such an examination of individuals as is necessary to ascertain
that they have faithfully performed the tasks assigned) is neglected, the exercise soon becomes
not much more than a lecture, to which those, and those only, will attend who please.

The business, therefore, of a thorough examination of the class must not be omitted. I do not
mean that each individual scholar must every day be examined, but simply that the teacher must,
in some way or other, satisfy himself by reasonable evidence that the whole class are really
prepared. A great deal of ingenuity may be exercised in contriving means for effecting this
object in the shortest possible time. I know of no part of the field of a teacher's labors
which may be more facilitated by a little ingenuity than this.

One teacher, for instance, has a spelling lesson to hear. He begins at the head of the line,
and putting one word to each boy, goes regularly down, each successive pupil calculating the
chances whether a word which he can accidentally spell will or will not come to him. If he
spells it, the teacher can not tell whether he is prepared or not. That word is only one among
fifty constituting the lesson. If he misses it, the teacher can not decide that he was unprepared.
It might have been a single accidental error.

Another teacher, hearing the same lesson, requests the boys to bring their slates, and, as
he dictates the words one after another, requires all to write them. After they are all written,
he calls upon the pupils to spell them aloud as they have written them, simultaneously, pausing
a moment after each, to give those who are wrong an opportunity to indicate it by some mark
opposite the word misspelled. They all count the number of errors and report them. He passes
down the class, glancing his eye at the work of each one to see that all is right, noticing
particularly those slates which, from the character of the boys, need a more careful inspection.
A teacher who had never tried this experiment would be surprised at the rapidity with which
such work will be performed by a class after a little practice.

Now how different are these two methods in their actual results! In the latter case the whole
class are thoroughly examined. In the former not a single member of it is. Let me not be understood
to recommend exactly this method of teaching spelling as the best one to be adopted in all
cases. I only bring it forward as an illustration of the idea that a little machinery, a little
ingenuity in contriving ways of acting on the whole rather than on individuals, will very much
promote the teacher's designs.

In order to facilitate such plans, it is highly desirable that the classes should be trained
to military precision and exactness in these manipulations. What I mean by this may perhaps
be best illustrated by describing a case: it will show, in another branch, how much will be
gained by acting upon numbers at once instead of upon each individual in succession.

Imagine, then, that a teacher requested all the pupils of his school who could write to take
out their slates at the hour for a general exercise. As soon as the first bustle of opening
and shutting the desks was over, he looked around the room, and saw some ruling lines across
their slates, others wiping them all over on both sides with sponges, others scribbling, or
writing, or making figures.

"All those," says he, speaking, however, with a pleasant tone and with a pleasant look, "who
have taken out any thing besides slates, may rise."

Several, in various parts of the room, stood up.

"All those who have written any thing since they took out their slates may rise too, and those
who have wiped their slates."

"When all were up, he said to them, though not with a frown or a scowl, as if they had committed
a great offense,

"Suppose a company of soldiers should be ordered to form a line, and instead of simply obeying
that order they should all set at work, each in his own way, doing something else. One man
at one end of the line begins to load and fire his gun; another takes out his knapsack and
begins to eat his luncheon; a third amuses himself by going as fast as possible through the
exercise; and another still, begins to march about hither and thither, facing to the right
and left, and performing all the evolutions he can think of. What should you say to such a
company as that?"

The boys laughed.

"It is better," said the teacher, "when numbers are acting under the direction of one, that
they should all act exactly together. In this way we advance much faster than we otherwise
should. Be careful, therefore, to do exactly what I command, and nothing more.

"Provide a place on your slates large enough to write a single line," added the teacher, in
a distinct voice. I print his orders in Italics, and his remarks and explanations in Roman letters.

"Prepare to write.

"I mean by this," he continued, "that you place your slates before you with your pencils at
the place where you are to begin, so that all may commence precisely at the same instant."

The teacher who tries such an experiment as this will find at such a juncture an expression
of fixed and pleasant attention upon every countenance in school. All will be intent, all will
be interested. Boys love order, and system, and acting in concert, and they will obey with
great alacrity such commands as these if they are good-humoredly, though decidedly expressed.

The teacher observed in one part of the room a hand raised, indicating that the boy wished
to speak to him. He gave him liberty by pronouncing his name.

"I have no pencil," said the boy.

A dozen hands all around him were immediately seen fumbling in pockets and desks, and in a
few minutes several pencils were reached out for his acceptance.

The boy looked at the pencils and then at the teacher; he did not exactly know whether he was
to take one or not.

"All those boys," said the teacher, pleasantly, "who have taken out pencils, may rise.

"Have these boys done right or wrong?"

"Right;" "Wrong;" "Right," answered their companions, variously.

"Their motive was to help their class-mate out of his difficulties; that is a good feeling,
certainly."

"Yes, sir, right;" "Right."

"But I thought you promised me a moment ago," replied the teacher, "not to do any thing unless
I commanded it. Did I ask for pencils?"

A pause.

"I do not blame these boys at all in this case; still, it is better to adhere rigidly to the
principle of exact obedience  when numbers are acting together. I thank them, therefore, for
being so ready to assist a companion, but they must put their pencils away, as they were taken
out without orders."

Now such a dialogue as this, if the teacher speaks in a good-humored, though decided manner,
would be universally well received in any school. Whenever strictness of discipline is unpopular,
it is rendered so simply by the ill-humored and ill-judged means by which it is attempted to
be introduced. But all children will love strict discipline if it is pleasantly, though firmly
maintained. It is a great, though very prevalent mistake, to imagine that boys and girls like
a lax and inefficient government, and dislike the pressure of steady control. What they dislike
is sour looks and irritating language, and they therefore very naturally dislike every thing
introduced or sustained by means of them. If, however, exactness and precision in all the operations
of a class and of the school are introduced and enforced in the proper manner, that is, by
a firm, but mild and good-humored authority, scholars will universally be pleased with them.
They like to see the uniform appearance, the straight line, the simultaneous movement. They
like to feel the operation of system, and to realize, while they are at the school-room, that
they form a community, governed by fixed and steady laws, firmly but kindly administered. On
the other hand, laxity of discipline, and the disorder which will result from it, will only
lead the pupils to contemn their teacher and to hate their school.

By introducing and maintaining such a discipline as I have described, great facilities will
be secured for examining the classes. For example, to take a case different from the one before
described, let us suppose that a class have been performing a number of examples in Addition.
They come together to the recitation, and, under one mode of managing classes, the teacher
is immediately beset by a number of the pupils with excuses. One had no slate; another was
absent when the lesson was assigned; a third performed the work, but it got rubbed out, and
a fourth did not know what was to be done. The teacher stops to hear all these, and to talk
about them, fretting himself, and fretting the delinquents by his impatient remarks. The rest
of the class are waiting, and, having nothing good to do, the temptation is almost irresistible
to do something bad. One boy is drawing pictures on his slate to make his neighbors laugh,
another is whispering, and two more are at play. The disorder continues while the teacher goes
round examining slate after slate, his whole attention being engrossed by each individual,
as the pupils come to him successively, while the rest are left to themselves, interrupted
only by an occasional harsh, or even angry, but utterly useless rebuke from him.

But, under another mode of managing classes and schools, a very different result would be produced.

A boy approaches the teacher to render an excuse; the teacher replies, addressing himself,
however, to the whole class, "I shall give all an opportunity to offer their excuses presently.
No one must come till he is called."

The class then regularly take their places in the recitation seats, the prepared and unprepared
together. The following commands are given and obeyed promptly. They are spoken pleasantly,
but still in the tone of command.

"The class may rise.

"All those that are not fully prepared with this lesson may sit."

A number sit; and others, doubtful whether they are prepared or not, or thinking that there
is something peculiar in their cases, which they wish to state, raise their hands, or make
any other signal which is customary to indicate a wish to speak. Such a signal ought always
to be agreed upon, and understood in school.

The teacher shakes his head, saying, "I will hear you presently. If there is, on any account
whatever, any doubt whether you are prepared, you must sit.

"Those that are standing may read their answers to No. 1. Unit figure?"

Boys. "Five."

Teacher. "Tens?"

B. "Six."

T. "Hundreds?"

B. "Seven."

While these numbers are thus reading, the teacher looks at the boys, and can easily see whether
any are not reading their own answers, but only following the rest. If they have been trained
to speak exactly together, his ear will also at once detect any erroneous answer which any
one may give. He takes down the figures given by the majority on his own slate, and reads them
aloud.

"This is the answer obtained by the majority; it is undoubtedly right. Those who have different
answers may sit."

These directions, if understood and obeyed, would divide the class evidently into two portions.
Those standing have their work done, and done correctly, and those sitting have some excuse
or error to be examined. A new lesson may now be assigned, and the first portion may be dismissed,
which in a well-regulated school will be two thirds of the class. Their slates may be slightly
examined as they pass by the teacher on their way to their seats to see that all is fair; but
it will be safe to take it for granted that a result in which a majority agree will be right.
Truth is consistent with itself, but error, in such a case, never is. This the teacher can
at any time show by comparing the answers that are wrong; they will always be found, not only
to differ from the correct result, but to contradict each other.

The teacher may now, if he pleases, after the majority of the class have gone, hear the reasons
of those who were unprepared, and look for the errors of those whose work was incorrect; but
it is better to spend as little time as possible in such a way. If a scholar is not prepared,
it is not of much consequence whether it is because he forgot his book or mistook the lesson;
or if it is ascertained that his answer is incorrect, it is ordinarily a mere waste of time
to search for the particular error.

"I have looked over my work, sir," says the boy, perhaps, "and I can not find where it is wrong."
He means by it that he does not believe that it is wrong.

"It is no matter if you can not," would be the proper reply, "since it certainly is wrong;
you have made a mistake in adding somewhere, but it is not worth while for me to spend two
or three minutes apiece with all of you to ascertain where. Try to be careful next time."

Indeed the teacher should understand and remember what many teachers are very prone to forget,
namely, that the mere fact of finding an arithmetical error in a pupil's work on the slate,
and pointing it out to him, has very little effect in correcting the false habit in his mind
from which it arose.

The cases of those who are unprepared at a recitation ought by no means to be passed by unnoticed,
although it would be unwise to spend much time in examining each in detail.

"It is not of much consequence," the teacher might say, "whether you have good excuses or bad,
so long as you are not prepared. In future life you will certainly be unsuccessful if you fail,
no matter for what reason, to discharge the duties which devolve upon you. A carpenter, for
instance, would certainly lose his custom if he should not perform his work faithfully and
in season. Excuses, no matter how reasonable, will do him little good. It is just so in respect
to punctuality in time as well as in respect to performance of duty. What we want is that every
boy should be in his place at the proper moment; not that he should be late, and have good
excuses for it. When you come to be men, tardiness will always be punished. Excuses will not
help the matter at all. Suppose, hereafter, when you are about to take a journey, you reach
the pier five minutes after the steamer has gone, what good will excuses do you? There you
are, left hopelessly behind, no matter if your excuses are the best in the world. So in this
school. I want good punctuality and good recitations, not good excuses. I hope every one will
be prepared to-morrow."

It is not probable, however, that every one would be prepared the next day in such a case,
but by acting steadily on these principles the number of delinquencies would be so much diminished
that the very few which should be left could easily be examined in detail, and the remedies
applied.

Simultaneous recitation, by which I mean the practice of addressing a question to all the class
to be answered by all together, is a practice which has been for some years rapidly extending
in our schools, and, if adopted with proper limits and restrictions, is attended with great
advantage. The teacher must guard against some dangers, however, which will be likely to attend it.

1. Some will answer very eagerly, instantly after the question is completed. They wish to show
their superior readiness. Let the teacher mention this, expose kindly the motive which leads
to it, and tell them it is as irregular to answer before the rest as after them.

2. Some will defer their answers until they can catch those of their comrades for a guide.
Let the teacher mention this fault, expose the motive which leads to it, and tell them that
if they do not answer independently and at once, they had better not answer at all.

3. Some will not answer at all. The teacher can see by looking around the room who do not,
for they can not counterfeit the proper motion of the lips with promptness and decision unless
they know what the answer is to be. He ought occasionally to say to such a one, "I perceive
you do not answer," and ask him questions individually.

4. In some cases there is danger of confusion in the answers, from the fact that the question
may be of such a nature that the answer is long, and may by different individuals be differently
expressed. This evil must be guarded against by so shaping the question as to admit of a reply
in a single word. In reading large numbers, for example, each figure may be called for by itself,
or they may be given one after another, the pupils keeping exact time. When it is desirable
to ask a question to which the answer is necessarily long it may be addressed to an individual,
or the whole class may write their replies, which may then be read in succession.

In a great many cases where simultaneous answering is practiced, after a short time the evils
above specified are allowed to grow, until at last some half a dozen bright members of a class
answer for all, the rest dragging after them, echoing their replies, or ceasing to take any
interest in an exercise which brings no personal and individual responsibility upon them. To
prevent this, the teacher should exercise double vigilance at such a time. He should often
address questions to individuals alone, especially to those most likely to be inattentive and
careless, and guard against the ingress of every abuse which might, without close vigilance,
appear.

With these cautions, the method here alluded to will be found to be of very great advantage
in many studies; for example, all the arithmetical tables may be recited in this way; words
may be spelled, answers to sums given, columns of figures added, or numbers multiplied, and
many questions in history, geography, and other miscellaneous studies answered, especially
the general questions asked for the purpose of a review.

But, besides being useful as a mode of examination, this plan of answering questions simultaneously
is a very important means of fixing in the mind any facts which the teacher may communicate
to his pupils. If, for instance, he says some day to a class that Vasco de Gama was the discoverer
of the passage round the Cape of Good Hope, and leaves it here, in a few days not one in twenty
will recollect the name. But let him call upon them all to spell it simultaneously, and then
to pronounce it distinctly three or four times in concert, and the word will be very strongly
impressed upon their minds. The reflecting teacher will find a thousand cases in the instruction
of his classes, and in his general exercises in the school, in which this principle will be
of great utility. It is universal in its application. What we say we fix, by the very act of
saying it, in the mind. Hence, reading aloud, though a slower, is a far more thorough method
of acquiring knowledge than reading silently, and it is better, in almost all cases, whether
in the family, or in Sabbath or common schools, when general instructions are given, to have
the leading points fixed in the mind by questions answered simultaneously.

But we are wandering a little from our subject, which is, in this part of our chapter, the
methods of examining a class, not of giving or fixing instructions.

Another mode of examining classes, which it is important to describe, consists in requiring
written answers to the questions asked. The form and manner in which this plan may be adopted
is various. The class may bring their slates to the recitation, and the teacher may propose
questions successively, the answers to which all the class may write, numbering them carefully.
After a dozen answers are written, the teacher may call at random for them, or he may repeat
a question, and ask each pupil to read the answer he had written, or he may examine the slates.
Perhaps this method may be very successfully employed in reviews by dictating to the class
a list of questions relating to the ground they have gone over for a week, and then instructing
them to prepare answers written out at length, and to bring them in at the next exercise. This
method may be made more formal still by requiring a class to write a full and regular abstract
of all they have learned during a specified time. The practice of thus reducing to writing
what has been learned will be attended with many advantages so obvious that they need not be
described.

It will be perceived that three methods of examining classes have now been named, and these
will afford the teacher the means of introducing a very great variety in his mode of conducting
his recitations, while he still carries his class forward steadily in their prescribed course.
Each is attended with its peculiar advantages. The single replies, coming from individuals
specially addressed, are more rigid, and more to be relied upon, but they consume a great deal
of time, and, while one is questioned, it requires much skill to keep up interest in the rest.
The simultaneous answers of a class awaken more general interest, but it is difficult, without
special care, to secure by this means a special examination of all. The written replies are
more thorough, but they require more time and attention, and while they habituate the pupil
to express himself in writing, they would, if exclusively adopted, fail to accustom him to
an equally important practice, that of the oral communication of his thoughts. A constant variety,
of which these three methods should be the elements, is unquestionably the best mode. We not
only, by this means, secure in a great degree the advantages which each is fitted to produce,
but we gain also the additional advantage and interest of variety.

By these, and perhaps by other means, it is the duty of the teacher to satisfy himself that
his pupils are really attentive to their duties. It is not perhaps necessary that every individual
should be every day minutely examined; this is, in many cases, impossible; but the system of
examination should be so framed and so administered as to be daily felt by all, and to bring
upon every one a daily responsibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

We come now to consider the second general head which was to be discussed in this chapter.

The study of books alone is insufficient to give knowledge to the young. In the first stage,
learning to read a book is of no use whatever without the voice of the living teacher. The
child can not take a step alone. As the pupil, however, advances in his course, his dependence
upon his teacher for guidance and help continually diminishes, until at last the scholar sits
in his solitary study, with no companion but his books, and desiring, for a solution of every
difficulty, nothing but a larger library. In schools, however, the pupils have made so little
progress in this course, that they all need more or less of the oral assistance of a teacher.
Difficulties must be explained; questions must be answered; the path must be smoothed, and
the way pointed out by a guide who has traveled it before, or it will be impossible for the
pupil to go on. This is the part of our subject which we now approach.

The great principle which is to guide the teacher in this part of his duty is this: Assist
your pupils in such a way as to lead them, as soon as possible, to do without assistance. This
is fundamental. In a short time they will be away from your reach; they will have no teacher
to consult; and unless you teach them how to understand books themselves, they must necessarily
stop suddenly in their course the moment you cease to help them forward. I shall proceed, therefore,
to consider the subject in the following plan:

1. Means of exciting interest in study.

2. The kind and decree of assistance to be rendered.

3. Miscellaneous suggestions.

1. Interesting the pupils in their studies. There are various principles of human nature which
may be of great avail in accomplishing this object. The teacher has, therefore, only to remove
obstructions and sources of pain, and the employment of his pupils will be of itself a pleasure.

"I am going to give you a new exercise to-day," said a teacher to a class of boys in Latin.
"I am going to have you parse your whole lesson in writing. It will be difficult, but I think
you may be able to accomplish it."

The class looked surprised. They did not know what parsing in writing could be.

"You may first, when you take your seats, and are ready to prepare the lesson, write upon your
slates a list of the ten first nouns that you find in the lesson, arranging them in a column.
Do you understand so far?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then rule lines for another column, just beyond this. In parsing nouns, what is the first
particular to be named?"

"What the noun is from."

"Yes; that is, its nominative. Now you may write, at the head of the first column, the word
Nouns, and at the head of the second, Nom., for nominative. Then rule a line for the third
column. What shall this contain!" "The declension." "Yes; and the fourth?" "Gender." "The fifth?"
"Number."

In the same manner the other columns were designated. The sixth was to contain case; the seventh,
the word with which the noun was connected in construction; and the eighth, a reference to
the rule.

"Now I wish you," continued the teacher, "to fill up such a table as this with ten nouns. Do
you understand how I mean?"

"Yes, sir;" "No, sir," they answered, variously.

"All who do understand may take their seats, as I wish to give as little explanation as possible.
The more you can depend upon yourselves, the better."

Those who saw clearly what was to be done left the class, and the teacher continued his explanation
to those who were left behind. He made the plan perfectly clear to them by taking a particular
noun and running it through the table, showing what should be written opposite to the word
in all the columns, and then dismissed them.

The class separated, as every class would, in such a case, with a strong feeling of interest
in the work before them. It was not so difficult as to perplex them, and yet it required attention
and care. They were interested and pleased--pleased with the effort which it required them
to make, and they anticipated, with interest and pleasure, the time of coming again to the
class to report and compare their work.

When the time for the class came, the teacher addressed them somewhat as follows:

"Before looking at your slates, I am going to predict what the faults are. I have not seen
any of your work, but shall judge altogether from my general knowledge of school-boys, and
the difficulties I know they meet with. Do you think I shall succeed?"

The scholars made no reply, and an unskillful teacher would imagine that time spent in such
remarks would be wholly wasted. By no means. The influence of them was to awaken universal
interest in the approaching examination of the slates. Every scholar would be intent, watching,
with eager interest, to see whether the imagined faults would be found upon his work. The class
was, by that single pleasant remark, put into the best possible state for receiving the criticisms
of the teacher.

"The first fault which I suppose will be found is that some are unfinished."

The scholars looked surprised. They did not expect to have that called a fault.

"How many plead guilty to it?"

A few raised their hands, and the teacher continued:

"I suppose that some will be found partly effaced. The slates were not laid away carefully,
or they were not clean, so that the writing is not distinct. How many find this the case with
their work?"

"I suppose that, in some cases, the lines will not be perpendicular, but will slant, probably
toward the left, like writing.

"I suppose, also, that, in some cases, the writing will be careless, so that I can not easily
read it. How many plead guilty to this?"

After mentioning such other faults as occurred to him, relating chiefly to the form of the
table, and the mere mechanical execution of the work, he said,

"I think I shall not look at your slates to-day. You can all see, I have no doubt, how you
can considerably improve them in mechanical execution in your next lesson; and I suppose you
would a little prefer that I should not see your first imperfect efforts. In fact, I should
rather not see them. At the next recitation they probably will be much better."

One important means by which the teacher may make his scholars careful of their reputation
is to show them, thus, that he is careful of it himself.

Now in such a case as this, for it is, except in the principles which it is intended to illustrate,
imaginary, a very strong interest would be awakened in the class in the work assigned them.
Intellectual effort in new and constantly varied modes is in itself a pleasure, and this pleasure
the teacher may deepen and increase very easily by a little dexterous management, designed
to awaken curiosity and concentrate attention. It ought, however, to be constantly borne in
mind that this variety should be confined to the modes of pursuing an object--the object itself
being permanent, and constant, and steadily pursued. For instance, if a little class are to
be taught simple addition, after the process is once explained, which may be done, perhaps,
in two or three lessons, they will need many days of patient practice to render it familiar,
to impress it firmly in their recollection, and to enable them to work with rapidity. Now this
object must be steadily pursued. It would be very unwise for the teacher to say to himself,
My class are tired of addition; I must carry them on to subtraction, or give them some other
study. It would be equally unwise to keep them many days performing example after example in
monotonous succession, each lesson a mere repetition of the last. The working party drew back.
"Damnation! They mustn't fling them minies round loose like that!"

Wright's brigade of Huger's division came up. Wright made his report. "We tried Brackett's ford
a mile up stream, sir. Couldn't manage it. Got two companies over by the skin of our teeth. They
drove in some pickets on the other side. Road through the swamp over there covered by felled
trees. Beyond is a small meadow and beyond that rising ground, almost free of trees. There are
Yankee batteries on the crest, and a large force of infantry lying along the side of the ridge.
They command the meadow and the swamp."

So tall were the trees, so thick the undergrowth, so full the midsummer foliage that the guns,
thundering at each other across the narrow stream, never saw their antagonists. Sharpshooters
and skirmishers were as hidden. Except as regarded the pioneers striving with the bridge, neither
side could see the damage that was done.

The noise was tremendous, echoing loudly from the opposing low ridges and rolling through the
swamp. The hollow filled with smoke; above the treetops a dull saffron veil was drawn across
the sky. The firing was without intermission, a monotonous thunder, beneath which the working
party strove spasmodically at the bridge, the cavalry chafed to and fro, and the infantry, filling
all the woods and the little clearings to the rear, began to swear. "Is it the Red Sea down there?
Why can't we cross without a bridge? Nobody's going to get drowned! Ain't more'n a hundred men
been drowned since this war began! O Great Day in the Morning! I'm tired of doing nothing!"

General
Wade Hampton of D. H. Hill's division, leaving his brigade in a pine wood, went with his son
and with an aide, Rawlins Lowndes, on a reconnoitring expedition
of his own.

He was a woodsman and hunter, with experience of swamps and bayous. Returning, he sought out
Jackson, and found him sitting on a fallen pine by the roadside near the slowly, slowly mending
bridge. Hampton dismounted and made his report. "We got over, three of us, general, a short way
above. It wasn't difficult. The stream's clear of obstructions there and has a sandy bottom.
We could see through the trees on the other side. There's a bit of level, and a hillside covered
with troops--a strong position. But we got across the stream, sir."

"Yes. Can you make a bridge there?"

"I can make one for infantry, sir. Not, I think, for the artillery. Cutting a road would expose
our position."

"Very good. Make the bridge, general."

Hampton's men cut saplings and threw a rude foot-bridge across the stream where he had traversed
it. He returned and reported. "They are quiet and unsuspecting beyond, sir. The crossing would
be slow, and there may be an accident, but cross we certainly can."

Jackson, still seated on the fallen pine, sat as though he had been there through eternity, and would
remain through eternity. The gun thundered, the minies sang. One of the latter struck a tree
above his head and severed a leafy twig. It came floating down, touched his shoulder like an accolade
and rested on the pine needles by his foot. He gave it no attention, sitting like a graven
image with clasped hands, listening to the South Carolinian's report. Hampton ceased to speak
and waited. It was the height of the afternoon. He stood three minutes in silence, perhaps,
then glanced toward the man on the log. Jackson's eyes were closed, his head slightly lifted.
"Praying?" thought the South Carolinian. "Well, there's a time for everything--" Jackson opened his eyes,
drew the forage cap far down over them, and rose from the pine. The other looked for him to
speak, but he said nothing.

He walked a little way down the road and stood among the whistling minies, looking at the slowly,
slowly building bridge.

Hampton did as Wright and Munford had done before him--went back to his men. D. H. Hill, after
an interview of his own, had retired to the artillery. "Yes, yes, Rhett, go ahead! Do something--make
a noise--do something! Infantry's kept home from school to-day--measles, I reckon, or maybe
it's lockjaw!"

About three o'clock there was caught from the southward, between the
loud wrangling of the batteries above White Oak, another sound,--first
two or three detonations occurring singly, then a prolonged and continuous
roar.

The batteries above White Oak Swamp, the sharpshooters and skirmishers, the grey chafing cavalry, the
grey masses of unemployed infantry, all held breath and listened. The sound was not three miles
away, and it was the sound of the crash of long battle-lines. There was a curious movement
among the men nearest the grey general-commanding. With their bodies bent forward, they looked
his way, expecting short, quick orders. He rested immobile, his eyes just gleaming beneath
the down-drawn cap, Little Sorrel cropping the marsh grass beside him. Munford, coming up, ventured
a remark. "General Longstreet or General A. P. Hill has joined with their centre, I suppose,
general? The firing is very heavy."

"Yes. The troops that have been lying before Richmond. General Lee
will see that they do what is right."

Stafford, near him, spoke again. "The sound comes, I think, sir, from a place called Glendale--Glendale
or Frayser's Farm."

"Yes, sir," said Jackson; "very probably."

The thunder never lessened. Artillery and infantry, Franklin's corps on the south bank of White
Oak, began again to pour an iron hail against the opposing guns and the working party at the
bridge, but in every interval between the explosions from these cannon there rolled louder
and louder the thunder from Frayser's Farm. A sound like a grating wind in a winter forest ran
through the idle grey brigades. "It's A. P. Hill's battle again!--A. P. Hill or Longstreet! Magruder
and Huger and Holmes and A. P. Hill and Longstreet--and we out of it again, on the wrong side of White
Oak Swamp! And they're looking for us to help--Wish I was dead!"

The 65th Virginia had its place some distance up the stream, in a tangled wood by the water. Facing
southward, it held the extreme right; beyond it only morass, tall trees, swaying masses of vine.
On the left an arm of the creek, thickly screened by tree and bush,
divided it from the remainder of the brigade.

It rested in semi-isolation, and its ten companies stared in anger at the narrow stream and the
deep woods beyond, listening to the thunder of Longstreet and A. P. Hill's unsupported attack
and the answering roar of the Federal 3d Army Corps. It was a sullen noise, deep and unintermittent.
The 65th, waiting for orders, could have wept as the orders did not come. "Get across? Well,
if General Jackson would just give us leave to try!--Oh, hell! listen to that!--Colonel, can't
you do something for us?--Where's the colonel gone?"

Cleave was beyond their vision. He had rounded a little point of land and now, Dundee's hoofs
in water, stood gazing at the darkly wooded opposite shore. He stood a moment thus, then spoke
to the horse, and they entered the stream.

It was not deep, and though there were obstructions, old stakes and drowned brushwood, Cleave
and Dundee crossed. The air was full of booming sound, but there
was no motion in the wood into which they rose from the water.

  All its floor was
        marshy, water
           in pools and threads, a slight growth of cane, and above, the tall
and solemn trees.

Cleave saw that there was open meadow beyond. Dismounting, he went
noiselessly to the edge of the swamp.

An open space, covered with some low growth; beyond it a hillside. Wood and meadow and hill,
all lay quiet and lonely in the late sunlight.

He went back to Dundee, remounted, passed again through the sombre
wood, over the boggy earth, entered the water and recrossed.

Turning the little point of the swamp, he rode before his regiment on his way to find Winder.
His men greeted him. "Colonel, if you could just get us over there we'd do anything in the world
for you! This weeping-willow place is getting awful hard to bear!

Look at Dundee! Even he's drooping his head. You know we'd follow you through hell, sir; and
if you could just manage it so's we could follow you through White Oak Swamp--"

Cleave passed the arm of the creek separating the 65th from the rest of the brigade, and asked
of Winder from the first troops beyond the screen of trees. "General Winder has ridden down to
the bridge to see General Jackson."

Cleave, following, found his leader indeed before Jackson, just finishing his representations
whatever they were, and somewhat perturbed by the commanding general's
highly developed silence.

This continuing unbroken, Winder, after an awkward minute of waiting, fell a little back, a
flush on his cheeks and his lips hard together. The action disclosed Cleave, just come up, his
hand checking Dundee, his grey eyes earnestly upon Jackson. When the latter spoke, it was not
to the brigadier but to the colonel of the 65th. "Why are you not with your regiment, sir?"

"I
left it but a moment ago, sir, to bring information I thought it my duty to bring."

"What information?"

"The 65th is on General Winder's extreme right, sir. The stream before it is fordable."

"How do you know, sir?"

"I forded it. The infantry could cross without much difficulty. The 65th would be happy, sir, to
lead the way."

Winder opened his lips. "The whole Stonewall Brigade is ready, sir."

Jackson, without regarding, continued to address himself to Cleave. His tone had been heard before
by the latter--in his own case on the night of the twenty-seventh as well as once before, and
in the case of others where there had been what was construed as remonstrance or negligence
or disobedience. He had heard him speak so to Garnett after Kernstown. The words were simple enough--they
always were. "You will return to your duty, sir. It lies where your regiment is, and that is
not here. Go!"

Cleave obeyed. The ford was there.

His regiment might have crossed, the rest of the Stonewall following. Together they might traverse
the swamp and the bit of open, pass the hillside, and strike Franklin upon the flank, while,
brigade by brigade, the rest of the division followed by that ford. Rout Franklin, and push
forward to help A. P. Hill. It had appeared his duty to give the information he was possessed
of.

He had given it, and his skirts were cleared. There was anger in him as he turned away; he
had a compressed lip, a sparkling eye. Not till he turned did he see Stafford, sitting his horse
in the shadow behind Jackson. The two men stared full at each other for a perceptible moment.
But Stafford's face was in the shadow, and as for Cleave his mind
was full of anger for the tragedy of the inaction.

At the moment he gave small attention to his own life, its heights or depths, past or future.
He saw Stafford, but he could not be said to consider him at all.

He turned from the road into the wood, and pushed the great bay over
spongy ground toward the isolated 65th.

Stafford saw that he gave him no thought, and it angered him. On the highroad of his life it
would not have done so, but he had left the road and was lost in
the jungle.

There were few things that Richard Cleave might do which would not
now work like madness on the mind astray in that place.

The cannonading over White Oak Swamp continued, and the sound of the
battle of Frayser's Farm continued.

On a difficult and broken ground Longstreet attacked, driving back McCall's division. McCall
was reinforced and Longstreet hard pressed. Lee loosed A. P. Hill, and the battle became furious.
He looked for Jackson, but Jackson was at White Oak Swamp; for Huger, but a road covered with
felled trees delayed Huger; for Magruder, but in the tangle of wood
and swamp Magruder, too, went astray; for Holmes, but Fitz John Porter
held Holmes in check.

Longstreet and A. P. Hill strove unsupported, fifty thousand grey
troops in hearing of their guns.

The battle swayed to and fro, long, loud, and sanguinary, with much
hand-to-hand work, much use of bayonets, and, over all, a shriek of
grape and canister.

Back on White Oak Swamp, Franklin on the southern side, Jackson on the northern, blue and grey alike caught
the noise of battle.

They themselves were cannonading loudly and continuously.

One Federal battery used fifteen hundred rounds. The grey were hardly
less lavish.

Not much damage was done except to the trees.

The trough through which crept the sluggish water was filled with
smoke.

It drifted through the swamp and the woods and along the opposing
hillsides.

It drifted over and about the idle infantry, until one command was hidden from another.

Stonewall Jackson, seated on the stump of a felled oak, his sabre
across his knees, his hands rigid upon it, his great booted feet squarely
planted, his cap drawn low, sent the aide beside him with some order
to the working party at the bridge.

A moment later the courier went, too, to D. H. Hill, with a query about prisoners. The thunders
continued, the smoke drifted heavily, veiling all movements.

Jackson spoke without turning. "Whoever is there--"

No one was there at the moment but Maury Stafford. He came forward. "You will find the 1st Brigade," said
Jackson. "Tell General Winder to move it nearer the stream.

Tell him to cross from his right, with caution, a small reconnoitring
party.

Let it find out the dispositions of the enemy, return and report."

Stafford went, riding westward through the smoke-filled forest, and
came presently to the Stonewall Brigade and to Winder, walking up
and down disconsolately.

"An order from General Jackson, sir. You will move your brigade nearer the stream. Also you
will cross, from your right, with caution, a small reconnoitring party. It will discover the dispositions
of the enemy, return and report."

"Very good," said Winder. "I'll move at once. The 65th is already on the brink--there to the right,
beyond the swamp. Perhaps, you'll take the order on to Colonel Cleave?--Very good! Tell him
to send a picked squad quietly across and find out what he can. I hope to God there'll come
another order for us all to cross at its heels!"

Stafford, riding on, presently found himself in a strip of bog and
thicket and tall trees masking a narrow, sluggish piece of water.

The brigade behind him was hidden, the regiment in front not yet visible. Despite the booming of
the guns, there was here an effect of stillness. It seemed a lonely place. Stafford, traversing
it slowly because the ground gave beneath his horse's feet, became
aware of a slight movement in a laurel thicket and of two eyes gleaming
behind the leaves.

He reined in his horse. "What are you doing in there? Straggling or deserting? Come out!" There
was a pause; then Steve Dagg emerged. "Major, I ain't either stragglin' or desertin'. I was just
seperated--I got seperated last night. The regiment's jes' down there--I crept down an' saw
it jes' now. I'm goin' back an' join right away--send me to hell if I ain't!--though Gawd knows my
foot's awful sore--"

Stafford regarded him closely.

"I've seen you before. Ah, I remember! On the Valley pike, moving
toward Winchester.... Poor scoundrel!"

Steve, his back against a swamp magnolia, undertook to show that he,
too, remembered, and that gratefully.

"Yes, sir. You saved me from markin' time on a barrel-head, major--an' my foot was sore--an'
I wasn't desertin' that time any more'n this time--an' I was as obleeged
to you as I could be.

The colonel's awful hard on the men."

"Is he?" said Stafford gratingly.

"They seem to like him."

He sat his horse before the laurel thicket and despised himself for
holding conference with this poor thief; or, rather, some fibre in
his brain told him that, out of this jungle, if ever he came out of
it, he would despise himself.

Had he really done so now, he would have turned away.

He did not so; he sat in the heart of the jungle and compared hatreds with Steve.

The latter glanced upward a moment with his ferret eyes, then turned his head aside and spat. "If there's
any of my way of thinkin' they don't like him--But they're all fools! Crept down through the
swamp a little ago an' heard it! 'Colonel, get us across, somehow, won't you? We'll fight like
hell!' 'I can't, men.

I haven't any orders.' Yaah! I wish he'd take the regiment over without them, and then be court-martialled
and shot for doing it!"

Steve spat again. "I seed long ago that you didn't like him either,
major.

He gets along too fast--all the prizes come his way."

"Yes," said Stafford, from the heart of the jungle. "They come his way.... And he's standing
there at the edge of the water, hoping for orders to cross."

Steve, beneath the swamp magnolia, had a widening of the lips. "Luck's turned agin him one way,
though. He's out of favour with Old Jack. The regiment don't know why, but it saw it mighty plain
day before yesterday, after the big battle! Gawd knows I'd like to see him so deep in trouble he'd
never get out--and so would you, major. Prizes would stop coming his way then, and he might lose
those he has--"

"If I entertain a devil," said Stafford, "I'll not be hypocrite enough to object to his conversation.
Nor, if I take his suggestion, is there any sense in covering him with reprobation. So go your way,
miserable imp! while I go mine!"
But Steve kept up with him, half-running at his stirrup. "I got to
rejoin, 'cause it's jest off one battlefield on to another, and there
ain't nowhere else to go! This world's a sickenin' place for men like
me. So I've got to rejoin. Ef there's ever anything I kin do for you,
major--"

At the head of the dividing arm of the creek they heard
behind them a horseman, and waited for a courier to come up. "You
are going on to the 65th?"

"Yes, sir. I belong there. I was kept
by General Winder for some special duty, and I'm just through it--"

"I
have an order," said Stafford, "from General Winder to Colonel Cleave.
There are others to carry and time presses. I'll entrust it to you.
Listen now, and get it straight."

He gave an order. The courier listened,
nodded energetically, repeated it after him, and gathered up the reins.
"I am powerfully glad to carry that order, sir! It means 'Cross,'
doesn't it?"

He rode off, southward to the stream, in which direction
Steve had already shambled. Stafford returned, through wood and swamp,
to the road by the bridge. Above and around the deep inner jungle
his intellect worked. He knew that he had done a villainy; knew it
and did not repent. A nature, fine enough in many ways, lay bound
hand and foot, deep in miasmas and primal heat, captive to a master
and consuming passion. To create a solitude where he alone might reach
one woman's figure, he would have set a world afire. He rode back
now, through the woods, to a general commanding who never forgave
nor listened overmuch to explanations, and he rode with quietude,
the very picture of a gallant soldier.

Back on the edge of White
Oak Swamp, Richard Cleave considered the order he had received. He
found an ambiguity in the wording, a choice of constructions. He half
turned to send the courier again to Winder, to make absolutely sure
that the construction which he strongly preferred was correct. As
he did so, though he could not see the brigade beyond the belt of
trees, he heard it in motion, coming down through the woods to cross
the stream in the rear of the 65th. He looked at the ford and the
silent woods beyond. From Frayser's Farm, so short a distance away,
came a deeper roll of thunder. It had a solemn and a pleading sound,
How long are we to wait for any help? Cleave knit his brows; then,
with a decisive gesture of his hand, he dismissed the doubt and stepped
in front of his colour company. Attention! Into column. Forward!

On
the road leading down to the bridge Stafford met his own division
general, riding Rifle back to his command. "Hello, Major Stafford!"
said Old Dick. "I thought I had lost you."

"General Jackson detained
me, general."

"Yes, yes, you aren't the only one! But let me tell
you, major, he's coming out of his spell!"

"You think it was a spell,
then, sir?"

"Sure of it! Old Jackson simply hasn't been here at all.

In applying this method, however, the teacher should be very careful not to subdivide too much.
It is best that the pupils should walk as fast as they can. The object of the teacher should
be to smooth the path not much more than barely enough to enable the pupil to go on. He should
not endeavor to make it very easy.

(2.) Truths must not only be taught to the pupils, but they must fixed, and made familiar.
This is a point which seems to be very generally overlooked.

"Can you say the Multiplication Table?" said a teacher to a boy who was standing before him
in his class.

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I should like to have you say the line beginning nine times one."

The boy repeated it slowly, but correctly.

"Now I should like to have you try again, and I will, at the same time, say another line, to
see if I can put you out."

The boy looked surprised. The idea of his teacher's trying to perplex and embarrass him was
entirely new.

"You must not be afraid," said the teacher. "You will undoubtedly not succeed in getting through,
but you will not be to blame for the failure. I only try it as a sort of intellectual experiment."

The boy accordingly began again, but was soon completely confused by the teacher's accompaniment.
He stopped in the middle of his line, saying,

"I could say it, only you put me out."

"Well, now try to say the Alphabet, and let me see if I can put you out there."

As might have been expected, the teacher failed. The boy went regularly onward to the end.

"You see, now," said the teacher to the class who had witnessed the experiment, "that this
boy knows his Alphabet in a different sense from that in which he knows his Multiplication
Table. In the latter, his knowledge is only imperfectly his own; he can make use of it only
under favorable circumstances. In the former it is entirely his own; circumstances have no
control over him."

A child has a lesson in Latin Grammar to recite. She hesitates and stammers, miscalls the cases,
and then corrects herself, and, if she gets through at last, she considers herself as having
recited well, and very many teachers would consider it well too. If she hesitates a little
longer than usual in trying to summon to her recollection a particular word, she says, perhaps,
"Don't tell me," and if she happens at last to guess right, she takes her book with a countenance
beaming with satisfaction.

"Suppose you had the care of an infant school," might the instructor say to such a scholar,
"and were endeavoring to teach a little child to count, and she should recite her lesson to
you in this way, 'One, two, four--no, three--one, two, three----stop, don't tell me--five--no,
four--four--five--------I shall think in a minute--six--is that right? five, six,' &c. Should
you call that reciting well?"

Nothing is more common than for pupils to say, when they fail of reciting their lesson, that
they could say it at their seats, but that they can not now say it before the class. When such
a thing is said for the first time it should not be severely reproved, because nine children
in ten honestly think that if the lesson were learned so that it could be recited any where,
their duty is discharged. But it should be kindly, though distinctly explained to them, that
in the business of life they must have their knowledge so much at command that they can use
it at all times and in all circumstances, or it will do them little good.

One of the most common cases of difficulty in pursuing mathematical studies, or studies of
any kind where the succeeding lessons depend upon those which precede, is the fact that the
pupil, though he may understand what precedes, is not familiar with it. This is very strikingly
the case with Geometry. The class study the definitions, and the teacher supposes they fully
understand them; in fact, they do understand them, but the name and the thing are so feebly
connected in their minds that a direct effort and a short pause are necessary to recall the
idea when they hear or see the word. When they come on, therefore, to the demonstrations, which
in themselves would be difficult enough, they have double duty to perform. The words used do
not readily suggest the idea, and the connection of the ideas requires careful study. Under
this double burden many a young geometrician sinks discouraged.

A class should go on slowly, and dwell on details so long as to fix firmly and make perfectly
familiar whatever they undertake to learn. In this manner the knowledge they acquire will become
their own. It will be incorporated, as it were, into their very minds, and they can not afterward
be deprived of it.

The exercises which have for their object this rendering familiar what has been learned may
be so varied as to interest the pupil very much, instead of being tiresome, as it might at
first be supposed.

Suppose, for instance, a teacher has explained to a large class in grammar the difference between
an adjective and an adverb; if he leave it here, in a fortnight one half of the pupils would
have forgotten the distinction, but by dwelling upon it a few lessons he may fix it forever.
The first lesson might be to require the pupils to write twenty short sentences containing
only adjectives. The second to write twenty containing only adverbs. The third to write sentences
in two forms, one containing the adjective, and the other expressing the same idea by means
of the adverb, arranging them in two columns, thus:

  He writes well.  |  His writing is good.

Again, they may make out a list of adjectives, with the adverbs derived from each in another
column. Then they may classify adverbs on the principle of their meaning, or according to their
termination. The exercise may be infinitely varied, and yet the object of the whole may be
to make perfectly familiar, and to fix forever in the mind the distinction explained.

These two points seem to me to be fundamental, so far as assisting pupils through the difficulties
which lie in their way is concerned. Diminish the difficulties as far as is necessary by shortening
and simplifying the steps, and make thorough work as you go on. These principles, carried steadily
into practice, will be effectual in leading any mind through any difficulties which may occur.
And though they can not, perhaps, be fully applied to every mind in a large school, yet they
can be so far acted upon in reference to the whole mass as to accomplish the object for a very
large majority.

3. General cautions. A few miscellaneous suggestions, which we shall include under this head,
will conclude this chapter.

(1.) Never do any thing for a scholar, but teach him to do it for himself. How many cases occur
in the schools of our country where the boy brings his slate to the teacher, saying he can
not do a certain sum. The teacher takes the slate and pencil, performs the work in silence,
brings the result, and returns the slate to the hands of his pupil, who walks off to his seat,
and goes to work on the next example, perfectly satisfied with the manner in which he is passing
on. A man who has not done this a hundred times himself will hardly believe it possible that
such a practice can prevail, it is so evidently a mere waste of time both for master and scholar.

(2.) Never get out of patience with dullness. Perhaps I ought to say, never get out of patience
with any thing. That would, perhaps, be the wisest rule. But, above all things, remember that
dullness and stupidity--and you will certainly find them in every school--are the very last
things to get out of patience with. If the Creator has so formed the mind of a boy that he
must go through life slowly and with difficulty, impeded by obstructions which others do not
feel, and depressed by discouragements which others never know, his lot is surely hard enough
without having you to add to it the trials and suffering which sarcasm and reproach from you
can heap upon him. Look over your school-room, therefore, and wherever you find one whom you
perceive the Creator to have endued with less intellectual power than others, fix your eye
upon him with an expression of kindness and sympathy. Such a boy will have suffering enough
from the selfish tyranny of his companions; he ought to find in you a protector and friend.
One of the greatest enjoyments which a teacher's life affords is the interest of seeking out
such a one, bowed down with burdens of depression and discouragement, unaccustomed to sympathy
and kindness, and expecting nothing for the future but a weary continuation of the cheerless
toils which have imbittered the past; and the pleasure of taking off the burden, of surprising
the timid, disheartened sufferer by kind words and cheering looks, and of seeing in his countenance
the expression of ease and even of happiness gradually returning.

(3.) The teacher should be interested in all his scholars, and aim equally to secure the progress
of all. Let there be no neglected ones in the school-room. We should always remember that,
however unpleasant in countenance and manners that bashful boy in the corner may be, or however
repulsive in appearance, or unhappy in disposition, that girl, seeming to be interested in
nobody, and nobody appearing interested in her, they still have, each of them, a mother, who
loves her own child, and takes a deep and constant interest in its history. Those mothers have
a right, too, that their children should receive their full share of attention in a school
which has been established for the common and equal benefit of all.

(4.) Do not hope or attempt to make all your pupils alike. Providence has determined that human
minds should differ from each other for the very purpose of giving variety and interest to
this busy scene of life. Now if it were possible for a teacher so to plan his operations as
to send his pupils forth upon the community formed on the same model, as if they were made
by machinery, he would do so much toward spoiling one of the wisest of the plans which the
Almighty has formed for making this world a happy scene. Let it be the teacher's aim to co-operate
with, not vainly to attempt to thwart, the designs of Providence. We should bring out those
powers with which the Creator has endued the minds placed under our control. We must open our
garden to such influences as shall bring forward all the plants, each in a way corresponding
to its own nature. It is impossible if it were wise, and it would be foolish if it were possible,
to stimulate, by artificial means, the rose, in hope of its reaching the size and magnitude
of the apple-tree, or to try to cultivate the fig and the orange where wheat only will grow.
No; it should be the teacher's main design to shelter his pupils from every deleterious influence,
and to bring every thing to bear upon the community of minds before him which will encourage
in each one the development of its own native powers. For the rest, he must remember that his
province is to cultivate, not to create.

Error on this point is very common. Many teachers, even among those who have taken high rank
through the success with which they have labored in the field, have wasted much time in attempting
to do what never can be done, to form the character of those brought under their influence
after a certain uniform model, which they have conceived as the standard of excellence. Their
pupils must write just such a hand, they must compose in just such a style, they must be similar
in sentiment and feeling, and their manners must be formed according to a fixed and uniform
model; and when, in such a case, a pupil comes under their charge whom Providence has designed
to be entirely different from the beau ideal adopted as the standard, more time, and pains,
and anxious solicitude is wasted in vain attempts to produce the desired conformity than half
the school require beside.

(5.) Do not allow the faults or obliquities of character, or the intellectual or moral wants
of any individual of your pupils to engross a disproportionate share of your time. I have already
said that those who are peculiarly in need of sympathy or help should receive the special attention
they seem to require; what I mean to say now is, do not carry this to an extreme. When a parent
sends you a pupil who, in consequence of neglect or mismanagement at home, has become wild
and ungovernable, and full of all sorts of wickedness, he has no right to expect that you shall
turn your attention away from the wide field which, in your whole school-room, lies before
you, to spend your time, and exhaust your spirits and strength in endeavoring to repair the
injuries which his own neglect has occasioned. When you open a school, you do not engage, either
openly or tacitly, to make every pupil who may be sent to you a learned or a virtuous man.
You do engage to give them all faithful instruction, and to bestow upon each such a degree
of attention as is consistent with the claims of the rest. But it is both unwise and unjust
to neglect the many trees in your nursery which, by ordinary attention, may be made to grow
straight and tall, and to bear good fruit, that you may waste your labor upon a crooked stick,
from which all your toil can secure very little beauty or fruitfulness.

Let no one now understand me to say that such cases are to be neglected. I admit the propriety,
and, in fact, have urged the duty, of paying to them a little more than their due share of
attention. What I now condemn is the practice, of which all teachers are in danger, of devoting
such a disproportionate and unreasonable degree of attention to them as to encroach upon their
duties to others. The school, the whole school, is your field, the elevation of the mass in
knowledge and virtue, and no individual instance, either of dullness or precocity, should draw
you away from its steady pursuit.

(6.) The teacher should guard against unnecessarily imbibing those faulty mental habits to
which his station and employment expose him. Accustomed to command, and to hold intercourse
with minds which are immature and feeble compared with our own, we gradually acquire habits
that the rough collisions and the friction of active life prevent from gathering around other
men. Narrow-minded prejudices and prepossessions are imbibed through the facility with which,
in our own little community, we adopt and maintain opinions. A too strong confidence in our
own views on every subject almost inevitably comes from never hearing our opinions contradicted
or called in question, and we express those opinions in a tone of authority, and even sometimes
of arrogance, which we acquire in the school-room, for there, when we speak, nobody can reply.

These peculiarities show themselves first, and, in fact, most commonly, in the school-room;
and the opinions thus formed very often relate to the studies and management of the school.
One has a peculiar mode of teaching spelling, which is successful almost entirely through the
magic influence of his interest in it, and he thinks no other mode of teaching this branch
is even tolerable. Another must have all his pupils write on the angular system, or the anti-angular
system, and he enters with all the zeal into a controversy on the subject, as if the destiny
of the whole rising generation depended upon its decision. Tell him that all that is of any
consequence in any handwriting is that it should be legible, rapid, and uniform, and that,
for the rest, it would be better that every human being should write a different hand, and
he looks upon you with astonishment, wondering that you can not see the vital importance of
the question whether the vertex of an o should, be pointed or round. So in every thing. He
has his way in every minute particular--a way from which he can not deviate, and to which he
wishes every one else to conform.

This set, formal mannerism is entirely inconsistent with that commanding intellectual influence
which the teacher should exert in the administration of his school. He should work with what
an artist calls boldness and freedom of touch. Activity and enterprise of mind should characterize
all his measures if he wishes to make bold, original, and efficient men.

(7.) Assume no false appearances in your school either as to knowledge or character. Perhaps
it may justly be said to be the common practice of teachers in this country to affect a dignity
of deportment in the presence of their pupils which in other cases is laid aside, and to pretend
to superiority in knowledge and an infallibility of judgment which no sensible man would claim
before other sensible men, but which an absurd fashion seems to require of the teacher. It
can, however, scarcely be said to be a fashion, for the temptation is almost exclusively confined
to the young and the ignorant, who think they must make up by appearance what they want in
reality. Very few of the older, and more experienced, and successful instructors in our country
fall into it at all; but some young beginner, whose knowledge is very limited, and who, in
manner and habits, has only just ceased to be a boy, walks into his school-room with a countenance
of forced gravity, and with a dignified and solemn step, which is ludicrous even to himself.
I describe accurately, for I describe from recollection. This unnatural, and forced, and ludicrous
dignity cleaves to him like a disease through the whole period of his duty. In the presence
of his scholars he is always under restraint, assuming a stiff and formal dignity which is
as ridiculous as it is unnatural. He is also obliged to resort to arts which are certainly
not very honorable to conceal his ignorance.

A scholar, for example, brings him a sum in arithmetic which he does not know how to perform.
This may be the case with a most excellent teacher, and one well qualified for his business.
In order to be successful as a teacher, it is not necessary to understand every thing. Instead,
however, of saying frankly, "I do not understand that example; I will examine it," he looks
at it embarrassed and perplexed, not knowing how he shall escape the exposure of his ignorance.
His first thought is to give some general directions to the pupil, and send him to his seat
to make a new experiment, hoping that in some way or other, he scarcely knows how, he will
get through; and, at any rate, if he should not, the teacher thinks that he himself at least
gains time by the manoeuvre, and he is glad to postpone his trouble, though he knows it must
soon return.

All efforts to conceal ignorance, and all affectation of knowledge not possessed, are as unwise
as they are dishonest. If a scholar asks a question which you can not answer, or brings you
a difficulty which you can not solve, say frankly, "I do not know." It is the only way to avoid
continual anxiety and irritation, and the surest means of securing real respect. Let the scholars
understand that the superiority of the teacher does not consist in his infallibility, or in
his universal acquisitions, but in a well-balanced mind, where the boundary between knowledge
and ignorance is distinctly marked; in a strong desire to go forward in mental improvement,
and in fixed principles of action and systematic habits. You may even take up in school a study
entirely new to you, and have it understood at the outset that you know no more of it than
the class commencing, but that you can be their guide on account of the superior maturity and
discipline of your powers, and the comparative ease with which you can meet and overcome difficulties.
This is the understanding which ought always to exist between master and scholars. The fact
that the teacher does not know every thing can not long be concealed if he tries to conceal
it, and in this, as in every other case, HONESTY IS THE BEST POLICY.

CHAPTER IV.

MORAL DISCIPLINE.

Under the title which I have placed at the head of this chapter I intend to discuss the methods
by which the teacher is to secure a moral ascendency over his pupils, so that he may lead them
to do what is right, and bring them back to duty when they do what is wrong. I shall use, in
what I have to say, a very plain and familiar style; and as very much depends not only on the
general principles by which the teacher is actuated, but also on the tone and manner in which,
in cases of discipline, he addresses his pupils, I shall describe particular cases, real and
imaginary, because by this method I can better illustrate the course to be pursued. I shall
also present and illustrate the various principles which I consider important, and in the order
in which they occur to my mind.

1. The first duty, then, of the teacher when he enters his school is to beware of the danger
of making an unfavorable impression at first upon his pupils. Many years ago, when I was a
child, the teacher of the school where my early studies were performed closed his connection
with the establishment, and after a short vacation another was expected. On the appointed day
the boys began to collect, some from curiosity, at an early hour, and many speculations were
started as to the character of the new instructor. We were standing near a table with our hats
on--and our position, and the exact appearance of the group, is indelibly fixed on my memory--when
a small and youthful-looking man entered the room, and walked up toward us. Supposing him to
be some stranger, or, rather, not making any supposition at all, we stood looking at him as
he approached, and were thunder-struck at hearing him accost us with a stern voice and sterner
brow, "Take off your hats. Take off your hats and go to your seats." The conviction immediately
rushed upon our minds that this must be our new teacher. The first emotion was that of surprise,
and the second was that of the ludicrous, though I believe we contrived to smother the laugh
until we got out into the open air.

So long since was this little occurrence that I have entirely forgotten the name of the teacher,
and have not the slightest recollection of any other act in his administration of the school.
But this recollection of his first greeting of his pupils, and the expression of his countenance
at the moment, will go with me to the end of life. So strong are first impressions.

Be careful, then, when you first see your pupils, that you meet them with a smile. I do not
mean a pretended cordiality, which has no existence in the heart, but think of the relation
which you are to sustain to them, and think of the very interesting circumstances under which,
for some months at least, your destinies are to be united to theirs, until you can not help
feeling a strong interest in them. Shut your eyes for a day or two to their faults, if possible,
and take an interest in all their pleasures and pursuits, that the first attitude in which
you exhibit yourself before them may be one which shall allure, not repel.

2. In endeavoring to correct the faults of your pupils, do not, as many teachers do, seize
only upon those particular cases of transgression which may happen to come under your notice.
These individual instances are very few, probably, compared with the whole number of faults
against which you ought to exert an influence. And though you perhaps ought not to neglect
those which may accidentally come under your notice, yet the observing and punishing such cases
is a very small part of your duty.

You accidentally hear, I will suppose, as you are walking home from school, two of your boys
in earnest conversation, and one of them uses profane language. Now the course to be pursued
in such a case is, most evidently, not to call the boy to you the next day and punish him,
and there let the matter rest. This would, perhaps, be better than nothing. But the chief impression
which it would make upon the individual and upon the other scholars would be, "I must take
care how I let the master hear me use such language again." A wise teacher, who takes enlarged
and extended views of his duty in regard to the moral progress of his pupils, would act very
differently. He would look at the whole subject. "Does this fault," he would say to himself,
"prevail among my pupils? If so, how extensively? It is comparatively of little consequence
to punish the particular transgression. The great point is to devise some plan to reach the
whole evil, and to correct it if possible."

In one case where such a circumstance occurred, the teacher managed it most successfully in
the following manner.

He said nothing to the boy, and, in fact, the boy did not know that he was overheard. He allowed
a day or two to elapse, so that the conversation might be forgotten, and then took an opportunity
one day, after school, when all things had gone on pleasantly, and the school was about to
be closed, to bring forward the whole subject. He told the boys that he had something to say
to them after they had laid by their books and were ready to go home. The desks were soon closed,
and every face in the room was turned toward the master with a look of fixed attention. It
was almost evening. The sun had gone down. The boys' labors were over. Their duties for the
day were over; their minds were at rest, and every thing was favorable for making a deep and
permanent impression.

"A few days ago," says the teacher, when all was still, "I accidentally overheard some conversation
between two of the boys of this school, and one of them swore."

There was a pause.

"Perhaps you expect that I am now going to call the boy out and punish him. Is that what I
ought to do?"

There was no answer.

"I think a boy who uses bad language of any kind does what he knows is wrong. He breaks God's
commands. He does what he knows would be displeasing to his parents, and he sets a bad example.
He does wrong, therefore, and justly deserves punishment."

There were, of course, many boys who felt that they were in danger. Every one who had used
profane language was aware that he might be the one who had been overheard, and, of course,
all were deeply interested in what the teacher was saying.

"He might, I say," continued the teacher, "justly be punished; but I am not going to punish
him; for if I should, I am afraid that it would only make him a little more careful hereafter
not to commit this sin when I could possibly be within hearing, instead of persuading him,
as I wish to, to avoid such a sin in future altogether. I am satisfied that that boy would
be far happier, even in this world, if he would make it a principle always to do his duty,
and never, in any case, to do wrong. And then, when I think how soon he and all of us will
be in another world, where we shall all be judged for what we do here, I feel strongly desirous
of persuading him to abandon entirely this practice. I am afraid that punishing him now would
not do that.

"Besides," continues the teacher, "I think it very probable that there are many other boys
in this school who are sometimes guilty of this fault, and I have thought that it would be
a great deal better and happier for us all if, instead of punishing this particular boy whom
I have accidentally overheard, and who probably is not more to blame than many other boys in
school, I should bring up the whole subject, and endeavor to persuade all the boys to reform."

I am aware that there are, unfortunately, in our country a great many teachers from whose lips
such an appeal as this would be wholly in vain. The man who is accustomed to scold, and storm,
and punish with unsparing severity every transgression, under the influence of irritation and
anger, must not expect that he can win over his pupils to confidence in him and to the principles
of duty by a word. But such an appeal will not be lost when it comes from a man whose daily
and habitual management corresponds with it. But to return to the story:

The teacher made some farther remarks, explaining the nature of the sin, not in the language
of execration and affected abhorrence, but calmly, temperately, and without any disposition
to make the worst of the occurrence which had taken place. In concluding what he said, he addressed
the boys as follows:

"Now, boys, the question is, do you wish to abandon this habit or not? If you do, all is well.
I shall immediately forget all the past, and will do all I can to help you resist and overcome
temptation in future. But all I can do is only to help you; and the first thing to be done,
if you wish to engage in this work of reform, is to acknowledge your fault; and I should like
to know how many are willing to do this."

"I wish all those who are willing to tell me whether they use profane language would rise."

Every individual but one rose.

"I am very glad to see so large a number," said the teacher; "and I hope you will find that
the work of confessing and forsaking your faults is, on the whole, pleasant, not painful business.
Now those who can truly and honestly say that they never do use profane language of any kind
may take their seats."

Three only of the whole number, which consisted of not far from twenty, sat down. It was in
a sea-port town, where the temptation to yield to this vice is even greater than would be,
in the interior of our country, supposed possible.

"Those who are now standing," pursued the teacher, "admit that they do, sometimes at least,
commit this sin. I suppose all, however, are determined to reform; for I do not know what else
should induce you to rise and acknowledge it here, unless it is a desire hereafter to break
yourselves of the habit. But do you suppose that it will be enough for you merely to resolve
here that you will reform?"

"No, sir," said the boys.

"Why not? If you now sincerely determine never more to use a profane word, will you not easily
avoid it?"

The boys were silent. Some said faintly, "No, sir."

"It will not be easy for you to avoid the sin hereafter," continued the teacher, "even if you
do now sincerely and resolutely determine to do so. You have formed the habit of sin, and the
habit will not be easily overcome. But I have detained you long enough now. I will try to devise
some method by which you may carry your plan into effect, and to-morrow I will tell you what
it is."

So the boys were dismissed for the day; the pleasant countenance and cheerful tone of the teacher
conveying to them the impression that they were engaging in the common effort to accomplish
a most desirable purpose, in which they were to receive the teacher's help, not that he was
pursuing them, with threatening and punishment, into the forbidden practice into which they
had wickedly strayed. Great caution is, however, in such a case, necessary to guard against
the danger that the teacher, in attempting to avoid the tones of irritation and anger, should
so speak of the sin as to blunt his pupils' sense of its guilt, and lull their consciences
into a slumber.

At the appointed time on the following day the subject was again brought before the school,
and some plans proposed by which the resolutions now formed might be more certainly kept. These
plans were readily and cheerfully adopted by the boys, and in a short time the vice of profaneness
was, in a great degree, banished from the school.

I hope the reader will keep in mind the object of the above illustration, which is to show
that it is the true policy of the teacher not to waste his time and strength in contending
against such accidental instances of transgression as may chance to fall under his notice,
but to take an enlarged and extended view of the whole ground, endeavoring to remove whole
classes of faults--to elevate and improve multitudes together.

By these means, his labors will not only be more effectual, but far more pleasant. You can
not come into collision with an individual scholar, to punish him for a mischievous spirit,
or even to rebuke him for some single act by which he has given you trouble, without an uncomfortable
and uneasy feeling, which makes, in ordinary cases, the discipline of a school the most unpleasant
part of a teacher's duty. But you can plan a campaign against a whole class of faults, and
put into operation a system of measures to correct them, and watch from day to day the operation
of that system with all the spirit and interest of a game. It is, in fact, a game where your
ingenuity and moral power are brought into the field, in opposition to the evil tendencies
of the hearts which are under your influence. You will notice the success or the failure of
the means you may put into operation with all the interest with which the experimental philosopher
observes the curious processes he guides, though your interest may be much purer and higher,
for he works upon matter, but you are experimenting upon mind.

Remember, then, as for the first time you take your new station at the head of your school,
that it is not your duty simply to watch with an eagle eye for those accidental instances of
transgression which may chance to fall under your notice. You are to look over the whole ground.
You are to make yourself acquainted, as soon as possible, with the classes of character and
classes of faults which may prevail in your dominions, and to form deliberate and well-digested
plans for improving the one and correcting the other.

And this is to be the course pursued not only with great delinquencies, such as those to which
I have already alluded, but to every little transgression against the rules of order and propriety.
You can correct them far more easily and pleasantly in the mass than in detail.

To illustrate this principle by another case. A teacher, who takes the course I am condemning,
approaches the seat of one of his pupils, and asks to see one of his books. As the boy opens
his desk, the teacher observes that it is in complete disorder. Books, maps, papers, play-things,
are there in promiscuous confusion, and, from the impulse of the moment, the displeased teacher
pours out upon the poor boy a torrent of reproach.

"What a looking desk! Why, John, I am really ashamed of you! Look!" continues he, holding up
the lid, so that the boys in the neighborhood can look in; "see what a mass of disorder and
confusion. If ever I see your desk in such a state again, I shall most certainly punish you."

The boys around laugh, very equivocally, however, for, with the feeling of amusement, there
is mingled the fear that the angry master may take it into his head to inspect their domains.
The boy accidentally exposed looks sullen, and begins to throw his books into some sort of
arrangement, just enough to shield himself from the charge of absolutely disobeying the injunction
that he has received, and there the matter ends.

Another teacher takes no apparent notice of the confusion which he thus accidentally witnesses.
"I must take up," thinks he to himself, "the subject of order before the whole school. I have
not yet spoken of it." He thanks the boy for the book he borrowed, and goes away. He makes
a memorandum of the subject, and the boy does not know that the condition of his desk was noticed;
perhaps he does not even know that there was any thing amiss.

A day or two after, at a time regularly appropriated to such subjects, he addresses the boys
as follows:

"In our efforts to improve the school as much as possible, there is one subject which we must
not forget. I mean the order of the desks."

The boys all begin to open their desk lids.

"You may stop a moment," says the teacher. "I shall give you all an opportunity to examine
your desks presently.

"I do not know what the condition of your desks is. I have not examined them, and have not,
in fact, seen the inside of more than one or two. As I have not brought up this subject before,
I presume that there are a great many which can be arranged better than they are. Will you
all now look into your desks, and see whether you consider them in good order? Stop a moment,
however. Let me tell you what good order is. All those things which are alike should be arranged
together. Books should be in one place, papers in another, and thus every thing should be classified.
Again, every thing should be so placed that it can be taken out without disturbing other things.
There is another principle, also, which I will mention: the various articles should have constant
places, that is, they should not be changed from day to day. By this means you soon remember
where every thing belongs, and you can put away your things much more easily every night than
if you had every night to arrange them in a new way. Now will you look into your desks, and
tell me whether they are, on these three principles, well arranged?"

The boys of most schools, where this subject had not been regularly attended to, would nearly
all answer in the negative.

"I will allow you, then, some time to-day, fifteen minutes to arrange your desks, and I hope
you will try to keep them in good order hereafter. A few days hence I shall examine them. If
any of you wish for assistance or advice from me in putting them in order, I shall be happy
to render it."

By such a plan, which will occupy but little more time than the irritating and useless scolding
which I supposed in the other case, how much more will be accomplished. Such an address would
of itself, probably, be the means of putting in order, and keeping in order, at least one half
of the desks in the room, and following up the plan in the same manner and in the same spirit
with which it was begun would secure the rest.

I repeat it, therefore, make it a principle in all cases to aim as much as possible at the
correction of those faults which are likely to be general by general measures. You avoid by
this means a vast amount of irritation and impatience, both on your own part and on the part
of your scholars, and you produce twenty times the useful effect.

3. The next principle which occurs to me as deserving the teacher's attention in the outset
of his course is this:

Interest your scholars in doing something themselves to elevate the moral character of the
school, so as to secure a decided majority who will, of their own accord, co-operate with you.

Let your pupils understand, not by any formal speech which you make to that effect, but by
the manner in which, from time to time, you incidentally allude to the subject, that you consider
the school, when you commence it, as at par, so to speak--that is, on a level with other schools,
and that your various plans for improving and amending it are not to be considered in the light
of finding fault, and punishing transgressions, and controlling evil propensities, so as just
to keep things in a tolerable state, but as efforts to improve and carry forward the institution
to a still higher state of excellence. Such is the tone and manner of some teachers that they
never appear to be more than merely satisfied. When the scholars do right, nothing is said
about it. The teacher seems to consider that a matter of course. It does not appear to interest
or please him at all. Nothing arouses him but when they do wrong, and that only excites him
to anger and frowns. Now in such a case there can, of course, be no stimulus to effort on the
part of the pupils but the cold and heartless stimulus of fear.

Now it is wrong for the teacher to expect that things will go right in his school as a matter
of course. All that he can expect as a matter of course is, that things should go on as well
as they do ordinarily in schools--the ordinary amount of idleness, the ordinary amount of misconduct.
This is the most that he can expect to come as a matter of course. He should feel this, and
then all he can gain which will be better than this will be a source of positive pleasure;
a pleasure which his pupils have procured for him, and which, consequently, they should share.
They should understand that the teacher is engaged in various plans for improving the school,
in which they should be invited to engage, not from the selfish desire of thereby saving him
trouble, but because it will really be happy employment for them to engage in such an enterprise,
and because, by such efforts, their own moral powers will be exerted and strengthened in the
best possible way.

In another chapter I have explained to what extent, and in what manner, the assistance of the
pupils may be usefully and successfully employed in carrying forward the general arrangements
of the school. The same principles will apply here, though perhaps a little more careful and
delicate management is necessary in interesting them in subjects which relate to moral discipline.

One important method of accomplishing this end is to present these plans before the minds of
the scholars as experiments--moral experiments, whose commencement, progress, and results they
may take a great interest in witnessing. Let us take, for example, the case alluded to under
the last head--the plan of effecting a reform in regard to keeping desks in order. Suppose
the teacher were to say, when the time had arrived at which he had promised to give them an
opportunity to put the desks in order,

"I think it would be a good plan to keep some account of our efforts for improving the school
in this respect. We might make a record of what we do to-day, noting the day of the month and
the number of desks which may be found to be disorderly. Then, at the end of any time you may
propose, we will have the desks examined again, and see how many are disorderly then. We can
thus see how much improvement has been made in that time. Should you like to adopt the plan?"

If the boys should appear not much interested in the proposal, the teacher might, at his own
discretion, waive it. In all probability, however, they would like it, and would indicate their
interest by their countenances, or perhaps by a response. If so, the teacher might proceed.

"You may all examine your desks, then, and decide whether they are in order or not. I do not
know, however, but that we ought to appoint a committee to examine them; for perhaps all the
boys would not be honest, and report their desks as they really are."

"Yes, sir;" "yes, sir," say the boys.

"Do you mean that you will be honest, or that you would like to have a committee appointed?"

There was a confused murmur. Some answer one, and some the other.

"I think," proceeds the teacher, "the boys will be honest, and report their desks just as they
are. At any rate, the number of dishonest boys in this school can not be so large as materially
to affect the result. I think we had better take your own statements. As soon as the desks
are all examined, those who have found theirs in a condition which does not satisfy them are
requested to rise and be counted."

The teacher then looks around the room, and selecting some intelligent boy who has influence
among his companions, and whose influence he is particularly desirous of enlisting on the side
of good order, says, "Shall I nominate some one to keep an account of the number?"

"Yes, sir," say the boys.

"Well, I nominate William Jones. How many are in favor of requesting William Jones to perform
this duty?"

"It is a vote. William, I will thank you to write upon a piece of paper that on the 8th of
December the subject of order in the desks was brought up, and that the boys resolved on making
an effort to improve the school in this respect. Then say that the boys reported all their
desks which they thought were disorderly, and that the number was thirty-five; and that after
a week or two, the desks are to be examined again, and the disorderly ones counted, that we
may see how much we have improved. After you have written it you may bring it to me, and I
will tell you whether it is right."

"How many desks do you think will be found to be disorderly when we come to make the examination?"

The boys hesitate.

The teacher names successively several numbers, and asks whether they think the real number
will be greater or less. He notices their votes upon them, and at last fixes upon one which
seems to be about the general sense of the school. Then the teacher himself mentions the number
which he supposes will be found to be disorderly. His estimate will ordinarily be larger than
that of the scholars, because he knows better how easily resolutions are broken. This number,
too, is recorded, and then the whole subject is dismissed.

Now, of course, no reader of these remarks will understand me to be recommending, by this imaginary
dialogue, a particular course to be taken in regard to this subject, far less the particular
language to be used. All I mean is to show by a familiar illustration how the teacher is to
endeavor to enlist the interest and to excite the curiosity of his pupils in his plans for
the improvement of his school, by presenting them as moral experiments, which they are to assist
him in trying--experiments whose progress they are to watch, and whose results they are to
predict. If the precise steps which I have described should actually be taken, although it
would occupy but a few minutes, and would cause no thought and no perplexing care, yet it would
undoubtedly be the means of awakening a very general interest in the subject of order throughout
the school. All would be interested in the work of arrangement.

All would watch, too, with interest the progress and the result of the experiment; and if,
a few days afterward, the teacher should accidentally, in recess, see a disorderly desk, a
good-humored remark made with a smile to the by-standers, "I suspect my prediction will turn
out the correct one," would have far more effect than the most severe reproaches, or the tingling
of a rap over the knuckles with a ratan.

I know from experience that scholars of every kind can be led by such measures as these, or
rather by such a spirit as this, to take an active interest, and to exert a most powerful influence
in regard to the whole condition of the institution. I have seen the experiment successful
in boys' schools and in girls' schools, among very little children, and among the seniors and
juniors at college.

In one of the colleges of New England a new and beautiful edifice was erected. The lecture-rooms
were fitted up in handsome style, and the officers, when the time for the occupation of the
building approached, were anticipating with regret what seemed to be the unavoidable defacing,
and cutting, and marking of the seats and walls. It was, however, thought that if the subject
was properly presented to the students, they would take an interest in preserving the property
from injury. They were accordingly addressed somewhat as follows:

"It seems, young gentlemen, to be generally the custom in colleges for the students to ornament
the walls and benches of their recitation-rooms with various inscriptions and caricatures,
so that after the premises have been for a short time in the possession of a class, every thing
within reach, which will take an impression from a penknife or a trace from a pencil, is covered
with names, and dates, and heads, and inscriptions of every kind. The faculty do not know what
you wish in this respect in regard to the new accommodations which the trustees have now provided
for you, and which you are soon to enter. They have had them fitted up for you handsomely,
and if you wish to have them kept in good order, we will assist you. If the students think
proper to express by a vote, or in any other way, their wish to keep them in good order, we
will engage to have such incidental injuries as may from time to time occur immediately repaired.
Such injuries will, of course, be done; for, whatever may be the wish and general opinion of
the whole, it is not to be expected that every individual in so large a community will be careful.
If, however, as a body, you wish to have the building preserved in its present state, and will,
as a body, take the necessary precautions, we will do our part."

The students responded to this appeal most heartily. They passed a vote expressing a desire
to preserve the premises in order, and for many years, and, for aught I know, to the present
hour, the whole is kept as a room occupied by gentlemen should be kept. At some other colleges,
and those, too, sustaining the very highest rank among the institutions of the country, the
doors of the public buildings are sometimes studded with nails as thick as they can possibly
be driven, and then covered with a thick coat of sand dried into the paint, as a protection
from the knives of the students!!

The particular methods by which the teacher is to interest his pupils in his various plans
for their improvement can not be fully described here. In fact, it does not depend so much
on the methods he adopts as upon the view which he himself takes of these plans, and the tone
and manner in which he speaks of them to his pupils.

A teacher, for example, perhaps on the first day of his labors in a new school, calls a class
to read. They pretend to form a line, but it crooks in every direction. One boy is leaning
back against a desk; another comes forward as far as possible, to get near the fire; the rest
lounge in every position and in every attitude. John is holding up his book high before his
face to conceal an apple from which he is endeavoring to secure an enormous bite. James is,
by the same sagacious device, concealing a whisper which he is addressing to his next neighbor,
and Moses is seeking amusement by crowding and elbowing the little boy who is unluckily standing
next him.

"What a spectacle!" says the master to himself, as he looks at this sad display. "What shall
I do?" The first impulse is to break forth upon them at once with all the artillery of reproof,
and threatening, and punishment. I have seen, in such a case, a scolding and frowning master
walk up and down before such a class with a stern and angry air, commanding this one to stand
back, and that one to come forward, ordering one boy to put down his book, and scolding at
a second for having lost his place, and knocking the knees of another with his ruler because
he was out of the line. The boys scowl at their teacher, and, with ill-natured reluctance,
they obey just enough to escape punishment.

Another teacher looks calmly at the scene, and says to himself, "What shall I do to remove
effectually these evils? If I can but interest the boys in reform, it will be far more easy
to effect it than if I attempt to accomplish it by the mere exercise of my authority."

In the mean time things go on during the reading in their own way. The teacher simply observes.
He is in no haste to commence his operations. He looks for the faults; watches, without seeming
to watch, the movements which he is attempting to control. He studies the materials with which
he is to work, and lets their true character develop itself. He tries to find something to
approve in the exercise as it proceeds, and endeavors to interest the class by narrating some
fact connected with the reading, or making some explanation which interests the boys. At the
end of the exercise he addresses them, perhaps, as follows:

"I have observed, boys, in some military companies, that the officers are very strict, requiring
implicit and precise obedience. The men are required to form a precise line." (Here there is
a sort of involuntary movement all along the line, by which it is very sensibly straightened.)
"They make all the men stand erect" (at this word heads go up, and straggling feet draw in
all along the class), "in the true military posture. They allow nothing to be done in the ranks
but to attend to the exercise" (John hastily crowds his apple into his pocket), "and thus they
regulate every thing in exact and steady discipline, so that all things go on in a most systematic
and scientific manner. This discipline is so admirable in some countries, especially in Europe,
where much greater attention is paid to military tactics than in our country, that I have heard
it said by travelers that some of the soldiers who mount guard at public places look as much
like statues as they do like living men.

"Other commanders act differently. They let the men do pretty much as they please. So you will
see such a company lounging into a line when the drum beats, as if they took little interest
in what was going on. While the captain is giving his commands, one is eating his luncheon,
another is talking with his next neighbor. Part are out of the line; part lounge on one foot;
they hold their guns in every position; and, on the whole, present a very disorderly and unsoldier-like
appearance.

"I have observed, too, that boys very generally prefer to see the strict companies, but perhaps
they would prefer to belong to the lax ones."

"No, sir;" "No, sir," say the boys.

"Suppose you all had your choice either to belong to a company like the first one I described,
where the captain was strict in all his requirements, or to one like the latter, where you
could do pretty much as you pleased, which should you prefer?"

Unless I am entirely mistaken in my idea of the inclinations of boys, it would be very difficult
to get a single honest expression of preference for the latter. They would say with one voice,

"The first."

"I suppose it would be so. You would be put to some inconvenience by the strict commands of
the captain, but then you would be more than paid by the beauty of regularity and order which
you would all witness. There is nothing so pleasant as regularity, and nobody likes regularity
more than boys do. To show this, I should like to have you now form a line as exact as you can."

After some unnecessary shoving and pushing, increased by the disorderly conduct of a few bad
boys, a line is formed. Most of the class are pleased with the experiment, and the teacher
takes no notice of the few exceptions. The time to attend to them will come by-and-by.

"Hands down." The boys obey.

"Shoulders back."

"There; there is a very perfect line."

"Do you stand easily in that position?"

"Yes, sir."

"I believe your position is the military one now, pretty nearly; and military men study the
postures of the human body for the sake of finding the one most easy; for they wish to preserve
as much as possible of the soldiers' strength for the time of battle. I should like to try
the experiment of your standing thus at the next lesson. It is a very great improvement upon
your common mode. Are you willing to do it?"

"Yes, sir," say the boys.

"You will get tired, I have no doubt; for the military position, though most convenient and
easy in the end, is not to be learned and fixed in practice without effort. In fact, I do not
expect you will succeed the first day very well. You will probably become restless and uneasy
before the end of the lesson, especially the smaller boys. I must excuse it, I suppose, if
you do, as it will be the first time."

By such methods as these the teacher will certainly secure a majority in favor of all his plans.
But perhaps some experienced teacher, who knows from his own repeated difficulties with bad
boys what sort of spirits the teacher of district schools has sometimes to deal with, may ask,
as he reads this,

"Do you expect that such a method as this will succeed in keeping your school in order? Why
there are boys in almost every school whom you would no more coax into obedience and order
in this way than you would persuade the northeast wind to change its course by reasoning."

I know there are. And my readers are requested to bear in mind that my object is not to show
how the whole government of the school may be secured, but how one important advantage may
be gained, which will assist in accomplishing the object. All I should expect or hope for,
by such measures as these, is to interest and gain over to our side the majority. What is to
be done with those who can not be reached by such kinds of influence I shall endeavor presently
to show. The object now is simply to gain the majority--to awaken a general interest, which
you can make effectual in promoting your plans, and thus to narrow the field of discipline
by getting those right who can be got right by such measures.

Thus securing a majority to be on your side in the general administration of the school is
absolutely indispensable to success. A teacher may, indeed, by the force of mere authority,
so control his pupils as to preserve order in the schoolroom, and secure a tolerable progress
in study, but the progress will be slow, and the cultivation of moral principle must be, in
such a case, entirely neglected. The principles of duty can not be inculcated by fear; and
though pain and terror must in many instances be called in to coerce an individual offender,
whom milder measures will not reach, yet these agents, and others like them, can never be successfully
employed as the ordinary motives to action. They can not produce any thing but mere external
and heartless obedience in the presence of the teacher, with an inclination to throw off all
restraint when the pressure of stern authority is removed.

We should all remember that our pupils are but for a very short time under our direct control.
Even when they are in school the most untiring vigilance will not enable us to watch, except
for a very small portion of the time, any one individual. Many hours of the day, too, they
are entirely removed from our inspection, and a few months will take them away from us altogether.
Subjecting them, then, to mere external restraint is a very inadequate remedy for the moral
evil to which they are exposed. For me, I would kill myself on her grave. Where you and I were
rivals and enemies, now we are enemies. Look out for me, Richard Cleave!" He began to laugh,
a broken and mirthless sound.

"Look out for me, Richard Cleave. Go!"

"I shall," said Cleave.

"I will not keep a watch upon you in such a moment, nor remember it. I doubt neither your passion
nor your suffering. But in one thing, Maury Stafford, you have lied again. I love as strongly,
and I love more highly than you do! As for your threats--threatened men live long."

He turned, left the forest glade and came out into the camp lying
now beneath the last rays of the sun.

That evening he spent with Ewell and his staff, passed the night in a friendly tent, and at
dawn turned Dundee's head toward the Blue Ridge.

CHAPTER XVIII

McDOWELL

At Stanardsville he heard from a breathless crowd about the small hotel news from over the mountains.
Banks was at last in motion--was marching, nineteen thousand strong, up the Valley--had seized
New Market, and, most astounding and terrific of all to the village boys, had captured a whole
company of Ashby's! "General Jackson?" General Jackson had burned the railway station at Mt. Jackson
and fallen back--was believed to be somewhere about Harrisonburg.

"Any other news?"

"Yes, sir! Fremont's pressing south from Moorefield, Milroy east from Monterey! General Edward Johnson's
had to fall back from the Alleghenies!--he's just west of Staunton. He hasn't got but a brigade
and a half."

"Anything more?"

"Stage's just brought the Richmond papers.

All about Albert Sydney Johnston's death at Shiloh. He led the charge and a minie ball struck
him, and he said 'Lay me down. Fight on.'"

"Fort Pulaski's taken! The darned gunboats battered down the wall. All of the garrison that ain't
dead are prisoners."

"News from New Orleans ain't hilarious. Damned mortar boats bombard and bombard!--four ships,
they say, against Fort Saint Philip, more against Fort Jackson. Air full of shells. Farragut
may try to run forts and batteries, Chalmette and all--"
"What else?"

"Looks downright bad down t' Richmond. McClellan's
landed seventy-five thousand men. Magruder lost a skirmish at Yorktown.
All the Richmond women are making sandbags for the fortifications.
Papers talk awful calm and large, but if Magruder gives way and Johnston
can't keep McClellan back, I reckon there'll be hell to pay! I reckon
Richmond'll fall."

"Anything more?"

"That's all to-day."

The village
wag stepped forth, half innocent and half knave. "Saay, colonel! The
prospects of this here Confederacy look rather blue."

"It is wonderful,"
said Cleave, "how quickly blue can turn to grey."

A portion of that
night he spent at a farmhouse at the western mouth of Swift Run Gap.
Between two and three he and Harris and Dundee and the grey were again
upon the road. It wound through forests and by great mountains, all
wreathed in a ghostly mist. The moon shone bright, but the cold was
clinging. It had rained and on the soft wood road the horses feet
fell noiselessly. The two men rode in silence, cloaks drawn close,
hats over their eyes.

Behind them in the east grew slowly the pallor
of the dawn. The stars waned, the moon lost her glitter, in the woods
to either side began a faint peeping of birds. The two came to Conrad's
Store, where the three or four houses lay yet asleep. An old negro,
sweeping the ground before a smithy, hobbled forward at Harris's call.
"Lawd, marster, enny news? I specs, sah, I'll hab ter ax you 'bout
dat. I ain' heard none but dat dar wuz er skirmish at Rude's Hill,
en er skirmish at New Market, en er-nurr skirmish at Sparta, en dat
Gineral Jackson hold de foht, sah, at Harrisonburg, en dat de Yankees
comin', lickerty-split, up de Valley, en dat de folk at Magaheysville
air powerful oneasy in dey minds fer fear dey'll deviate dis way. In fact,
it is probable that a very large proportion of the punishments which are ordinarily inflicted
in schools only prepare the way for more offenses.

It is, however, possible to bring forward individual cases in such a way as to produce a very
strong moral effect of the right kind. This is to be done by seizing upon those peculiar emergencies
which will arise in the course of the administration of a school, and which each teacher must
watch for and discover himself. They can not be pointed out. I may, however, give a clearer
idea of what is meant by such emergencies by an example. It is a case which actually occurred
as here narrated.

In a school where nearly all the pupils were faithful and docile, there were one or two boys
who were determined to find amusement in those mischievous tricks so common in schools and
colleges. There was one boy, in particular, who was the life and soul of all these plans. Devoid
of principle, idle as a scholar, morose and sullen in his manners, he was, in every respect,
a true specimen of the whole class of mischief-makers, wherever they are to be found. His mischief
consisted, as usual, in such exploits as stopping up the keyhole of the door, upsetting the
teacher's inkstand, or fixing something to his desk to make a noise and interrupt the school.

It so happened that there was a standing feud between the boys of his neighborhood and those
of another situated a mile or two from it. By his malicious activity he had stimulated this
quarrel to a high pitch, and was very obnoxious to the boys of the other party. One day, when
taking a walk, the teacher observed a number of boys with excited looks, and armed with sticks
and stones, standing around a shoemaker's shop, to which his poor pupil had gone for refuge
from them. They had got him completely within their power, and were going to wait until he
should be wearied with his confinement and come out, when they were going to inflict upon him
the punishment they thought he deserved.

The teacher interfered, and by the united influence of authority, management, and persuasion,
succeeded in effecting a rescue. The boy would probably have preferred to owe his safety to
any one else than to the teacher whom he had so often tried to tease, but he was glad to escape
in any way. The teacher said nothing about the subject, and the boy soon supposed it was entirely
forgotten.

But it was not forgotten. The teacher knew perfectly well that the boy would before long be
at his old tricks again, and was reserving this story as the means of turning the whole current
of public opinion against such tricks, should they again occur.

One day he came to school in the afternoon, and found the room filled with smoke; the doors
and windows were all closed, though, as soon as he came in, some of the boys opened them. He
knew by this circumstance that it was roguery, not accident, which caused the smoke. He appeared
not to notice it, however, said he was sorry it smoked, and asked the mischievous boy--for
he was sure to be always near in such a case--to assist him in putting up the wood of the fire
more compactly. The boy supposed that the smoke was understood to be accidental, and perhaps
secretly laughed at the dullness of his master.

In the course of the afternoon, the teacher ascertained by private inquiries that his suspicions
were correct as to the author of the mischief. At the close of school, when the studies were
ended, and the books laid away, he said to the scholars that he wanted to tell them a story.

He then, with a pleasant tone and manner, gave a very minute, and, to the boys, a very interesting
narrative of his adventure two or three weeks before, when he rescued this boy from his danger.
He called him, however, simply a boy, without mentioning his name, or even hinting that he
was a member of the school. No narrative could excite a stronger interest among an audience
of school-boys than such a one as this, and no act of kindness from a teacher would make as
vivid an impression as interfering to rescue a trembling captive from such a situation as the
one this boy had been in.

The scholars listened with profound interest and attention, and though the teacher said little
about his share in the affair, and spoke of what he did as if it were a matter of course that
he should thus befriend a boy in distress, an impression very favorable to himself must have
been made. After he had finished his narrative, he said,

"Now should you like to know who this boy was?"

"Yes, sir," "Yes, sir," said they, eagerly.

"It was a boy that you all know."

The boys looked around upon one another. Who could it be?

"He is a member of this school."

There was an expression of fixed, and eager, and increasing interest on every face in the room.

"He is here now," said the teacher, winding up the interest and curiosity of the scholars,
by these words, to the highest pitch.

"But I can not tell you his name; for what return do you think he made to me? To be sure it
was no very great favor that I did him; I should have been unworthy the name of teacher if
I had not done it for him, or for any boy in my school. But, at any rate, it showed my good
wishes for him; it showed that I was his friend; and what return do you think he made me for
it? Why, to-day he spent his time between schools in filling the room with smoke, that he might
torment his companions here, and give me trouble, and anxiety, and suffering when I should
come. If I should tell you his name, the whole school would turn against him for his ingratitude."

The business ended here, and it put a stop, a final stop, to all malicious tricks in the school.
Now it is not very often that so fine an opportunity occurs to kill, by a single blow, the
disposition to do willful, wanton injury, as this circumstance afforded; but the principle
illustrated by it, bringing forward individual cases of transgression in a public manner, only
for the sake of the general effect, and so arranging what is said and done as to produce the
desired effect upon the public mind in the highest degree, may very frequently be acted upon.
Cases are continually occurring, and if the teacher will keep it constantly in mind, that when
a particular case comes before the whole school, the object is an influence upon the whole,
and not the punishment or reform of the guilty individual, he will insensibly so shape his
measures as to produce the desired result.

(4.) There should be a great difference made between the measures which you take to prevent
wrong, and the feelings of displeasure which you express against the wrong when it is done.
The former should be strict, authoritative, unbending; the latter should be mild and gentle.
Your measures, if uniform and systematic, will never give offense, however powerfully you may
restrain and control those subject to them. It is the morose look, the harsh expression, the
tone of irritation and fretfulness, which is so unpopular in school. The sins of childhood
are by nine tenths of mankind enormously overrated, and perhaps none overrate them more extravagantly
than teachers. We confound the trouble they give us with their real moral turpitude, and measure
the one by the other. Now if a fault prevails in school, one teacher will scold and fret himself
about it day after day, until his scholars are tired both of school and of him; and yet he
will do nothing effectual to remove it. Another will take efficient and decided measures, and
yet say very little on the subject, and the whole evil will be removed without suspending for
a moment the good-humor and pleasant feeling which should prevail in school.

The expression of your displeasure on account of any thing that is wrong will seldom or never
do any good. The scholars consider it scolding; it is scolding; and though it may, in many
cases, contain many sound arguments and eloquent expostulations, it operates simply as a punishment.
It is unpleasant to hear it. General instruction must indeed be given, but not general reproof.

(5.) Feel that in the management of the school you are under obligation as well as the scholars,
and let this feeling appear in all that you do. Your scholars wish you to dismiss school earlier
than usual on some particular occasion, or to allow them an extra holiday. Show by the manner
in which you consider and speak of the question that your main inquiry is what is your duty.
Speak often of your responsibility to your employers--not formally, but incidentally and naturally,
as you will speak if you feel this responsibility.

It will assist very much, too, in securing cheerful, good-humored obedience to the regulations
of the school, if you extend their authority over yourself. Not that the teacher is to have
no liberty from which the scholars are debarred; this would be impossible. But the teacher
should submit, himself, to every thing which he requires of his scholars, unless it is in cases
where a different course is necessary.

Suppose, for instance, a study-card, like the one described in a preceding chapter, is made
so as to mark the time of recess and of study. The teacher, near the close of recess, is sitting
with a group of his pupils around him, telling them some story. They are all interested, and
they see he is interested. He looks at his watch, and shows by his manner that he is desirous
of finishing what he is saying, but that he knows that the striking of the bell will cut short
his story. Perhaps he says not a word about it, but his pupils see that he is submitting to
the control which is placed over them; and when the card goes up, and he stops instantly in
the middle of his sentence and rises with the rest, each one to go to his own place, to engage
at once in their several duties, he teaches them a most important lesson, and in the most effectual
way. Such a lesson of fidelity and obedience, and such an example of it, will have more influence
than half an hour's scolding about whispering without leave, or a dozen public punishments.
At least so I found it, for I have tried both.

Show then continually that you see and enjoy the beauty of system and strict discipline, and
that you submit to law yourself as well as require submission of others.

(6.) Lead your pupils to see that they must share with you the credit or the disgrace which
success or failure in the management of the school may bring. Lead them to feel this, not by
telling them so, for there are very few things which can be impressed upon children by direct
efforts to impress them, but by so speaking of the subject, from time to time, as to lead them
to see that you understand it so.

Repeat, with judicious caution, what is said of the school, both for and against it, and thus
endeavor to interest the scholars in its public reputation. This feeling of interest in the
institution may very easily be awakened. It sometimes springs up spontaneously, and, where
it is not guided aright by the teacher, sometimes produces very bad effects upon the minds
of the pupils in rival institutions. When two schools are situated near each other, evil consequences
will result from this feeling, unless the teacher manages it so as to deduce good consequences.
I recollect that in my boyish days there was a standing quarrel between the boys of a town
school and an academy which were in the same village. We were all ready at any time, when out
of school, to fight for the honor of our respective institutions, each for his own, but very
few were ready to be diligent and faithful when in it, though it would seem that that might
have been rather a more effectual means of establishing the point. If the scholars are led
to understand that the school is to a great extent their institution, that they must assist
to sustain its character, and that they share the honor of its excellence, if any honor is
acquired, a feeling will prevail in the school which may be turned to a most useful account.

(7.) In giving instruction on moral duty, the subject should generally be taken up in reference
to imaginary cases, or cases which are unknown to most of the scholars. If this is done, the
pupils feel that the object of bringing up the subject is to do good; whereas, if questions
of moral duty are only introduced from time to time, when some prevailing or accidental fault
in school calls for reproof, the feeling will be that the teacher is only endeavoring to remove
from his own path a source of inconvenience and trouble. The most successful mode of giving
general moral instruction that I have known, and which has been adopted in many schools with
occasional variations of form, is the following:

When the time has arrived, a subject is assigned, and small papers are distributed to the whole
school, that all may write something concerning it. These are then read and commented on by
the teacher, and become the occasion of any remarks which he may wish to make. The interest
of the pupils is strongly excited to hear the papers read, and the instruction which the teacher
may give produces a deeper effect when ingrafted thus upon something which originates in the
minds of the pupils.

To take a particular case. A teacher addresses his scholars thus: "The subject for the moral
exercise to-day is Prejudice. Each one may take one of the papers which have been distributed,
and you may write upon them any thing you please relating to the subject. As many as have thought
of any thing to write may raise their hands."

One or two only of the older scholars gave the signal.

"I will mention the kinds of communications you can make, and perhaps what I say will suggest
something to you. As fast as you think of any thing, you may raise your hands, and as soon
as I see a sufficient number up, I will give directions to begin.

"You can describe any case in which you have been prejudiced yourselves either against persons
or things."

Here a number of the hands went up.

"You can mention any facts relating to antipathies of any kind, or any cases where you know
other persons to be prejudiced. You can ask any questions in regard to the subject--questions
about the nature of prejudice, or the causes of it, or the remedy for it."

As he said this, many hands were successively raised, and at last directions were given for
all to begin to write. Five minutes were allowed, and at the end of that time the papers were
collected and read. The following specimens, transcribed verbatim from the originals, with
the remarks made as nearly as could be remembered immediately after the exercise, will give
an idea of the ordinary operation of this plan.

"I am very much prejudiced against spiders and every insect in the known world with scarcely
an exception. There is a horrid sensation created by their ugly forms that makes me wish them
all to Jericho. The butterfly's wings are pretty, but he is dreadful ugly. The is no affectation
in this, for my pride will not permit me to show this prejudice to any great degree when I
can help it. I do not fear the little wretches, but I do hate them. ANTI-SPIDER-SPARER."

"This is not expressed very well; the phrases 'to Jericho?' and 'dreadful ugly' are vulgar,
and not in good taste. Such a dislike, too, is more commonly called an antipathy than a prejudice,
though perhaps it comes under the general head of prejudices."

"How may we overcome prejudice? I think that when we are prejudiced against a person, it is
the hardest thing in the world to overcome it."

A prejudice is usually founded on some unpleasant association connected with the subject of
it. The best way to overcome the prejudice, therefore, is to connect some pleasant association
with it.

For example (to take the case of the antipathy to the spider, alluded to in the last article),
the reason why that young lady dislikes spiders is undoubtedly because she has some unpleasant
idea associated with the thought of that animal, perhaps, for example, the idea of their crawling
upon her, which is certainly not a very pleasant one for any body. Now the way to correct such
a prejudice is to try to connect some pleasant thoughts with the sight of the animal.

I once found a spider in an empty apartment hanging in its web on the wall, with a large ball
of eggs which it had suspended by its side. My companion and myself cautiously brought up a
tumbler under the web, and pressed it suddenly against the wall, so as to inclose both spider
and eggs within it. We then contrived to run in a pair of shears, so as to cut off the web,
and let both the animal and its treasure fall down into the tumbler. We put a book over the
top, and walked off with our prize to a table to see what the spider would do.

At first it tried to climb up the side of the tumbler, but its feet slipped on account of the
smoothness of the glass. We then inclined the glass so as to favor its climbing, and to enable
it to reach the book at the top. As soon as it touched the book, it was safe. It could cling
to the book easily, and we placed the tumbler again upright to watch its motions.

It attached a thread to the book, and let itself down by it to the bottom of the tumbler, and
walked round and round the ball of eggs, apparently in great trouble. Presently it ascended
by its thread, and then came down again. It attached a new thread to the ball, and then went
up, drawing the ball with it. It hung the ball at a proper distance from the book, and bound
it firmly in its place by threads running from it in every direction to the parts of the book
which were near, and then the animal took its place quietly by its side.

Now I do not say that if any body had a strong antipathy to a spider, seeing one perform such
a work as this would entirely remove it, but it would certainly soften it. It would tend to
remove it. It would connect an interesting and pleasant association with the object. So if
she should watch a spider in the fields making his web. You have all seen those beautiful regular
webs in the morning dew ("Yes, sir;" "Yes, sir"), composed of concentric circles, and radii
diverging in every direction. ("Yes, sir.") Well, watch a spider when making one of these,
or observe his artful ingenuity and vigilance when he is lying in wait for a fly. By thus connecting
pleasant ideas with the sight of the animal, you will destroy the unpleasant association which
constitutes the prejudice. In the same manner, if I wished to create an antipathy to a spider
in a child, it would be very easily done. I would tie her hands behind her, and put three or
four upon her to crawl over her face.

"Thus you must destroy prejudices in all cases by connecting pleasant thoughts and associations
with the objects of them."

"I am very often prejudiced against new scholars without knowing why."

"We sometimes hear a person talk in this way: 'I do not like such or such a person at all.'

"'Why?'

"'Oh, I don't know; I do not like her at all. I can't bear her.'

"'But why not? What is your objection to her?'

"'Oh, I don't know; I have not any particular reason, but I never did like her.'

"Now, whenever you hear any person talk so, you may be sure that her opinion on any subject
is worth nothing at all. She forms opinions in one case without grounds, and it depends merely
upon accident whether she does or not in other cases."

"Why is it that so many of our countrymen are, or seem to be, prejudiced against the unfortunate
children of Africa? Almost every large white boy who meets a small black boy insults him in
some way or other."

"It is so hard to overcome prejudices, that we ought to be careful how we form them."

"When I see a new scholar enter this school, and she does not happen to suit me exactly in
her ways and manners, I very often get prejudiced against her; though sometimes I find her
a valuable friend after I get acquainted with her."

"There is an inquiry I should like very much to make, though I suppose it would not be quite
right to make it. I should like to ask all those who have some particular friend in school,
and who can recollect the impression which the individual made upon them when they first saw
her, to rise, and then I should like to inquire in how many cases the first impression was
favorable, and in how many unfavorable."

"Yes, sir;" "Yes, sir."

"Do you mean you would like to have the inquiry made?"

"Yes, sir."

"All, then, who have intimate friends, and can recollect the impression which they first made
upon them, may rise."

[About thirty rose; more than two thirds of whom voted that the first impression made by the
persons who had since become their particular friends was unfavorable.]

"This shows how much dependence you can justly place on first impressions."

"It was the next Monday morning after I had attained the wise age of four years that I was
called up into my mother's room, and told that I was the next day going to school.

"I called forth all my reasoning powers, and with all the ability of a child of four years,
I reasoned with my mother, but to no purpose. I told her that I hated the school-mistress then,
though I had never seen her. The very first day I tottered under the weight of the mighty fool's-cap.
I only attended her school two quarters; with prejudice I went, and with prejudice I came away.

"The old school-house is now torn down, and a large brick house takes the place of it. But
I never pass by without remembering my teacher. I am prejudiced to [against] the very spot."

"Is it not right to allow prejudice to have influence over our minds as far as this? If any
thing comes to our knowledge with which wrong seems to be connected, and one in whom we have
always felt confidence is engaged in it, is it not right to allow our prejudice in favor of
this individual to have so much influence over us as to cause us to believe that all is really
right, though every circumstance which has come to our knowledge is against such a conclusion?
I felt this influence, not many weeks since, in a very great degree."

"The disposition to judge favorably of a fraud in such a case would not be prejudice; or, at
least, if it were so, it would not be a sufficient ground to justify us in withholding blame.
Well-grounded confidence in such a person, if there was reason for it, ought to have such an
effect, but not prejudice."

The above may be considered as a fair specimen of the ordinary operation of such an exercise.
It is taken as an illustration, not by selection, from the large number of similar exercises
which I have witnessed, but simply because it was an exercise occurring at the time when a
description was to be written. Besides the articles quoted above, there were thirty or forty
others which were read and commented on. The above will, however, be sufficient to give the
reader a clear idea of the exercise, and to show what is the nature of the moral effect it
is calculated to produce.

The subjects which may be advantageously brought forward in such a way are, of course, very
numerous. They are such as the following:

1. DUTIES TO PARENTS.--Anecdotes of good or bad conduct at home. Questions. Cases where it
is most difficult to obey. Dialogues between parents and children. Excuses which are often
made for disobedience.

2. SELFISHNESS.--Cases of selfishness any of the pupils have observed. Dialogues they have
heard exhibiting it. Questions about its nature. Indications of selfishness.

3. FAULTS OF THE SCHOOL.--Any bad practices the scholars may have observed in regard to general
deportment, recitations, habits of study, or the scholars' treatment of one another. Each scholar
may write what is his own greatest trouble in school, and whether he thinks any thing can be
done to remove it. Any thing they think can be improved in the management of the school by
the teacher. Unfavorable things they have heard said about it out of school, though without names.

4. EXCELLENCES OF THE SCHOOL.--Good practices which ought to be persevered in. Any little incidents
the scholars may have noticed illustrating good character. Cases which have occurred in which
scholars have done right in temptation, or when others around were doing wrong. Favorable reports
in regard to the school in the community around.

5. THE SABBATH.--Any thing the scholars may have known to be done on the Sabbath which they
doubt whether right or wrong. Questions in regard to the subject. Various opinions they have
heard expressed. Difficulties they have in regard to proper ways of spending the Sabbath.

(8.) We have one other method to describe by which a favorable moral influence may be exerted
in school. The method can, however, go into full effect only where there are several pupils
who have made considerable advances in mental cultivation.

It is to provide a way by which teachers and pupils may write anonymously for the school. This
may be done by having a place of deposit for such articles as may be written, where any person
may leave what he wishes to have read, nominating by a memorandum upon the article itself the
reader. If a proper feeling on the subject of good discipline and the formation of good character
prevails in school, many articles, which will have a great deal of effect upon the pupils,
will find their way through such an avenue once opened. The teacher can himself often bring
forward in this way his suggestions with more effect than he otherwise could do. Such a plan
is, in fact, like the plan of a newspaper for an ordinary community, where sentiments and opinions
stand on their own basis, and influence the community just in proportion to their intrinsic
merits, unassisted by the authority of the writer's name, and unimpeded by any prejudice which
may exist against him.

The following articles, which were really offered for such a purpose in the Mount Vernon school,
will serve as specimens to illustrate the actual operation of the plan. One or two of them
were written by teachers. I do not know the authors of the others. I do not offer them as remarkable
compositions: every teacher will see that they are not so. The design of inserting them is
merely to show that the ordinary literary ability to be found in every school may be turned
to useful account by simply opening a channel for it, and to furnish such teachers as may be
inclined to try the experiment the means of making the plan clearly understood by their pupils.

MARKS OF A BAD SCHOLAR.

"At the time when she should be ready to take her seat at school, she commences preparation
for leaving home. To the extreme annoyance of those about her, all is now hurry, and bustle,
and ill-humor. Thorough search is to be made for every book or paper for which she has occasion;
some are found in one place, some in another, and others are forgotten altogether. Being finally
equipped, she casts her eye at the clock, hopes to be in tolerable good season (notwithstanding
that the hour for opening the school has already arrived), and sets out in the most violent hurry.

"After so much haste, she is unfitted for attending properly to the duties of the school until
a considerable time after her arrival. If present at the devotional exercises, she finds it
difficult to command her attention even when desirous of so doing, and her deportment at this
hour is, accordingly, marked with an unbecoming listlessness and abstraction.

"When called to recitations, she recollects that some task was assigned, which, till that moment,
she had forgotten; of others she had mistaken the extent, most commonly thinking them to be
shorter than her companions suppose. In her answers to questions with which she should be familiar,
she always manifests more or less of hesitation, and what she ventures to express is very commonly
in the form of a question. In these, as in all exercises, there is an inattention to general
instructions. Unless what is said be addressed particularly to herself, her eyes are directed
toward another part of the room; it may be, her thoughts are employed about something not at
all connected with the school. If reproved by her teacher for negligence in any respects, she
is generally provided with an abundance of excuses, and however mild the reproof, she receives
it as a piece of extreme severity.

"Throughout her whole deportment there is an air of indolence and a want of interest in those
exercises which should engage her attention. In her seat, she most commonly sits in some lazy
posture--either with her elbows upon her desk, her head leaning upon her hands, or with her
seat tipped forward or backward. When she has occasion to leave her seat, it is in a sauntering,
lingering gait--perhaps some trick is contrived on the way for exciting the mirth of her companions.

"About every thing in which it is possible to be so, she is untidy. Her books are carelessly
used, and placed in her desk without order. If she has a piece of waste paper to dispose of,
she finds it much more convenient to tear it into small pieces and scatter it about her desk,
than to put it in a proper place. Her hands and clothes are usually covered with ink. Her written
exercises are blotted and full of mistakes."

THE CONSEQUENCES OF BEING BEHINDHAND.

"The following incident, which I witnessed on a late journey, illustrates an important principle,
and I will relate it.

"When our steam-boat started from the wharf, all our passengers had not come. After we had
proceeded a few yards, there appeared among the crowd on the wharf a man with his trunk under
his arm, out of breath, and with a most disappointed and disconsolate air. The captain determined
to stop for him; but stopping an immense steam-boat, moving swiftly through the water, is not
to be done in a moment; so we took a grand sweep, wheeling majestically around an English ship
which was at anchor in the harbor. As we came toward the wharf again, we saw the man in a small
boat coming off from it. As the steam-boat swept round, they barely succeeded in catching a
rope from the stern, and then immediately the steam-engine began its work again, and we pressed
forward, the little boat following us so swiftly that the water around her was all in a foam.

"They pulled upon the rope attached to the little boat until they drew it alongside. They then
let down a rope, with a hook in the end of it, from an iron crane which projected over the
side of the steam-boat, and hooked it into a staple in the front of the small boat. 'Hoist
away!' said the captain. The sailors hoisted, and the front part of the little boat began to
rise, the stern plowing and foaming through the water, and the man still in it, with his trunk
under his arm. They 'hoisted away' until I began to think that the poor man would actually
tumble out behind. He clung to the seat, and looked as though he was saying to himself, 'I
will take care how I am tardy the next time.' However, after a while, they hoisted up the stern
of the boat, and he got safely on board.

"Moral--Though coming to school a few minutes earlier or later may not in itself be a matter
of much consequence, yet the habit of being five minutes too late, if once formed, will, in
actual life, be a source of great inconvenience, and sometimes of lasting injury." 

Having done this with a proper Pourvu que Dieu lui prête vie referring
to both book and author, I thought it well to look up next what had
been done in the way before me, at least to the extent of what the
London Library could provide me in circumstances of enforced abstinence
from the Museum and from "Bodley."

From its catalogue I selected a curious eighteenth-century Art of
Letter Writing, and four nineteenth and earliest twentieth century
books--Roberts's History of Letter Writing (1843) with Pickering's
ever-beloved title-page and his beautiful clear print; the Littérature
Epistolaire of Barbey d'Aurevilly--a critic never to be neglected
though always to be consulted with eyes wide open and brain alert;
finally, two Essays in Dr. Jessopp's Studies by a Recluse and in the
Men and Letters of Mr. Herbert Paul, once a very frequent associate
of mine.

       The title of the first mentioned book speaks it pretty thoroughly.

"The Art of Letter Writing: Divided into Two Parts. The First: Containing Rules and Directions
for writing letters on all sorts of subjects [this line as well as several others is Rubricked]
with a variety of examples equally elegant and instructive. The Second: a Collection of Letters
on the Most interesting occasions of life in which are inserted--The proper method of Addressing
Persons of all ranks; some necessary orthographical directions, the right forms of message for cards;
and thoughts upon a multiplicity of subjects; the whole composed upon an entirely new plan--chiefly
calculated for the instruction of youth, but may be [sic] of singular service to Gentlemen,
Ladies and all others who are desirous to attain the true style and
manner of a polite epistolary intercourse."

May our own little book have no worse fortune!

Mr. Roberts's avowedly restricts itself to the fifth century as a
terminus ad quem, though it professes to start "from the earliest
times," and its seven hundred pages deal very honestly and fully with
their subjects.

The essays of Dr. Jessopp and Mr. Paul are of course merely Essays, of a score or two of pages: though
the first is pretty wide in its scope.

There would be nothing but good to be said of either, if both had
not been, not perhaps blasphemous but parsimonious of praise, towards
"Our Lady of the Rocks."

It cannot be too often or too solemnly laid down that an adoration of Madame de Sévigné as a letter-writer
is not crotchet or fashion or affectation--is no result of merely
taking authority on trust.

The more one reads her, and the more one reads others, the more convinced should one be of her
absolute non-pareility in almost every kind of genuine letter (as
apart from letters that are really pamphlets or speeches or sermons)
except pure love-letters, of which we have none from her.

As for Littérature Epistolaire, it is a collection of some two dozen
reviews of various modern reprints of letters by distinguished writers--mostly
but not all French.

The author has throughout used the letters he is considering almost wholly as tell-tales of
character, not as examples of art: and therefore he does not, except in possible glances, require
further attention, though the book is full of interesting things. Its judgment of one of our greatest,
and one of the greatest of all, letter-writers--Horace Walpole--is too severe, but not, like Macaulay's,
superficially insistent on superficial defects, and ought not to be neglected by anyone who
studies the subject.

If, however, there was no need to rely on any of these books, they
did nothing to hinder in the peculiar way in which I had feared some
hindrance.

For it is a nuisance to find that somebody else has done something in the precise way in which you
have planned doing it. I have not yet encountered that nuisance here. Dr. Jessopp's general
plan is most like mine--indeed some similarity was unavoidable: but the two are not identical,
and I had planned mine before I knew anything about his.

So with this prelude let us go to business, only premising further that the object, unlike that
of the anonymous Augustan, is not to "give rules and instructions for writing good letters,"
except in the way (which far excels all rules and instructions) of showing how good letters have been
written.

Let us also modestly trust that the collection may deal with some "interesting occasions of
life" and contain "thoughts on a [fair] multiplicity of subjects." Having been, as above observed,
unable during the composition of this book to visit London or Oxford, I have had to rely occasionally
on friendly assistance.
 This dangerous habit of making satirical remarks was evinced
in childhood; it was cherished; it 'grew with her growth, and strengthened with her strength,'
until she became what I have described. LAURA."

Though such a satirical spirit is justly condemned, a little good-humored raillery may sometimes
be allowed as a mode of attacking faults in school which can not be reached by graver methods.
The teacher must not be surprised if some things connected with his own administration come
in sometimes for a share.

VARIETY.

"I was walking out a few days since, and not being particularly in haste, I concluded to visit
a certain school for an hour or two. In a few minutes after I had seated myself on the sofa,
the 'Study Card' was dropped, and the general noise and confusion indicated that recess had
arrived. A line of military characters, bearing the title of the 'Freedom's Band,' was soon
called out, headed by one of their own number. The tune chosen to guide them was Kendall's March.

"'Please to form a regular line,' said the lady commander. 'Remember that there is to be no
speaking in the ranks. Do not begin to step until I strike the bell. Miss B., I requested you
not to step until I gave the signal.'

"Presently the command was given, and the whole line stepped for a few minutes to all intents
and purposes. Again the bell sounded. 'Some of you have lost the step,' said the general. 'Look
at me, and begin again. Left! right! left! right!' The line was once more in order, and I observed
a new army on the opposite side of the room, performing the same manoeuvres, always to the
tune of 'Kendall's March.' After a time the recess closed, and order was again restored. In
about half an hour I approached a class which was reciting behind the railing. 'Miss A.,' said
a teacher, 'how many kinds of magnitude are there?' Miss A. (Answer inaudible.) Several voices.
'We can't hear.' Teacher. 'Will you try to speak a little louder, Miss A.?"

"Some of the class at length seemed to guess the meaning of the young lady, but I was unable
to do even that until the answer was repeated by the teacher. Finding that I should derive
little instruction from the recitation, I returned to the sofa.

"In a short time the propositions were read. 'Proposed, that the committee be impeached for
not providing suitable pens.' 'Lost, a pencil, with a piece of India-rubber attached to it
by a blue ribbon,' &c., &c.

"Recess was again announced, and the lines commenced their evolutions to the tune of 'Kendall's
March.' Thought I, 'Oh that there were a new tune under the sun!'

"Before the close of school some compositions were read. One was entitled 'The Magic King,'
and commenced, 'As I was sitting alone last evening, I heard a gentle tap on the door, and
immediately a beautiful fairy appeared before me. She placed a ring on my finger, and left
me.' The next began, 'It is my week to write composition, but I do not know what to say. However,
I must write something, so it shall be a dialogue.' Another was entitled the 'Magical Shoe,'
and contained a marvelous narration of adventures made in a pair of shoes more valuable than
the far-famed 'seven-league boots.' A fourth began, 'Are you acquainted with that new scholar?'
'No; but I don't believe I shall like her.' And soon the 'Magical Thimble,' the 'Magical Eye-glass,'
&c., were read in succession, until I could not but exclaim, 'How pleasing is variety!' School
was at length closed, and the young ladies again attacked the piano. 'Oh,' repeated I to myself,
'how pleasing is variety! as I left the room to the tune of Kendall's March."

By means like these, and others similar to them, it will not be difficult for any teacher to
obtain so far an ascendency over the minds of his pupils as to secure an overwhelming majority
in favor of good order and co-operation with him in his plans for elevating the character of
the school. But let it be distinctly understood that this, and this only, has been the object
of this chapter thus far. The first point brought up was the desirableness of making at first
a favorable impression; the second, the necessity of taking general views of the condition
of the school, and aiming to improve it in the mass, and not merely to rebuke or punish accidental
faults; and the third, the importance and the means of gaining a general influence and ascendency
over the minds of the pupils. But, though an overwhelming majority can be reached by such methods
as these, all can not. We must have the majority secured, however, in order to enable us to
reach and to reduce the others. But to this work we must come at last.

4. I am, therefore, now to consider, under a fourth general head, what course is to be taken
with individual offenders whom the general influences of the school-room will not control.

The teacher must always expect that there will be such cases. They are always to be found in
the best and most skillfully-managed schools. The following suggestions will perhaps assist
the teacher in dealing with them.

(1.) The first point to be attended to is to ascertain who they are. Not by appearing suspiciously
to watch any individuals, for this would be almost sufficient to make them bad, if they were
not so before. Observe, however; notice, from day to day, the conduct of individuals, not for
the purpose of reproving or punishing their faults, but to enable you to understand their characters.
This work will often require great adroitness and very close scrutiny, and you will find, as
the results of it, a considerable variety of character, which the general influences above
described will not be sufficient to control. The number of individuals will not be great, but
the diversity of character comprised in it will be such as to call into exercise all your powers
of vigilance and discrimination. On one seat you will find a coarse, rough-looking boy, who
openly disobeys your commands and opposes your wishes while in school, and makes himself a
continual source of trouble and annoyance during play-hours by bullying and hectoring every
gentle and timid schoolmate. On another sits a more sly rogue, whose demure and submissive
look is assumed to conceal a mischief-making disposition. Here is one whose giddy spirit is
always leading him into difficulty, but who is of so open and frank a disposition that you
will most easily lead him back to duty; but there is another who, when reproved, will fly into
a passion; and then a third, who will stand sullen and silent before you when he has done wrong,
and is not to be touched by kindness nor awed by authority.

Now all these characters must be studied. It is true that the caution given in a preceding
part of this chapter, against devoting undue and disproportionate attention to such persons,
must not be forgotten. Still, these individuals will require, and it is right that they should
receive, a far greater degree of attention, so far as the moral administration of the school
is concerned, than their mere numbers would appear to justify. This is the field in which the
teacher is to study human nature, for here it shows itself without disguise. It is through
this class, too, that a very powerful moral influence is to be exerted upon the rest of the
school. The manner in which such individuals are managed, the tone the teacher assumes toward
them, the gentleness with which he speaks of their faults, and the unbending decision with
which he restrains them from wrong, will have a most powerful effect upon the rest of the school.
That he may occupy this field, therefore, to the best advantage, it is necessary that he should
first thoroughly explore it.

By understanding the dispositions and characters of such a class of pupils as I have described,
I do not mean merely watching them with vigilance in school, so that none of their transgressions
shall go unobserved and unpunished. I intend a far deeper and more thorough examination of
character. Every boy has something or other which is good in his disposition and character
which he is aware of, and on which he prides himself; find out what it is, for it may often
be made the foundation on which you may build the superstructure of reform. Every one has his
peculiar sources of enjoyment and objects of pursuit, which are before his mind from day to
day. Find out what they are, that by taking an interest in what interests him, and perhaps
sometimes assisting him in his plans, you can bind him to you. Every boy is, from the circumstances
in which he is placed at home, exposed to temptations which have perhaps had far greater influence
in the formation of his character than any deliberate and intentional depravity of his own;
ascertain what these temptations are, that you may know where to pity him and where to blame.
The knowledge which such an examination of character will give you, will not be confined to
making you acquainted with the individual. It will be the most valuable knowledge which a man
can possess, both to assist him in the general administration of the school and in his intercourse
among mankind in the business of life. Men are but boys, only with somewhat loftier objects
of pursuit. Their principles, motives, and ruling passions are essentially the same. Extended
commercial speculations are, so far as the human heart is concerned, substantially what trading
in jack-knives and toys is at school, and building a snow fort, to its own architects, the
same as erecting a monument of marble.

(2.) After exploring the ground, the first thing to be done as a preparation for reforming
individual character in school is to secure the personal attachment of the individuals to be
reformed. This must not be attempted by professions and affected smiles, and still less by
that sort of obsequiousness, common in such cases, which produces no effect but to make the
bad boy suppose that his teacher is afraid of him; which, by the way, is, in fact, in such
cases, usually true. Approach the pupil in a bold and manly, but frank and pleasant manner.
Approach him as his superior, but still as his friend; desirous to make him happy, not merely
to obtain his good-will. And the best way to secure these appearances is just to secure the
reality. Actually be the boy's friend. Really desire to make him happy--happy, too, in his
own way, not in yours. Feel that you are his superior, and that you must and will enforce obedience;
but with this, feel that probably obedience will be rendered without any contest. If these
are really the feelings which reign within you, the boy will see it, and they will exert a
strong influence over him; but you can not counterfeit appearances.

A most effectual way to secure the good-will of a scholar is to ask him to assist you. The
Creator has so formed the human heart that doing good must be a source of pleasure, and he
who tastes this pleasure once will almost always wish to taste it again. To do good to any
individual creates or increases the desire to do it.

There is a boy in your school who is famous for his skill in making whistles from the green
branches of the poplar. He is a bad boy, and likes to turn his ingenuity to purposes of mischief.
You observe him some day in school, when he thinks your attention is engaged in another way,
blowing softly upon one which he has concealed in his desk for the purpose of amusing his neighbors
without attracting the attention of the teacher. Now there are two remedies. Will you try the
physical one? Then call him out into the floor, inflict painful punishment, and send him smarting
to his seat, with his heart full of anger and revenge, to plot some new and less dangerous
scheme of annoyance. Will you try the moral one? Then wait till the recess, and while he is
out at his play, send a message out by another boy, saying that you have heard he is very skillful
in making whistles, and asking him to make one for you to carry home to a little child at your
boarding-house. What would, in ordinary cases, be the effect? It would certainly be a very
simple application, but its effect would be to open an entirely new train of thought and feeling
for the boy. "What!" he would say to himself, while at work on his task, "give the master pleasure
by making whistles! Who would have conceived of it? I never thought of any thing but giving
him trouble and pain. I wonder who told him I could make whistles?" He would find, too, that
the new enjoyment was far higher and purer than the old, and would have little disposition
to return to the latter.

I do not mean by this illustration that such a measure as this would be the only notice that
ought to be taken of such an act of willful disturbance in school. Probably it would not. What
measures in direct reference to the fault committed would be necessary would depend upon the
circumstances of the case. It is not necessary to our purpose that they should be described here.

The teacher can awaken in the hearts of his pupils a personal attachment for him by asking
in various ways their assistance in school, and then appearing honestly gratified with the
assistance rendered. Boys and girls are delighted to have what powers and attainments they
possess brought out into action, especially where they can lead to useful results. They love
to be of some consequence in the world, and will be especially gratified to be able to assist
their teacher. Even if the studies of a turbulent boy are occasionally interrupted for half
an hour, that he might help you arrange papers, or rule books, or distribute exercises, it
will be time well spent. Get him to co-operate with you in any thing, and he will feel how
much more pleasant it is to co-operate than to thwart and oppose; and, by judicious measures
of this kind, almost any boy may be brought over to your side.

Another means of securing the personal attachment of boys is to notice them, to take an interest
in their pursuits, and the qualities and powers which they value in one another. It is astonishing
what an influence is exerted by such little circumstances as stopping at a play-ground a moment
to notice with interest, though perhaps without saying a word, speed of running, or exactness
of aim, the force with which a ball is struck, or the dexterity with which it is caught or
thrown. The teacher must, indeed, in all his intercourse with his pupils, never forget his
station, nor allow them to lay aside the respect, without which authority can not be maintained.
But he may be, notwithstanding this, on the most intimate and familiar footing with them all.
He may take a strong and open interest in all their enjoyments, and thus awaken on their part
a personal attachment to himself, which will exert over them a constant and powerful control.

(3.) The efforts described under the last head for gaining a personal influence over those
who, from their disposition and character, are most in danger of doing wrong, will not be sufficient
entirely to prevent transgression. Cases of deliberate, intentional wrong will occur, and the
question will rise, What is the duty of the teacher in such an emergency? When such cases occur,
the course to be taken is, first of all, to come to a distinct understanding on the subject
with the guilty individual. Think of the case calmly, until you have obtained just and clear
ideas of it. Endeavor to understand precisely in what the guilt of it consists. Notice every
palliating circumstance, and take as favorable a view of the thing as you can, while, at the
same time, you fix most firmly in your mind the determination to put a stop to it. Then go
to the individual, and lay the subject before him, for the purpose of understanding distinctly
from his own lips what he intends to do. I can, however, as usual, explain more fully what
I mean by describing a particular case, substantially true.

The teacher of a school observed himself, and learned from several quarters, that a certain
boy was in the habit of causing disturbance during time of prayer, at the opening and close
of school, by whispering, playing, making gestures to the other boys, and throwing things about
from seat to seat. The teacher's first step was to speak of the subject generally before the
whole school, not alluding, however, to any particular instance which had come under his notice.
These general remarks produced, as he expected, but little effect.

He waited for some days, and the difficulty still continued. Had the irregularity been very
great, it would have been necessary to have taken more immediate measures, but he thought the
case admitted of a little delay. In the mean time, he took pains to cultivate the acquaintance
of the boy, to discover, and to show that he noticed, what was good in his character and conduct,
occasionally to ask some assistance from him, and thus to gain some personal ascendency over him.

One day, when every thing had gone smoothly and prosperously, the teacher told the boy, at
the close of the school, that he wished to talk with him a little, and asked him to walk home
with him. It was not uncommon for the teacher to associate thus with his pupils out of school,
and this request, accordingly, attracted no special attention. On the walk the teacher thus
accosted the criminal:

"Do you like frank, open dealing, James?"

James hesitated a moment, and then answered, faintly,

"Yes, sir."

"Most boys do, and I do, and I supposed that you would prefer being treated in that way. Do you?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I am going to tell you of one of your faults. I have asked you to walk with me, because
I supposed it would be more agreeable for you to have me see you privately than to bring it
up in school."

James said it would be more agreeable.

"Well, the fault is being disorderly at prayer-time. Now, if you like frank and open dealing,
and are willing to deal so with me, I should like to talk with you a little about it, but if
you are not willing, I will dismiss the subject. I do not wish to talk with you now about it
unless you yourself desire it; but if we talk at all, we must both be open, and honest, and
sincere. Now, should you rather have me talk with you or not?"

"Yes, sir, I should rather have you talk with me now than in school."

The teacher then described his conduct in a mild manner, using the style of simple narration,
admitting no harsh epithets, no terms of reproach. The boy was surprised, for he supposed that
he had not been noticed. He thought, perhaps, that he should have been punished if he had been
observed. The teacher said, in conclusion,

"Now, James, I do not suppose you have done this from any designed irreverence toward God,
or deliberate intention of giving me trouble and pain. You have several times lately assisted
me in various ways, and I know, from the cheerful manner with which you comply with my wishes,
that your prevailing desire is to give me pleasure, not pain. You have fallen into this practice
through thoughtlessness, but that does not alter the character of the sin. To do so is a great
sin against God, and a great offense against good order in school. You see, yourself, that
my duty to the school will require me to adopt the most decided measures to prevent the continuance
and the spread of such a practice. I should be imperiously bound to do it, even if the individual
was the very best friend I had in school, and if the measures necessary should bring upon him
great disgrace and suffering. Do you not think it would be so?"

"Yes, sir," said James, seriously, "I suppose it would."

"I wish to remove the evil, however, in the pleasantest way. Do you remember my speaking on
this subject in school the other day?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, my object in what I said then was almost entirely to persuade you to reform without
having to speak to you directly. I thought it would be pleasanter to you to be reminded of
your duty in that way. But I do not think it did you much good. Did it?"

"I don't think I have played so much since then."

"Nor I. You have improved a little, but you have not decidedly and thoroughly reformed. So
I was obliged to take the next step which would be least unpleasant to you, that is, talking
with you alone. Now you told me when we began that you would deal honestly and sincerely with
me, if I would with you. I have been honest and open. I have told you all about it so far as
I am concerned. Now I wish you to be honest, and tell me what you are going to do. If you think,
from this conversation, that you have done wrong, and if you are fully determined to do so
no more, and to break off at once, and forever, from this practice, I should like to have you
tell me, and then the whole thing will be settled. On the other hand, if you feel about it
pretty much as you have done, I should like to have you tell me that too, honestly and frankly,
that we may have a distinct understanding, and that I may be considering what to do next. I
shall not be offended with you for giving me either of these answers, but be sure that you
are honest; you promised to be so."

The boy looked up in his master's face, and said, with great earnestness,

"Mr T. I will do better. I will not trouble you any more."

I have detailed this case thus particularly because it exhibits clearly what I mean by going
directly and frankly to the individual, and coming at once to a full understanding. In nine
cases out of ten this course will be effectual. For four years, with a very large school, I
found this sufficient in every case of discipline which occurred, except in three or four instances,
where something more was required. To make it successful, however, the work must be done properly.
Several things are necessary. It must be deliberate; generally better after a little delay.
It must be indulgent, so far as the view which the teacher takes of the guilt of the pupil
is concerned; every palliating consideration must be felt. It must be firm and decided in regard
to the necessity of a change, and the determination of the teacher to effect it. It must also
be open and frank; no insinuations, no hints, no surmises, but plain, honest, open dealing.

In many cases the communication may be made most delicately and most successfully in writing.
The more delicately you touch the feelings of your pupils, the more tender these feelings will
become. Many a teacher hardens and stupefies the moral sense of his pupils by the harsh and
rough exposures to which he drags out the private feelings of the heart. A man may easily produce
such a state of feeling in his schoolroom, that to address even the gentlest reproof to any
individual, in the hearing of the next, would be a most severe punishment; and, on the other
hand, he may so destroy that sensitiveness that his vociferated reproaches will be as unheeded
as the idle wind. 

And this continued till Mr. Waterton [Footnote: "Mr. Waterton":--Had the reader lived through the
last generation, he would not need to be told that, some thirty or thirty-five years back, Mr.
Waterton, a distinguished country gentleman of ancient family in Northumberland, publicly mounted
and rode in top- boots a savage old crocodile, that was restive and very impertinent, but all to
no purpose. The crocodile jibbed and tried to kick, but vainly. He was no more able to throw the
squire than Sinbad was to throw the old scoundrel who used his back without paying for it, until
he discovered a mode (slightly immoral, perhaps, though some think not) of murdering the old
fraudulent jockey, and so circuitously of unhorsing him.] changed the relations between the
animals. The mode of escaping from the reptile he showed to be not by running away, but by leaping
on its back booted and spurred. The two animals had misunderstood each other. The use of the
crocodile has now been cleared up--viz., to be ridden; and the final
cause of man is that he may improve the health of the crocodile by
riding him a-fox-hunting before breakfast.

And it is pretty certain that any crocodile who has been regularly hunted through the season,
and is master of the weight he carries, will take a six-barred gate now as well as ever he would
have done in the infancy of the pyramids.

If, therefore, the crocodile does not change, all things else undeniably do: even the shadow of the
pyramids grows less. And often the restoration in vision of Fanny and the Bath road makes
me too pathetically sensible of that truth. Out of the darkness, if I happen to call back the
image of Fanny, up rises suddenly from a gulf of forty years a rose in June; or, if I think
for an instant of the rose in June, up rises the heavenly face of Fanny. One after the other, like
the antiphonies in the choral service, rise Fanny and the rose in June, then back again the rose
in June and Fanny. Then come both together, as in a chorus--roses and Fannies, Fannies and
roses, without end, thick as blossoms in paradise. Then comes a venerable crocodile, in a royal
livery of scarlet and gold, with sixteen capes; and the crocodile is driving four-in-hand from
the box of the Bath mail. And suddenly we upon the mail are pulled up by a mighty dial, sculptured
with the hours, that mingle with the heavens and the heavenly host. Then all at once we are
arrived at Marlborough forest, amongst the lovely households [Footnote:
"Households":--Roe-deer do not congregate in herds like the fallow
or the red deer, but by separate families, parents and children; which
feature of approximation to the sanctity of human hearths, added to
their comparatively miniature and graceful proportions, conciliates
to them an interest of peculiar tenderness, supposing even that this
beautiful creature is less characteristically impressed with the grandeurs
of savage and forest life.] of the roe- deer; the deer and their fawns
retire into the dewy thickets; the thickets are rich with roses; once
again the roses call up the sweet countenance of Fanny; and she, being
the granddaughter of a crocodile, awakens a dreadful host of semi-legendary
animals--griffins, dragons, basilisks, sphinxes--till at length the
whole vision of fighting images crowds into one towering armorial
shield, a vast emblazonry of human charities and human loveliness
that have perished, but quartered heraldically with unutterable and
demoniac natures, whilst over all rises, as a surmounting crest, one
fair female hand, with the forefinger pointing, in sweet, sorrowful
admonition, upwards to heaven, where is sculptured the eternal writing
which proclaims the frailty of earth and her children.

GOING DOWN WITH VICTORY

But the grandest chapter of our experience within the whole mail-coach service was on those occasions
when we went down from London with the news of victory. A period of about ten years stretched
from Trafalgar to Waterloo; the second and third years of which period (1806 and 1807) were comparatively
sterile; but the other nine (from 1805 to 1815 inclusively) furnished a long succession of victories,
the least of which, in such a contest of Titans, had an inappreciable value of position: partly
for its absolute interference with the plans of our enemy, but still
more from its keeping alive through central Europe the sense of a
deep-seated vulnerability in France.

Even to tease the coasts of our enemy, to mortify them by continual blockades, to insult them
by capturing if it were but a baubling schooner under the eyes of their arrogant armies, repeated
from time to time a sullen proclamation of power lodged in one quarter to which the hopes of Christendom
turned in secret. How much more loudly must this proclamation have spoken in the audacity [Footnote:
"Audacity":--Such the French accounted it; and it has struck me that Soult would not have been so popular
in London, at the period of her present Majesty's coronation, or in Manchester, on occasion of
his visit to that town, if they had been aware of the insolence with which he spoke of us in notes
written at intervals from the field of Waterloo. As though it had been mere felony in our army
to look a French one in the face, he said in more notes than one, dated from two to four P.M. on
the field of Waterloo, "Here are the English--we have them; they are caught en flagrant delit"
Yet no man should have known us better; no man had drunk deeper from
the cup of humiliation than Soult had in 1809, when ejected by us
with headlong violence from Oporto, and pursued through a long line
of wrecks to the frontier of Spain; and subsequently at Albuera, in
the bloodiest of recorded battles, to say nothing of Toulouse, he
should have learned our pretensions.] of having bearded the elite
of their troops, and having beaten them in pitched battles!

Five years of life it was worth paying down for the privilege of an outside place on a mail-coach,
when carrying down the first tidings of any such event. And it is to be noted that, from our insular
situation, and the multitude of our frigates disposable for the rapid
transmission of intelligence, rarely did any unauthorised rumour steal
away a prelibation from the first aroma of the regular despatches.

The government news was generally the earliest news.

From eight P.M. to fifteen or twenty minutes later imagine the mails assembled on parade in
Lombard Street; where, at that time, [Footnote: "At that time":--I speak of the era previous
to Waterloo.] and not in St. Martin's-le-Grand, was seated the General Post-Office. In what
exact strength we mustered I do not remember; but, from the length of each separate attelage,
we filled the street, though a long one, and though we were drawn up in double file. On any night
the spectacle was beautiful. The absolute perfection of all the appointments about the carriages
and the harness, their strength, their brilliant cleanliness, their beautiful simplicity--but,
more than all, the royal magnificence of the horses--were what might first have fixed the
attention. Every carriage on every morning in the year was taken down to an official inspector
for examination: wheels, axles, linchpins, pole, glasses, lamps, were all critically probed
and tested. Every part of every carriage had been cleaned, every horse had been groomed, with
as much rigour as if they belonged to a private gentleman; and that
part of the spectacle offered itself always.

But the night before us is a night of victory; and, behold! to the ordinary display what a
heart-shaking addition!--horses, men, carriages, all are dressed in laurels and flowers, oak-leaves
and ribbons. The guards, as being officially his Majesty's servants, and of the coachmen such
as are within the privilege of the post-office, wear the royal liveries of course; and, as it
is summer (for all the land victories were naturally won in summer), they wear, on this fine evening,
these liveries exposed to view, without any covering of upper coats.

Such a costume, and the elaborate arrangement of the laurels in their hats, dilate their hearts,
by giving to them openly a personal connexion with the great news
in which already they have the general interest of patriotism.

That great national sentiment surmounts and quells all sense of ordinary
distinctions.

Those passengers who happen to be gentlemen are now hardly to be distinguished as such except
by dress; for the usual reserve of their manner in speaking to the attendants has on this night
melted away. One heart, one pride, one glory, connects every man by the transcendent bond of his national
blood. The spectators, who are numerous beyond precedent, express their sympathy with these
fervent feelings by continual hurrahs.

Every moment are shouted aloud by the post-office servants, and summoned to draw up, the great
ancestral names of cities known to history through a thousand years--Lincoln, Winchester, Portsmouth,
Gloucester, Oxford, Bristol, Manchester, York, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Perth, Stirling,
Aberdeen--expressing the grandeur of the empire by the antiquity of its towns, and the grandeur
of the mail establishment by the diffusive radiation of its separate missions. Every moment you hear the
thunder of lids locked down upon the mail-bags. That sound to each individual mail is the signal
for drawing off; which process is the finest part of the entire spectacle. Then come the horses
into play. Horses! can these be horses that bound off with the action and gestures of leopards?
What stir!--what sea-like ferment!--what a thundering of wheels!--what a trampling of hoofs!--what
a sounding of trumpets!--what farewell cheers--what redoubling peals of brotherly congratulation,
connecting the name of the particular mail--"Liverpool for ever!"--with the name of the particular
victory--"Badajoz for ever!" or "Salamanca for ever!"

The half-slumbering consciousness that all night long, and all the next day--perhaps for even
a longer period--many of these mails, like fire racing along a train of gunpowder, will be kindling
at every instant new successions of burning joy, has an obscure effect of multiplying the victory
itself, by multiplying to the imagination into infinity the stages of its progressive diffusion.
A fiery arrow seems to be let loose, which from that moment is destined to travel, without intermission,
westwards for three hundred [Footnote: "Three hundred":--Of necessity, this scale of measurement,
to an American, if he happens to be a thoughtless man, must sound ludicrous. Accordingly, I remember
a case in which an American writer indulges himself in the luxury of a little fibbing, by ascribing
to an Englishman a pompous account of the Thames, constructed entirely upon American ideas of
grandeur, and concluding in something like these terms:--"And, sir, arriving at London, this
mighty father of rivers attains a breadth of at least two furlongs, having, in its winding course,
traversed the astonishing distance of one hundred and seventy miles." And this the candid American
thinks it fair to contrast with the scale of the Mississippi.

Now, it is hardly worth while to answer a pure fiction gravely; else one might say that no Englishman
out of Bedlam ever thought of looking in an island for the rivers of a continent, nor, consequently,
could have thought of looking for the peculiar grandeur of the Thames in the length of its course,
or in the extent of soil which it drains. Yet, if he had been so absurd, the American might have
recollected that a river, not to be compared with the Thames even as to volume of water--viz.,
the Tiber--has contrived to make itself heard of in this world for twenty-five centuries to
an extent not reached as yet by any river, however corpulent, of his own land. The glory of
the Thames is measured by the destiny of the population to which it ministers, by the commerce
which it supports, by the grandeur of the empire in which, though far from the largest, it is
the most influential stream. Upon some such scale, and not by a transfer of Columbian standards,
is the course of our English mails to be valued. The American may fancy the effect of his own
valuations to our English ears by supposing the case of a Siberian glorifying his country in these
terms:--"These wretches, sir, in France and England, cannot march half a mile in any direction
without finding a house where food can be had and lodging; whereas such is the noble desolation
of our magnificent country that in many a direction for a thousand miles I will engage that a
dog shall not find shelter from a snow-storm, nor a wren find an
apology for breakfast."] miles-- northwards for six hundred; and the
sympathy of our Lombard Street friends at parting is exalted a hundredfold
by a sort of visionary sympathy with the yet slumbering sympathies
which in so vast a succession we are going to awake.

Liberated from the embarrassments of the city, and issuing into the broad uncrowded avenues of
the northern suburbs, we soon begin to enter upon our natural pace of ten miles an hour. In the
broad light of the summer evening, the sun, perhaps, only just at the point of setting, we are
seen from every storey of every house. Heads of every age crowd to the windows; young and old
understand the language of our victorious symbols; and rolling volleys of sympathising cheers
run along us, behind us, and before us. The beggar, rearing himself against the wall, forgets
his lameness--real or assumed--thinks not of his whining trade, but stands erect, with bold
exulting smiles, as we pass him. The victory has healed him, and says, Be thou whole! Women
and children, from garrets alike and cellars, through infinite London, look down or look up with
loving eyes upon our gay ribbons and our martial laurels; sometimes kiss their hands; sometimes
hang out, as signals of affection, pocket-handkerchiefs, aprons, dusters, anything that, by
catching the summer breezes, will express an aerial jubilation. On the London side of Barnet,
to which we draw near within a few minutes after nine, observe that private carriage which is
approaching us. The weather being so warm, the glasses are all down; and one may read, as on the
stage of a theatre, everything that goes on within. It contains three ladies--one likely to
be "mamma," and two of seventeen or eighteen, who are probably her daughters. What lovely animation,
what beautiful unpremeditated pantomime, explaining to us every syllable that passes, in these ingenuous
girls! By the sudden start and raising of the hands on first discovering our laurelled equipage,
by the sudden movement and appeal to the elder lady from both of them, and by the heightened colour
on their animated countenances, we can almost hear them saying, "See, see! Look at their laurels!
Oh, mamma! there has been a great battle in Spain; and it has been
a great victory."

In a moment we are on the point of passing them. We passengers--I on the box, and the two on
the roof behind me--raise our hats to the ladies; the coachman makes his professional salute
with the whip; the guard even, though punctilious on the matter of his dignity as an officer
under the crown, touches his hat. The ladies move to us, in return, with a winning graciousness of gesture;
all smile on each side in a way that nobody could misunderstand,
and that nothing short of a grand national sympathy could so instantaneously
prompt.

Will these ladies say that we are nothing to them? Oh no; they will not say that. They cannot
deny--they do not deny--that for this night they are our sisters; gentle or simple, scholar or
illiterate servant, for twelve hours to come, we on the outside have the honour to be their brothers.
Those poor women, again, who stop to gaze upon us with delight at
the entrance of Barnet, and seem, by their air of weariness, to be
returning from labour--do you mean to say that they are washerwomen
and charwomen?

Oh, my poor friend, you are quite mistaken. I assure you they stand in a far higher rank; for
this one night they feel themselves by birthright to be daughters of England, and answer to
no humbler title.

Every joy, however, even rapturous joy--such is the sad law of earth-- may carry with it grief,
or fear of grief, to some. Three miles beyond Barnet, we see approaching us another private carriage,
nearly repeating the circumstances of the former case. Here, also, the glasses are all down;
here, also, is an elderly lady seated; but the two daughters are missing; for the single young
person sitting by the lady's side seems to be an attendant--so I judge from her dress, and
her air of respectful reserve. The lady is in mourning; and her countenance expresses sorrow.
 He can, under
pretense of awakening and cherishing the spirit of piety in the hearts of his pupils, present
the subject in such aspects and relations as to arouse the sectarian or denominational feelings
of some of his employers; but I believe, if this was honestly and fully avoided, there are
few, if any parents in our country who would not be gratified to have the great principle of
love to God manifest itself in the instructions of the school-room, and showing itself, by
its genuine indications, in the hearts and conduct of their children.

6. The community are agreed not only in believing that piety consists primarily in love to
God, but that the life of piety is to be commenced by penitence for past sins, and forgiveness,
in some way or other, through a Savior. I am aware that one class of theological writers, in
the heat of controversy, charge the other with believing that Jesus Christ was nothing more
nor less than a teacher of religion, and there are unquestionably individuals who take this
view. But these individuals are few. There are very few in our community who do not in some
sense look upon Jesus Christ as our Savior--our Redeemer; who do not feel themselves in some
way indebted to him for the offer of pardon. There may be here and there a theological student,
or a contributor to the columns of a polemical magazine, who ranks Jesus Christ with Moses
and with Paul. But the great mass of the fathers and mothers, of every name and denomination
through all the ranks of society, look up to the Savior of sinners with something at least
of the feeling that he is the object of extraordinary affection and reverence. I am aware,
however, that I am approaching the limit which, in many parts of our country, ought to bound
the religious influence of the teacher in a public school, and on this subject, as on every
other, he ought to do nothing directly or indirectly which would be displeasing to those who
have intrusted children to his care.

So much ground, it seems, the teacher may occupy, by common consent, in this country, and it
certainly is a great deal. It may be doubted whether, after all our disputes, there is a country
in the world whose inhabitants have so much in common in regard to religious belief. There
is, perhaps, no country in the world where the teacher may be allowed to do so much toward
leading his pupils to fear God and to obey his commands, with the cordial consent of parents,
as he can here.[3]

[Footnote 3: In speaking of this common ground, and in commenting upon it, I wish not to be
understood that I consider these truths as comprising all that is essential in Christianity.
Very far from it. A full expression of the Christian faith would go far in advance of all here
presented. We must not confound, however, what is essential to prepare the way for the forgiveness
of sin with what is essential that a child should understand in order to secure his penitence
and forgiveness. The former is a great deal, the latter very little.]

The ground which I have been laying out is common all over our country; in particular places
there will be even much more that is common. Of course the teacher, in such cases, will be
at much greater liberty. If a Roman Catholic community establish a school, and appoint a Roman
Catholic teacher, he may properly, in his intercourse with his scholars, allude, with commendation,
to the opinions and practices of that church. If a college is established by the Methodist
denomination, the teacher of that institution may, of course, explain and enforce there the
views of that society. Each teacher is confined only to those views which are common to the
founders and supporters of the particular institution to which he is attached.

I trust the principle which I have been attempting to enforce is fully before the reader's
mind, namely, that moral and religious instruction in a school being in a great degree extra-official
in its nature, must be carried no farther than the teacher can go with the common consent,
either expressed or implied, of those who have founded, and who support his school. Of course,
if those founders forbid it altogether, they have a right to do so, and the teacher must submit.
The only question that can justly arise is whether he will remain in such a situation, or go
and seek employment where a door of usefulness, here closed against him, will be opened. While
he remains, he must honestly and fully submit to the wishes of those in whose hands Providence
has placed the ultimate responsibility of training up the children of his school. It is only
for a partial and specific purpose that they are placed under his care.

The religious reader may inquire why I am so anxious to restrain, rather than to urge on, the
exercise of religious influence in schools. "There is far too little," some one will say, "instead
of too much, and teachers need to be encouraged and led on in this duty, not to be restrained
from it." There is, indeed, far too little religious influence exerted in common schools. What
I have said has been intended to prepare the way for an increase of it. My view of it is this:

If teachers do universally confine themselves to the limits which I have been attempting to
define, they may accomplish within these limits a vast amount of good. By attempting, however,
to exceed them, the confidence of parents is destroyed or weakened, and the door is closed.
In this way, injury to a very great extent has been done in many parts of our country. Parents
are led to associate with the very idea of religion, indirect and perhaps secret efforts to
influence their children in a way which they themselves would disapprove. They transfer to
the cause of piety itself the dislike which was first awakened by exceptionable means to promote
it; and other teachers, seeing these evil effects, are deterred from attempting what they might
easily have accomplished. Before, therefore, attempting to enforce the duty and to explain
the methods of exerting religious influence in school, I thought proper distinctly to state
with what restrictions and within what limits the work is to be done.

There are many teachers who profess to cherish the spirit and to entertain the hopes of piety,
who yet make no effort whatever to extend its influence to the hearts of their pupils. Others
appeal sometimes to religious truth merely to assist them in the government of the school.
They perhaps bring it before the minds of disobedient pupils in a vain effort to make an impression
upon the conscience of one who has done wrong, and who can not by other means be brought to
submission. But the pupil in such cases understands, or at least he believes, that the teacher
applies to religious truth only to eke out his own authority, and of course it produces no
effect. Another teacher thinks he must, to discharge his duty, give a certain amount, weekly,
of what he considers religious instruction. Pie accordingly appropriates a regular portion
of time to a formal lecture or exhortation, which he delivers without regard to the mental
habits of thought and feeling which prevail among his charge. He forgets that the heart must
be led, not driven to piety, and that unless his efforts are adapted to the nature of the minds
he is acting upon, and suited to influence them, he must as certainly fail of success as when
there is a want of adaptedness between the means and the end in any other undertaking whatever.

The arrangement which seems to me as well calculated as any for the religious exercises of
a school is this:

1. In the morning, open the school with a very short prayer, resembling in its object and length
the opening prayer in the morning at Congregational churches. The posture which, from some
considerable experience, I would recommend at this exercise, is sitting with the head reclined
upon the desk. The prayer, besides being short, should be simple in its language and specific
in its petitions. A degree of particularity and familiarity which would be improper elsewhere
is not only allowable here, but necessary to the production of the proper effect. That the
reader may understand to what extent I mean to be understood to recommend this, I will subjoin
a form, such as in spirit I suppose such a prayer ought to be.

"Our Father in Heaven, who hast kindly preserved the pupils and the teacher of this school
during the past night, come and grant us a continuance of thy protection and blessing during
this day. We can not spend the day prosperously and happily without thee. Come, then, and,
be in this school-room during this day, and help us all to be faithful and successful in duty.

"Guide the teacher in all that he may do. Give him wisdom, and patience, and faithfulness.
May he treat all his pupils with kindness; and if any of them should do any thing that is wrong,
wilt thou help him, gently but firmly, to endeavor to bring him back to duty. May he sympathize
with the difficulties and trials of all, and promote the present happiness as well as the intellectual
progress of all who are committed to his care.

"Take care of the pupils too. May they spend the day pleasantly and happily together. Wilt
thou, who didst originally give us all our powers, direct and assist us all, this day, in the
use and improvement of them. Remove difficulties from our path, and give us all fidelity and
patience in every duty. Let no one of us destroy our peace and happiness this day by breaking
any of thy commands, or encouraging our companions in sins, or neglecting, in any respect,
our duty. We ask all in the name of our great Redeemer. Amen."

Of course the prayer of each day will be varied, unless in special cases the teacher prefers
to read some form like the above. But let every one be minute and particular, relating especially
to school--to school temptations, and trials, and difficulties. Let every one be filled with
expressions relating to school, so that it will bear upon every sentence the impression that
it is the petition of a teacher and his pupils at the throne of grace.

2. If the pupils can sing, there may be a single verse, or sometimes two verses, of some well-known
hymn sung after the prayer at the opening of the school. Teachers will find it much easier
to introduce this practice than it would at first be supposed. In almost every school there
are enough who can sing to begin, especially if the first experiment is made in a recess, or
before or after school; and the beginning once made, the difficulty is over. If but few tunes
are sung, a very large proportion of the scholars will soon learn them.

3. Let there be no other regular exercise until the close of the afternoon school. When that
hour has arrived, let the teacher devote a very short period, five minutes perhaps, to religious
instruction, given in various ways. At one time he may explain and illustrate some important
truth. At another, read and comment upon a very short portion of Scripture. At another, relate
an anecdote or fact which will tend to interest the scholars in the performance of duty. The
teacher should be very careful not to imitate on these occasions the formal style of exhortation
from the pulpit. Let him use no cant and hackneyed phrases, and never approach the subject
of personal piety, or speak of such feelings as penitence for sin, trust in God, and love for
the Savior, unless his own heart is really at the time warmed by the emotions which he wishes
to awaken in others. Children very easily detect hypocrisy. They know very well when a parent
or teacher is talking to them on religious subjects merely as a matter of course for the sake
of effect, and such constrained and formal efforts never do any good.

Let, then, every thing which you do in reference to this subject be done with proper regard
to the character and condition of the youthful mind, and in such a way as shall be calculated
to interest as well as to instruct. A cold and formal exhortation, or even an apparently earnest
one, delivered in a tone of affected solemnity, will produce no good effect. Perhaps I ought
not to say it will produce no good effect, for good does sometimes result as a sort of accidental
consequence from almost any thing. I mean it will have no effectual tendency to do good. You
must vary your method, too, in order to interest your pupils. Watch their countenances when
you are addressing them, and see if they look interested. If they do not, be assured that there
is something wrong, or at least something ill-judged or inefficient in your manner of explaining
the truths which you wish to have produce an effect upon their minds.

That you may be prepared to bring moral and religious truths before their minds in the way
I have described, your own mind must take a strong interest in this class of truths. You must
habituate yourself to look at the moral and religious aspects and relations of all that you
see and hear. When you are reading, notice such facts and remember such narratives as you can
turn to good account in this way. In the same way, treasure up in your mind such occurrences
as may come under your own personal observation when traveling, or when mixing with society.

That the spirit and manner of these religious exercises may be the more distinctly understood,
I will give some examples.

Let us suppose, then, that the hour for closing school has come. The books are laid aside;
the room is still; the boys expect the few words which the teacher is accustomed to address
to them, and, looking up to him, they listen to hear what he has to say.

"You may take your Bibles."

The boys, by a simultaneous movement, open their desks, and take from them their copies of
the sacred volume.

"What is the first book of the New Testament?"

"Matthew," they all answer at once.

"The second?" "Mark." "The third?" "Luke." "The next?" "John." "The next?" "The Acts." "The next?"

Many answer, "Romans."

"The next?"

A few voices say faintly, and with hesitation, "First of Corinthians."

"I perceive your answers become fainter and fainter. Do you know what is the last book of the
New Testament?"

The boys answer promptly, "Revelations."

"Do you know what books are between the Acts and the book of Revelation?"

Some say "No, sir;" some begin to enumerate such books as occur to them, and some, perhaps,
begin to name them promptly and in their regular order.

"I do not mean," interrupts the teacher, "the names of the books, but the kinds of books."

The boys hesitate.

"They are epistles or letters. Do you know who wrote the letters?"

"Paul," "Peter," answer many voices at once.

"Yes, there were several writers. Now the point which I wish to bring before you is this; do
you know in what order, I mean on what principles, the books are arranged?"

"No, sir," is the universal reply.

I will tell you. First come all Paul's epistles. If you turn over the leaves of the Testament,
you will see that Paul's letters are all put together after the book of the Acts; and what
I wish you to notice is, that they are arranged in the order of their length. The longest comes
first, and then the next, and so on to the shortest, which is the epistle to Philemon. This,
of course, comes last--no, I am wrong in saying it is the last of Paul's epistles; there is
one more to the Hebrews; and this comes after all the others, for there has been a good deal
of dispute whether it was really written by Paul. You will see that his name is not at the
beginning of it, as it is in his other epistles: so it was put last.

Then comes the Epistle of James. Will you see whether it is longer than any that come after
it? The boys, after a minute's examination, answer, "Yes, sir;" "Yes, sir."

"What comes next?"

"The epistles of Peter."

"Yes; and you will see that the longest of Peter's epistles is next in length to that of James's;
and, indeed, all his are arranged in the order of their length."

"Yes, sir."

"What comes next?"

"John's."

"Yes; and they are arranged in the order of their length. Do you now understand the principle
of the arrangement of the epistles?"

"Yes, sir."

"I should like to have any of you who are interested in it to try to express this principle
in a few sentences, on paper, and lay it on my desk to-morrow, and I will read what you write.
You will find it very difficult to express it. Now you may lay aside your books. It will be
pleasanter for you if you do it silently."

Intelligent children will be interested even in so simple a point as this--much more interested
than a maturer mind, unacquainted with the peculiarities of children, would suppose. By bringing
up from time to time some such literary inquiry as this, they will be led insensibly to regard
the Bible as opening a field for interesting intellectual research, and will more easily be
led to study it.

At another time the teacher spends his five minutes in aiming to accomplish a very different
object. I will suppose it to be one of those afternoons when all has gone smoothly and pleasantly
in school. There has been nothing to excite strong interest or emotion; and there has been
(as every teacher knows there sometimes will be), without any assignable cause which he can
perceive, a calm, and quiet, and happy spirit diffused over the minds and countenances of the
little assembly. His evening communication should accord with this feeling, and he should make
it the occasion to promote those pure and hallowed emotions in which every immortal mind must
find its happiness, if it is to enjoy any worth possessing.

When all is still, the teacher addresses his pupils as follows:

"I have nothing but a simple story to tell you to-night. It is true, and the fact interested
me very much when I witnessed it, but I do not know that it will interest you now merely to
hear it repeated. It is this:

"Last vacation, I was traveling in a remote and thinly-settled country, among the mountains,
in another state. I was riding with a gentleman on an almost unfrequented road. Forests were
all around us, and the houses were small and very few.

"At length, as we were passing an humble and solitary dwelling, the gentleman said to me, 'There
is a young woman sick in this house; should you like to go in and see her?' 'Yes, sir,' said
I, 'very much. She can have very few visitors, I think, in this lonely place, and if you think
she would like to see us, I should like to go.'

"We turned our horses toward the door, and as we were riding up, I asked what was the matter
with the young woman.

"'Consumption,' the gentleman replied; 'and I suppose she will not live long.'

"At that moment we dismounted and entered the house. It was a very pleasant summer afternoon,
and the door was open. We entered, and were received by an elderly lady, who seemed glad to
see us. In one corner of the room was a bed, on which was lying the patient whom we had come
to visit. She was pale and thin in her countenance, but there was a very calm and happy expression
beaming in her eye. I went up to her bedside, and asked her how she did.

"I talked with her some time, and found that she was a Christian. She did not seem to know
whether she would get well again or not, and, in fact, she did not appear to care much about
it. She was evidently happy then, and she believed that she should continue so. She had been
penitent for her sins, and had sought and obtained forgiveness, and enjoyed, in her loneliness,
not only the protection of God, but also his presence in her heart, diffusing peace and happiness
there. When I came into the house, I said to myself, 'I pity, I am sure, a person who is confined
by sickness in this lonely place, with nothing to interest or amuse her;' but when I came out,
I said to myself, 'I do not pity her at all.'"

Never destroy the effect of such a communication as this by attempting to follow it up with
an exhortation, or with general remarks, vainly attempting to strengthen the impression.

Never, do I say? Perhaps there may be some exceptions. But children are not reached by formal
exhortations; their hearts are touched and affected in other ways. Sometimes you must reprove,
sometimes you must condemn; but indiscriminate and perpetual harangues about the guilt of impenitence,
and earnest entreaties to begin a life of piety, only harden the hearts they are intended to
soften, and consequently confirm those who hear them in the habits of sin.

In the same way a multitude of other subjects, infinite in number and variety, may be brought
before your pupils at stated seasons for religious instruction. It is unnecessary to give any
more particular examples, but still it may not be amiss to suggest a few general principles,
which ought to guide those who are addressing the young on every subject, and especially on
the subject of religion.

1. Make no effort to simplify language when addressing the young. Children always observe this,
and are always displeased with it, unless they are very young; and it is not necessary. They
can understand ordinary language well enough, if the subject is within their comprehension,
and treated in a manner adapted to their powers. If you doubt whether children can understand
language, tell such a story as this, with ardor of tone and proper gesticulation, to a child
only two or three years old:

"I saw an enormous dog in the street the other day. He was sauntering along slowly, until he
saw a huge piece of meat lying down on the ground. He grasped it instantly between his teeth,
and ran away with all speed, until he disappeared around a corner so that I could see him no more."

In such a description there is a large number of words which such a child would not understand
if they stood alone, but the whole description would be perfectly intelligible. The reason
is, the subject is simple; the facts are such as a very little child would be interested in;
and the connection of each new word, in almost every instance, explains its meaning. That is
the way by which children learn all language. They learn the meaning of words, not by definitions,
but by their connection in the sentences in which they hear them; and, by long practice, they
acquire an astonishing facility of doing this. It is true they sometimes mistake, but not often,
and the teacher of children of almost any age need not be afraid that he shall not be understood.
There is no danger from his using the language of men, if his subject, and the manner in which
he treats it, and the form and structure of his sentences, are what they ought to be. Of course
there may be cases, in fact there often will be cases, where particular words will require
special explanation, but they will be comparatively few, and instead of making efforts to avoid
them, it will be better to let them come. The pupils will be interested and profited by the
explanation.

Perhaps some may ask what harm it will do to simplify language when talking to children. "It
certainly can do no injury," they may say, "and it diminishes all possibility of being misunderstood."
It does injury in at least three ways:

(1.) It disgusts the young persons to whom it is addressed, and prevents their being interested
in what is said. I once met two children, twelve years of age, who had just returned from hearing
a very able discourse, delivered before a number of Sabbath-schools assembled on some public
occasion. "How did you like the discourse?" said I.

"Very well indeed," they replied; "only," said one of them, smiling, "he talked to us as if
we were all little children."

Girls and boys, however young, never consider themselves little children, for they can always
look down upon some younger than themselves. They are mortified when treated as though they
could not understand what is really within the reach of their faculties. They do not like to
have their powers underrated, and they are right in this feeling. It is common to all, old
and young.

(2.) Children are kept back in learning language if their teacher makes effort to come down,
as it is called, to their comprehension in the use of words. Notice that I say in the use of
words; for, as I shall show presently, it is absolutely necessary to come down to the comprehension
of children in some other respects. If, however, in the use of words, those who address children
confine themselves to such words as children already understand, how are they to make progress
in that most important of all studies, the knowledge of language? Many a mother keeps back
her child, in this way, to a degree that is hardly conceivable, thus doing all in her power
to perpetuate in the child an ignorance of its mother tongue.

Teachers ought to make constant efforts to increase their scholars' stock of words by using
new ones from time to time, taking care to explain them when the connection does not do it
for them; so that, instead of coming down to the language of childhood, they ought rather to
go as far away from it as they can, without leaving their pupils behind them.

(3.) But perhaps the greatest evil of this practice is, it satisfies the teacher. He thinks
he addresses his pupils in the right manner, and overlooks altogether the real peculiarities
in which the power to interest the young depends. He talks to them in simple language, and
wonders why they are not interested. He certainly is plain enough. He is vexed with them for
not attending to what he says, attributing it to their dullness or regardlessness of all that
is useful or good, instead of perceiving that the great difficulty is his own want of skill.
These three evils are sufficient to deter the teacher from the practice.

2. Present your subject, not in its general views, but in its minute details. This is the great
secret of interesting the young. Present it in its details and in its practical exemplifications;
do this with any subject whatever, and children will always be interested.

To illustrate this, let us suppose two teachers wishing to explain to their pupils the same
subject, and taking the following opposite methods of doing it. One, at the close of school,
addresses his charge as follows:

"The moral character of any action, that is, whether it is right or wrong, depends upon the
motives with which it is performed. Men look only at the outward conduct, but God looks at
the heart. In order, now, that any action should be pleasing to God, it is necessary it should
be performed from the motive of a desire to please him.

"Now there are a great many other motives of action which prevail among mankind besides this
right one. There is love of praise, love of money, affection for friends, and many others."

By the time the teacher has proceeded thus far, he finds, as he looks around the room, that
the countenances of his pupils are assuming a listless and inattentive air. One is restless
in his seat, evidently paying no attention. Another has reclined his head upon his desk, lost
in a reverie, and others are looking round the room at one another, or at the door, restless
and impatient, hoping that the dull lecture will soon be over.

The other teacher says:

"I have thought of an experiment I might try, which would illustrate to you a very important
subject. Suppose I should call one of the boys, A, to me, and should say to him, 'I wish you
to go to your seat, and transcribe a piece of poetry as handsomely as you can. If it is written
as well as you can possibly write it, I will give you a quarter of a dollar. Suppose I say
this to him privately, so that none of the rest of the boys can hear, and he goes to take his
seat and begins to work. You perceive that I have presented to him a motive to exertion."

"Yes, sir," say the boys, all looking with interest at the teacher, wondering how this experiment
is going to end.

"Well, what would that motive be?"

"Money." "The quarter of a dollar." "Love of money," or perhaps other answers, are heard from
the various parts of the room.

"Yes, love of money it is called. Now suppose I should call another boy, one with whom I was
particularly acquainted, and who I should know would make an effort to please me, and should
say to him, 'For a particular reason, I want you to copy this poetry'--giving him the same--'I
wish you to copy it handsomely, for I wish to send it away, and have not time to copy it myself.
Can you do it for me?'

"Suppose the boy should say he could, and should take it to his seat and begin, neither of
the boys knowing what the other was doing. I should now have offered to this second boy a motive.
Would it be the same with the other?"

"No, sir."

"What was the other?"

"Love of money."

"What is this?"

The boys hesitate.

"It might be called," continues the teacher, "friendship. It is the motive of a vast number
of the actions which are performed in this world.

"Do you think of any other common motive of action besides love of money and friendship?"

"Love of honor," says one; "fear," says another.

"Yes," continues the teacher, "both these are common motives. I might, to exhibit them, call
two more boys, one after the other, and say to the one, 'I will thank you to go and copy this
piece of poetry as well as you can. I want to send it to the school committee as a specimen
of improvement made in this school.'

"To the other I might say, 'You have been a careless boy to-day; you have not got your lessons
well. Now take your seat and copy this poetry. Do it carefully. Unless you take pains, and
do it as well as you possibly can, I shall punish you severely before you go home.'

"How many motives have I got now? Four, I believe."

"Yes, sir," say the boys.

"Love of money, friendship, love of honor, and fear. We called the first boy A; let us call
the others B, C, and D; no, we shall remember better to call them by the name of their motives.
We will call the first M, for money; the second, F, for friendship; the third, H, for honor;
and the last, F--we have got an F already; what shall we do? On the whole, it is of no consequence;
we will have two F's, but we will take care not to confound them.

"But there are a great many other motives entirely distinct from these. For example, suppose
I should say to a fifth boy, 'Will you copy this piece of poetry? It belongs to one of the
little boys in school: he wants a copy of it, and I told him I would try to get some one to
copy it for him.' This motive, now, would be benevolence; that is, if the boy who was asked
to copy it was not particularly acquainted with the other, and did it chiefly to oblige him.
We will call this boy B, for Benevolence.

"Now suppose I call a sixth boy, and say to him, 'I have set four or five boys to work copying
this piece of poetry; now I wish you to sit down, and see if you can not do it better than
any of them. After all are done, I will compare them, and see if yours is not the best.' This
would be trying to excite emulation. We must call this boy, then, E. But the time I intended
to devote to talking with you on this subject for to-day is expired. Perhaps to-morrow I will
take up the subject again."

The reader now will observe that the grand peculiarity of the instructions given by this last
teacher, as distinguished from those of the first, consists in this, that the parts of the
subject are presented in detail, and in particular exemplification. In the first case, the
whole subject was dispatched in a single, general, and comprehensive description; in the latter,
it is examined minutely, one point being brought forward at a time. The discussions are enlivened,
too, by meeting and removing such little difficulties as will naturally come up in such an
investigation. Boys and girls will take an interest in such a lecture; they will regret to
have it come to a conclusion, and will give their attention when the subject is again brought
forward on the following day. Let us suppose the time for continuing the exercise to have arrived.
The teacher resumes the discussion thus:

"I was talking to you yesterday about the motives of action. How many had I made?"

Some say "Four," some "Five," some "Six."

"Can you name any of them?"

The boys attempt to recollect them, and they give the names in the order in which they accidentally
occur to the various individuals. Of course the words Fear, Emulation, Honor, Friendship, and
others, come in confused and irregular sounds from every part of the school-room.

"You do not recollect the order," says the teacher, "and it is of no consequence, for the order
I named was only accidental. Now to go on with my account: suppose all these boys to sit down
and go to writing, each one acting under the impulse of the motive which had been presented
to him individually. But, in order to make the supposition answer my purpose, I must add two
other cases. I will imagine that one of these boys is called away a few minutes, and leaves
his paper on his desk, and that another boy, of an ill-natured and morose disposition, happening
to pass by and see his paper, thinks he will sit down and write upon it a few lines, just to
tease and vex the one who was called away. We will also suppose that I call another boy to
me, who I have reason to believe is a sincere Christian, and say to him, 'Here is a new duty
for you to perform this afternoon. This piece of poetry is to be copied; now do it carefully
and faithfully. You know that this morning you committed yourself to God's care during the
day; now remember that he has been watching you all the time thus far, and that he will be
noticing you all the time you are doing this; he will be pleased if you do your duty faithfully.'

"The boys thus all go to writing. Now suppose a stranger should come in, and, seeing them all
busy, should say to me,

"'What are all these boys doing?'

"'They are writing.'

"'What are they writing?'

"'They are writing a piece of poetry.'

"'They seem to be very busy; they are very industrious, good boys.'

"'Oh no! it is not by any means certain that they are good boys.'

"'I mean that they are good boys now; that they are doing right at this time."

'That is not certain; some of them are doing right and some are doing very wrong, though they
are all writing the same piece of poetry.'

The stranger would perhaps look surprised while I said this, and would ask an explanation,
and I might properly reply as follows:

'Whether the boys are at this moment doing right or wrong depends not so much upon what they
are doing as upon the feelings of the heart with which they are doing it. I acknowledge that
they are all doing the same thing outwardly; they are all writing the same extract, and they
are all doing it attentively and carefully, but they are thinking of very different things.'

'What are they thinking of?'

'Do you see that boy?' I might say, pointing to one of them. 'His name is M. He is writing
for money. He is saying to himself all the time, "I hope I shall get the quarter of a dollar."
He is calculating what he shall buy with it, and every good or bad letter that he makes, he
is considering the chance whether he shall succeed or fail in obtaining it.'

'What is the next boy to him thinking of?'

'His name is B. He is copying to oblige a little fellow whom he scarcely knows, and is trying
to make his copy handsome, so as to give him pleasure. He is thinking how gratified his schoolmate
will be when he receives it, and is forming plans to get acquainted with him.

"'Do you see that boy in the back seat? He has maliciously taken another boy's place just to
spoil his work. He knows, too, that he is breaking the rules of the school in being out of
his place, but he stays notwithstanding, and is delighting himself with thinking how disappointed
and sad his schoolmate will be when he comes in and finds his work spoiled by having another
handwriting in it, when he was depending on doing it all himself.'

"'I see,' the stranger might say by this time, 'that there is a great difference among these
boys; have you told me about them all?'

"'No,' I might reply, 'there are several others. I will only mention one more. He sits in the
middle of the second desk. He is writing carefully, simply because he wishes to do his duty
and please God. He thinks that God is present, and loves him, and takes care of him, and he
is obedient and grateful in return. I do not mean that he is all the time thinking of God,
but love to him is his motive of effort.'

"Do you see now, boys, what I mean to teach you by this long supposition?"

"Yes, sir."

"I presume you do. Perhaps it would be difficult for you to express it in words; I can express
it in general terms thus:

"Our characters depend, not on what we do, but on the spirit and motive with which we do it.
What I have been saying throws light upon one important verse in the Bible, which I should
like to have read. James, have you a Bible in your desk?"

"Yes, sir."

"Will you turn to 1 Samuel, xvi., 7, and then rise and read it? Read it loud, so that all the
school can hear."

James read as follows:

"MAN LOOKETH ON THE OUTWARD APPEARANCE, BUT GOD LOOKETH ON THE HEART."

This is the way to reach the intellect and the heart of the young. Go into detail. Explain
truth and duty, not in an abstract form, but exhibit it in actual and living examples.

(3.) Be very cautious how you bring in the awful sanctions of religion to assist you directly
in the discipline of your school. You will derive a most powerful indirect assistance from
the influence of religion in the little community which you govern, but this will be through
the prevalence of its spirit in the hearts of your pupils, and not from any assistance which
you can usually derive from it in managing particular cases of transgression. Many teachers
make great mistakes in this respect. A bad boy, who has done something openly and directly
subversive of the good order of the school, or the rights of his companions, is called before
the master, who thinks that the most powerful weapon to wield against him is the Bible. So,
while the trembling culprit stands before him, he administers to him a reproof, which consists
of an almost ludicrous mixture of scolding, entreaty, religious instruction, and threatening
of punishment. But such an occasion as this is no time to touch a bad boy's heart. He is steeled
at such a moment against any thing but mortification and the desire to get out of the hands
of the master, and he has an impression that the teacher appeals to religious principles only
to assist him to sustain his own authority. Of course, religious truth, at such a time, can
make no good impression. There may be exceptions to this rule. There doubtless are. I have
found some; and every successful teacher who reads this will probably call to mind some which
have occurred in the course of his own experience. I am only speaking of what ought to be the
general rule, which is to reserve religious truths for moments of a different character altogether.
Bring the principles of the Bible forward when the mind is calm, when the emotions are quieted,
and all within is at rest; and in exhibiting them, be actuated, not by a desire to make your
duties of government easier, but to promote the real and permanent happiness of your charge.

(4.) Do not be eager to draw from your pupils an expression of their personal interest in religious
truth. Lay before them, and enforce, by all the means in your power, the principles of Christian
duty, but do not converse with them for the purpose of gratifying your curiosity in regard
to their piety, or your spiritual pride by counting up the numbers of those who have been led
to piety by your influence. Beginning to act from Christian principle is the beginning of a
new life, and it may be an interesting subject of inquiry to you to ascertain how many of your
pupils have experienced the change; but, in many cases, it would merely gratify curiosity to
know. There is no question, too, that, in very many instances, the faint glimmering of religious
interest, which would have kindled into a bright flame, is extinguished at once, and perhaps
forever, by the rough inquiries of a religious friend. Besides, if you make inquiries, and
form a definite opinion of your pupils, they will know that this is your practice, and many
a one will repose in the belief that you consider him or her a Christian, and you will thus
increase the number, already unfortunately too large, of those who maintain the form and pretenses
of piety without its power; whose hearts are filled with self-sufficiency and spiritual pride,
and perhaps zeal for the truths and external duties of religion, while the real spirit of piety
has no place there. They trust to some imaginary change, long since passed by, and which has
proved to be spurious by its failing of its fruits. The best way--in fact, the only way--to
guard against this danger, especially with the young, is to show, by your manner of speaking
and acting on this subject at all times, that you regard a truly religious life as the only
evidence of piety, and that, consequently, however much interest your pupils may apparently
take in religious instruction, they can not know, and you can not know, whether Christian principle
reigns within them in any other way than by following them through life, and observing how,
and with what spirit, the various duties which devolve upon them are performed.

There are very many fallacious indications of piety, so fallacious and so plausible that there
are very few, even among intelligent Christians, who are not often greatly deceived. "By their
fruits ye shall know them," said the Savior; a direction sufficiently plain, one would think,
and pointing to a test sufficiently easy to be applied. But it is slow and tedious work to
wait for fruits, and we accordingly seek a criterion which will help us quicker to a result.
You see your pupil serious and thoughtful. It is well; but it is not proof of piety. You see
him deeply interested when you speak of his obligations to his Maker, and the duties he owes
to Him. This is well, but it is no proof of piety. You know he reads his Bible daily, and offers
his morning and evening prayers. When you speak to him of God's goodness, and of his past ingratitude,
his bosom heaves with emotion, and the tear stands in his eye. It is all well. You may hope
that he is going to devote his life to the service of God; but you can not know, you can not
even believe with any great confidence. These appearances are not piety. They are not conclusive
evidences of it. They are only, in the young, faint grounds of hope that the genuine fruits
of piety will appear.

I am aware that there are many persons so habituated to judging with confidence of the piety
of others from some such indications as I have described, that they will think I carry my cautions
to the extreme. Perhaps I do; but the Savior said, "By their fruits ye shall know them," and
it is safest to follow his direction.

By the word "fruits," however, our Savior unquestionably does not mean the mere moral virtues
of this life. The fruits to be looked at are the fruits of piety, that is, indications of permanent
attachment to the Creator, and a desire to obey his commands. We must look for these.

There is no objection to your giving particular individuals special instruction adapted to
their wants and circumstances. You may do this by writing or in other ways, but do not lead
them to make up their minds fully that they are Christians in such a sense as to induce them
to feel that the work is done. Let them understand that becoming a Christian is beginning a
work, not finishing it. Be cautious how you form an opinion even yourself on the question of
the genuineness of their piety. Be content not to know. You will be more faithful and watchful
if you consider it uncertain, and they will be more faithful and watchful too.

(5.) Bring very fully and frequently before your pupils the practical duties of religion in
all their details, especially their duties at home, to their parents, and to their brothers
and sisters. Do not, however, allow them to mistake morality for religion. Show them clearly
what piety is in its essence, and this you can do most successfully by exhibiting its effects.

(6.) Finally, let me insert as the keystone of all that I have been saying in this chapter,
be sincere, and ardent, and consistent in your own piety. The whole structure which I have
been attempting to build will tumble into ruins without this. Be constantly watchful and careful,
not only to maintain intimate communion with God, and to renew it daily in your seasons of
retirement, but to guard your conduct. Let piety control and regulate it. Show your pupils
that it makes you amiable, patient, forbearing, benevolent in little things as well as in great
things, and your example will co-operate with your instructions, and allure your pupils to
walk in the paths which you tread. But no clearness and faithfulness in religious teaching
will atone for the injury which a bad example will effect. Conduct speaks louder than words,
and no persons are more shrewd than the young to discover the hollowness of empty professions,
and the heartlessness of mere pretended interest in their good.

I am aware that this book may fall into the hands of some who may take little interest in the
subject of this chapter. To such I may perhaps owe an apology for having thus fully discussed
a topic in which only a part of my readers can be supposed to be interested. My apology is
this: It is obvious and unquestionable that we all owe allegiance to the Supreme. It is so
obvious and unquestionable as to be entirely beyond the necessity of proof, for it is plain
that nothing but such a bond of union can keep the peace among the millions of distinct intelligences
with which the creation is filled. It is therefore the plain duty of every man to establish
that connection himself and his Maker which the Bible requires, and to do what he can to bring
others to the peace and happiness of piety. These truths are so plain that they admit of no
discussion and no denial, and it seems to me highly unsafe for any man to neglect or to postpone
the performance of the duty which arises from them. A still greater hazard is incurred when
such a man, having forty or fifty fellow-beings almost entirely under his influence, leads
them, by his example, away from their Maker, and so far that he must, in many cases, hopelessly
confirm the separation. With these views, I could not, when writing on the duties of a teacher
of the young, refrain from bringing distinctly to view this which has so imperious a claim.

CHAPTER VI.

THE MOUNT VERNON SCHOOL.

Perhaps there is no way by which teachers can, in a given time, do more to acquire a knowledge
of their art, and an interest in it, than by visiting each others' schools.

It is not always the case that any thing is observed by the visitor which he can directly and
wholly introduce into his own school, but what he sees suggests to him modifications or changes,
and it gives him, at any rate, renewed strength and resolution in his work to see how similar
objects are accomplished, or similar difficulties removed by others. I have often thought that
there ought, on this account, to be far greater freedom and frequency in the inter-change of
visits than there is.

Next, however, to a visit to a school, comes the reading of a vivid description of it. I do
not mean a cold, theoretical exposition of the general principles of its management and instruction,
for these are essentially the same in all good schools. I mean a minute account of the plans
and arrangements by which these general principles are applied. Suppose twenty of the most
successful teachers in New England would write such a description, each of his own school,
how valuable would be the volume which should contain them!

With these views, I have concluded to devote one chapter to the description of a school which
was for several years under my care.[4] The account was originally prepared and printed, but
not published, for the purpose of distribution among the scholars, simply because this seemed
to be the easiest and surest method of making them, on their admission to the school, acquainted
with its arrangements and plans. It is addressed, therefore, throughout to a pupil, and I preserve
its original form, as, by its being addressed to pupils, and intended to influence them, it
is an example of the mode of address and the kind of influence recommended in this work. It
was chiefly designed for new scholars; a copy of it was presented to each on the day of her
admission to the school, and it was made her first duty to read it attentively.

[Footnote 4: The author was still connected with this school at the time when this work was
written.]

The system which it describes is one which gradually grew up in the institution under the writer's
care. The school was commenced with a small number of pupils, and without any system or plan
whatever, and the one here described was formed insensibly and by slow degrees, through the
influence of various and accidental circumstances. I have no idea that it is superior to the
plans of government and instruction adopted in many other schools. It is true that there must
necessarily be some system in every large institution; but various instructors will fall upon
different principles of organization, which will naturally be such as are adapted to the habits
of thought and manner of instruction of their respective authors, and consequently each will
be best for its own place. While, therefore, some system--some methodical arrangement is necessary
in all schools, it is not necessary that it should be the same in all. It is not even desirable
that it should be. I consider this plan as only one among a multitude of others, each of which
will be successful, not by the power of its intrinsic qualities, but just in proportion to
the ability and faithfulness with which it is carried into effect.

There may be features of this plan which teachers who may read it may be inclined to adopt.
In other cases, suggestions may occur to the mind of the reader, which may modify in some degree
his present plans. Others may merely be interested in seeing how others effect what they, by
other methods, are equally successful in effecting.

It is in these and similar ways that I have often myself been highly benefited in visiting
schools and, in reading descriptions of them, and it is for such purposes that I insert the
account here.

TO A NEW SCHOLAR ON HER ADMISSION TO THE MOUNT VERNON SCHOOL.

As a large school is necessarily somewhat complicated in its plan, and as new scholars usually
find that it requires some time and gives them no little trouble to understand the arrangements
they find in operation here, I have concluded to write a brief description of these arrangements,
by help of which you will, I hope, the sooner feel at home in your new place of duty. That
I may be more distinct and specific, I shall class what I have to say under separate heads.

I. YOUR PERSONAL DUTY.

Your first anxiety as you come into the school-room, and take your seat among the busy multitude,
if you are conscientiously desirous of doing your duty, will be, lest, ignorant as you are
of the whole plan and of all the regulations of the institution, you should inadvertently do
what will be considered wrong. I wish first, then, to put you at rest on this score. There
is but one rule of this school. That you can easily keep.

You will observe on one side of my desk a clock upon the wall, and not far from it a piece
of apparatus that is probably new to you. It is a metallic plate, upon which are marked, in
gilded letters, the words "Study Hours." This is upright, but it is so attached by its lower
edge to its support by means of a hinge that it can fall over from above, and thus be in a
horizontal position; or it will rest in an inclined position--half down, as it is called. It
is drawn up and let down by a cord passing over a pulley. When it passes either way, its upper
part touches a bell, which gives all in the room notice of its motion.

Now when this "Study Card" [5] as the scholars call it, is up, so that the words "STUDY HOURS"
are presented to the view of the school, it is the signal for silence and study. THERE IS THEN
TO BE NO COMMUNICATION AND NO LEAVING OF SEATS EXCEPT AT THE DIRECTION OF TEACHERS. When it
is half down, each scholar may leave her seat and whisper, but she must do nothing which will
disturb others. When it is down, all the duties of school are suspended, and scholars are left
entirely to their liberty.

[Footnote 5: This apparatus has been previously described. See p. 47.]

As this is the only rule of the school, it deserves a little more full explanation; for not
only your progress in study, but your influence in promoting the welfare of the school, and,
consequently, your peace and happiness while you are a member of it, will depend upon the strictness
with which you observe it.

Whenever, then, the study card goes up, and you hear the sound of its little bell, immediately
and instantaneously stop, whatever you are saying. If you are away from your seat, go directly
to it and there remain, and forget in your own silent and solitary studies, so far as you can,
all that are around you. You will remember that all communication is forbidden. Whispering,
making signs, writing upon paper or a slate, bowing to any one, and, in fact, every possible
way by which one person may have any sort of mental intercourse with another, is wrong. A large
number of the scholars take a pride and pleasure in carrying this rule into as perfect an observance
as possible. They say that as this is the only rule with which I trouble them, they ought certainly
to observe this faithfully. I myself, however, put it upon other ground. I am satisfied that
it is better and pleasanter for you to observe it most rigidly, if it is attempted to be enforced
at all.

You will ask, "Can not we obtain permission of you or of the teachers to leave our seats or
to whisper if it is necessary?" The answer is "No." You must never ask permission of me or
of the teachers. You can leave seats or speak at the direction of the teachers, that is, when
they of their own accord ask you to do it, but you are never to ask their permission. If you
should, and if any teachers should give you permission, it would be of no avail. I have never
given them authority to grant any permissions of the kind.

You will then say, "Are we never, on any occasion whatever, to leave our seats in study hours?"
Yes, you are. There are two ways:

1. At the direction of teachers.--Going to and from recitations is considered as at the direction
of teachers. So, if a person is requested by a teacher to transact any business, or is elected
to a public office, or appointed upon a committee, leaving seats or speaking, so far as is
really necessary for the accomplishing such a purpose, is considered as at the direction of
teachers, and is consequently right. In the same manner, if a teacher should ask you individually,
or give general notice to the members of a class, to come to her seat for private instruction,
or to go to any part of the school-room for her, it would be right to do it. The distinction,
you observe, is this: the teacher may, of her own accord, direct any leaving of seats which
she may think necessary to accomplish the objects of the school. She must not, however, at
the request of an individual, for the sake of her mere private convenience, give her permission
to speak or to leave her seat. If, for example, a teacher should say to you in your class,
"As soon as you have performed a certain work you may bring it to me," you would, in bringing
it, be acting under her direction, and would consequently do right. If, however, you should
want a pencil, and should ask her to give you leave to borrow it, even if she should give you
leave you would do wrong to go, for you would not be acting at her direction, but simply by
her consent, and she has no authority to grant consent.

2. The second case in which you may leave your seat is when some very uncommon occurrence takes
place, which is sufficient reason for suspending all rules. If your neighbor is faint, you
may speak to her, and, if necessary, lead her out. If your mother or some other friend should
come into the school-room, you can go and sit with her upon the sofa, and talk about the school.[6]
And so in many other similar cases. Be very careful not to abuse this privilege, and make slight
causes the grounds of your exceptions. It ought to be a very clear case. If a young lady is
unwell in a trifling degree, so as to need no assistance, you would evidently do wrong to talk
to her. The rule, in fact, is very similar to that which all well-bred people observe at church.
They never speak or leave their seats unless some really important cause, such as sickness,
requires them to break over all rules and go out. You have, in the same manner, in really important
cases, such as serious sickness in your own case or in that of your companions, or the coming
in of a stranger, or any thing else equally extraordinary, power to lay aside any rule, and
to act as the emergency may require. During the first stage, I found out that Cyclops was mortal:
he was liable to the shocking affection of sleep--a thing which previously
I had never suspected.

If a man indulges in the vicious habit of sleeping, all the skill in aurigation of Apollo himself,
with the horses of Aurora to execute his notions, avails him nothing.

"Oh, Cyclops!" I exclaimed, "thou art mortal. My friend, thou snorest." Through the first eleven
miles, however, this infirmity--which I grieve to say that he shared with the whole Pagan Pantheon--betrayed
itself only by brief snatches. On waking up, he made an apology for himself which, instead
of mending matters, laid open a gloomy vista of coming disasters.
 This all the scholars repeatedly acknowledged;
and they almost unanimously admitted that the good of the school required the prohibition of
all communication during certain hours. I gave them their choice, either always to ask permission
when they wished to speak, or to have a certain time allowed for the purpose, during which
free intercommunication might be allowed to all the school, with the understanding, however,
that, out of this time, no permission should ever be asked or granted. They very wisely chose
the latter plan, and the Study Card was constructed and put up, to mark the times of free communication
and of silent study. The card was at first down every half hour for one or two minutes. The
scholars afterward thinking that their intellectual habits would be improved and the welfare
of the school promoted by their having a longer time for uninterrupted study, of their own
accord, without any influence from me, proposed that the card should be down only once an hour.
This plan was adopted by them by vote. I wish it to be understood that it was not my plan,
but theirs; and that I am at any time willing to have the Study Card down once in half an hour,
whenever a majority of the scholars, voting by ballot, desire it.

You will find that this system of having a distinct time for whispering, when all may whisper
freely, all communication being entirely excluded at other times, will at first give you some
trouble. It will be hard for you, if you are not accustomed to it, to learn conscientiously
and faithfully to comply. Besides, at first you will often need some little information or
desire to ask for an article which you might obtain in a moment, but which you can not innocently
ask for till the card is down, and this might keep you waiting an hour. You will, however,
after a few such instances, soon learn to make your preparations beforehand, and if you are
a girl of enlarged views and elevated feelings, you will good-humoredly acquiesce in suffering
a little inconvenience yourself for the sake of helping to preserve those distinct and well
defined lines by which all boundaries must be marked in a large establishment, if order and
system are to be preserved at all.

Though at first you may experience a little inconvenience, you will soon take pleasure in the
scientific strictness of the plan. It will gratify you to observe the profound stillness of
the room where a hundred are studying. You will take pleasure in observing the sudden transition
from the silence of study hours to the joyful sounds and the animating activity of recess when
the Study Card goes down; and then when it rises again at the close of the recess, you will
be gratified to observe how suddenly the sounds which have filled the air, and made the room
so lively a scene, are hushed into silence by the single and almost inaudible touch of that
little bell. You will take pleasure in this; for young and old always take pleasure in the
strict and rigid operation of system rather than in laxity and disorder. I am convinced, also,
that the scholars do like the operation of this plan, for I do not have to make any efforts
to sustain it. With the exception that occasionally, usually not oftener than once in several
months, I allude to the subject, and that chiefly on account of a few careless and unfaithful
individuals, I have little to say or to do to maintain the authority of the Study Card. Most
of the scholars obey it of their own accord, implicitly and cordially. And I believe they consider
this faithful monitor not only one of the most useful, but one of the most agreeable friends
they have. We should not only regret its services, but miss its company if it should be taken away.

This regulation then, namely, to abstain from all communication with one another, and from
all leaving of seats, at certain times which are marked by the position of the Study Card,
is the only one which can properly be called a rule of the school. There are a great many arrangements
and plans relating to the instruction of the pupils, but no other specific rules relating to
their conduct. You are, of course, while in the school, under the same moral obligations which
rest upon you elsewhere. You must be kind to one another, respectful to superiors, and quiet
and orderly in your deportment. You must do nothing to encroach upon another's rights, or to
interrupt and disturb your companions in their pursuits. You must not produce disorder, or
be wasteful of the public property, or do any thing else which you might know is in itself
wrong. But you are to avoid these things, not because there are any rules in this school against
them, for there are none, but because they are in themselves wrong--in all places and under
all circumstances, wrong. The universal and unchangeable principles of duty are the same here
as elsewhere. I do not make rules pointing them out, but expect that you will, through your
own conscience and moral principle, discover and obey them.

It is wrong, for instance, for you to speak harshly or unkindly to your companions, or to do
any thing to wound their feelings unnecessarily, in any way. But this is a universal principle
of duty, not a rule of school.

So it is wrong for you to be rude and noisy, and thus disturb others who are studying, or to
brush by them carelessly, so as to jostle them at their writing or derange their books. But
to be careful not to do injury to others in the reckless pursuit of our own pleasures is a
universal principle of duty, not a rule of school.

Such a case as this, for example, once occurred. A number of little girls began to amuse themselves
in recess with running about among the desks in pursuit of one another, and they told me, in
excuse for it, when I called them to account, that they did not know that it was "against the
rule".

"It is not against the rule," said I; "I have never made any rule against running about among
the desks."

"Then," asked they, "did we do wrong?"

"Do you think it would be a good plan," I inquired, "to have it a common amusement in the recess
for the girls to hunt each other among the desks?"

"No, sir," they replied, simultaneously.

"Why not? There are some reasons. I do not know, however, whether you will have the ingenuity
to think of them."

"We may start the desks from their places," said one.

"Yes," said I, "they are fastened down very slightly, so that I may easily alter their position."

"We might upset the inkstands," said another.

"Sometimes," added a third, "we run against the scholars who are sitting in their seats."

"It seems, then, you have ingenuity enough to discover the reasons. Why did not these reasons
prevent your doing it?"

"We did not think of them before."

"True; that is the exact state of the case. Now, when persons are so eager to promote their
own enjoyment as to forget the rights and the comforts of others, it is selfishness.  Now is
there any rule in this school against selfishness?"

"No, sir."

"You are right. There is not. But selfishness is wrong, very wrong, in whatever form it appears,
here and every where else, and that whether I make any rules against it or not."

You will see, from this anecdote, that, though there is but one rule of the school, I by no
means intend to say that there is only one way of doing wrong here. That would be very absurd.
You must not do any thing which you may know, by proper reflection, to be in itself wrong.
This, however, is a universal principle of duty, not a rule of the Mount Vernon School. If
I should attempt to make rules which would specify and prohibit every possible way by which
you might do wrong, my laws would be innumerable, and even then I should fail of securing my
object, unless you had the disposition to do your duty. No legislation can enact laws as fast
as a perverted ingenuity can find means to evade them.

You will perhaps ask what will be the consequence if we transgress either the single rule of
the school or any of the great principles of duty. In other words, What are the punishments
which are resorted to in the Mount Vernon School? The answer is, there are no punishments.
I do not say that I should not, in case all other means should fail, resort to the most decisive
measures to secure obedience and subordination. Most certainly I should do so, as it would
plainly be my duty to do it. If you should at any time be so unhappy as to violate your obligations
to yourself, to your companions, or to me--should you misimprove your time, or exhibit an unkind
or a selfish spirit, or be disrespectful or insubordinate to your teachers, I should go frankly
and openly, but kindly to you, and endeavor to convince you of your fault. I should very probably
do this by addressing a note to you, as I suppose this would be less unpleasant to you than
a conversation. In such a case, I shall hope that you will as frankly and openly reply, telling
me whether you admit your fault and are determined to amend, or else informing me of the contrary.
I shall wish you to be sincere, and then I shall know what course to take next. But as to the
consequences which may result to you if you should persist in what is wrong, it is not necessary
that you should know them beforehand. They who wander from duty always plunge themselves into
troubles which they do not anticipate; and if you do what, at the time you are doing it, you
know to be wrong, it will not be unjust that you should suffer the consequences, even if they
were not beforehand understood and expected. This will be the case with you all through life,
and it will be the case here.

I say it will be the case here; I ought rather to say that it will be the case should you be
so unhappy as to do wrong and to persist in it. Such persistance, however, never occurs--at
least it occurs so seldom, and at intervals so great, that every thing of the nature of punishment,
that is, the depriving a pupil of any enjoyment, or subjecting her to any disgrace, or giving
her pain in any way in consequence of her faults, except the simple pain of awakening conscience
in her bosom, is almost entirely unknown. I hope that you will always be ready to confess and
forsake your faults, and endeavor, while you remain in school, to improve in character, and
attain, as far as possible, every moral excellence.

I ought to remark, before dismissing this topic, that I place very great confidence in the
scholars in regard to their moral conduct and deportment, and they fully deserve it. I have
no care and no trouble in what is commonly called the government of the school. Neither myself
nor any one else is employed in any way in watching the scholars, or keeping any sort of account
of them. I should not at any time hesitate to call all the teachers into an adjoining room,
leaving the school alone for half an hour, and I should be confident that, at such a time,
order, and stillness, and attention to study would prevail as much as ever. The scholars would
not look to see whether I was in my desk, but whether the Study Card was up. The school was
left in this way, half an hour every day, during a quarter, that we might have a teachers'
meeting, and the studies went on generally quite as well, to say the least, as when the teachers
were present. One or two instances of irregular conduct occurred. I do not now recollect precisely
what they were. They were, however, fully acknowledged and not repeated, and I believe the
scholars were generally more scrupulous and faithful then than at other times. They would not
betray the confidence reposed in them. This plan was continued until it was found more convenient
to have the teachers' meetings in the afternoons.

When any thing wrong is done in school, I generally state the case, and request the individuals
who have done it to let me know who they are. They inform me sometimes by notes and sometimes
in conversation; but they always inform me. The plan always succeeds. The scholars all know
that there is nothing to be feared from confessing faults to me; but that, on the other hand,
it is a most direct and certain way to secure returning peace and happiness.

I can illustrate this by describing a case which actually occurred, though the description
is not to be considered so much an accurate account of what took place in a particular instance
as an illustration of the general spirit and manner in which such cases are disposed of. I
accidentally understood that some of the younger scholars were in the habit, during recesses
and after school, of ringing the door-bell and then running away, to amuse themselves with
the perplexity of their companions who should go to the door and find no one there. I explained
in a few words, one day, to the school, that this was wrong.

"How many," I then asked, "have ever been put to the trouble to go to the door when the bell
has thus been rung? They may rise."

A very large number of scholars stood up. Those who had done the mischief were evidently surprised
at the extent of the trouble they had occasioned.

"Now," I continued, "I think all will be convinced that the trouble which this practice has
occasioned to the fifty or sixty young ladies, who can not be expected to find amusement in
such a way, is far greater than the pleasure it can have given to the few who are young enough
to have enjoyed it. Therefore it was wrong. Do you think that the girls who rang the bell might
have known this by proper reflection?"

"Yes, sir," the school generally answered.

"I do not mean," said I, "if they had set themselves formally at work to think about the subject,
but with such a degree of reflection as ought reasonably to be expected of little girls in
the hilarity of recess and of play."

"Yes, sir," was still the reply, but fainter than before.

"There is one way by which I might ascertain whether you were old enough to know that this
was wrong, and that is by asking those who have refrained from doing this, because they supposed
it would be wrong, to rise. Then, if some of the youngest scholars in school should stand up,
as I have no doubt they would, it would prove that all might have known, if they had been equally
conscientious. But if I ask those to rise who have not rung the bell, I shall make known to
the whole school who they are that have done it, and I wish that the exposure of faults should
be private, unless it is necessary that it should be public. I will, therefore, not do it.
I have myself, however, no doubt that all might have known that it was wrong.

"There is," continued I, "another injury which must grow out of such a practice. This I should
not have expected the little girls could think of. In fact, I doubt whether any in school will
think of it. Can any one tell me what it is?"

No one replied.

"I should suppose that it would lead you to disregard the bell when it rings, and that consequently
a gentleman or lady might sometimes ring in vain, the scholars near the door saying, 'Oh, it
is only the little girls.'"

"Yes, sir," was heard from all parts of the room.

I found, from farther inquiry, that this had been the case, and I closed by saying,

"I am satisfied that those who have inadvertently fallen into this practice are sorry for it,
and that if I should leave it here, no more cases of it would occur, and this is all I wish.
At the same time, they who have done this will feel more effectually relieved from the pain
which having done wrong must necessarily give them, if they individually acknowledge it to
me. I wish, therefore, that all who have thus rung the bell in play would write me notes stating
the facts. If any one does not do it, she will punish herself severely, for she will feel for
many days to come that while her companions were willing to acknowledge their faults, she wished
to conceal and cover hers. Conscience will reproach her bitterly for her insincerity, and,
whenever she hears the sound of the door-bell, it will remind her not only of her fault, but
of what is far worse, her willingness to appear innocent when she was really guilty." 

Every sarcophagus showed many bas-reliefs--bas- reliefs of battles and of battle-fields; battles
from forgotten ages, battles from yesterday; battle-fields that,
long since, nature had healed and reconciled to herself with the sweet
oblivion of flowers; battle-fields that were yet angry and crimson
with carnage.

Where the terraces ran, there did we run; where the towers curved, there did we curve. With
the flight of swallows our horses swept round every angle. Like rivers in flood wheeling round
headlands, like hurricanes that ride into the secrets of forests, faster than ever light unwove
the mazes of darkness, our flying equipage carried earthly passions, kindled warrior instincts,
amongst the dust that lay around us--dust oftentimes of our noble fathers that had slept in
God from Crecy to Trafalgar. And now had we reached the last sarcophagus, now were we abreast
of the last bas-relief, already had we recovered the arrow-like flight of the illimitable central
aisle, when coming up this aisle to meet us we beheld afar off a female child, that rode in
a carriage as frail as flowers. The mists which went before her hid the fawns that drew her, but
could not hide the shells and tropic flowers with which she played--but could not hide the lovely
smiles by which she uttered her trust in the mighty cathedral, and in the cherubim that looked
down upon her from the mighty shafts of its pillars. Face to face she was meeting us; face to face she
rode, as if danger there were none. "Oh, baby!" I exclaimed, "shalt thou be the ransom for
Waterloo? Must we, that carry tidings of great joy to every people, be messengers of ruin to
thee!" In horror I rose at the thought; but then also, in horror at the thought, rose one that was
sculptured on a bas-relief--a Dying Trumpeter. Solemnly from the field of battle he rose to his
feet; and, unslinging his stony trumpet, carried it, in his dying anguish, to his stony lips--sounding
once, and yet once again; proclamation that, in thy ears, oh baby!
spoke from the battlements of death.

Immediately deep shadows fell between us, and aboriginal silence.

The choir had ceased to sing. The hoofs of our horses, the dreadful rattle of our harness, the
groaning of our wheels, alarmed the graves no more. By horror the bas-relief had been unlocked
unto life.

By horror we, that were so full of life, we men and our horses, with their fiery fore-legs
rising in mid air to their everlasting gallop, were frozen to a bas-relief. Then a third time
the trumpet sounded; the seals were taken off all pulses; life, and
the frenzy of life, tore into their channels again; again the choir
burst forth in sunny grandeur, as from the muffling of storms and
darkness; again the thunderings of our horses carried temptation into
the graves.

One cry burst from our lips, as the clouds, drawing off from the
aisle, showed it empty before us.-- "Whither has the infant fled?--is
the young child caught up to God?"

Lo! afar off, in a vast recess, rose three mighty windows to the clouds; and on a level with
their summits, at height insuperable to man, rose an altar of purest alabaster. On its eastern
face was trembling a crimson glory. A glory was it from the reddening dawn that now streamed
through the windows? Was it from the crimson robes of the martyrs painted on the windows? Was
it from the bloody bas-reliefs of earth? There, suddenly, within that crimson radiance, rose
the apparition of a woman's head, and then of a woman's figure. The child it was--grown up
to woman's height. Clinging to the horns of the altar, voiceless she stood--sinking, rising, raving,
despairing; and behind the volume of incense that, night and day, streamed upwards from the
altar, dimly was seen the fiery font, and the shadow of that dreadful being who should have baptized
her with the baptism of death. But by her side was kneeling her better angel, that hid his
face with wings; that wept and pleaded for her; that prayed when she could not; that fought
with Heaven by tears for her deliverance; which also, as he raised his immortal countenance from
his wings, I saw, by the glory in his eye, that from Heaven he had won at last.

V

Then was completed the passion of the mighty fugue.
    |SECOND HOUR|     |THIRD HOUR |     |FOURTH HOUR| |         +---------------+-----------+--+--+-----------+--+--+-----------+
|         |EVENING LESSONS|LANGUAGES. |G.|R.|MATHEMATICS|G.|R.|SECTIONS.  | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+--+-----+-----+--+--+-----------+
|MONDAY   |        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     |  |  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+
+-----+-----+--+  +-----------+ |TUESDAY  |        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     | 
|  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+  +-----+-----+--+  +-----------+
|WEDNESDAY|        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     |  |  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+
+-----+-----+--+  +-----------+ |THURSDAY |        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     | 
|  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+  +-----+-----+--+  +-----------+
|FRIDAY   |        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     |  |  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+
+-----+-----+--+  +-----------+ |SATURDAY |        |      |     |     |  |  |     |     | 
|  |           | +---------+--------+------+-----+-----+--+--+-----+-----+--+--+-----------+

I now proceed to describe in detail the several hours, as represented in the diagram.

First Hour.--Evening Lessons.

The first hour of the day, as you will see by the schedule, is marked evening lessons, because
most, though not all, of the studies assigned to it are intended to be prepared out of school.
These studies are miscellaneous in their character, comprising Geography, History, Natural
and Intellectual Philosophy, and Natural History. This hour, like all the other hours for study,
is divided into two equal parts, some classes reciting in the first part, and others in the
second. A bell is always rung five minutes before the time for closing the recitation, to give
the teachers notice that their time is nearly expired, and then again at the time, to give
notice to new classes to take their places. Thus you will observe that five minutes before
the half hour expires the bell will ring, soon after which the classes in recitation will take
their seats. Precisely at the end of the half hour it will ring again, when new classes will
take their places. In the same manner, notice is given five minutes before the second half
of the hour expires, and so in all the other three hours.

At the end of the first hour the Study Card will be let half down five minutes, and you will
perceive that the sound of its bell will immediately produce a decided change in the whole
aspect of the room. It is the signal, as has been before explained, for universal permission
to whisper and to leave seats, though not for loud talking or play, so that those who wish
to continue their studies may do so without interruption. When the five-minute period has expired
the card goes up again, and its sound immediately restores silence and order.

Second Hour.--Languages. We then commence the second hour of the school. This is devoted to
the study of the languages. The Latin, French, and English classes recite at this time. By
English classes I mean those studying the English as a language, that is, classes in Grammar,
Rhetoric, and Composition. The hour is divided as the first hour is, and the bell is rung in
the same way, that is, at the close of each half hour, and also five minutes before the close,
to give the classes notice that the time for recitation is about to expire.

First General Exercise.

You will observe, then, that there follows upon the schedule a quarter of an hour marked G.
That initial stands for General Exercise, and when it arrives each pupil is to lay aside her
work, and attend to any exercise which may be proposed. This quarter of an hour is appropriated
to a great variety of purposes. Sometimes I give a short and familiar lecture on some useful
subject connected with science or art, or the principles of duty. Sometimes we have a general
reading lesson. Sometimes we turn the school into a Bible class. Again, the time is occupied
in attending to some general business of the school. The bell is rung one minute before the
close of the time, and when the period appropriated to this purpose has actually expired, the
Study Card, for the first time in the morning, is let entirely down, and the room is at once
suddenly transformed into a scene of life, and motion, and gayety.

First Recess.

The time for the recess is a quarter of an hour, and, as you will see, it is marked R. on the
schedule. We have various modes of amusing ourselves, and finding exercise and recreation in
recesses. Sometimes the girls bring their battledores to school. Sometimes they have a large
number of soft balls with which they amuse themselves. A more common amusement is marching
to the music of the piano. For this purpose a set of signals by the whistle has been devised,
by which commands are communicated to the school.

In these and similar amusements the recesses pass away, and one minute before it expires the
bell is rung to give notice of the approach of study hours.

At this signal the scholars begin to prepare for a return to the ordinary duties of school,
and when, at the full expiration of the recess, the Study Card again goes up, silence, and
attention, and order is immediately restored.

Third Hour.--Mathematics.

There follows next, as you will see by reference to the schedule, an hour marked Mathematics.
It is time for studying and reciting Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, and similar studies. It
is divided, as the previous hours were, into two equal parts, and the bell is rung, as has
been described, five minutes before the close, and also precisely at the close of each half hour.

Second General Exercise.--Business.

Then follow two quarter hours, appropriated like those heretofore described, the first to a
General Exercise, the second to a recess. At the first of these the general business of the
school is transacted. As this business will probably appear new to you, and will attract your
attention, I will describe its nature and design.

At first you will observe a young lady rise at the secretary's desk to read a journal of what
was done the day before. The notices which I gave, the arrangements I made, the subjects discussed
and decided, and, in fact, every thing important and interesting in the business or occurrences
of the preceding day, is recorded by the secretary of the school, and read at this time. This
journal ought not to be a mere dry record of votes and business, but, as far as possible, an
interesting description, in a narrative style, of the occurrences of the day. The secretary
must keep a memorandum, and ascertain that every thing important really finds a place in the
record, but she may employ any good writer in school to prepare, from her minutes, the full
account.

After the record is read, you will observe me take from a little red morocco wrapper which
has been brought to my desk a number of narrow slips of paper, which I am to read aloud. In
most assemblies, it is customary for any person wishing it to rise in his place and propose
any plan, or, as it is called, "make any motion" that he pleases. It would be unpleasant for
a young lady to do this in presence of a hundred companions, and we have consequently resorted
to another plan. The red wrapper is placed in a part of the room accessible to all, and any
one who pleases writes upon a narrow slip of paper any thing she wishes to lay before the school,
and deposits it there, and at the appointed time the whole are brought to me. These propositions
are of various kinds. I can, perhaps, best give you an idea of them by such specimens as occur
to me.

"A.B. resigns her office of copyist, as she is about to leave school."

"Proposed that a class in Botany be formed. There are many who would like to join it."

"When will vacation commence?"

"Proposed that a music committee be appointed, so that we can have some marching in recess."

"Proposed that school begin at nine o'clock."

"Mr. Abbott, will you have the goodness to explain to us what is meant by the Veto Message?"

"Proposed that we have locks upon our desks."

You see that the variety is very great, and there are usually from four or five to ten or fifteen
of such papers daily. You will be at liberty to make in this way any suggestion or inquiry,
or to propose any change you please in any part of the instruction or administration of the
school. If any thing dissatisfies you, you ought not to murmur at it in private, or complain
of it to your companions, thus injuring to no purpose both your own peace and happiness and
theirs, but you ought immediately to bring up the subject in the way above described, that
the evil may be removed. I receive some of the most valuable suggestions in this way from the
older and most reflecting pupils. These suggestions are read. Sometimes I decide the question
that arises myself. Sometimes I say that the pupils may decide it. Sometimes I ask their opinion
and wishes, and then, after taking them into consideration, come to a conclusion.

For example, I will insert a few of these propositions, as these papers are called, describing
the way in which they would be disposed of. Most of them are real cases.

"Mr. Abbott, the first class in Geography is so large that we have not room in the recitation
seats. Can not we have another place?"

After reading this, I should perhaps say, "The class in Geography may rise and be counted."
They rise. Those in each division are counted by the proper officer, as will hereafter be explained,
and the numbers are reported aloud to me. It is all done in a moment.

"How many of you think you need better accommodations?"

If a majority of hands are raised, I say, "I wish the teacher of that class would ascertain
whether any other place of recitation is vacant, or occupied by a smaller class at that time,
and report the case to me."

"Proposed that we be allowed to walk upon the common in the recesses."

"I should like to have some plan formed by which you can walk on the common in recesses, but
there are difficulties. If all should go out together, it is probable that some would be rude
and noisy, and that others would come back tardy and out of breath. Besides, as the recess
is short, so many would be in haste to prepare to go out, that there would be a great crowd
and much confusion in the ante-room and passage-ways. I do not mention these as insuperable
objections, but only as difficulties which there must be some plan to avoid. Perhaps, however,
they can not be avoided. Do any of you think of any plan?"

I see, perhaps, two or three hands raised, and call upon the individuals by name, and they
express their opinions. One says that a part can go out at a time. Another proposes that those
who are tardy one day should not go out again, &c.

"I think it possible that a plan can be formed on these or some such principles. If you will
appoint a committee who will prepare a plan, and mature its details, and take charge of the
execution of it, you may try the experiment. I will allow it to go on as long as you avoid
the evils I have above alluded to."

A committee is then raised, to report in writing at the business hour of the following day.

"Proposed that the Study Card be down every half hour."

"You may decide this question yourselves. That you may vote more freely, I wish you to vote
by ballot. The boxes will be open during the next recess. The vote-receivers will write the
question and place it upon the boxes. All who feel interested in the subject may carry in their
votes, Aye or Nay. When the result is reported to me I will read it to the school."

In this and similar ways the various business brought up is disposed of. This custom is useful
to the scholars, for it exercises and strengthens their judgment and their reflecting powers
more than almost any thing besides; so that, if interesting them in this way in the management
of the school were of no benefit to me, I should retain the practice as most valuable to them.
But it is most useful to me and to the school. I think that nothing has contributed more to
its prosperity than the active interest which the scholars have always taken in its concerns,
and the assistance they have rendered me in carrying my plans into effect.

You will observe that in transacting this business very little is actually done by myself,
except making the ultimate decision. All the details of business are assigned to teachers,
or to officers and committees appointed for the purpose. By this means we dispatch business
very rapidly. The system of offices will be explained in another place; but I may say here
that all appointments and elections are made in this quarter hour, and by means of the assistance
of these officers the transaction of business is so facilitated that much more can sometimes
be accomplished than you would suppose possible. I consider this period as one of the most
important in the whole morning.

Second Recess.

After the expiration of the quarter hour above described, the Study Card is dropped, and a
recess succeeds.

Fourth Hour.--Sections.

In all the former part of the day the scholars are divided into classes, according to their
proficiency in particular branches of study, and they resort to their recitations for instruction.
They now are divided into six sections, as we call them, and placed under the care of superintendents,
not for instruction, but for what may be called supervision. Teaching a pupil is not all that
is necessary to be done for her in school. There are many other things to be attended to, such
as supplying her with the various articles necessary for her use, seeing that her desk is convenient,
that her time is well arranged, that she has not too much to do nor too little, and that no
difficulty which can be removed obstructs her progress in study or her happiness in school.
The last hour is appropriated to this purpose, with the understanding, however, that such a
portion of it as is not wanted by the superintendent is to be spent in study. You will see,
then, when the last hour arrives, that all the scholars go in various directions to the meetings
of their respective sections. Here they remain as long as the superintendent retains them.
Sometimes they adjourn almost immediately, perhaps after having simply attended to the distribution
of pens for the next day; at other times they remain during the hour, attending to such exercises
as the superintendent may plan. The design, however, and nature of this whole arrangement I
shall explain more fully in another place.

Close of the School.

As the end of the hour approaches, five minutes' notice is given by the bell, and when the
time arrives the Study Card is half dropped for a moment before the closing exercises. When
it rises again the room is restored to silence and order. We then sing a verse or two of a
hymn, and commend ourselves to God's protection in a short prayer. As the scholars raise their
heads from the posture of reverence which they have assumed, they pause a moment till the regulator
lets down the Study Card, and the sound of its bell is the signal that our duties at school
are ended for the day.

III. INSTRUCTION AND SUPERVISION OF PUPILS.

For the instruction of the pupils the school is divided into classes, and for their general
supervision into sections, as has been intimated under the preceding caption. The head of a
class is called a teacher, and the head of a section a superintendent. The same individual
may be both the teacher of a class and the superintendent of a section. The two offices are,
however, entirely distinct in their nature and design. As you will perceive by recalling to
mind the daily order of exercises, the classes meet and recite during the first three hours
of the school, and the sections assemble on the fourth and last. We shall give each a separate
description.

1. CLASSES.

The object of the division into classes is instruction. Whenever it is desirable that several
individuals should pursue a particular study, a list of their names is made out, a book selected,
a time for recitation assigned, a teacher appointed, and the exercises begin. In this way a
large number of classes have been formed, and the wishes of parents, or the opinion of the
principal, and, in many cases, that of the pupil, determines how many and what shall be assigned
to each individual. A list of these classes, with the average age of the members, the name
of the teacher, and the time of recitation, is posted in a conspicuous place, and public notice
is given whenever a new class is formed. You will therefore have the opportunity to know all
the arrangements of school in this respect, and I wish you to exercise your own judgment and
discretion a great deal in regard to your studies. I do not mean I expect you to decide, but
to reflect upon them. Look at the list, and consider what are most useful for you. Propose
to me or to your parents changes, whenever you think they are necessary; and when you finish
one study, reflect carefully, yourself, on the question what you shall next commence.

The scholars prepare their lessons when they please. They are expected to be present and prepared
at the time of recitation, but they make the preparation when it is most convenient. The more
methodical and systematic of the young ladies mark the times of study as well as of recitation
upon their schedules, so that the employment of their whole time at school is regulated by
a systematic plan. You will observe, too, that by this plan of having a great many classes
reciting through the first three hours of the morning, every pupil can be employed as much
or as little as her parents desire. In a case of ill health, she may, as has often been done
in such cases at the request of parents, join one or two classes only, and occupy the whole
forenoon in preparing for them, and be entirely free from school duties at home. Or she may,
as is much more frequently the case, choose to join a great many classes, so as to fill up,
perhaps, her whole schedule with recitations, in which case she must prepare all her lessons
at home. It is the duty of teachers to take care, however, when a pupil pleads want of time
as a reason for being unprepared in any lesson, that the case is fully examined, in order that
it may be ascertained whether the individual has joined too many classes, in which case some
one should be dropped, and thus the time and the employments of each individual should be so
adjusted as to give her constant occupation in school, and as much more as her parents may
desire. By this plan of the classes, each scholar advances just as rapidly in her studies as
her time, and talents, and health will allow. No one is kept back by the rest. Each class goes
on regularly and systematically, all its members keeping exactly together in that study; but
the various members of it will have joined a greater or less number of other classes, according
to their age, or abilities, or progress in study, so that all will or may have full employment
for their time.

When you first enter the school, you will, for a day or two, be assigned to but few classes,
for your mind will be distracted by the excitement of new scenes and pursuits, and the intellectual
effort necessary for joining a class is greater than that requisite for going on with it after
being once under way. After a few days you will come to me and say, perhaps (for this is ordinarily
the process),

"Mr. Abbott, I think I have time for some more studies."

"I will thank you to bring me your schedule," I say in reply, "so that I can see what you have
now to do."

By glancing my eye over the schedule in such a case, I see in a moment what duties have been
already assigned you, and from my general schedule, containing all the studies of the school,
I select what would be most suitable for you after conferring with you about your past pursuits,
and your own wishes or those of your parents in regard to your future course. Additions are
thus made until your time is fully occupied.

The manner of recitation in the classes is almost boundlessly varied. The design is not to
have you commit to memory what the book contains, but to understand and digest it--to incorporate
it fully into your own mind, that it may come up in future life in such a form as you wish
it for use. Do not then, in ordinary cases, endeavor to fix words, but ideas in your minds.
Conceive clearly--paint distinctly to your imagination what is described--contemplate facts
in all their bearings and relations, and thus endeavor to exercise the judgment, and the thinking
and reasoning powers, rather than the mere memory, upon the subjects which will come before you.

2. SECTIONS.

In describing the order of daily exercises, I alluded to the sections which assemble in the
last hour of the school. It is necessary that I should fully describe the system of sections,
as it constitutes a very important part of the plan of the school.

Besides giving the scholars the necessary intellectual instruction, there are, as I have already
remarked, a great many other points which must receive attention in order to promote their
progress, and to secure the regular operation and general welfare of the school. These various
points have something common in their nature, but it is difficult to give them a common name.
They are such as supplying the pupils with pens and paper, and stationery of other kinds; becoming
acquainted with each individual; ascertaining that she has enough and not too much to do; arranging
her work so that no one of her duties shall interfere with another; assisting her to discover
and correct her faults, and removing any sources of difficulty or causes of discontent which
may gradually come in her way. These, and a multitude of similar points, constituting what
may be called the general administration of the school, become, when the number of pupils is
large, a most important branch of the teacher's duty.

To accomplish these objects more effectually, the school is divided into six sections, arranged,
not according to proficiency in particular studies, as the several classes are, but according
to age and general maturity of mind. Each one of these sections is assigned to the care of
a superintendent. These superintendents, it is true, during most of school hours, are also
teachers. Their duties, however, as Teachers and as Superintendents, are entirely distinct.
I shall briefly enumerate the duties which devolve upon her in the latter capacity.

1. A superintendent ought to prepare an exact list of the members of her section, and to become
intimately acquainted with them, so as to be as far as possible their friend and confidante,
and to feel a stronger interest in their progress in study and their happiness in school, and
a greater personal attachment to them than to any other scholars.

2. She is to superintend the preparation of their schedules; to see that each one has enough
and not too much to do, by making known to me the necessity of a change, where such necessity
exists; to see that the schedules are submitted to the parents, and that their opinion or suggestions,
if they wish to make any, are reported to me.

3. She is to take care that all the daily wants of her section are supplied--that all have
pens and paper, and desks of suitable height. If any are new scholars, she ought to interest
herself in assisting them to become acquainted in school; if they are friendless and alone,
to find companions for them, and to endeavor in every way to make their time pass pleasantly
and happily.

4. To watch the characters of the members of her section. To inquire of their several teachers
as to the progress they make in study, and the faithfulness and punctuality with which they
prepare their lessons. She ought to ascertain whether they are punctual at school and regular
in their habits--whether their desks are neat and well arranged, and their exercises carefully
executed. She ought to correct, through her own influence, any evils of this kind she may find,
or else immediately to refer the cases where this can not be done to me.

The better and the more pleasantly to accomplish the object of exerting a favorable influence
upon the characters of the members of their section, the superintendents ought often to bring
up subjects connected with moral and religious duty in section meetings. This may be done in
the form of subjects assigned for composition, or proposed for free discussion in writing or
conversation, or the superintendents may write themselves, and read to the section the instructions
they wish to give.

When subjects for written composition are thus assigned, they should be so presented to the
pupils as to lead their minds to a very practical mode of regarding them. For example, instead
of simply assigning the subject Truth as the theme of an abstract moral essay, bring up definite
points of a practical character, such especially as are connected with the trials and temptations
of early life. "I wish you would all give me your opinions," the teacher might say in such
a case, "on the question, What is the most frequent inducement that leads children to tell
falsehoods? Also, do you think it is right to tell untruths to very little children, as many
persons do, or to people who are sick? Also, whether it would be right to tell a falsehood
to an insane man in order to manage him?"

Sometimes, instead of assigning a subject of composition verbally, the superintendent exhibits
an engraving, and the several members of the class then write any thing they please which is
suggested to them by the engraving. For example, suppose the picture thus exhibited were to
represent a girl sewing in an attic. The compositions to which it would give rise might be
very various. One pupil would perhaps simply give an account of the picture itself, describing
the arrangements of the room, and specifying the particular articles of furniture contained
in it. Another would give a soliloquy supposed to be spoken by the sewing-girl as she sits
at her work. Another would narrate the history of her life, of course an imaginary one. Another
would write an essay on the advantages of industry and independence.

This is a very good way of assigning subjects of composition, and, if well managed, it may
be the means of awakening a great interest in writing among almost all the pupils of a school.

5. Though the superintendents, as such, have, necessarily speaking, no teaching to do, still
they ought particularly to secure the progress of every pupil in what may be called the essential
studies, such as reading, writing, and spelling. For this purpose, they either see that their
pupils are going on successfully in classes in school in these branches, or they may attend
to them in the section, provided that they never allow such instruction to interfere with their
more appropriate and important duties.

In a word, the superintendents are to consider the members of their sections as pupils confided
to their care, and they are not merely to discharge mechanically any mere routine of duty,
such as can be here pointed out, but to exert all their powers, their ingenuity, their knowledge
of human character, their judgment and discretion, in every way, to secure for each of those
committed to their care the highest benefits which the institution to which they belong can
afford. They are to keep a careful and faithful record of their plans and of the history of
their respective sections, and to endeavor as faithfully and as diligently to advance the interests
of the members of them as if the sections were separate and independent schools of their own.

A great responsibility is thus evidently intrusted to them, but not a great deal of power.
They ought not to make changes, except in very plain cases, without referring the subject to
me. They ought not to make rash experiments, or even to try many new plans, without first obtaining
my approval of them. They ought to refer all cases which they can not easily manage to my care.
They ought to understand the distinction between seeing that a thing is done and doing it.
For example, if a superintendent thinks that one of her section is in too high a class in Arithmetic,
her duty is not to undertake, by her own authority, to remove her to a lower one, for, as superintendent,
she has no authority over Arithmetic classes, nor should she go to the opposite extreme of
saying, "I have no authority over Arithmetic classes, and therefore I have nothing to do with
this case." She ought to go to the teacher of the class to which her pupil had been unwisely
assigned, converse with her, obtain her opinion, then find some other class more suited to
her attainments, and after fully ascertaining all the facts in the case, bring them to me,
that I may make the change. This is superintendence--looking over the condition and progress
of the scholar. The superintendents have thus great responsibility, and yet, comparatively,
little power. They accomplish a great deal of good, and, in its ordinary course, it is by their
direct personal efforts; but in making changes, and remedying defects and evils, they act generally
in a different way.

The last hour of school is devoted to the sections. No classes recite then, but the sections
meet, if the superintendents wish, and attend to such exercises as they provide. Each section
has its own organization, its own officers and plans. These arrangements of course vary in
their character according to the ingenuity and enterprise of the superintendents, and more
especially according to the talents and intellectual ardor of the members of the section.

The two upper sections are called senior, the next two middle, and the two younger junior.
The senior sections are distinguished by using paper for section purposes with a light blue
tinge. To the middle sections is assigned a light straw color; and to the junior, pink. These
colors are used for the schedules of the members, and for the records and other documents of
the section.

This account, though it is brief, will be sufficient to explain to you the general principles
of the plan. You will soon become acquainted with the exercises and arrangements of the particular
section to which you will be assigned, and by taking an active interest in them, and endeavoring
to cooperate with the superintendent in all her measures and to comply with her wishes, you
will very materially add to her happiness, and do your part toward elevating the character
of the circle to which you will belong.

IV. OFFICERS.

In consequence of the disposition early manifested by the scholars to render me every assistance
in their power in carrying into effect the plans of the school and promoting its prosperity,
I gradually adopted the plan of assigning to various officers and committees, a number of specific
duties relating to the general business of the school. These officers have gradually multiplied
as the school has increased and as business has accumulated. The system has, from time to time,
been revised, condensed, and simplified, and at the present time it is thus arranged. The particular
duties of each officer are minutely described to the individuals themselves at the time of
their election; all I intend here is to give a general view of the plan, such as is necessary
for the scholars at large.

There are, then, five departments of business intrusted to officers of the school. The names
of the officers, and a brief exposition of their duties, are as follows:

[I omit the particular explanation of the duties of the officers, as the arrangement must vary
in different schools, and the details of any one plan can only be useful in the school-room
to which it belongs. It will be sufficient to name the officers of each department, with their
duties, in general terms.]

1. REGULATORS.--To assist in the ordinary routine of business in school: ringing the bells;
managing the Study Card; distributing and collecting papers; counting votes, &c.

2. SECRETARIES.--Keeping the records, and executing writing of various kinds.

3. ACCOUNTANTS.--Keeping a register of the scholars, and various other duties connected with
the accounts.

4. LIBRARIANS.--To take charge of books and stationery.

5. CURATORS.--To secure neatness and good order in the apartments.

The secretaries and accountants are appointed by the principal, and will generally be chosen
from the teachers. The first in each of the other departments are chosen by ballot, by the
scholars. Each one thus chosen nominates the second in her department, and they two the assistants.
These nominations must be approved at a teachers' meeting; for, if a scholar is inattentive
to her studies, disorderly in her desk, or careless and troublesome in her manners, she evidently
ought not to be appointed to public office. No person can hold an office in two of these departments.
She can, if she pleases, however, resign one to accept another. Each of these departments ought
often to assemble and consult together, and form plans for carrying into effect with greater
efficiency the objects intrusted to them. They are to keep a record of all their proceedings,
the head of the department acting as secretary for this purpose.

The following may be given as an example of the manner in which business is transacted by means
of these officers. On the day that the above description of their duties was written, I wished
for a sort of directory to assist the collector employed to receive payments for the bills,
and, to obtain it, I took the following steps:

At the business quarter hour I issued the following order:

"Before the close of school, I wish the distributors to leave upon each of the desks a piece
of paper" (the size I described). "It is for a purpose which I shall then explain."

Accordingly, at some leisure moment before the close of school, each one of the regulators
went with her box to the stationery shelves, which you will see in the corners of the room,
where a supply of paper of all the various sizes used in school is kept, and, taking out a
sufficient number, they supplied all the desks in their respective divisions.

When the time for closing school arrived, I requested each young lady to write the name of
her parent or guardian upon the paper, and opposite to it his place of business. This was done
in a minute or two.

"All those whose parent's or guardian's name begins with a letter above m may rise."

They rose.

"The distributors may collect the papers."

The officers then passed round in regular order, each through her own division, and collected
the papers.

"Deliver them at the accountants' desk."

They were accordingly carried there, and received by the accountants.

In the same manner, the others were collected and received by the accountants, but kept separate.

"I wish now the second accountant would copy these in a little book I have prepared for the
purpose, arranging them alphabetically, referring all doubtful cases again to me."

The second accountant then arranged the papers, and prepared them to go into the book, and
the writer who belongs to the department copied them fairly.

I describe this case, because it was one which occurred at the time I was writing the above
description, and not because there is any thing otherwise peculiar in it. Such cases are continually
taking place, and by the division of labor above illustrated, I am very much assisted in a
great many of the duties which would otherwise consume a great portion of my time.

Any of the scholars may at any time make suggestions in writing to any of these officers or
to the whole school; and if an officer should be partial, or unfaithful, or negligent in her
duty, any scholar may propose her impeachment. After hearing what she chooses to write in her
defense, a vote is taken on sustaining the impeachment. If it is sustained, she is deprived
of the office, and another appointed to fill her place.

V. THE COURT.

I have already described how all serious cases of doing wrong or neglect of duty are managed
in the school. I manage them myself, by coming as directly and as openly as I can to the heart
and conscience of the offender. There are, however, a number of little transgressions, too
small to be individually worthy of serious attention, but which are yet troublesome to the
community when frequently repeated. These relate chiefly to order in the school-rooms. These
misdemeanors are tried, half in jest and half in earnest, by a sort of court, whose forms of
process might make a legal gentleman smile. They, however, fully answer our purpose. I can
best give you an idea of the court by describing an actual trial. I ought, however, first to
say that any young lady who chooses to be free from the jurisdiction of the court can signify
that wish to me, and she is safe from it. This, however, is never done. They all see the useful
influence of it, and wish to sustain it.

Near the close of school, I find, perhaps, on my desk a paper, of which the following may be
considered a copy. It is called the indictment.

We accuse Miss A.B. of having waste papers in the aisle opposite her desk,
at 11 o'clock, on Friday, Oct. 12.
  C.D.}
  E.F.} Witnesses.

I give notice after school that a case is to be tried. Those interested, twenty or thirty perhaps,
gather around my desk, while the sheriff goes to summon the accused and the witnesses. A certain
space is marked off as the precincts of the court, within which no one must enter in the slightest
degree, on pain of imprisonment, that is, confinement to her seat until court adjourns.

"Miss A.B., you are accused of having an untidy floor about your desk. Have you any objection
to the indictment?"

While she is looking over the indictment to discover a misspelled word, or an error in the
date, or some other latent flaw, I appoint any two of the by-standers jury. The jury come forward
to listen to the cause.

The accused returns the indictment, saying she has no objection, and the witnesses are called
upon to present their testimony.

Perhaps the prisoner alleges in defense that the papers were out in the aisle, not under her
desk, or that she did not put them there, or that they were too few or too small to deserve
attention.

My charge to the jury would be somewhat as follows:

"You are to consider and decide whether she was guilty of disorder, taking into view the testimony
of the witnesses and also her defense. It is considered here that each young lady is responsible
not only for the appearance of the carpet under her desk, but also for the aisle opposite to
it, so that her first ground of defense must be abandoned. So, also, with the second, that
she did not put them there. She ought not to have them there. Each scholar must keep her own
place in a proper condition; so that if disorder is found there, no matter who made it, she
is responsible if she only had time to remove it. As to the third, you must judge whether enough
has been proved by the witnesses to make out real disorder." The jury write guilty or not guilty
upon the paper, and it is returned to me. If sentence is pronounced, it is usually confinement
to the seat during a recess, or part of a recess, or something that requires a slight effort
or sacrifice for the public good. The sentence is always something real, though always slight,
and the court has a great deal of influence in a double way--making amusement and preserving order.

The cases tried are very various, but none of the serious business of the school is intrusted
to it. Its sessions are always held out of school hours, and, in fact, it is hardly considered
by the scholars as a constituent part of the arrangements of the school; so much so, that I
hesitated much about inserting an account of it in this description.

VI. RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION.

In giving you this account, brief as it is, I ought not to omit to speak of one feature of
our plan, which we have always intended should be one of the most prominent and distinctive
characteristics of the school. The gentlemen who originally interested themselves in its establishment
had mainly in view the exertion, by the principal, of a decided moral and religious influence
over the hearts of the pupils. Knowing, as they did, how much more dutiful and affectionate
at home you would be, how much more successful in your studies at school, how much happier
in your intercourse with each other, and in your prospects for the future both here and hereafter,
if your hearts could be brought under the influence of Christian principle, they were strongly
desirous that the school should be so conducted that its religious influence, though gentle
and alluring in its character, should be frank, and open, and decided. I need not say that
I myself entered very cordially into these views. It has been my constant effort, and one of
the greatest sources of my enjoyment, to try to win my pupils to piety, and to create such
an atmosphere in school that conscience, and moral principle, and affection for the unseen
Jehovah should reign here. You can easily see how much pleasanter it is for me to have the
school controlled by such influence, than if it were necessary for me to hire you to diligence
in duty by prizes or rewards, or to deter you from neglect or from transgression by reproaches,
and threatenings, and punishments.

The influence which the school has thus exerted has always been cordially welcomed by my pupils,
and approved, so far as I have known, by their parents, though four or five denominations,
and fifteen or twenty different congregations, have been from time to time represented in the
school. There are few parents who would not like to have their children Christians--sincerely
and practically so; for everything which a parent can desire in a child is promoted just in
proportion as she opens her heart to the influence of the spirit of piety. But that you may
understand what course is taken, I shall describe, first, what I wish to effect in the hearts
of my pupils, and then what means I take to accomplish the object.

1. A large number of young persons of your age, and in circumstances similar to those in which
you are placed, perform with some fidelity their various outward duties, but maintain no habitual
and daily communion with God. It is very wrong for them to live thus without God, but they
do not see, or, rather, do not feel the guilt of it. They only think of their accountability
to human beings like themselves; for example, their parents, teachers, brothers and sisters,
and friends. Consequently, they think most of their external conduct, which is all that human
beings can see. Their i>hearts are neglected, and become very impure, full of evil thoughts,
and desires, and passions, which are not repented of, and consequently not forgiven. Now what
I wish to accomplish in regard to all my pupils is, that they should begin to feel their accountability
to God, and to act according to it; that they should explore their hearts, and ask God's forgiveness
for all their past sins, through Jesus Christ, who died for them that they might be forgiven;
and that they should from this time try to live near to God, feel his presence, and enjoy that
solid peace and happiness which flows from a sense of his protection. When such a change takes
place, it relieves the mind from that constant and irritating uneasiness which the great mass
of mankind feel as a constant burden; the ceaseless forebodings of a troubled conscience reproaching
them for their past accumulated guilt, and warning them of a judgment to come. The change which
I endeavor to promote relieves the heart both of the present suffering and of the future danger.

After endeavoring to induce you to begin to act from Christian principle, I wish to explain
to you your various duties to yourselves, your parents, and to God.

2. The measures to which I resort to accomplish these objects are three:

First, Religious Exercises in School.--We open and close the school with a very short prayer
and one or two verses of a hymn. Sometimes I occupy ten or fifteen minutes at one of the general
exercises, or at the close of the school, in giving instruction upon practical religious duty.
The subjects are sometimes suggested by a passage of Scripture read for the purpose, but more
commonly in another way.

You will observe often, at the close of the school or at an appointed general exercise, that
a scholar will bring to my desk a dark-colored morocco wrapper containing several small strips
of paper, upon which questions relating to moral or religious duty, or subjects for remarks
from me, or anecdotes, or short statements of facts, giving rise to inquiries of various kinds,
are written. This wrapper is deposited in a place accessible to all the scholars, and any one
who pleases deposits in it any question or suggestion on religious subjects which may occur
to her. You can at any time do this yourself, thus presenting any doubt, or difficulty, or
inquiry which may at any time occur to you.

Secondly, Religious Exercise on Saturday afternoon.--In order to bring up more distinctly and
systematically the subject of religious duty, I established, a long time ago, a religious meeting
on Saturday afternoon. It is intended for those who feel interested in receiving such instruction,
and who can conveniently attend at that time. If you have no other engagements, and if your
parents approve of it, I should be happy to have you attend. There will be very little to interest
you except the subject itself, for I make all the instructions which I give there as plain,
direct, and practical as is in my power. A considerable number of the scholars usually attend,
and frequently bring with them many of their female friends. You can at any time invite any
one whom you please to come to the meeting. It commences at half past three, and continues
about half an hour.

Thirdly, Personal Religious Instruction.--In consequence of the large number of my pupils,
and the constant occupation of my time in school, I have scarcely any opportunity of religious
conversation with them, even with those who particularly desire it. The practice has therefore
arisen, and gradually extended itself almost universally in school, of writing to me on the
subject. These communications are usually brief notes, expressing the writer's interest in
the duties of piety, or bringing forward her own peculiar practical difficulties, or making
specific inquiries, or asking particular instruction in regard to some branch of religious
duty. I answer in a similar way, very briefly and concisely, however, for the number of notes
of this kind which I receive is very large, and the time which I can devote to such a correspondence
necessarily limited. I should like to receive such communications from all my pupils; for advice
or instruction communicated in reply, being directly personal, is far more likely to produce
effect. Besides, my remarks, being in writing, can be read a second time, and be more attentively
considered and reconsidered than when words are merely spoken. These communications must always
be begun by the pupil. I never (unless there may be occasional exceptions in some few very
peculiar cases) commence. I am prevented from doing this both by my unwillingness to obtrude
such a subject personally upon those who might not welcome it, and by want of time. I have
scarcely time to write to all those who are willing first to write to me. Many cases have occurred
where individuals have strongly desired some private communication with me, but have hesitated
long, and shrunk reluctantly from the first step. I hope it will not be so with you. Should
you ever wish to receive from me any direct religious instruction, I hope you will write immediately
and freely. I shall very probably not even notice that it is the first time I have received
such a communication from you. So numerous and so frequent are these communications, that I
seldom observe, when I receive one from any individual for the first time, that it comes from
one who has not written me before.

Such are the means to which I resort in endeavoring to lead my pupils to God and to duty, and
you will observe that the whole design of them is to win and to allure, not to compel. The
regular devotional exercises of school are all which you will necessarily witness. These are
very short, occupying much less time than many of the pupils think desirable. The rest is all
private and voluntary. I never make any effort to urge any one to attend the Saturday meeting,
nor do I, except in a few rare and peculiar cases, ever address any one personally, unless
she desires to be so addressed. You will be left, therefore, in this school, unmolested, to
choose your own way. If you should choose to neglect religious duty, and to wander away from
God, I shall still do all in my power to make you happy in school, and to secure for you in
future life such a measure of enjoyment as can fall to the share of one over whose prospects
in another world there hangs so gloomy a cloud. I shall never reproach you, and perhaps may
not even know what your choice is. Should you, on the other hand, prefer the peace and happiness
of piety, and be willing to begin to walk in its paths, you will find many, both among the
teachers and pupils of the Mount Vernon School, to sympathize with you, and to encourage and
help you on your way.

CHAPTER VII.

SCHEMING.

Some of the best teachers in our country, or, rather, of those who might be the best, lose
a great deal of their time, and endanger, or perhaps entirely destroy, their hopes of success
by a scheming spirit, which is always reaching forward to something new. One has in his mind
some new school-book by which Arithmetic, Grammar, or Geography are to be taught with unexampled
rapidity, and his own purse to be filled in a much more easy way than by waiting for the rewards
of patient industry. Another has the plan of a school, bringing into operation new principles
of management or instruction, which he is to establish on some favored spot, and which is to
become, in a few years, a second Hofwyl. Another has some royal road to learning, and, though
he is trammeled and held down by what he calls the ignorance and stupidity of his trustees
or his school committee, yet, if he could fairly put his principles and methods to the test,
he is certain of advancing the science of education half a century at least at a single leap. 

Even now she was going home, because the will said she must; must rest two hours, and come back fresher for
the night.

As she came out into the golden light, Cleave left the group of young and old about the door
and met her. In the plane along which life now moved, nothing was unnatural; certainly Richmond did
not find it so, that a lover and his beloved should thus encounter in the street, a moment between battles.
Her dark eyes and his grey ones met. To find him there seemed as natural as it had been in
her dream; the street was no more to her than the lonely beach. They crossed it, went up toward
the Capitol Square, and, entering, found a green dip of earth with a bench beneath a linden tree.
Behind them rose the terraced slope to the pillared Capitol; as always, in this square children's
voices were heard with their answering nurses, and the squirrels ran along the grass or upon the boughs
above. But the voices were somewhat distant and the squirrels did
not disturb; it was a leafy, quiet nook.

The few men or women who passed, pale, distrait, hurrying from one quarter of the city to another,
heeded as little as they were heeded. Lovers' meetings--lovers' partings--soldiers--women who
loved them--faces pale and grave, yet raised, hands in hands, low voices in leafy places--man and
woman together in the golden light, in the breathing space before the cannon should begin again--Richmond
was growing used to that. All life was now in public. For the most part a clear altruism swayed
the place and time, and in the glow smallness of comment or of thought was drowned. Certainly,
it mattered not to Cleave and Judith that it was the Capitol Square, and that people went up and
down.

"I have but the shortest while," he said. "I came this morning with Allen's body--the colonel
of the 2d. I ride back directly. I hope that we will move to-night."

"Following McClellan?"

"To get across his path, if possible."

"There will be another battle?"

"Yes. More than one, perhaps."

"I have believed that you were safe. I do not see that I could have lived else."

"Many have fallen; many are hurt. I found Allan Gold in the hospital. He will not die, however.... Judith,
how often do I see your face beside the flag!"

"When I was asleep I dreamed of you. We were drifting together, far out at sea--your arm here--"
She lifted his hand, drew his arm about her, rested her head on his breast. "I love you--I
love you--I love you."

They stayed in the leafy place and the red-gold light for half an hour, speaking little, sitting
sometimes with closed eyes, but hand in hand. It was much as though they were drifting together
at sea, understanding perfectly, but weary from battling, and with great issues towering to
the inner vision. They would have been less nobly minded had their own passion inexorably claimed
them. All about them were suffering and death and the peril of their cause. For one half-hour
they drew happiness from the darkly gigantic background, but it was a quiet and lofty form, though sweet,
sweet! with whom they companioned. When the time was passed the two rose, and Cleave held her in his
arms. "Love--Love--"

When he was gone she waited awhile beneath the trees, then slowly crossed the Capitol Square and
moved toward the small room behind the tulip tree. The streets were flooded with a sunset glow. Into
Franklin from Main came marching feet, then, dull, dull! the muffled drums. Soldiers and furled
colours and the coffin, atop it the dead man's cap and gauntlets and sword; behind, pacing slowly,
his war horse, stirrups crossed over saddle. Soldiers, soldiers, and the drums beating like
breaking hearts.

She moved back to a doorstep and let the Dead March from "Saul" go by.

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE RAILROAD GUN

The troops, moving at dawn to the Chickahominy, over a road and through woods which testified
in many ways of the blue retreat, found the Grapevine Bridge a wreck, the sleepers hacked apart,
framework and middle structure cast into the water. Fitz John Porter and the 5th Army Corps
were across, somewhere between the river and Savage Station, leaving only, in the thick wood
above the stream, a party of sharpshooters and a battery. When the grey pioneers advanced to their
work, these opened fire. The bridge must be rebuilt, and the grey
worked on, but with delays and difficulties.

D. H. Hill, leading Jackson's advance, brought up two batteries and shelled the opposite side. The
blue guns and riflemen moved to another position and continued, at short intervals, to fire on
the pioneers. It was Sunday the twenty-ninth; fearfully hot by the McGehee house, and on Turkey
Hill, and in the dense midsummer woods, and in the mosquito-breeding bogs and swamps through
which meandered the Chickahominy. The river spread out as many arms as Briareus; short, stubby
creeks, slow waters prone to overflow and creep, between high knotted roots of live-oak and cypress,
into thickets of bog myrtle. The soil hereabouts was black and wet, further back light and sandy.
The Valley troops drew the most uncomplimentary comparisons. To a man they preferred mountains,
firm rolling champaign, clean rivers with rocky bottoms, sound roads,
and a different vegetation.

They were not in a good humour, anyhow.

Ewell was at Dispatch Station, seven miles below, guarding Bottom's
Bridge and tearing up the York River Railroad.

Stuart was before him, sweeping down on the White House, burning McClellan's stations and stores,
making that line of retreat difficult enough for an encumbered army. But McClellan had definitely
abandoned any idea of return upon Yorktown. The head of his column was set for the James, for
Harrison's Landing and the gunboats.

There were twenty-five difficult miles to go. He had something like a hundred thousand men.
He had five thousand wagons, heavy artillery trains, enormous stores, a rabble of camp followers,
a vast, melancholy freight of sick and wounded.

He left his camps and burned his depots, and plunged into the heavy, still, and torrid forest. This
Sunday morning, the twenty-ninth, the entrenchments before Richmond,
skilful, elaborate pieces of engineering, were found by Magruder's
and Huger's scouts deserted by all but the dead and a few score of
sick and wounded, too far gone to be moved.

Later, columns of smoke, rising from various quarters of the forest,
betrayed other burning camps or depots.

This was followed by tidings which served to make his destination certain. He was striking
down toward White Oak Swamp. There the defeated right, coming from the Chickahominy, would join
him, and the entire great force move toward the James.

Lee issued his orders. Magruder with Huger pursued by the Williamsburg road. A. P. Hill and Longstreet,
leaving the battlefield of the twenty-seventh, crossed the Chickahominy
by the New Bridge, passed behind Magruder, and took the Darbytown
road.

A courier, dispatched to Ewell, ordered him to rejoin Jackson. The latter was directed to cross
the Chickahominy with all his force by the Grapevine Bridge, and to pursue with eagerness.
He had the directest, shortest road; immediately before him the corps which had been defeated
at Gaines's Mill. With D. H. Hill, with Whiting and Lawton, he had now fourteen brigades--say
twenty thousand men.

The hours passed in languid sunshine on the north bank of the Chickahominy. The troops were under
arms, but the bridge was not finished. The smoke and sound of the rival batteries, the crack
of the hidden rifles on the southern side, concerned only those immediately at issue and the
doggedly working pioneers. Mere casual cannonading, amusement of sharpshooters, no longer possessed
the slightest tang of novelty. Where the operation was petty, and a man in no extreme personal
danger, he could not be expected to be much interested. The troops yawned; some of the men slept;
others fretted. "Why can't we swim the damned old trough? They'll get away! Thank the Lord,
I wasn't born in Tidewater Virginia! Oh, I'd like to see the Shenandoah!"

The 65th Virginia occupied a rise of sandy ground covered with hazel bushes. Company A had the
brink of it, looking out toward the enormously tall trees towering
erect from the river's margin of swamp.

The hazel bushes gave little shade and kept off the air, the blue above was intense, the buzzards
sailing. Muskets were stacked, the men sprawling at ease. A private, who at home was a Sunday
School superintendent, read his Bible; another, a lawyer, tickled a hop toad with a spear of
grass; another, a blacksmith, rebound the injured ankle of a schoolboy. Some slept, snoring in
the scanty shade; some compared diaries or related, scrappily enough, battle experiences. "Yes,
and Robinson was scouting, and he was close to Garland's line, and, gosh! he said it was short
enough! And Garland rode along it, and he said, said he, 'Boys, you are not many, but you
are a noble few.'" Some listened to the booming of the sparring batteries; two or three who had lost
close friends or kinsmen moped aside.

The frank sympathy of all for these made itself apparent. The shadiest hazel bushes unobtrusively
came into their possession; there was an evident intention of seeing that they got the best fare
when dinner was called; a collection of tobacco had been taken and quietly pushed their way.
Some examined knapsack and haversacks, good oilcloths, belts, rolled blankets, canteens, cartridge-boxes
and cartridges, picked up upon the road. Others seriously did incline to search for certain intruders
along the seams of shirt and trousers; others merely lay on their backs and looked up into Heaven.
Billy Maydew was one of these, and Steve Dagg overturned the contents of a knapsack.

It was well filled, but with things Steve did not want.

"O Gawd! picters and pincushions and Testaments with United States flags in them--I never did have
any luck, anyhow!--in this here war nor on Thunder Run neither!"

Dave Maydew rolled over. "Steve says Thunder Run didn't like him--Gosh! what's a-going to happen
ef Steve takes to telling the truth?"

Sergeant Coffin turned from contemplation of a bursting shell above the Grapevine crossing.
"If anybody finds any letter-paper and doesn't want it--"

A chorus arose. "Sorry we haven't got any!"--"I have got some--lovely! But I've got a girl, too."--"Sorry,
sergeant, but it isn't pale blue, scented with forget-me-nots."--"Just
think her a letter--think it out loud!

Wait, I'll show you how. Darling Chloe--Don't get angry! He's most gotten over getting angry
and it becomes him beautifully--Darling Chloe--What're you coming into it for, Billy Maydew?
'Don't tease him!'--My son, he loves to be teased. All lovers love to be teased. Darling Chloe.
It is Sunday morning. The swans are warbling your name and so are half a dozen pesky Yankee Parrotts.
The gentle zephyrs speak of thee, and so does the hot simoom that blows from Chickahominy, bringing
an inordinate number of mosquitoes. I behold thy sinuous grace in the curls of smoke from Reilly's
battery, and also in the slide and swoop of black buzzards over a multitude of dead horses in
the woods. Darling Chloe, we are stranded on an ant heap which down here they call a hill, and why
in hell we don't swim the river is more than at the moment I can tell you. It's rumoured that
Old Jack's attending church in the neighbourhood, but we are left outside to praise God from whom
all blessings flow. Darling Chloe, this company is not so unpopular with me as once it was. War
is teaching it a damned lot, good temper and pretty ways and what not--It is teaching it! Who
says it is not?--Darling Chloe, if you could see how long and lean and brown we are and how
ragged we are and how lousy--Of course, of course, sergeant, you're
not!

Only the high private in the rear rank is, and even he says he's not--Darling Chloe, if I could
rise like one of those damned crows down there and sail over these damned flats and drop at your
feet in God's country beyond the mountains, you wouldn't walk to
church to-day with me.

You'd turn up your pretty little nose, and accept the arm of some damned bombproof--Look out!
What's the matter here? 'The last straw! shan't slander her!'--I'm not slandering her. I don't
believe either she'd do it. Needn't all of you look so glum! I'll take it back. We know, God bless
every last woman of them, that they don't do it! They haven't got any more use for a bombproof than
we have!--I can't retract handsomer than that!--Darling Chloe, the Company's grown amiable, but
it don't think much so far of its part in this campaign. Heretofore in tableaux and amateur
theatricals it has had a star role, and in this damned Richmond play it's nothing but a walking
shadow! Darling Chloe, we want somebody to whoop things up. We demand the centre of the stage--"

It
was so hot on the little sandy hill that there was much straggling down through the woods to
some one of the mesh of water-courses. The men nearest Steve were all turned toward the discourser
to Chloe, who sat on a lift of sand, cross-legged like an Eastern
scribe.

Mathew Coffin, near him, looked half pleased, half sulky at the teasing. Since Port Republic
he was a better-liked non-commissioned officer. Billy Maydew, again flat on his back, stared
at the blue sky. Steve stole a tin cup and slipped quietly off through the hazel bushes.

He found a muddy runlet straying off from the river and quenched his thirst, then, turning,
surveyed through the trees the hump of earth he had left and the company upon it. Beyond it were
other companies, the regiment, the brigade. Out there it was hot and glaring, in here there
was black, cool, miry loam, shade and water. Steve was a Sybarite born, and he lingered here.
He didn't mean to straggle, for he was afraid of this country and afraid now of his colonel;
he merely lingered and roamed about a little, beneath the immensely tall trees and in the
thick undergrowth. In doing this he presently came, over quaking soil and between the knees
of cypresses, flush with the Chickahominy itself. He sat down, took his own knees in his arms and
looked at it. It was not so wide, but it looked stiller than the sky, and bottomless. The banks
were so low that the least rain lifted it over. It strayed now, here and there, between tree roots.
There was no such word as "sinister" in Steve's vocabulary. He only said, "Gawd! I wouldn't
live here for choice!" The country across the stream engaged his attention. Seen from this bank
it appeared all forest clad, but where his own existence from moment to moment was in question Steve
could read the signboards as well as another. Certain distant, southward moving, yellowish streaks
he pronounced dust clouds.

There were roads beneath, and moving troops and wagon trains. He counted four columns of smoke of varying
thickness. The heavier meant a cluster of buildings, holding stores probably, the thinner some
farmhouse or barn or mill. From other signs he divined that there were clearings over there,
and that the blue troops were burning hayricks and fences as well as buildings. Sound, too--it
seemed deathly still here on the brim of this dead water, and yet there was sound--the batteries,
of course, down the stream where they built the bridge, but also a dull, low, dreary murmur from
across,--from the thick forest and the lost roads, and the swamps
through which guns were dragged; from the clearings, the corn and
wheat fields, the burning depots and encampments and houses of the
people--the sound of a hostile army rising from the country where
two months before it had settled.

All was blended; there came simply a whirring murmur out of the forest beyond the Chickahominy.

Steve rose, yawned, and began again to prowl. Every rood of this region had been in possession
of that humming army over there. All manner of desirable articles were being picked up. Orders
were strict.

Weapons, even injured weapons, ammunition, even half-spoiled ammunition, gun-barrels, ramrods,
bayonets, cartridge-boxes, belts--all these must be turned in to the field ordnance officer. The
South gleaned her battlefields of every ounce of lead or iron, every
weapon or part of a weapon, every manufactured article of war.

This done, the men might appropriate or themselves distribute apparel, food, or other matters. Steve,
wandering now, his eyes on earth, saw nothing. The black wet soil, the gnarled roots, the gloomy
meanders of the stream, looked terribly lonely. "Gawd! even the water-rats don't come here!"
thought Steve, and on his way back to the hill entered a thicket of low bushes with shiny
green leaves. Here he all but stumbled over a dead soldier in a blue
uniform.

He lay on his face, arms out, hands clutching at some reed-like grass. His rifle was beside
him, haversack--all undisturbed. "Picket," said Steve. "O Gawd, ain't war glorious?"

Not at all without imagination, he had no fondness for touching dead
men, but there were several things about this one that he wanted.

He saw that the shoes wouldn't fit, and so he left them alone. His own rifle was back there,
stacked with the others on the hot hillside, and he had no intention of bothering with this one.
If the ordnance officer wanted it, let him come himself and get it! He exchanged cartridge-boxes,
and took the other's rolled oilcloth, and then he looked into the haversack.

Rising to his feet, he glanced about him with quick, furtive, squirrel-like motions of his
head. Cool shade, stillness, a creepy loneliness. Taking the haversack, he left the thicket
and went back to the brink of Chickahominy. Here he sat down between the cypress knees and
drew out of the haversack the prize of prizes. It fixed a grin upon his lean, narrow face, the
sight and smell of it, the black, squat bottle. He held it up to the light; it was three quarters
full. The cork came out easily; he put it to his lips and drank. "Gawd! it ain't so damned lonely,
after all!"

The sun climbed to the meridian. The pioneers wrought as best they
might on the Grapevine Bridge.

The blue battery and the blue sharpshooters persisted in their hindering, and the grey battery
continued to interfere with the blue. In the woods and over the low hills back of the Chickahominy
the grey brigades of Stonewall Jackson rested, impatiently wondering, staring at the river,
staring at the smoke of conflagrations on the other side and the dust streaks moving southward. Down
on the swampy bank, squat between the cypress knees, Steve drank again, and then again,--in fact,
emptied the squat, black bottle. The stuff filled him with a tremendous courage, and conferred
upon him great fluency of thought. He waxed eloquent to the cypress roots upon the conduct
of the war. "Gawd! if they'd listen ter me I'd te--tell them how!--I'd bui--build a bridge
for the whole rotten army to cross on! Ef it broke I'd bui--build another. Yah! They don't 'pre--'preciate
a man when they see him. Gawd! they're damn slow, and ain't a man over here got anything to drink!
It's all over there." He wept a little. "O Gawd, make them hurry up, so's I kin git across." He put
the bottle to his lips and jerked his head far back, but there was not a drop left to trickle
forth. He flung it savagely far out into the water. "Ef I thought there was another like you
over there--" His courage continued to mount as he went further from himself. He stood up
and felt a giant; stretched out his arm and admired the muscle, kicked a clod of black earth into
the stream and rejoiced in the swing of his leg. Then he smiled, a satyr-like grin wrinkling the
cheek to the ear; then he took off his grey jacket, letting it drop
upon the cypress roots; then he waded into the Chickahominy and began
to swim to the further shore.

The stream was deep but not swift; he was lank and lean but strong, and there was on the other side a
pied piper piping of bestial sweetnesses. Several times arms and legs refused to cooperate and
there was some likelihood of a death by drowning, but each time instinct asserted herself,
righted matters, and on he went. She pulled him out at last, on the southern bank, and he
lay gasping among the tree roots, somewhat sobered by the drenching, but still on the whole
a courageous giant. He triumphed. "Yah! I got across! Goo'--goo-'bye, ye darned fools squattin'
on the hillside!"

He left the Chickahominy and moved through the woods. He went quite at random and with a peculiar
gait, his eyes on the ground, looking for another haversack. But just hereabouts there showed
nothing of the kind; it was a solemn wood of pines and cedars, not overtrampled as yet by war.
Steve shivered, found a small opening where the sun streamed in, planted himself in the middle
of the warmth, and presently toppled over on the pine needles and went to sleep. He slept
an hour or more, when he was waked by a party of officers riding through the wood. They stopped.
Steve sat up and blinked. The foremost, a florid, side-whiskered, magnificently soldierly personage,
wearing a very fine grey uniform and the stars of a major-general, addressed him. "What are you
doing here, thir? Thraggling?--Anther me!"

Steve saluted. "I ain't the straggling kind, sir. Any man that says I straggle is a liar--exceptin'
the colonel, and he's mistaken. I'm one of Stonewall's men."

"Thtonewall! Ith Jackthon acwoss?"
"They're building a bridge. I don't know if they air across yet.
I swum."

"What did you thwim for? Where'th your jacket? What's your
wegiment?--'65th Virginia?'--Well, 65th Virginia, you appear to me
a detherter--"

Steve began to whine. "Gawd, general, I ain't no deserter.
If you'll jest have patience and listen, I kin explain--"

"Time'th
lacking, thir. You get up behind one of my couriers, and if Jackthon's
crothed I'll return you to your colonel. Take him up, O'Brien."

"General
Magruder, sor, can't I make him trot before me face like any other
water-spaniel? He's wet and dhirty, sor."

"All wight, all wight,
O'Brien. Come on, Gwiffith. Nine-Mile road and Thavage Thation!"

The
officers rode on. The courier regarded with disfavour the unlucky
Steve. "Forward march, dhirty, desartin', weak-kneed crayture that
ye be! Thrott!"

Beyond the pine wood the two came into an area which
had been overtrampled. Indescribably dreary under the hot sun looked
the smouldering heaps and mounds of foodstuffs, the wrecked wagons,
the abandoned picks and spades and shovels, the smashed camp equipage,
broken kettles, pots and pans, the blankets, bedding, overcoats, torn
and trampled in the mire, or piled together and a dull red fire slow
creeping through the mass. Medicine-chests had been split by a blow
of the axe, the vials shivered, and a black mire made by the liquids.
Ruined weapons glinted in the sun between the furrows of a ruined
cornfield; bags of powder, boxes of cartridges, great chests of shot
and shell showed, half submerged in a tortuous creek. At the edge
of the field, there was a cannon spiked and overturned. Here, too,
were dead horses, and here, too, were the black, ill-omened birds.
There was a trench as well, a long trench just filled, with two or
three little head boards bearing some legend. "Holy Virgin!" said
the courier, "if I was a horse, a child, or a woman, I'd hate war
with a holy hathred!"

Steve whined at his stirrup. "Look a-here,
sir, I can't keep up! My foot's awful sore. Gawd don't look my way,
if it ain't! I ain't desertin'. Who'd I desert to? They've all gone.
I wanted a bath an' I swum the river. The regiment'll be over directly
an' I'll rejoin. Take my oath, I will!"

"You trot along out of this
plundering mess," ordered the courier. "I'm thinking I'll drop you
soon, but it won't be just here! Step lively now!" Consider whether it will require so much time and
effort as will draw off in any considerable degree, the attention of the teacher from the more
essential parts of his duty. All will admit that it is highly important that every school should
be simple in its plan--as simple as its size and general circumstances will permit, and especially
that the public schools in every town and village of our country should never lose sight of
what is and must be, after all, their great design--teaching the whole population to ready
write, and calculate.

7. If it is a school-book which you are wishing to introduce, consider well before you waste
your time in preparing it, and your spirits in the vexatious work of getting it through the
press; whether it is, for general use, so superior to those already published as to induce
teachers to make a change in favor of yours. I have italicized the words for general use, for
no delusion is more common than for a teacher to suppose that because a text-book which he
has prepared and uses in manuscript is better for him than any other work which he can obtain,
it will therefore be better for general circulation. Every man, if he has any originality of
mind, has of course some peculiar method of his own, and he can of course prepare a text-book
which will be better adapted to this method than those ordinarily in use. The history of a
vast number of text-books, Arithmetics, Geographies, and Grammars, is this: A man of somewhat
ingenious mind, adopts some peculiar mode of instruction in one of these branches, and is quite
successful, not because the method has any very peculiar excellence, but simply because he
takes a greater interest in it, both on account of its novelty and also from the fact that
it is his own invention. He conceives the plan of writing a text-book to develop and illustrate
this method. He hurries through the work. By some means or other he gets it printed. In due
time it is regularly advertised. The journals of education give notice of it; the author sends
a few copies to his friends, and that is the end of it. Perhaps a few schools may make a trial
of it, and if, for any reason, the teachers who try it are interested in the work, probably
in their hands it succeeds. But it does not succeed so well as to attract general attention,
and consequently does not get into general circulation. The author loses his time and his patience.
The publisher, unless, unfortunately, it was published on the author's account, loses his paper,
and in a few months scarcely any body knows that such a book ever saw the light.

It is in this way that the great multitude of school-books which are now constantly issuing
from the press take their origin. Far be it from me to discourage the preparation of good school-books.
This department of our literature offers a fine field for the efforts of learning and genius.
What I contend against is the endless multiplicity of useless works, hastily conceived and
carelessly executed, and which serve no purpose but to employ uselessly talents which, if properly
applied, might greatly benefit both the community and the possessor.

8. If, however, after mature deliberation, you conclude that you have the plan of a school-book
which you ought to try to mature and execute, be slow and cautious about it. Remember that
so great is now the competition in this branch, nothing but superior excellence or very extraordinary
exertions will secure the favorable reception of a work. Examine all that your predecessors
have done before you. Obtain, whatever may be the trouble and expense, all other text-books
on the subject, and examine them thoroughly. If you see that you can make a very decided advance
on all that has been done, and that the public will probably submit to the inconvenience and
expense of a change to secure the result of your labors, go forward slowly and carefully in
your work, no matter how much investigation, how much time and labor it may require. The more
difficulty you may find in gaining the eminence, the less likely will you be to be followed
by successful competitors.

9. Consider, in forming your text-book, not merely the whole subject on which you are to write,
but also look extensively and thoroughly at the institutions throughout the country, and consider
carefully the character of the teachers by whom you expect it to be used. Sometimes a man publishes
a text-book, and when it fails on trial, he says "it is because they did not know how to use
it. The book in itself was good. The whole fault was in the awkwardness and ignorance of the
teacher." How absurd! As if, to make a good text-book, it was not as necessary to adapt it
to teachers as to scholars. A good text-book, which the teachers for whom it was intended did
not know how to use!! In other words, a good contrivance, but entirely unfit for the purpose
for which it was intended.

10. Lastly, in every new plan, consider carefully whether its success in your hands, after
you have tried it and found it successful, be owing to its novelty and to your own special
interest in it, or to its own innate and intrinsic superiority. If the former, use it so long
as it will last, simply to give variety and interest to your plans. Recommend it in conversation
or in other ways to teachers with whom you are acquainted, not as a wonderful discovery, which
is going to change the whole science of education, but as one method among others which may
be introduced from time to time to relieve the monotony of the teacher's labors.

In a word, do not go away from the established institutions of our country, or deviate from
the great objects which are at present, and ought continually to be pursued by them, without
great caution, circumspection, and deliberate inquiry. But, within these limits, exercise ingenuity
and invention as much as you will. Pursue steadily the great objects which demand the teacher's
attention. They are simple and few. Never lose sight of them, nor turn to the right or to the
left to follow any ignis fatuus which may arise to allure you away, but exercise as much ingenuity
and enterprise as you please in giving variety and interest to the modes by which these objects
are pursued.

If planning and scheming are confined within these limits, and conducted on these principles,
the teacher will save all the agitating perplexity and care which will otherwise be his continual
portion. He can go forward peaceably and quietly, and while his own success is greatly increased,
he may be of essential service to the cause in which he is engaged, by making known his various
experiments and plans to others. For this purpose, it seems to me highly desirable that every
teacher should KEEP A JOURNAL of all his plans. In these should be carefully entered all his
experiments; the new methods he adopts; the course he takes in regard to difficulties which
may arise, and any interesting incidents which may occur which it would be useful for him to
refer to at some future time. These, or the most interesting of them, should be made known
to other teachers. This may be done in several ways:

(1.) By publishing them in periodicals devoted to education. Such contributions, furnished
by judicious men, would be among the most valuable articles in such a work. They would be far
more valuable than any general speculations, however well conceived or expressed.

(2.) In newspapers intended for general circulation. There are very few editors whose papers
circulate in families who would not gladly receive articles of this kind to fill a teacher's
department in their columns. If properly written, they would be read with interest and profit
by multitudes of parents, and would throw much light on family government and instruction.

(3.) By reading them in teachers' meetings. If half a dozen teachers who are associated in
the same vicinity would meet once a fortnight, simply to hear each other's journals, they would
be amply repaid for their time and labor. Teachers' meetings will be interesting and useful,
when those who come forward in them will give up the prevailing practice of delivering orations,
and come down at once to the scenes and to the business of the school-room.

There is one topic connected with the subject of this chapter which deserves a few paragraphs.
I refer to the rights of the committee, or the trustees, or patrons in the control of the school.
The right to such control, when claimed at all, is usually claimed in reference to the teacher's
new plans, which renders it proper to allude to the subject here; and it ought not to be omitted,
for a great many cases occur in which teachers have difficulties with the trustees or committee
of their school. Sometimes these difficulties result at last in an open rupture; at other times
in only a slight and temporary misunderstanding, arising from what the teacher calls an unwise
and unwarrantable interference on the part of the committee or the trustees in the arrangements
of the school. Difficulties of some sort very often arise. In fact, a right understanding of
this subject is, in most cases, absolutely essential to the harmony and co-operation of the
teacher and the representatives of his patrons.

There are then, it must be recollected, three different parties connected with every establishment
for education: the parents of the scholars, the teacher, and the pupils themselves. Sometimes,
as, for example, in a common private school, the parents are not organized, and whatever influence
they exert they must exert in their individual capacity. At other times, as in a common district
or town school, they are by law organized, and the school committee chosen for this purpose
are their legal representatives. In other instances, a board of trustees are constituted by
the appointment of the founders of the institution, or by the Legislature of a state, to whom
is committed the oversight of its concerns, and who are consequently the representatives of
the founders and patrons of the school.

There are differences between these various modes of organization which I shall not now stop
to examine, as it will be sufficiently correct for my purpose to consider them all as only
various ways of organizing the employers in the contract by which the teacher is employed.
The teacher is the agent; the patrons represented in these several ways are the principals.
When, therefore, in the following paragraphs I use the word employers, I mean to be understood
to speak of the committee, or the trustees, or the visitors, or the parents themselves, as
the case in each particular institution may be; that is, the persons for whose purpose and
at whose expense the institution is maintained, or their representatives.

Now there is a very reasonable and almost universally established rule, which teachers are
very frequently prone to forget, namely, the employed ought always to be responsible to the
employers, and to be under their direction. So obviously reasonable is this rule, and, in fact,
so absolutely indispensable in the transaction of all the business of life, that it would be
idle to attempt to establish and illustrate it here. It has, however, limitations, and it is
applicable to a much greater extent, in some departments of human labor than in others. It
is applicable to the business of teaching, and though I confess that it is somewhat less absolute
and imperious here, still it is obligatory, I believe, to a far greater extent than teachers
have been generally willing to admit.

A young lady, I will imagine, wishes to introduce the study of Botany into her school. The
parents or the committee object; they say that they wish the children to confine their attention
exclusively to the elementary branches of education. "It will do them no good," says the chairman
of the committee, "to learn by heart some dozen or two of learned names. We want them to read
well, to write well, and to calculate well, and not to waste their time in studying about pistils,
and stamens, and nonsense."

Now what is the duty of the teacher in such a case? Why, very plainly her duty is the same
as that of the governor of a state, where the people, through their representatives, regularly
chosen, negative a proposal which he considers calculated to promote the public good. It is
his duty to submit to the public will; and, though he may properly do all in his power to present
the subject to his employers in such a light as to lead them to regard it as he does, he must
still, until they do so regard it, bow to their authority; and every magistrate who takes an
enlarged and comprehensive view of his duties as the executive of a republican community, will
do this without any humiliating feelings of submission to unauthorized interference with his
plans. He will, on the other hand, enjoy the satisfaction of feeling that he confines himself
to his proper sphere, and leave to others the full possession of rights which properly pertain
to them.

It is so with every case where the relation of employer and employed subsists. You engage a
carpenter to erect a house for you, and you present your plan; instead of going to work and
executing your orders according to your wishes, he falls to criticising and condemning it;
he finds fault with this, and ridicules that, and tells you you ought to make such and such
an alteration in it. It is perfectly right for him to give his opinion, in the tone and spirit
of recommendation or suggestion, with a distinct understanding that with his employer rests
the power and the right to decide. But how many teachers take possession of their school-room
as though it was an empire in which they are supreme, who resist every interference of their
employers as they would an attack upon their personal freedom, and who feel that in regard
to every thing connected with school they have really no actual responsibility.

In most cases, the employers, knowing how sensitive teachers very frequently are on this point,
acquiesce in it, and leave them to themselves. Whenever, in any case, they think that the state
of the school requires their interference, they come cautiously and fearfully to the teacher,
as if they were encroaching upon his rights, instead of advancing with the confidence and directness
with which employers have always a right to approach the employed; and the teacher, with the
view he has insensibly taken of the subject, being perhaps confirmed by the tone and manner
which his employers use, makes the conversation quite as often an occasion of resentment and
offense as of improvement. He is silent, perhaps, but in his heart he accuses his committee
or his trustees of improper interference in his concerns, as though it was no part of their
business to look after work which is going forward for their advantage, and for which they pay.

Perhaps some individuals who have had some collision with their trustees or committee will
ask me if I mean that a teacher ought to be entirely and immediately under the supervision
and control of the trustees, just as a mechanic is when employed by another man. By no means.
There are various circumstances connected with the nature of this employment, such as the impossibility
of the employers fully understanding it in all its details, and the character and the standing
of the teacher himself, which always will, in matter of fact, prevent this. The employers always
will, in a great many respects, place more confidence in the teacher and in his views than
they will in their own. But still, the ultimate power is theirs. Even if they err, if they
wish to have a course pursued which is manifestly inexpedient and wrong, they still have a
right to decide. It is their work; it is going on at their instance and at their expense, and
the power of ultimate decision on all disputed questions must, from the very nature of the
case, rest with them. The teacher may, it is true, have his option either to comply with their
wishes or to seek employment in another sphere; but while he remains in the employ of any persons,
whether in teaching or in any other service, he is bound to yield to the wishes of his employers
when they insist upon it, and to submit good-humoredly to their direction when they shall claim
their undoubted right to direct.

This is to be done, it must be remembered, when they are wrong as well as when they are right.
The obligation of the teacher is not founded upon the superior wisdom of his employers in reference
to the business for which they have engaged him, for they are very probably his inferiors in
this respect, but upon their right as employers to determine how their own work shall be done.
A gardener, we will suppose, is engaged by a gentleman to lay out his grounds. The gardener
goes to work, and, after a few hours, the gentleman comes out to see how he goes on and to
give directions. He proposes something which the gardener, who, to make the case stronger,
we will suppose knows better than the proprietor of the grounds, considers ridiculous and absurd;
nay, we will suppose it is ridiculous and absurd. Now what can the gardener do? There are obviously
two courses. He can say to the proprietor, after a vain attempt to convince him he is wrong,
"Well, sir, I will do just as you say. The grounds are yours: I have no interest in it or responsibility,
except to accomplish your wishes." This would be right. Or he might say, "Sir, you have a right
to direct upon your own grounds, and I do not wish to interfere with your plans; but I must
ask you to obtain another gardener. I have a reputation at stake, and this work, if I do it
even at your direction, will be considered as a specimen of my taste and of my planning, so
that I must, in justice to myself, decline remaining in your employment." This, too, would
be right, though probably, both in the business of gardening and of teaching, the case ought
to be a strong one to render it expedient.

But it would not be right for him, after his employer should have gone away, to say to himself,
with a feeling of resentment at the imaginary interference, "I shall not follow any such directions;
I understand my own trade, and shall receive no instructions in it from him," and then, disobeying
all directions, go on and do the work contrary to the orders of his employer, who alone has
a right to decide.

And yet a great many teachers take a course as absurd and unjustifiable as this would be. Whenever
the parents, or the committee, or the trustees express, however mildly and properly, their
wishes in regard to the manner in which they desire to have their own work performed, their
pride is at once aroused. They seem to feel it an indignity to act in any other way than just
in accordance with their own will and pleasure; and they absolutely refuse to comply, resenting
the interference as an insult; or else, if they apparently yield, it is with mere cold civility,
and entirely without any honest desire to carry the wishes thus expressed into actual effect.

Parents may, indeed, often misjudge. A good teacher will, however, soon secure their confidence,
and they may acquiesce in his opinion. But they ought to be watchful, and the teacher ought
to feel and acknowledge their authority on all questions connected with the education of their
children. They have originally entire power in regard to the course which is to be pursued
with them. Providence has made the parents responsible, and wholly responsible, for the manner
in which their children are prepared for the duties of this life, and it is interesting to
observe how very cautious the laws of society are about interfering with the parent's wishes
in regard to the education of the child. There are many cases in which enlightened governments
might make arrangements which would be better than those made by the parents if they are left
to themselves. But they will not do it; they ought not to do it. God has placed the responsibility
in the hands of the father and mother, and unless the manner in which it is exercised is calculated
to endanger or to injure the community, there can rightfully be no interference except that
of argument and persuasion.

It ought also to be considered that upon the parents will come the consequences of the good
or bad education of their children, and not upon the teacher, and consequently it is right
that they should direct. The teacher remains, perhaps, a few months with his charge, and then
goes to other places, and perhaps hears of them no more. He has thus very little at stake.
The parent has every thing at stake; and it is manifestly unjust to give one man the power
of deciding, while he escapes all the consequences of his mistakes, if he makes any, and to
take away all the power from those upon whose heads all the suffering which will follow an
abuse of the power must descend.

CHAPTER VIII.

REPORTS OF CASES.

There is, perhaps, no way by which a writer can more effectually explain his views on the subject
of education than by presenting a great variety of actual cases, whether real or imaginary,
and describing particularly the course of treatment which he would recommend in each. This
method of communicating knowledge is very extensively resorted to in the medical profession,
where writers detail particular cases, and report the symptoms and the treatment for each succeeding
day, so that the reader may almost fancy himself actually a visitor at the sick-bed, and the
nature and effects of the various prescriptions become fixed in the mind with almost as much
distinctness and permanency as actual experience would give.

This principle has been kept in view, the reader may perhaps think, too closely in all the
chapters of this volume, almost every point brought up having been illustrated by anecdotes
and narratives. I propose, however, devoting one chapter now to presenting a number of miscellaneous
cases, without any attempt to arrange them. Sometimes the case will be merely stated, the reader
being left to draw the inference; at others, such remarks will be added as the case suggests.
All will, however, be intended to answer some useful purpose, either to exhibit good or bad
management and its consequences, or to bring to view some trait of human nature, as it exhibits
itself in children, which it may be desirable for the teacher to know. Let it be understood,
however, that these cases are not selected with reference to their being strange or extraordinary.
They are rather chosen because they are common; that is, they, or cases similar, will be constantly
occurring to the teacher, and reading such a chapter will be the best substitute for experience
which the teacher can have. Some are descriptions of literary exercises or plans which the
reader can adopt in classes or with a whole school; others are cases of discipline, good or
bad management, which the teacher can imitate or avoid. The stories are from various sources,
and are the results of the experience of several individuals.

1. HATS AND BONNETS.--The master of a district school was accidentally looking out of the window
one day, and he saw one of the boys throwing stones at a hat, which was put up for that purpose
upon the fence. He said nothing about it at the time, but made a memorandum of the occurrence,
that he might bring it before the school at the proper time. When the hour set apart for attending
to the general business of the school had arrived, and all were still, he said,

"I saw one of the boys throwing stones at a hat to-day: did he do right or wrong?"

There were one or two faint murmurs which sounded like "Wrong" but the boys generally made
no answer.

"Perhaps it depends a little upon the question whose hat it was. Do you think it does depend
upon that?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, suppose then it was not his own hat, and he was throwing stones at it without the owner's
consent, would it be plain in that case whether he was doing right or wrong?"

"Yes, sir; wrong," was the universal reply.

"Suppose it was his own hat, would he have been right? Has a boy a right to do what he pleases
with his own hat?"

"Yes, sir," "Yes, sir;" "No, sir," "No, sir," answered the boys, confusedly.

"I do not know whose hat it was. If the boy who did it is willing to rise and tell me, it will
help us to decide this question."

The boy, knowing that a severe punishment was not in such a case to be anticipated, and, in
fact, apparently pleased with the idea of exonerating himself from the blame of willfully injuring
the property of another, rose and said,

"I suppose it was I, sir, who did it, and it was my own hat."

"Well," said the master, "I am glad that you are willing to tell frankly how it was; but let
us look at this case. There are two senses in which a hat may be said to belong to any person.
It may belong to him because he bought it and paid for it, or it may belong to him because
it fits him and he wears it. In other words, a person may have a hat as his property, or he
may have it only as a part of his dress. Now you see that, according to the first of these
senses, all the hats in this school belong to your fathers. There is not, in fact, a single
boy in this school who has a hat of his own."

The boys laughed.

"Is not this the fact?"

"Yes, sir."

It certainly is so, though I suppose James did not consider it. Your fathers bought your hats.
They worked for them and paid for them. You are only the wearers, and consequently every generous
boy, and, in fact, every honest boy, will be careful of the property which is intrusted to
him, but which, strictly speaking, is not his own.

2. MISTAKES.--A wide difference must always be made between mistakes arising from carelessness,
and those resulting from circumstances beyond control, such as want of sufficient data, and
the like. The former are always censurable; the latter never; for they may be the result of
correct reasoning from insufficient data, and it is the reasoning only for which the child
is responsible.

"What do you suppose a prophet is?" said a teacher to a class of little boys. The word occurred
in their reading lesson.

The scholars all hesitated; at last one ventured to reply:

"If a man should sell a yoke of oxen, and get more for them than they are worth, he would be
a prophet."

"Yes," said the instructor, "that is right; that is one kind of profit, but this is another
and a little different," and he proceeded to explain the word, and the difference of the spelling.

This child had, without doubt, heard of some transaction of the kind which he described, and
had observed that the word profit was applied to it. Now the care which he had exercised in
attending to it at the time, and remembering it when the same word (for the difference in the
spelling he of course knew nothing about) occurred again, was really commendable. The fact,
which is a mere accident, that we affix very different significations to the same sound, was
unknown to him. The fault, if any where, was in the language and not in him, for he reasoned
correctly from the data he possessed, and he deserved credit for it.

The teacher should always discriminate carefully between errors of this kind, and those that
result from culpable carelessness.

3. TARDINESS.--"My duty to this school," said a teacher to his pupils, "demands, as I suppose
you all admit, that I should require you all to be here punctually at the time appointed for
the commencement of the school. I have done nothing on this subject yet, for I wished to see
whether you would not come early on principle. I wish now, however, to inquire in regard to
this subject, and to ascertain how many have been tardy, and to consider what must be done
hereafter."

He made the inquiries, and ascertained pretty nearly how many had been tardy, and how often
within a week.

The number was found to be so great that the scholars admitted that something ought to be done.

"What shall I do?" asked he. "Can any one propose a plan which will remedy the difficulty?"

There was no answer.

"The easiest and pleasantest way to secure punctuality is for the scholars to come early of
their own accord, upon principle. It is evident, from the reports, that many of you do so,
but some do not. Now there is no other plan which will not be attended with very serious difficulty,
but I am willing to adopt the one which will be most agreeable to yourselves, if it will be
likely to accomplish the object. Has any one any plan to propose?"

There was a pause.

"It would evidently," continued the teacher, "be the easiest for me to leave this subject,
and do nothing about it. It is of no personal consequence to me whether you come early or not,
but as long as I hold this office I must be faithful, and I have no doubt the school committee,
if they knew how many of you were tardy, would think I ought to do something to diminish the evil.

"The best plan that I can think of is that all who are tardy should lose their recess."

The boys looked rather anxiously at one another, but continued silent.

"There is a great objection to this plan from the fact that a boy is sometimes necessarily
absent, and by this rule he will lose his recess with the rest, so that the innocent will be
punished with the guilty."

"I should think, sir," said William, "that those who are necessarily tardy might be excused."

"Yes, I should be very glad to excuse them, if I could find out who they are."

The boys seemed to be surprised at this remark, as if they thought it would not be a difficult
matter to decide.

"How can I tell?" asked the master.

"You can hear their excuses, and then decide."

"Yes," said the teacher: "but here are fifteen or twenty boys tardy this morning; now how long
would it take me to hear their excuses, and understand each case thoroughly, so that I could
really tell whether they were tardy from good reasons or not?"

No answer.

"Should you not think it would take a minute apiece?"

"Yes, sir."

"It would, undoubtedly, and even then I could not in many cases tell. It would take fifteen
minutes, at least. I can not do this in school hours, for I have not time, and if I do it in
recess it will consume the whole of every recess. Now I need the rest of a recess as well as
you, and it does not seem to me to be just that I should lose the whole of mine every day,
and spend it in a most unpleasant business, when I take pains myself to come punctually every
morning. Would it be just?"

"No, sir."

"I think it would be less unjust to deprive all those of their recess who are tardy; for then
the loss of a recess by a boy who had not been to blame would not be very common, and the evil
would be divided among the whole; but in the plan of my hearing the excuses it would all come
upon one."

After a short pause one of the boys said that they might be required to bring written excuses.

"Yes, that is another plan," said the teacher; "but there are objections to it. Can any of
you think what they are? I suppose you have all been, either at this school or at some other,
required to bring written excuses, so that you have seen the plan tried. Now have you never
noticed any objection to it?"

One boy said that it gave the parents a great deal of trouble at home.

"Yes," said the teacher, "this is a great objection; it is often very inconvenient to write.
But that is not the greatest difficulty; can any of you think of any other?"

There was a pause.

"Do you think that these written excuses are, after all, a fair test of the real reasons for
tardiness? I understand that sometimes boys will tease their fathers or mothers for an excuse
when they do not deserve it, 'Yes, sir,' and sometimes they will loiter about when sent of
an errand before school, knowing that they can get a written excuse, when they might easily
have been punctual."

"Yes, sir," "Yes, sir," said the boys.

"Well, now, if we adopt this plan, some unprincipled boy would always contrive to have an excuse,
whether necessarily tardy or not; and, besides, each parent would have a different principle
and a different opinion as to what was a reasonable excuse, so that there would be no uniformity,
and, consequently, no justice in the operation of the system."

The boys admitted the truth of this, and, as no other plan was presented, the rule was adopted
of requiring all those who were tardy to remain in their seats during the recess, whether they
were necessarily tardy or not. The plan very soon diminished the number of loiterers.

4. HELEN'S LESSON.--The possibility of being inflexibly firm in measures, and, at the same
time, gentle and mild in manners and language, is happily illustrated in the following description,
which is based on an incident narrated by Mrs. Sherwood:

"Mrs. M. had observed, even during the few days that Helen had been under her care, that she
was totally unaccustomed to habits of diligence and application. After making all due allowance
for long-indulged habits of indolence and inattention, she one morning assigned an easy lesson
to her pupil, informing her at the same time that she should hear it immediately before dinner.
Helen made no objections to the plan, but she silently resolved not to perform the required
task. Being in some measure a stranger, she thought her aunt would not insist upon perfect
obedience, and besides, in her estimation, she was too old to be treated like a child.

"During the whole morning Helen exerted herself to be mild and obliging; her conduct toward
her aunt was uncommonly affectionate. By these and various other artifices she endeavored to
gain her first victory. Meanwhile Mrs. M. quietly pursued her various avocations, without apparently
noticing Helen's conduct. At length dinner-hour arrived; the lesson was called for, but Helen
was unprepared. Mrs. M. told Helen she was sorry that she had not learned the lesson, and concluded
by saying that she hoped she would be prepared before tea-time.

"Helen, finding she was not to come to the table, began to be a little alarmed. She was acquainted
in some measure with the character of her aunt, still she hoped to be allowed to partake of
the dessert, as she had been accustomed to on similar occasions at home, and soon regained
her wonted composure. But the dinner-cloth was removed, and there sat Helen, suffering not
a little from hunger; still she would not complain; she meant to convince her aunt that she
was not moved by trifles.

"A walk had been proposed for the afternoon, and as the hour drew near, Helen made preparations
to accompany the party. Mrs. M. reminded her of her lesson, but she just noticed the remark
by a toss of the head, and was soon in the green fields, apparently the gayest of the gay.
After her return from the excursion she complained of a head-ache, which in fact she had. She
threw herself languidly on the sofa, sighed deeply, and took up her History.

"Tea was now on the table, and most tempting looked the white loaf. Mrs. M. again heard the
pupil recite, but was sorry to find the lesson still imperfectly prepared. She left her, saying
she thought half an hour's additional study would conquer all the difficulties she found in
the lesson.

"During all this time Mrs. M. appeared so perfectly calm, composed, and even kind, and so regardless
of sighs and doleful exclamations, that Helen entirely lost her equanimity, and let her tears
flow freely and abundantly. Her mother was always moved by her tears, and would not her aunt
relent? No. Mrs. M. quietly performed the duties of the table, and ordered the tea-equipage
to be removed. This latter movement brought Helen to reflection. It is useless to resist, thought
she; indeed, why should I wish to? Nothing too much has been required of me. How ridiculous
I have made myself appear in the eyes of my aunt, and even of the domestics!

"In less than an hour she had the satisfaction of reciting her lesson perfectly; her aunt made
no comments on the occasion, but assigned her the next lesson, and went on sewing. Helen did
not expect this; she had anticipated a refreshing cup of tea after the long siege. She had
expected that even something nicer than usual would be necessary to compensate her for her
past sufferings. At length, worn out by long-continued watching and fasting, she went to the
closet, provided herself with a cracker, and retired to bed to muse deliberately on the strange
character of her aunt.

"Teachers not unfrequently threaten their pupils with some proper punishment, but, when obliged
to put the threat into execution, contrive in some indirect way to abate its rigor, and thus
destroy all its effects. For example, a mother was in the habit, when her little boy ran beyond
his prescribed play-ground, of putting him into solitary confinement. On such occasions, she
was very careful to have some amusing book or diverting plaything in a conspicuous part of
the room, and not unfrequently a piece of gingerbread was given to solace the runaway. The
mother thought it very strange her little boy should so often transgress, when he knew what
to expect from such a course of conduct. The boy was wiser than the mother; he knew perfectly
well how to manage the business. He could play with the boys beyond the garden gate, and if
detected, to be sure he was obliged to spend a quiet hour in the pleasant parlor. But this
was not intolerable as long as he could expect a paper of sugar-plums, a cake, or at least
something amply to compensate him for the loss of a game at marbles."

5. COMPLAINTS or LONG LESSONS.--A college officer assigned lessons which the idle and ignorant
members of the class thought too long. They murmured for a time, and at last openly complained.
The other members of the class could say nothing in behalf of the professor, awed by the greatest
of all fears to a collegian, the fear of being called a "fisher" or a "blueskin" The professor
paid no attention to the petitions and complaints which were poured in upon him, and which,
though originated by the idle, all were compelled to vote for. He coldly, and with uncompromising
dignity, went on; the excitement in the class increased, and what is called a college rebellion,
with all its disastrous consequences to the infatuated rebels, ensued.

Another professor had the dexterity to manage the case in a different way. After hearing that
there was dissatisfaction, he brought up the subject as follows:

"I understand, gentlemen, that you consider your lessons too long. Perhaps I have overrated
the abilities of the class, but I have not intended to assign you more than you can accomplish.
I feel no other interest in the subject than the pride and pleasure it would give me to have
my class stand high, in respect to the amount of ground it has gone over, when you come to
examination. I propose, therefore, that you appoint a committee, in whose abilities and judgment
you can confide, and let them examine this subject and report. They might ascertain how much
other classes have done, and how much is expedient for this class to attempt; and then, by
estimating the number of recitations assigned to this study, they can easily determine what
should be the length of the lessons."

The plan was adopted, and the report put an end to the difficulty.

6. ENGLISH COMPOSITION.--The great prevailing fault of writers in this country is an affectation
of eloquence. It is almost universally the fashion to aim, not at striking thoughts, simply
and clearly expressed, but at splendid language, glowing imagery, and magnificent periods.
It arises, perhaps, from the fact that public speaking is the almost universal object of ambition,
and, consequently, both at school and at college, nothing is thought of but oratory. Vain attempts
at oratory result, in nine cases out of ten, in grandiloquence and empty verbiage--common thoughts
expressed in pompous periods.

The teacher should guard against this, and assign to children such subjects as are within the
field of childish observation. A little skill on his part will soon determine the question
which kind of writing shall prevail in his school. The following specimens, both written with
some skill, will illustrate the two kinds of writing alluded to. Both were written by pupils
of the same age, twelve; one a boy, the other a girl. The subjects were assigned by the teacher.
I need not say that the following was the writer's first attempt at composition, and that it
is printed without alteration.

THE PAINS OF A SAILOR'S LIFE.

The joyful sailor embarks on board of his ship, the sails are spread to catch the playful gale,
swift as an arrow he cuts the rolling wave. A few days thus sporting on the briny wave, when
suddenly the sky is overspread with clouds, the rain descends in torrents, the sails are lowered,
the gale begins, the vessel is carried with great velocity, and the shrouds, unable to support
the tottering mast, gives way to the furious tempest; the vessel is drove among the rocks,
is sprung aleak; the sailor works at the pumps till, faint and weary, is heard from below,
six feet of water in the hold; the boats are got ready, but, before they are into them, the
vessel is dashed against a reef of rocks; some, in despair, throw themselves into the sea;
others get on the rocks without any clothes or provisions, and linger a few days, perhaps weeks
or months, living on shell fish, or perhaps taken up by some ship; others get on pieces of
the wreck, and perhaps be cast on some foreign country, where perhaps he may be taken by the
natives, and sold into slavery where he never more returns.

In regard to the following specimen, it should be stated that when the subject was assigned,
the pupil was directed to see how precisely she could imitate the language and conversation
which two little children really lost in the woods would use. While writing, therefore, her
mind was in pursuit of the natural and the simple, not of the eloquent.

TWO CHILDREN LOST IN THE WOODS.

Emily. Look here! see how many berries I've got. I don't believe you've got so many.

Charles. Yes, I'm sure I have. My basket's almost full; and if we hurry, we shall get ever
so many before we go home. So pick away as fast as you can, Emily.

Emily. There, mine is full. Now we'll go and find some flowers for mother. You know somebody
told us there were some red ones close to that rock.

Charles. Well, so we will. We'll leave our baskets here, and come back and get them.

Emily. But if we can't find our way back, what shall we do?

Charles. Poh! I can find the way back. I only want a quarter to seven years old, and I sha'n't
lose myself, I know.

Emily. Well, we've got flowers enough, and now I'm tired and want to go home.

Charles. I don't; but, if you are tired, we'll go and find our baskets.

Emily. Where do you think they are? We've been looking a great while for them. I know we are
lost, for when we went after the flowers we only turned once, and coming back we have turned
three times.

Charles. Have we? Well, never mind, I guess we shall find them.

Emily. I'm afraid we sha'n't. Do let's run.

Charles. Well, so do. Oh, Emily! here's a brook, and I am sure we didn't pass any brook going.

Emily. Oh dear! we must be lost. Hark! Charles, didn't you hear that dreadful noise just now?
Wasn't it a bear?

Charles. Poh! I should love to see a bear here. I guess, if he should come near me, I would
give him one good slap that would make him feel pretty bad. I could kill him at the first hit.

Emily. I should like to see you taking hold of a bear. Why, didn't you know bears were stronger
than men? But only see how dark it grows; we sha'n't see ma to-night, I'm afraid.

Charles. So am I: do let's run some more.

Emily. Oh, Charles, do you believe we shall ever find the way out of this dreadful long wood?

Charles. Let's scream, and see if somebody won't come.

Emily. Well (screaming), ma! ma!

Charles (screaming also). Pa! pa!

Emily. Oh dear! there's the sun setting. It will be dreadfully dark by-and-by, won't it?

We have given enough for a specimen. The composition, though faulty in many respects, illustrates
the point we had in view.

7. Insincere Confession.--An assistant in a school informed the principal that she had some
difficulty in preserving order in a certain class composed of small children. The principal
accordingly went into the class, and something like the following dialogue ensued:

"Your teacher informs me," said the principal, "that there is not perfect order in the class.
Now if you are satisfied that there has not been order, and wish to help me discover and correct
the fault, we can do it very easily. If, on the other hand, you do not wish to co-operate with
me, it will be a little more difficult for me to correct it, and I must take a different course.
Now I wish to know, at the outset, whether you do or do not wish to help me?"

A faint "Yes, sir," was murmured through the class.

"I do not wish you to assist me unless you really and honestly desire it yourselves; and if
you undertake to do it, you must do it honestly. The first thing which will be necessary will
be an open and thorough exposure of all which has been wrong, and this, you know, will be unpleasant.
But I will put the question to vote by asking how many are willing that I should know, entirely
and fully, all that they have done in this class that has been wrong?"

Very nearly all the hands were raised at once, promptly, and the others were gradually brought
up, though with more or less of hesitation.

"Are you willing not only to tell me yourselves what you have done, but also, in case any one
has forgotten something which she has done, that others should tell me of it?"

The hands were all raised.

After obtaining thus from the class a distinct and universal expression of willingness that
all the facts should be made known, the principal called upon all those who had any thing to
state to raise their hands, and those who raised them had opportunity to say what they wished.
A great number of very trifling incidents were mentioned, such as could not have produced any
difficulty in the class, and, consequently, could not have been the real instances of disorder
alluded to. Or at least it was evident, if they were, that in the statement they must have
been so palliated and softened that a really honest confession had not been made. This result
might, in such a case, have been expected. Such is human nature, that in nine cases out of
ten, unless such a result had been particularly guarded against, it would have inevitably followed.

Not only will such a result follow in individual cases like this, but, unless the teacher watches
and guards against it, it will grow into a habit. I mean, boys will get a sort of an idea that
it is a fine thing to confess their faults, and by a show of humility and frankness will deceive
their teacher, and perhaps themselves, by a sort of acknowledgment, which in fact exposes nothing
of the guilt which the transgressor professes to expose. A great many cases occur where teachers
are pleased with the confession of faults, and scholars perceive it, and the latter get into
the habit of coming to the teacher when they have done something which they think may get them
into difficulty, and make a sort of half confession, which, by bringing forward every palliating
circumstance, and suppressing every thing of different character, keeps entirely out of view
all the real guilt of the transgression. The criminal is praised by the teacher for the frankness
and honesty of the confession, and his fault is freely forgiven. He goes away, therefore, well
satisfied with himself, when, in fact, he has been only submitting to a little mortification,
voluntarily, to avoid the danger of a greater; much in the same spirit with that which leads
a man to receive the small-pox by inoculation, to avoid the danger of taking it in the natural way.

The teacher who accustoms his pupils to confess their faults voluntarily ought to guard carefully
against this danger. When such a case as the one just described occurs, it will afford a favorable
opportunity of showing distinctly to pupils the difference between an honest and a hypocritical
confession. In this instance the teacher proceeded thus:

"Now there is one more question which I wish you all to answer by your votes honestly. It is
this. Do you think that the real disorder which has been in this class--that is, the real cases
which you referred to when you stated to me that you thought that the class was not in good
order--have been now really exposed, so that I honestly and fully understand the case? How
many suppose so?"

Not a single hand was raised.

"How many of you think, and are willing to avow your opinion, that I have not been fully informed
of the case?"

A large proportion held up their hands.

"Now it seems the class pretended to be willing that I should know all the affair. You pretended
to be willing to tell me the whole, but when I call upon you for the information, instead of
telling me honestly, you attempt to amuse me by little trifles, which in reality made no disturbance,
and you omit the things which you know were the real objects of my inquiries. Am I right in
my supposition?"

They were silent. After a moment's pause, one perhaps raised her hand, and began now to confess
something which she had before concealed.

The teacher, however, interrupted her by saying,

"I do not wish to have the confession made now. I gave you all time to do that, and now I should
rather not hear any more about the disorder. I gave an opportunity to have it acknowledged,
but it was not honestly improved, and now I should rather not hear. I shall probably never know.

"I wished to see whether this class would be honest--really honest, or whether they would have
the insincerity to pretend to be confessing when they were not doing so honestly, so as to
get the credit of being frank and sincere, when in reality they are not so. Now am I not compelled
to conclude that this latter is the case?"

Such an example will make a deep and lasting impression. It will show that the teacher is upon
his guard; and there are very few so hardened in deception that they would not wish that they
had been really sincere rather than rest under such an imputation.

8. Court.--A pupil, quite young (says a teacher), came to me one day with a complaint that
one of her companions had got her seat. There had been some changes in the seats by my permission,
and probably, from some inconsistency in the promises which I had made, there were two claimants
for the same desk. The complainant came to me, and appealed to my recollection of the circumstance.

"I do not recollect any thing about it," said I.

"Why, Mr. B.!" replied she, with astonishment.

"No," said I; "you forget that I have, every day, arrangements, almost without number, of such
a kind to make, and as soon as I have made one I immediately forget all about it."

"Why, don't you remember that you got me a new baize?"

"No; I ordered a dozen new baizes at that time, but I do not remember who they were for."

There was a pause; the disappointed complainant seemed not to know what to do.

"I will tell you what to do. Bring the case into court, and I will try it regularly."

"Why, Mr. B., I do not like to do any thing like that about it; besides, I do not know how
to write an indictment."

"Oh," I answered, "the scholars will like to have a good trial, and this will make a new sort
of case. All our cases thus far have been for offenses--that is what they call criminal cases--and
this will be only an examination of the conflicting claims of two individuals to the same property,
and it will excite a good deal of interest. I think you had better bring it into court."

She went slowly and thoughtfully to her seat, and presently returned with an indictment.

"Mr. B., is this right?"

It was as follows:

I accuse Miss A.B. of coming to take away my seat--the one Mr. B. gave me.

  Witnesses, { C.D.
             { E.T.

"Why--yes--that will do; and yet it is not exactly right. You see this is what they call a
civil case."

"I don't think it is very civil."

"No, I don't mean it was civil to take your seat, but this is not a case where a person is
prosecuted for having done any thing wrong."

The plaintiff looked a little perplexed, as if she could not understand how it could be otherwise
than wrong for a girl to usurp her seat.

"I mean, you do not bring it into court as a case of wrong. You do not want her to be punished,
do you?"

"No, I only want her to give me up my seat; I don't want her to be punished."

"Well, then, you see that, although she may have done wrong to take your seat, it is not in
that point of view that you bring it into court. It is a question about the right of property,
and the lawyers call such cases civil cases, to distinguish them from cases where persons are
tried for the purpose of being punished for doing wrong. These last are called criminal cases."

The aggrieved party still looked perplexed. "Well, Mr. B.," she continued, "what shall I do?
How shall I write it? I can not say any thing about civil in it, can I?"

A form was given her which would be proper for the purpose, and the case was brought forward,
and the evidence on both sides examined. The irritation of the quarrel was soon dissipated
in the amusement of a semi-serious trial, and both parties good-humoredly acquiesced in the
decision.

9. TEACHERS' PERSONAL CHARACTER.--Much has been said within a few years, by writers on the
subject of education in this country, on the desirableness of raising the business of teaching
to the rank of a learned profession. There is but one way of doing this, and that is raising
the personal characters and attainments of the teachers themselves. Whether an employment is
elevated or otherwise in public estimation, depends altogether on the associations, connected
with it in the public mind, and these depend altogether on the characters of the individuals
who are engaged in it. Franklin, by the simple fact that he was a printer himself, has done
more toward giving dignity and respectability to the employment of printing, than a hundred
orations on the intrinsic excellence of the art. In fact, all mechanical employments have,
within a few years, risen in rank in this country, not through the influence of efforts to
impress the community directly with a sense of their importance, but simply because mechanics
themselves have risen in intellectual and moral character. In the same manner, the employment
of the teacher will be raised most effectually in the estimation of the public, not by the
individual who writes the most eloquent oration on the intrinsic dignity of the art, but by
the one who goes forward most successfully in the exercise of it, and who, by his general attainments
and public character, stands out most fully to the view of the public as a well-informed, liberal-minded,
and useful man.

If this is so--and it can not well be denied--it furnishes to every teacher a strong motive
to exertion for the improvement of his own personal character. But there is a stronger motive
still in the results which flow directly to himself from such efforts. No man ought to engage
in any business which, as mere business, will engross all his time and attention. The Creator
has bestowed upon every one a mind, upon the cultivation of which our rank among intelligent
beings, our happiness, our moral and intellectual power, every thing valuable to us, depend;
and after all the cultivation which we can bestow, in this life, upon this mysterious principle,
it will still be in embryo. The progress which it is capable of making is entirely indefinite.
If by ten years of cultivation we can secure a certain degree of knowledge and power, by ten
more we can double, or more than double it, and every succeeding year of effort is attended
with equal success. There is no point of attainment where we must stop, or beyond which effort
will bring in a less valuable return.

Look at that teacher, and consider for a moment his condition. He began to teach when he was
twenty years of age, and now he is forty. Between the ages of fifteen and twenty he made a
vigorous effort to acquire such an education as would fit him for these duties. He succeeded,
and by these efforts he raised himself from being a mere laborer, receiving for his daily toil
a mere daily subsistence, to the respectability and the comforts of an intellectual pursuit.
But this change once produced, he stops short in his progress. Once seated in his desk, he
is satisfied, and for twenty years he has been going through the same routine, without any
effort to advance or to improve. He does not reflect that the same efforts, which so essentially
altered his condition and prospects at twenty, would have carried him forward to higher and
higher sources of influence and enjoyment as long as he should continue them. His efforts ceased
when he obtained a situation as teacher at fifty dollars a month, and, though twenty years
have glided away, he is now exactly what he was then.

There is probably no employment whatever which affords so favorable an opportunity for personal
improvement--for steady intellectual and moral progress, as that of teaching. There are two
reasons for this:

First, there is time for it. With an ordinary degree of health and strength, the mind can be
vigorously employed at least ten hours a day. As much as this is required of students in many
literary institutions. In fact, ten hours to study, seven to sleep, and seven to food, exercise,
and recreation, is perhaps as good an arrangement as can be made; at any rate, very few persons
will suppose that such a plan allows too little under the latter head. Now six hours is as
much as is expected of a teacher under ordinary circumstances, and it is as much as ought ever
to be bestowed; for, though he may labor four hours out of school in some new field, his health
and spirits will soon sink under the burden, if, after his weary labors during the day in school,
he gives up his evenings to the same perplexities and cares. And it is not necessary. No one
who knows any thing of the nature of the human mind, and who will reflect a moment on the subject,
can doubt that a man can make a better school by expending six hours labor upon it with alacrity
and ardor, than he can by driving himself on to ten. Every teacher, therefore, who is commencing
his work, should begin with the firm determination of devoting only six hours daily to the
pursuit. Make as good a school, and accomplish as much for it as you can in six hours, and
let the rest go. When you come from your school-room at night, leave all your perplexities
and cares behind you. No matter what unfinished business or unsettled difficulties remain,
dismiss them till another sun shall rise, and the hour of duty for another day shall come.
Carry no school-work home with you, and do not even talk of your school-work at home. You will
then get refreshment and rest. Your mind, during the evening, will be in a different world
from that in which you have moved during the day. At first this will be difficult. It will
be hard for you, unless your mind is uncommonly well disciplined, to dismiss all your cares;
and you will think, each evening, that some peculiar emergency demands your attention just
at that time, and that as soon as you have passed the crisis you will confine yourself to what
you admit are generally reasonable limits; but if you once allow school, with its perplexities
and cares, to get possession of the rest of the day, it will keep possession. It will intrude
itself into all your waking thoughts, and trouble you in your dreams. You will lose all command
of your powers, and, besides cutting off from yourself all hope of general intellectual progress,
you will, in fact, destroy your success as a teacher. Exhaustion, weariness, and anxiety will
be your continual portion, and in such a state no business can be successfully prosecuted.

There need be no fear that employers will be dissatisfied if the teacher acts upon this principle.
If he is faithful, and enters with all his heart into the discharge of his duties during six
hours, there will be something in the ardor, and alacrity, and spirit with which his duties
will be performed which parents and scholars will both be very glad to receive in exchange
for the languid, and dull, and heartless toil in which the other method must sooner or later
result.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the teacher, then, will confine himself to such a portion of time as is, in fact, all he
can advantageously employ, there will be much left which can be devoted to his own private
employment--more than is usual in the other avocations of life. In most of these other avocations
there is not the same necessity for limiting the hours which a man may devote to his business.
A merchant, for example, may be employed nearly all the day at his counting-room, and so may
a mechanic. A physician may spend all his waking hours in visiting patients, and feel little
more than healthy fatigue. The reason is, that in all these employments, and, in fact, in most
of the employments of life, there is so much to diversify, so many little incidents constantly
occurring to animate and relieve, and so much bodily exercise, which alternates with and suspends
the fatigues of the mind, that the labors may be much longer continued, and with less cessation,
and yet the health not suffer. But the teacher, while engaged in his work, has his mind continually
on the stretch. There is little relief, little respite, and he is almost entirely deprived
of bodily exercise. He must, consequently, limit his hours of attending to his business, or
his health will soon sink under labors which Providence never intended the human mind to bear.

There is another circumstance which facilitates the progress of the teacher. It is a fact that
all this general progress has a direct and immediate bearing upon his pursuits. A lawyer may
read in an evening an interesting book of travels, and find nothing to help him with his case,
the next day, in court; but almost every fact which the teacher thus learns will come at once
into use in some of his recitations at school. We do not mean to imply by this that the members
of the legal profession have not need of a great variety and extent of knowledge; they doubtless
have. It is simply in the directness and certainty with which the teacher's knowledge may be
applied to his purpose that the business of teaching has the advantage over every other pursuit.

This fact, now, has a very important influence in encouraging and leading forward the teacher
to make constant intellectual progress, for every step brings at once a direct reward.

10. THE CHESTNUT BURR.--A story for school-boys.--One fine Saturday afternoon, in the fall
of the year, the master was taking a walk in the woods, and he came to a place where a number
of boys were gathering chestnuts.

One of the boys was sitting upon a bank trying to open some chestnut burrs which he had knocked
off from the tree. The burrs were green, and he was attempting to open them by pounding them
with a stone.

He was a very impatient boy, and was scolding in a loud, angry, tone against the burrs. He
did not see, he said, what in the world chestnuts were made to grow so for. They ought to grow
right out in the open air, like apples, and not have such vile porcupine skins on them, just
to plague the boys. So saying, he struck with all his might a fine large burr, crushed it to
pieces, and then jumped up, using at the same time profane and wicked words. As soon as he
turned round he saw the master standing very near him. He felt very much ashamed and afraid,
and hung down his head.

"Roger," said the master (for this boy's name was Roger), "can you get me a chestnut burr?"

Roger looked up for a moment to see whether the master was in earnest, and then began to look
around for a burr.

A boy who was standing near the tree, with a red cap full of burrs in his hand, held out one
of them. Roger took the burr and handed it to the master, who quietly put it into his pocket,
and walked away without saying a word.

As soon as he was gone, the boy with the red cap said to Roger, "I expected that the master
would have given you a good scolding for talking so."

"The master never scolds," said another boy, who was sitting on a log pretty near, with a green
satchel in his hand, "but you see if he does not remember it." Roger looked as if he did not
know what to think about it.

"I wish," said he, "I knew what he is going to do with that burr."

That afternoon, when the lessons had been all recited, and it was about time to dismiss the
school, the boys put away their books, and the master read a few verses in the Bible, and then
offered a prayer, in which he asked God to forgive all the sins which any of them had committed
that day, and to take care of them during the night. After this he asked the boys all to sit
down. He then took his handkerchief out of his pocket and laid it on the desk, and afterward
he put his hand into his pocket again, and took out the chestnut burr, and all the boys looked
at it.

"Boys," said he, "do you know what this is?"

One of the boys in the back seat said, in a half whisper, "It is nothing but a chestnut burr."

"Lucy," said the master to a bright-eyed little girl near him, "what is this?"

"It is a chestnut burr, sir," said she.

"Do you know what it is for?"

"I suppose there are chestnuts in it."

"But what is this rough, prickly covering for?"

Lucy did not know.

"Does any body here know?" said the master.

One of the boys said that he supposed it was to hold the chestnuts together, and keep them
up on the tree.

"But I heard a boy say," replied the master, "that they ought not to be made to grow so. The
nut itself, he thought, ought to hang alone on the branches, without any prickly covering,
just as apples do."

"But the nuts themselves have no stems to be fastened by," answered the same boy.

"That is true; but I suppose this boy thought that God could have made them grow with stems,
and that this would have been better than to have them in burrs."

After a little pause the master said that he would explain TO them what the chestnut burr was
for, and wished them all to listen attentively.

"How much of the chestnut is good to eat, William?" asked he, looking at a boy before him.

"Only the meat."

"How long does it take the meat to grow?"

"All summer, I suppose, it is growing."

"Yes; it begins early in the summer, and gradually swells and grows until it has become of
full size, and is ripe, in the fall. Now suppose there was a tree out here near the school-house,
and the chestnut meats should grow upon it without any shell or covering; suppose, too, that
they should taste like good ripe chestnuts at first, when they were very small. Do you think
they would be safe?"

William said "No; the boys would pick and eat them before they had time to grow."

"Well, what harm would there be in that? Would it not be as well to have the chestnuts early
in the summer as to have them in the fall?"

William hesitated. Another boy who sat next to him said,

"There would not be so much meat in the chestnuts if they were eaten before they had time to grow."

"Right," said the master; "but would not the boys know this, and so all agree to let the little
chestnuts stay, and not eat them while they were small?"

William said he thought they would not. If the chestnuts were good, he was afraid they would
pick them off and eat them if they were small.

All the rest of the boys in the school thought so too.

"Here, then," said the master, "is one reason for having prickles around the chestnuts when
they are small. But then it is not necessary to have all chestnuts guarded from boys in this
way; a great many of the trees are in the woods, which the boys do not see; what good do the
burrs do in these trees?"

The boys hesitated. Presently the boy who had the green satchel under the tree with Roger,
who was sitting in one corner of the room, said,

"I should think they would keep the squirrels from eating them.

"And besides," continued he, after thinking a moment, "I should suppose, if the meat of the
chestnut had no covering, the rain would wet it and make it rot, or the sun might dry and wither
it."

"Yes," said the master, "these are very good reasons why the nut should be carefully guarded.
First the meats are packed away in a hard brown shell, which the water can not get through;
this keeps it dry, and away from dust and other things which might injure it. Then several
nuts thus protected grow closely together inside this green, prickly covering, which spreads
over them and guards them from the larger animals and the boys. Where the chestnut gets its
full growth and is ripe, this covering, you know, splits open, and the nuts drop out, and then
any body can get them and eat them."

The boys were then all satisfied that it was better that chestnuts should grow in burrs.

"But why," asked one of the boys, "do not apples grow so?"

"Can any body answer that question?" asked the master.

The boy with the green satchel said that apples had a smooth, tight skin, which kept out the
wet, but he did not see how they were guarded from animals.

The master said it was by their taste. "They are hard and sour before they are full grown,
and so the taste is not pleasant, and nobody wishes to eat them, except sometimes a few foolish
boys, and these are punished by being made sick. When the apples are full grown, they change
from sour to sweet, and become mellow--then they can be eaten. Can you tell me of any other
fruits which are preserved in this way?"

One boy answered, "Strawberries and blackberries;" and another said, "Peaches and pears."

Another boy asked why the peach-stone was not outside the peach, so as to keep it from being
eaten; but the master said that he would explain this another time. Then he dismissed the scholars,
after asking Roger to wait until the rest had gone, as he wished to see him alone.

Several of the articles which follow were communicated for this work by different teachers,
at the request of the author.

11. THE SERIES OF WRITING LESSONS.--Very many pupils soon become weary of the dull and monotonous
business of writing, unless some plans are devised to give interest and variety to the exercise;
and, on this account, this branch of education, in which improvement may be most rapid, is
often the last and most tedious to be acquired.

A teacher, by adopting the following plan, succeeded in awakening a great degree of interest
on the subject, and, consequently, of promoting rapid improvement. The plan was this: he prepared,
on a large sheet of paper, a series of lessons in coarse-hand, beginning with straight lines,
and proceeding to the elementary parts of the various letters, and finally to the letters themselves.
This paper was posted up in a part of the room accessible to all.

The writing-books were made of three sheets of foolscap paper, folded into a convenient size,
making twenty-four pages in the book. The books were to be ruled by the pupil, for it was thought
important that each should learn this art. Every pupil in school, then, being furnished with
one of these writing-books, was required to commence this series, and to practice each lesson
until he could write it well; then, and not till then, he was permitted to pass to the next.
A few brief directions were given under each lesson on the large sheet. For example, under
the line of straight marks, which constituted the first lesson, was written as follows:

Straight, equidistant, parallel, smooth, well-terminated.

These directions were to call the attention of the pupil to the excellences which he must aim
at, and when he supposed he had secured them, his book was to be presented to the teacher for
examination. If approved, the word Passed, or, afterward, simply P., was written under the
line, and he could then proceed to the next lesson. Other requisites were necessary, besides
the correct formation of the letters, to enable one to pass; for example, the page must not
be soiled or blotted, no paper must be wasted, and, in no case, a leaf torn out. As soon as
one line was written in the manner required, the scholar was allowed to pass. In a majority
of cases, however, not less than a page would be practiced, and in many instances a sheet would
be covered, before one line could be produced which would be approved.

One peculiar excellency of this method was, that although the whole school were working under
a regular and systematic plan, individuals could go on independently; that is, the progress
of no scholar was retarded by that of his companion; the one more advanced might easily pass
the earlier lessons in a few days, while the others would require weeks of practice to acquire
the same degree of skill.

During the writing-hour the scholars would practice each at the lesson where he left off before,
and at a particular time each day the books were brought from the regular place of deposit
and laid before the teacher for examination. Without some arrangement for an examination of
all the books together, the teacher would be liable to interruption at any time from individual
questions and requests, which would consume much time, and benefit only a few.

When a page of writing could not pass, a brief remark, calling the attention of the pupil to
the faults which prevented it, was sometimes made in pencil at the bottom of the page. In other
cases, the fault was of such a character as to require full and minute oral directions to the
pupil. At last, to facilitate the criticism of the writing, a set of arbitrary marks, indicative
of the various faults, was devised and applied, as occasion might require, to the writing-books,
by means of red ink.

These marks, which were very simple in their character, were easily remembered, for there was
generally some connection between the sign and the thing signified. For example, the mark denoting
that letters were too short was simply lengthening them in red ink; a faulty curve was denoted
by making a new curve over the old one, &c. The following are the principal criticisms and
directions for which marks were contrived:

  Strokes rough.                    Too tall or too short.
  Curve wrong.                      Stems not straight.
  Bad termination                   Careless work.
  Too slanting, and the reverse.    Paper wasted.
  Too broad, and the reverse.       Almost well enough to pass.
  Not parallel.                      Bring your book to the teacher.
  Form of the letter bad.           Former fault not corrected.
  Large stroke made too fine, and the reverse.

A catalogue of these marks, with an explanation, was made out and placed where it was accessible
to all, and by means of them the books could be very easily and rapidly, but thoroughly criticised.

After the plan had gone on for some time, and its operation was fully understood, the teacher
gave up the business of examining the books into the hands of a committee, appointed by him
from among the older and more advanced pupils. That the committee might be unbiased in their
judgment, they were required to examine and decide upon the books without knowing the names
of the writers. Each scholar was, indeed, required to place her name on the right hand upper
corner of every page of her writing-book, for the convenience of the distributors; but this
corner was turned down when the book was brought in, that it might not be seen by the committee.

This committee was invested with plenary powers, and there was no appeal from their decision.
In case they exercised their authority in an improper way, or failed on any account to give
satisfaction, they were liable to impeachment, but while they continued in office they were
to be strictly obeyed.

This plan went on successfully for three months, and with very little diminution of interest.
The whole school went regularly through the lessons in coarse-hand, and afterward through a
similar series in fine-hand, and improvement in this branch was thought to be greater than
at any former period in the same length of time.

The same principle of arranging the several steps of an art or a study into a series of lessons,
and requiring the pupil to pass regularly from one to the other, might easily be applied to
other studies, and would afford an agreeable variety.

12. THE CORRESPONDENCE.--A master of a district school was walking through the room with a
large rule in his hands, and as he came up behind two small boys, he observed that they were
playing with some papers. He struck them once or twice, though not very severely, on the head
with the rule which he had in his hand. Tears started from the eyes of one. They were called
forth by a mingled feeling of grief, mortification, and pain. The other, who was of "sterner
stuff," looked steadily into the master's face, and when his back was turned, shook his fist
at him and laughed in defiance.

Another teacher, seeing a similar case, did nothing. The boys, when they saw him, hastily gathered
up their playthings and put them away. An hour or two after, a little boy, who sat near the
master, brought them a note addressed to them both. They opened it, and read as follows:

"To EDWARD AND JOHN,--I observed, when I passed you to-day, from your concerned looks, and
your hurried manner of putting something into your desk, that you were doing something that
you knew was wrong. When you attempt to do any thing whatever which conscience tells you is
wrong, you only make yourself uneasy and anxious while you do it, and then you are forced to
resort to concealment and deception when you see me coming. You would be a great deal happier
if you would always be doing your duty, and then you would never be afraid. Your affectionate
teacher,----."

As the teacher was arranging his papers in his desk at the close of school, he found a small
piece of paper neatly folded up in the form of a note, and addressed to him. He read as follows:

"DEAR TEACHER,--We are very much obliged to you for writing us a note. We were making a paper
box. We know it was wrong, and are determined not to do so any more. We hope you will forgive us.

"Your pupils, EDWARD, JOHN."

Which of these teachers understood human nature best?

13. WEEKLY REPORTS.--The plan described by the following article, which was furnished by a
teacher for insertion here, was originally adopted, so far as I know, in a school on the Kennebec.
I have adopted it with great advantage.

A teacher had one day been speaking to her scholars of certain cases of slight disorder in
the school, which, she remarked, had been gradually creeping in, and which, as she thought,
it devolved upon the scholars, by systematic efforts, to repress. She enumerated instances
of disorder in the arrangement of the rooms, leaving the benches out of their places, throwing
waste papers upon the floor, having the desk in disorder inside, spilling water upon the entry
floor, irregular deportment, such as too loud talking or laughing in recess, or in the intermission
at noon, or when coming to school, and making unnecessary noise in going to or returning from
recitations.

"I have a plan to propose," said the teacher, "which I think may be the pleasantest way of
promoting a reform in things of this kind. It is this. Let several of your number be chosen
a committee to prepare statedly--perhaps as often as once a week--a written report of the state
of the school. The report might be read before the school at the close of each week. The committee
might consist, in the whole, of seven or eight, or even of eleven or twelve individuals, who
should take the whole business into their hands. This committee might appoint individuals of
their number to write in turn each week. By this arrangement, it would not be known to the
school generally who are the writers of any particular report, if the individuals wish to be
anonymous. Two individuals might be appointed at the beginning of the week, who should feel
it their business to observe particularly the course of things from day to day with reference
to the report. Individuals not members of the committee can render assistance by any suggestions
they may present to this committee. These should, however, generally be made in writing.

"Subjects for such a report will be found to suggest themselves very abundantly, though you
may not perhaps think so at first. The committee may be empowered not only to state the particulars
in which things are going wrong, but the methods by which they may be made right. Let them
present us with any suggestions they please. If we do not like them, we are not obliged to
adopt them. For instance, it is generally the case, whenever a recitation is attended in the
corner yonder, that an end of one of the benches is put against the door, so as to occasion
a serious interruption to the exercises when a person wishes to come in or go out. It would
come within the province of the committee to attend to such a case as this, that is, to bring
it up in the report. The remedy in such a case is a very simple one. Suppose, however, that
instead of the simple remedy, our committee should propose that the classes reciting in the
said corner should be dissolved and the studies abolished? We should know the proposal was
an absurd one, but then it would do no hurt; we should have only to reject it.

"Again, besides our faults, let our committee notice the respects in which we are doing particularly
well, that we may be encouraged to go on doing well, or even to do better. If they think, for
example, that we are deserving of credit for the neatness with which books are kept--for their
freedom from blots, or scribblings, or dog's-ears, by which school-books are so commonly defaced,
let them tell us so. And the same of any other excellence."

With the plan as thus presented, the scholars were very much pleased. It was proposed by one
individual that such a committee should be appointed immediately, and a report prepared for
the ensuing week. This was done. The committee were chosen by ballot. The following may be
taken as a specimen of their reports:

WEEKLY REPORT.

"The Committee appointed to write the weekly report have noticed several things which they
think wrong. In the first place, there have been a greater number of tardy scholars during
the past week than usual. Much of this tardiness, we suppose, is owing to the interest felt
in building the bower; but we think this business ought to be attended to only in play-hours.
If only one or two come in late when we are reading in the morning, or after we have composed
ourselves to study at the close of the recess, every scholar must look up from her book--we
do not say they ought to do so, but only that they will do so. However, we anticipate an improvement
in this respect, as we know 'a word to the wise is sufficient.'

"In the two back rows we are sorry to say that we have noticed whispering. We know that this
fact will very much distress our teacher, as she expects assistance, and not trouble, from
our older scholars. It is not our business to reprove any one's misconduct, but it is our duty
to mention it, however disagreeable it may be. We think the younger scholars, during the past
week, have much improved in this respect. Only three cases of whispering among them have occurred
to our knowledge.

"We remember some remarks made a few weeks ago by our teacher on the practice of prompting
each other in the classes. We wish she would repeat them, for we fear that, by some, they are
forgotten. In the class in Geography, particularly in the questions on the map, we have noticed
sly whispers, which, we suppose, were the hints of some kind friend designed to refresh the
memory of her less attentive companion. We propose that the following question be now put to
vote. Shall the practice of prompting in the classes be any longer continued?

"We would propose that we have a composition exercise this week similar to the one on Thursday
last. It was very interesting, and we think all would be willing to try their thinking powers
once more. We would propose, also, that the readers of the compositions should sit near the
centre of the room, as last week many fine sentences escaped the ears of those seated in the
remote corners.

"We were requested by a very public-spirited individual to mention once more the want of three
nails, for bonnets, in the entry. Also, to say that the air from the broken pane of glass on
the east side of the room is very unpleasant to those who sit near.

"Proposed that the girls who exhibited so much taste and ingenuity in the arrangement of the
festoons of evergreen, and tumblers of flowers around the teacher's desk, be now requested
to remove the faded roses and drooping violets. We have gazed on these sad emblems long enough.

"Finally, proposed that greater care be taken by those who stay at noon to place their dinner-baskets
in proper places. The contents of more than one were partly strewed upon the entry floor this
morning."

If such a measure as this is adopted, it should not be continued uninterrupted for a very long
time. Every thing of this sort should be occasionally changed, or it sooner or later becomes
only a form.

14. THE SHOPPING EXERCISE.--I have often, when going a shopping, found difficulty and trouble
in making change. I could never calculate very readily, and in the hurry and perplexity of
the moment I was always making mistakes. I have heard others often make the same complaint,
and I resolved to try the experiment of regularly teaching children to make change. I had a
bright little class in Arithmetic, the members of which were always ready to engage with interest
in any thing new, and to them I proposed my plan. It was to be called the Shopping Exercise.
I first requested each individual to write something upon her slate which she would like to
buy, if she was going a shopping, stating the quantity she wished and the price of it. To make
the first lesson as simple as possible, I requested no one to go above ten, either in the quantity
or price. When all were ready, I called upon some to read what she had written. Her next neighbor
was then requested to tell us how much the purchase would amount to. Then the first one named
a bill, which she supposed to be offered in payment, and the second showed what change was
needed. A short specimen of the exercise will probably make it clearer than mere description.

Mary. Eight ounces of candy at seven cents.

Susan. Fifty-six cents.

Mary. One dollar.

Susan. Forty-four cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Susan. Nine yards of lace at eight cents.

Anna. Seventy-two cents.

Susan. Two dollars.

Anna. One dollar and twenty-eight cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anna. Three pieces of tape at five cents.

Jane. Fifteen cents.

Anna. Three dollars.

Jane. Eighty-five cents.

Several voices. Wrong.

Jane. Two dollars and eighty-five cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jane. Six pictures at eight cents.

Sarah. Forty-two cents.

Several voices. Wrong.

Sarah. Forty-eight cents.

Jane. One dollar.

Sarah. Sixty-two cents.

Several voices. Wrong.

Sarah. Fifty-two cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be perceived that the same individual who names the article and the price names also
the bill which she would give in payment; and the one who sits next her, who calculated the
amount, calculated also the change to be returned. She then proposed her example to the one
next in the line, with whom the same course was pursued, and thus it passed down the class.

The exercise went on for some time in this way, till the pupils had become so familiar with
it that I thought it best to allow them to take higher numbers. They were always interested
in it, and made great improvement in a short time, and I myself derived great advantage from
listening to them.

There is one more circumstance I will add which may contribute to the interest of this account.
While the class were confined, in what they purchased, to the number ten, they were sometimes
inclined to turn the exercise into a frolic. The variety of articles which they could find
costing less than ten cents was so small, that, for the sake of getting something new, they
would propose examples really ludicrous, such as these: three meeting-houses at two cents;
four pianos at nine cents. But I soon found that if I allowed this at all, their attention
was diverted from the main object, and occupied in seeking the most diverting and curious examples.

15. ARTIFICES IN RECITATIONS.--The teacher of a small newly-established school had all of his
scholars classed together in some of their studies. At recitations he usually sat in the middle
of the room, while the scholars occupied the usual places at their desks, which were arranged
around the sides. In the recitation in Rhetoric, the teacher, after a time, observed that one
or two of the class seldom answered appropriately the questions which came to them, but yet
were always ready with some kind of answer--generally an exact quotation of the words of the
book. Upon noticing these individuals more particularly, he was convinced that their books
were open before them in some concealed situation. Another practice not uncommon in the class
was that of prompting each other, either by whispers or writing. The teacher took no notice
publicly of these practices for some time, until, at the close of an uncommonly good recitation,
he remarked, "I think we have had a fine recitation to-day. It is one of the most agreeable
things that I ever do to hear a lesson that is learned as well as this. Do you think it would
be possible for us to have as good an exercise every day?" "Yes, sir," answered several, faintly.
"Do you think it would be reasonable for me to expect of every member of the class that she
should always be able to recite all her lessons without ever missing a single question?" "No,
sir," answered all. "I do not expect it," said the teacher. "All I wish is that each of you
should be faithful in your efforts to prepare your lessons. I wish you to study from a sense
of duty, and for the sake of your own improvement. You know I do not punish you for failures.
I have no going up or down, no system of marking. Your only reward, when you have made faithful
preparation for a recitation, is the feeling of satisfaction which you will always experience;
and when you have been negligent, your only punishment is a sort of uneasy feeling of self-reproach.
I do not expect you all to be invariably prepared with every question of your lessons. Sometimes
you will be unavoidably prevented from studying them, and at other times, when you have studied
them very carefully, you may have forgotten, or you may fail from some misapprehension of the
meaning in some cases. Do not, in such a case, feel troubled because you may not have appeared
as well as some individual who has not been half as faithful as yourself. If you have done
your duty, that is enough. On the other hand, you ought to feel no better satisfied with yourselves
when your lesson has not been studied well, because you may have happened to know the parts
which came to you. Have I done well? should always be the question, not, Have I managed to
appear well?

"I will say a word here," continued the teacher, "upon a practice which I have known to be
very common in some schools, and which I have been sorry to notice occasionally in this. I
mean that of prompting, or helping each other along in some way at recitations. Now where a
severe punishment is the consequence of a failure, there might seem to be some reasonableness
in helping your companions out of difficulty, though even then such tricks are departures from
honorable dealing. But, especially where there is no purpose to be served but that of appearing
to know more than you do, it certainly must be considered a very mean kind of artifice. I think
I have sometimes observed an individual to be prompted where evidently the assistance was not
desired, and even where it was not needed. To whisper to an individual the answer to a question
is sometimes to pay her rather a poor compliment at least, for it is the same as saying 'I
am a better scholar than you are; let me help you along a little.'

"Let us then, hereafter, have only fair, open, honest dealings with each other; no attempts
to appear to advantage by little artful manoeuvring; no prompting; no peeping into books. Be
faithful and conscientious, and then banish anxiety for your success. Do you not think you
will find this the best course?" "Yes, sir," answered every scholar. "Are you willing to pledge
yourselves to adopt it?" "Yes, sir." "Those who are may raise their hands," said the teacher.
Every hand was raised; and the pledge, there was evidence to believe, was honorably sustained.

16. KEEPING RESOLUTIONS.--The following are notes of a familiar lecture on this subject, given
by a teacher at some general exercise in the school. The practice of thus reducing to writing
what the teacher may say on such subjects will be attended with excellent effects.

This is a subject upon which young persons find much difficulty. The question is asked a thousand
times, "How shall I ever learn to keep my resolutions?" Perhaps the great cause of your failures
is this. You are not sufficiently definite in forming your purposes. You will resolve to do
a thing without knowing with certainty whether it is even possible to do it. Again, you make
resolutions which are to run on indefinitely, so that, of course, they can never be fully kept.
For instance, one of you will resolve to rise earlier in the morning. You fix upon no definite
hour, on any definite number of mornings, only you are going to "rise earlier." Morning comes,
and finds you sleepy and disinclined to rise. You remember your resolution of rising earlier.
"But then it is very early," you say. You resolved to rise earlier, but you didn't resolve
to rise just then. And this, it may be, is the last of your resolution. Or perhaps you are,
for a few mornings, a little earlier; but then, at the end of a week or fortnight, you do not
know exactly whether your resolution has been broken or kept, for you had not decided whether
to rise earlier for ten days or for ten years.

In the same vague and general manner, a person will resolve to be more studious or more diligent.
In the case of an individual of a mature and well-disciplined mind, of acquired firmness of
character, such a resolution might have effect. The individual will really devote more time
and attention to his pursuits. But for one of you to make such a resolution would do no sort
of good. It would only be a source of trouble and disquiet. You perceive there is nothing definite--nothing
fixed about it. You have not decided what amount of additional time or attention to give to
your studies, or when you will begin, or when you will end. There is no one time when you will
feel that you are breaking your resolution, because there were no particular times when you
were to study more. You waste one opportunity and another, and then, with a feeling of discouragement
and self-reproach, conclude to abandon your resolution. "Oh! It does no good to make resolutions,"
you say; "I never shall keep them."

Now, if you would have the business of making resolutions a pleasant and interesting instead
of a discouraging, disquieting one, you must proceed in a different manner. A number of the new
notes I owe to a review of the Selections by Dr. Lane Cooper, of Cornell University. I wish also
to thank for many favors the Committee and officers of the Glasgow University Library.

If a word by way of suggestion to teachers be pertinent, I would venture to remark that the object
of the teacher of literature is, of course, only to fulfill the desire of the author--to make
clear his facts and to bring home his ideas in all their power and
beauty.

Introductions and notes are only means to this end. Teachers, I think, sometimes lose sight
of this fact; I know it is fatally easy for students to forget it. That teacher will have rendered
a great service who has kept his pupils alive to the real aim of their studies,--to know the
author, not to know of him.

M.H.T

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION I. LIFE II. CRITICAL REMARKS III. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

SELECTIONS THE ENGLISH MAIL-COACH JOAN OF ARC

NOTES

INTRODUCTION

I.
LIFE

Thomas de Quincey was born in Manchester on the 15th of August,
1785.

His father was a man of high character and great taste for literature as well as a successful
man of business; he died, most unfortunately, when Thomas was quite young. Very soon after our
author's birth the family removed to The Farm, and later to Greenhay,
a larger country place near Manchester.

In 1796 De Quincey's mother, now for some years a widow, removed to Bath and placed him in the
grammar school there.

Thomas, the future opium-eater, was a weak and sickly child.

His first years were spent in solitude, and when his elder brother, William, a real boy, came
home, the young author followed in humility mingled with terror the diversions of that ingenious
and pugnacious "son of eternal racket." De Quincey's mother was a woman of strong character and
emotions, as well as excellent mind, but she was excessively formal, and she seems to have inspired
more awe than affection in her children, to whom she was for all that deeply devoted. Her notions
of conduct in general and of child rearing in particular were very
strict.

She took Thomas out of Bath School, after three years' excellent work there, because he was too
much praised, and kept him for a year at an inferior school at Winkfield in Wiltshire.

In 1800, at the age of fifteen, De Quincey was ready for Oxford; he had not been praised without
reason, for his scholarship was far in advance of that of ordinary pupils of his years. "That
boy," his master at Bath School had said, "that boy could harangue an Athenian mob better than
you or I could address an English one." He was sent to Manchester Grammar School, however, in
order that after three years' stay he might secure a scholarship at Brasenose College, Oxford.
He remained there-- strongly protesting against a situation which deprived him "of health, of
society, of amusement, of liberty, of congeniality of pursuits"--for
nineteen months, and then ran away.

His first plan had been to reach Wordsworth, whose Lyrical Ballads (1798) had solaced him in
fits of melancholy and had awakened in him a deep reverence for the
neglected poet.

His timidity preventing this, he made his way to Chester, where his mother then lived, in the hope
of seeing a sister; was apprehended by the older members of the family; and through the intercession
of his uncle, Colonel Penson, received the promise of a guinea a week to carry out his later
project of a solitary tramp through Wales. From July to November, 1802, De Quincey then led a
wayfarer's life. [Footnote: For a most interesting account of this period see the Confessions
of an English Opium-Eater, Athenaeum Press Selections from De Quincey, pp. 165-171, and notes.]
He soon lost his guinea, however, by ceasing to keep his family informed of his whereabouts, and
subsisted for a time with great difficulty. Still apparently fearing pursuit, with a little
borrowed money he broke away entirely from his home by exchanging the solitude of Wales for the
greater wilderness of London. Failing there to raise money on his expected patrimony, he for
some time deliberately clung to a life of degradation and starvation rather than return to his lawful
governors.

Discovered by chance by his friends, De Quincey was brought home and finally allowed (1803) to
go to Worcester College, Oxford, on a reduced income.

Here, we are told, "he came to be looked upon as a strange being who associated with no one." During
this time he learned to take opium.

He left, apparently about 1807, without a degree. In the same year he made the acquaintance of Coleridge
and Wordsworth; Lamb he had sought out in London several years before.

His acquaintance with Wordsworth led to his settlement in 1809 at
Grasmere, in the beautiful English Lake District; his home for ten
years was Dove Cottage, which Wordsworth had occupied for several
years and which is now held in trust as a memorial of the poet.

De Quincey was married in 1816, and soon after, his patrimony having been exhausted, he took
up literary work in earnest.

In 1821 he went to London to dispose of some translations from German authors, but was persuaded
first to write and publish an account of his opium experiences, which accordingly appeared in
the London Magazine in that year. This new sensation eclipsed Lamb's Essays of Elia, which
were appearing in the same periodical. The Confessions of an English Opium-Eater was forthwith
published in book form. De Quincey now made literary acquaintances. Tom Hood found the shrinking
author "at home in a German ocean of literature, in a storm, flooding all the floor, the tables,
and the chairs--billows of books." Richard Woodhouse speaks of the "depth and reality of his
knowledge. ... His conversation appeared like the elaboration of a mine of results. ... Taylor
led him into political economy, into the Greek and Latin accents,
into antiquities, Roman roads, old castles, the origin and analogy
of languages; upon all these he was informed to considerable minuteness.

The same with regard to Shakespeare's sonnets, Spenser's minor poems, and the great writers
and characters of Elizabeth's age and those of Cromwell's time."

From this time on De Quincey maintained himself by contributing to various magazines. He soon
exchanged London and the Lakes for Edinburgh and its suburb, Lasswade, where the remainder
of his life was spent.

Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine and its rival Tatt's Magazine received a large number of contributions.
The English Mail-Coach appeared in 1849 in Blackwood. Joan of Arc had already been published
(1847) in Tait. De Quincey continued to drink laudanum throughout
his life,--twice after 1821 in very great excess.

During his last years he nearly completed a collected edition of his works. He died in Edinburgh
on the 8th of December, 1859.

II. CRITICAL REMARKS

The Opium-Eater had been a weak, lonely, and over-studious child,
and he was a solitary and ill-developed man.

His character and his work present strange contradictions. He is most precise in statement,
yet often very careless of fact; he is most courteous in manner,
yet inexcusably inconsiderate in his behavior.

Again, he sets up a high standard of purity of diction, yet uses slang quite unnecessarily and inappropriately;
and though a great master of style, he is guilty, at times, of digression within digression
until all trace of the original subject is lost.

De Quincey divides his writings into three groups: first, that class
which "proposes primarily to amuse the reader, but which, in doing
so, may or may not happen occasionally to reach a higher station,
at which the amusement passes into an impassioned interest."

To this class would belong the Autobiographic Sketches and the Literary Reminiscences. As a
second class he groups "those papers which address themselves purely to the understanding as an
insulated faculty, or do so primarily." These essays would include, according to Professor Masson's
subdivision, (a) Biographies, such as Shakespeare or Pope--Joan of Arc falls here, yet has some claim
to a place in the first class; (b) Historical essays, like The Caesars;
(c) Speculative and Theological essays; (d) Essays in Political Economy
and Politics; (e) Papers of Literary Theory and Criticism, such as
the brilliant discussions of Rhetoric, Style, and Conversation, and
the famous On the Knocking at the Gate in 'Macbeth.' As a third and
"far higher" class the author ranks the Confessions of an English
Opium-Eater, and also (but more emphatically) the Suspiria de Profundis.

"On these," he says, "as modes of impassioned prose ranging under no precedents that I am aware
of in any literature, it is much more difficult to speak justly, whether in a hostile or a friendly
character."

Of De Quincey's essays in general it may be said that they bear witness alike to the diversity
of his knowledge and the penetrative power of his intellect. The wide range of his subjects,
however, deprives his papers when taken together of the weight which might attach to a series
of related discussions.

And, remarkable as is De Quincey's aptitude for analysis and speculation, more than once we have
to regret the lack of the "saving common-sense" possessed by many far less gifted men. His erudition
and insight are always a little in advance of his good judgment.

As to the works of the first class, the Reminiscences are defaced by the shrewish spirit shown
in the accounts of Wordsworth and other friends; nor can we depend upon them as records of fact.
But our author had had exceptional opportunities to observe these famous men and women, and he
possessed no little insight into literature and personality. As to the Autobiographic Sketches,
the handling of events is hopelessly arbitrary and fragmentary. In truth, De Quincey is drawing
an idealized picture of childhood,--creating a type rather than re-creating
a person; it is a study of a child of talent that we receive from
him, and as such these sketches form one of the most satisfactory
products of his pen.

The Confessions as a narrative is related to the Autobiography, while its poetical passages range
it with the Suspiria and the Mail-Coach. De Quincey seems to have believed that he was creating
in such writings a new literary type of prose poetry or prose phantasy; he had, with his splendid
dreams as subject-matter, lifted prose to heights hitherto scaled only by the poet. In reality his
style owed much to the seventeenth-century writers, such as Milton and Sir Thomas Browne. He
took part with Coleridge, Lamb, and others in the general revival of interest in earlier modern
English prose, which is a feature of the Romantic Movement.

Still none of his contemporaries wrote as he did; evidently De Quincey has a distinct quality
of his own. Ruskin, in our own day, is like him, but never the same.

Yet De Quincey's prose poetry is a very small portion of his work, and it is not in this way only
that he excels.

Mr. Saintsbury has spoken of the strong appeal that De Quincey makes to boys. [Footnote: "Probably
more boys have in the last forty years been brought to a love of
literature proper by De Quincy than by any other writer whatever."--
History of Nineteenth-Century Literature, p.198.] It is not without
significance that he mentions as especially attractive to the young
only writings with a large narrative element.

[Footnote: "To read the Essay on Murder, the English Mail-Coach,
The Spanish Nun, The Caesars, and half a score other things at the
age of about fifteen or sixteen is, or ought to be, to fall in love
with them."--Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860, p.307.] Few
boys read poetry, whether in verse or prose, and fewer still criticism
or philosophy; to every normal boy the gate of good literature is
the good story.

It is the narrative skill of De Quincey that has secured for him,
in preference to other writers of his class, the favor of youthful
readers.

It would be too much to say that the talent that attracts the young to him must needs be the
Opium-Eater's grand talent, though the notion is defensible, seeing that only salient qualities
in good writing appeal to inexperienced readers.

I believe, however, that this skill in narration is De Quincey's most persistent quality,--the
golden thread that unites all his most distinguished and most enduring work. And it is with him
a part of his genius for style. Creative power of the kind that goes to the making of plots De
Quincey had not; he has proved that forever by the mediocrity of Klosterheim. Give him Bergmann's
account of the Tartar Migration, or the story of the Fighting Nun,--
give him the matter,--and a brilliant narrative will result.

Indeed, De Quincey loved a story for its own sake; he rejoiced to see it extend its winding course
before him; he delighted to follow it, touch it, color it, see it grow into body and being under his
hand. That this enthusiasm should now and then tend to endanger the integrity of the facts
need not surprise us; as I have said elsewhere, accuracy in these matters is hardly to be expected
of De Quincey. And we can take our pleasure in the skillful unfolding of the dramatic narrative
of the Tartar Flight--we can feel the author's joy in the scenic possibilities of his theme--even
if we know that here and there an incident appears that is quite in its proper place--but is
unknown to history.

In his Confessions the same constructive power bears its part in the author's triumph. A peculiar
end was to be reached in that narrative,--an end in which the writer had a deep personal interest.
What is an opium-eater? Says a character in a recent work of fiction, of a social wreck: "If it
isn't whisky with him, it's opium; if it isn't opium, it's whisky." This speech establishes the popular
category in which De Quincey's habit had placed him. Our attention was to be drawn from these
degrading connections. And this is done not merely by the correction of some widespread fallacies
as to the effects of the drug; far more it is the result of narrative
skill.

As we follow with ever-increasing sympathy the lonely and sensitive child, the wandering youth,
the neuralgic patient, into the terrible grasp of opium, who realizes, amid the gorgeous delights and
the awful horrors of the tale, that the writer is after all the victim of the worst of bad
habits? We can hardly praise too highly the art which even as we
look beneath it throws its glamour over us still.

Nor is it only in this constructive power, in the selection and arrangement of details, that De Quincey
excels as a narrator; a score of minor excellences of his style, such as the fine Latin words
or the sweeping periodic sentences, contribute to the effective progress of his narrative prose.
Mr. Lowell has said that "there are no such vistas and avenues of verse as Milton's." The comparison
is somewhat hazardous, still I should like to venture the parallel claim that there are no
such streams of prose as De Quincey's. The movement of his discourse is that of the broad
river, not in its weight or force perhaps, but in its easy flowing progress, in its serene, unhurried
certainty of its end. To be sure, only too often the waters overflow their banks and run far
afield in alien channels.

Yet, when great power over the instrument of language is joined to so much constructive skill,
the result is narrative art of high quality,--an achievement that must be in no small measure
the solid basis of De Quincey's fame.

III. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

I. WORKS

1. The Collected Writings of Thomas de Quincey. New and enlarged edition by David Masson. Edinburgh:
A. and C. Black, 1889-1890. [New York: The Macmillan Co. 14 vols., with footnotes, a preface
to each volume, and index. Reissued in cheaper form. The standard edition.]

2. The Works of Thomas de Quincey. Riverside Edition. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1877. [12
vols., with notes and index.]

3. Selections from De Quincey.

Edited with an Introduction and Notes, by M. H. Turk. Athenaeum Press Series. Boston, U.S.A., and
London: Ginn and Company, 1902. ["The largest body of selections from De Quincey recently published....
The selections are The affliction of Childhood, Introduction to the World of Strife, A Meeting with
Lamb, A Meeting with Coleridge, Recollections of Wordsworth, Confessions, A Portion of Suspiria,
The English Mail-Coach, Murder as one of the Fine Arts, Second Paper, Joan of Arc, and On the
Knocking at the Gate in 'Macbeth.'"]

II. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM
4. D. MASSON. Thomas De Quincey. English Men of Letters. London.
[New York: Harper. An excellent brief biography. This book, with a
good volume of selections, should go far toward supplying the ordinary
student's needs.]

5. H. S. SALT. DE QUINCEY. Bell's Miniature Series
of Great Writers. London: George Bell and Sons. [A good short life.]
6. A. H. JAPP. Thomas De Quincey: His Life and Writings. London, 1890.
[New York: Scribner. First edition by "H. A. Page," 1877. The standard
life of De Quincey; it contains valuable communications from De Quincey's
daughters, J. Hogg, Rev. F. Jacox, Professor Masson, and others.]

7.
A. H. JAPP. De Quincey Memorials. Being Letters and Other Records,
here first published. With Communications from Coleridge, the Wordsworths,
Hannah More, Professor Wilson, and others. 2 vols. London: W. Heinemann,
1891.

8. J. HOGG. De Quincey and his Friends, Personal Recollections,
Souvenirs, and Anecdotes [including Woodhouse's Conversations, Findlay's
Personal Recollections, Hodgson's On the Genius of De Quincey, and
a mass of personal notes from a host of friends].

Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that the young teacher should look forward
with unusual solicitude to his first day in school, and he desires, ordinarily, special instructions
in respect to this occasion. Some such special instructions we propose to give in this chapter.
The experienced teacher may think some of them too minute and trivial. But he must remember
that they are intended for the youngest beginner in the humblest school; and if he recalls
to mind his own feverish solicitude on the morning when he went to take his first command in
the district school, he will pardon the seeming minuteness of detail.

1. It will be well for the young teacher to take opportunity, between the time of his engaging
his school and that of his commencing it, to acquire as much information in respect to it beforehand
as possible, so as to be somewhat acquainted with the scene of his labors before entering upon
it. Ascertain the names and the characters of the principal families in the district, their
ideas and wishes in respect to the government of the school, the kind of management adopted
by one or two of the last teachers, the difficulties they fell into, the nature of the complaints
made against them, if any, and the families with whom difficulty has usually arisen. This information
must, of course, be obtained in private conversation; a good deal of it must be, from its very
nature, highly confidential; but it is very important that the teacher should be possessed
of it. He will necessarily become possessed of it by degrees in the course of his administration,
when, however, it may be too late to be of any service to him. But, by judicious and proper
efforts to acquire it beforehand, he will enter upon the discharge of his duties with great
advantage. It is like a navigator's becoming acquainted beforehand with the nature and the
dangers of the sea over which he is about to sail.

Such inquiries as these will, in ordinary cases, bring to the teacher's knowledge, in most
districts in our country, some cases of peculiarly troublesome scholars, or unreasonable and
complaining parents; and stories of their unjustifiable conduct on former occasions will come
to him exaggerated by the jealousy of rival neighbors. There is danger that his resentment
may be roused a little, and that his mind will assume a hostile attitude at once toward such
individuals, so that he will enter upon his work rather with a desire to seek a collision with
them, or, at least, with secret feelings of defiance toward them--feelings which will lead
to that kind of unbending perpendicularity in his demeanor toward them which will almost inevitably
lead to a collision. Now this is wrong. There is, indeed, a point where firm resistance to
unreasonable demands becomes a duty; but, as a general principle, it is most unquestionably
true that it is the teacher's duty to accommodate himself to the character and expectations
of his employers, not to face and brave them. Those italicized words may be understood to mean
something which would be entirely wrong; but in the sense in which I mean to use them there
can be no question that they indicate the proper path for one employed by others to do work
for them in all cases to pursue. If, therefore, the teacher finds by his inquiries into the
state of his district that there are some peculiar difficulties and dangers there, let him
not cherish a disposition to face and resist them, but to avoid them. Let him go with an intention
to soothe rather than to irritate feelings which have been wounded before, to comply with the
wishes of all so far as he can, even if they are not entirely reasonable, and, while he endeavors
to elevate the standard and correct the opinions prevailing among his employers by any means
in his power, to aim at doing it gently, and in a tone and manner suitable to the relation
he sustains--in a word, let him skillfully avoid the dangers of his navigation, not obstinately
run his ship against a rock on purpose on the ground that the rock has no business to be there.

This is the spirit, then, with which these preliminary inquiries in regard to the patrons of
the school ought to be made. We come now to a second point.

2. It will assist the young teacher very much in his first day's labors if he takes measures
for seeing and conversing with some of the older or more intelligent scholars on the day or
evening before he begins his school, with a view of obtaining from them some acquaintance with
the internal arrangements and customs of the school. The object of this is to obtain the same
kind of information with respect to the interior of the school that was recommended in respect
to the district under the former head. He may call upon a few families, especially those which
furnish a large number of scholars for the school, and make as many minute inquiries of them
as he can respecting all the interior arrangements to which they have been accustomed, what
reading-books and other text-books have been used, what are the principal classes in all the
several departments of instruction, and what is the system of discipline, and of rewards and
punishments, to which the school has been accustomed.

If, in such conversations, the teacher should find a few intelligent and communicative scholars,
he might learn a great deal about the past habits and condition of the school, which would
be of great service to him. Not, by any means, that he will adopt and continue these methods
as a matter of course, but only that a knowledge of them will render him very important aid
in marking out his own course. The more minute and full the information of this sort is which
he thus obtains, the better. If practicable, it would be well to make out a catalogue of all
the principal classes, with the names of those individuals belonging to them who will probably
attend the new school, and the order in which they were usually called upon to read or recite.
The conversation which would be necessary to accomplish this would of itself be of great service.
It would bring the teacher into an acquaintance with several important families and groups
of children under the most favorable circumstances. The parents would see and be pleased with
the kind of interest they would see the teacher taking in his new duties. The children would
be pleased to be able to render their new instructor some service, and would go to the school-room
on the next morning with a feeling of acquaintance with him, and a predisposition to be pleased.
And if by chance any family should be thus called upon that had heretofore been captious or
complaining, or disposed to be jealous of the higher importance or influence of other families,
that spirit would be entirely softened and subdued by such an interview with their new instructor
at their own fireside on the evening preceding the commencement of his labors. The great object,
however, which the teacher would have in view in such inquiries should be the value of the
information itself. As to the use which he will make of it, we shall speak hereafter.

3. It is desirable that the young teacher should meet his scholars first in an unofficial capacity.
For this purpose, repair to the school-room on the first day at an early hour, so as to see
and become acquainted with the scholars as they come in one by one. The intercourse between
teacher and pupil should be like that between parents and children, where the utmost freedom
is united with the most perfect respect. The father who is most firm and decisive in his family
government can mingle most freely in the conversation and sports of his children without any
derogation of his authority, or diminution of the respect they owe. Young teachers, however,
are prone to forget this, and to imagine that they must assume an appearance of stern authority
always, when in the presence of their scholars, if they wish to be respected or obeyed. This
they call keeping up their dignity. Accordingly, they wait, on the morning of their induction
into office, until their new subjects are all assembled, and then walk in with an air of the
highest dignity, and with the step of a king; and sometimes a formidable instrument of discipline
is carried in the hand to heighten the impression. Now there is no question that it is of great
importance that scholars should have a high idea of the teacher's firmness and inflexible decision
in maintaining his authority and repressing all disorder of every kind, but this impression
should be created by their seeing how he acts in the various emergencies which will spontaneously
occur, and not by assuming airs of importance or dignity, feigned for effect. In other words,
their respect for him should be based on real traits of character as they see them brought
out into natural action, and not on appearances assumed for the occasion.

It seems to me, therefore, that it is best for the teacher first to meet his scholars with
the air and tone of free and familiar intercourse, and he will find his opportunity more favorable
for doing this if he goes early on the first morning of his labors, and converses freely with
those whom he finds there, and with others as they come in. He may take an interest with them
in all the little arrangements connected with the opening of the school--the building of the
fire, the paths through the snow, the arrangements of seats; calling upon them for information
or aid, asking their names, and, in a word, entering fully and freely into conversation with
them, just as a parent, under similar circumstances, would do with his children. All the children
thus addressed will be pleased with the gentleness and affability of the teacher. Even a rough
and ill-natured boy, who has perhaps come to the school with the express determination of attempting
to make mischief, will be completely disarmed by being asked politely to help the teacher arrange
the fire, or alter the position of his desk. Thus, by means of the half hour during which the
scholars are coming together, and of the visits made in the preceding evening, as described
under the last head, the teacher will find, when he calls upon the children to take their seats,
that he has made a very large number of them his personal friends. Many of these will have
communicated their first impressions to the others, so that he will find himself possessed,
at the outset, of that which is of vital consequence in the opening of any administration--a
strong party in his favor.

4. The time for calling the school to order and commencing exercises of some sort will at length
arrive, though if the work of making personal acquaintances is going on prosperously, it may
perhaps be delayed a little beyond the usual hour. When, however, the time arrives, we would
strongly recommend that the first service by which the regular duties of the school are commenced
should be an act of religious worship. There are many reasons why the exercises of the school
should every day be thus commenced, and there are special reasons for it on the first day.

There are very few districts where parents would have any objection to this. They might, indeed,
in some cases, if the subject were to be brought up formally before them as a matter of doubt,
anticipate some difficulties, or create imaginary ones, growing out of the supposed sensitiveness
of contending sects; but if the teacher were, of his own accord, to commence the plain, faithful,
and honest discharge of this duty as a matter of course, very few would think of making any
objection to it, and almost all would be satisfied and pleased with its actual operation. If,
however, the teacher should, in any case, have reason to believe that such a practice would
be contrary to the wishes of his employers, it would, according to views we have presented
in another chapter, be wrong for him to attempt to introduce it. He might, if he should see
fit, make such an objection a reason for declining to take the school; but he ought not, if
he takes it, to act counter to the known wishes of his employers in so important a point. But
if, on the other hand, no such objections are made known to him, he need not raise the question
himself at all, but take it for granted that in a Christian land there will be no objection
to imploring the Divine protection and blessing at the opening of a daily school.

If this practice is adopted, it will have a most powerful influence upon the moral condition
of the school. It must be so. Though many will be inattentive, and many utterly unconcerned,
yet it is not possible to bring children, even in form, into the presence of God every day,
and to utter in their hearing the petitions which they ought to present, without bringing a
powerful element of moral influence to bear upon their hearts. The good will be made better;
the conscientious more conscientious still; and the rude and savage will be subdued and softened
by the daily attempt to lead them to the throne of their Creator. To secure this effect, the
devotional service must be an honest one. There must be nothing feigned or hypocritical; no
hackneyed phrases used without meaning, or intonations of assumed solemnity. It must be honest,
heartfelt, simple prayer; the plain and direct expression of such sentiments as children ought
to feel, and of such petitions as they ought to offer. We shall speak presently of the mode
of avoiding some abuses to which this exercise is liable; but if these sources of abuse are
avoided, and the duty is performed in that plain, simple, direct, and honest manner in which
it certainly will be if it springs from the heart, it must have a great influence on the moral
progress of the children, and, in fact, in all respects on the prosperity of the school.

But, then, independently of the advantages which may be expected to result from the practice
of daily prayer in school, it would seem to be the imperious duty of the teacher to adopt it.
So many human minds committed thus to the guidance of one, at a period when the character receives
so easily and so permanently its shape and direction, and in a world of probation like this,
is an occasion which seems to demand the open recognition of the hand of God on the part of
any individual to whom such a trust is committed. The duty springs so directly out of the attitude
in which the teacher and pupil stand in respect to each other, and the relation they together
bear to the Supreme, that it would seem impossible for any one to hesitate to admit the duty,
without denying altogether the existence of a God.

How vast the responsibility of giving form and character to the human soul! How mighty the
influence of which the unformed minds of a group of children are susceptible! How much their
daily teacher must inevitably exert upon them! If we admit the existence of God at all, and
that he exerts any agency whatever in the moral world which he has produced, here seems to
be one of the strongest cases in which his intervention should be sought. And then, when we
reflect upon the influence which would be exerted upon the future religious character of this
nation by having the millions of children training up in the schools accustomed, through all
the years of early life, to being brought daily into the presence of the Supreme, with thanksgiving,
confession, and prayer, it can hardly seem possible that the teacher who wishes to be faithful
in his duties should hesitate in regard to this. Some teacher may perhaps say that he can not
perform it because he is not a religious man--he makes no pretensions to piety. But this can
surely be no reason. He ought to be a religious man, and his first prayer offered in school
may be the first act by which he becomes so. Entering the service of Jehovah is a work which
requires no preliminary steps. It is to be done at once by sincere confession, and an honest
prayer for forgiveness for the past, and strength for time to come. A daily religious service
in school may be, therefore, the outward act by which he, who has long lived without God, may
return to his duty.

If, from such considerations, the teacher purposes to have a daily religious service in his
school, he should by all means begin on the first day, and when he first calls his school to
order. He should mention to his pupils the great and obvious duty of imploring God's guidance
and blessing in all their ways, and then read a short portion of Scripture, with an occasional
word or two of simple explanation, and offer, himself, a short and simple prayer. In some cases,
teachers are disposed to postpone this duty a day or two, from timidity or other causes, hoping
that, after becoming acquainted a little with the school, and having completed their more important
arrangements, they shall find it easier to begin. But this is a great mistake. The longer the
duty is postponed, the more difficult and trying it will be. And then the moral impressions
will be altogether more strong and salutary if an act of solemn religious worship is made the
first opening act of the school.

Where the teacher has not sufficient confidence that the general sense of propriety among his
pupils will preserve good order and decorum during the exercise, it may be better for him to
read a prayer selected from books of devotion, or prepared by himself expressly for the occasion.
By this plan his school will be, during the exercise, under his own observation, as at other
times. It may, in some schools where the number is small, or the prevailing habits of seriousness
and order are good, be well to allow the older scholars to read the prayer in rotation, taking
especial care that it does not degenerate into a mere reading exercise, but that it is understood,
both by readers and hearers, to be a solemn act of religious worship. In a word, if the teacher
is really honest and sincere in his wish to lead his pupils to the worship of God, he will
find no serious difficulty in preventing the abuses and avoiding the dangers which some might
fear, and in accomplishing vast good, both in promoting the prosperity of the school, and in
the formation of the highest and best traits of individual character.

We have dwelt, perhaps, longer on this subject than we ought to have done in this place; but
its importance, when viewed in its bearings on the thousands of children daily assembling in
our district schools must be our apology. The embarrassments and difficulties arising from
the extreme sensitiveness which exists among the various denominations of Christians in our
land, threaten to interfere very seriously with giving a proper degree of religious instruction
to the mass of the youthful population. But we must not, because we have no national church,
cease to have a national religion. All our institutions ought to be so administered as openly
to recognize the hand of God, and to seek his protection and blessing; and in regard to none
is it more imperiously necessary than in respect to our common schools.

5. After the school is thus opened, the teacher will find himself brought to the great difficulty
which embarrasses the beginning of his labors, namely, that of finding immediate employment
at once for the thirty or forty children who all look up to him waiting for their orders. I
say thirty or forty, for the young teachers first school will usually be a small one. His object
should be, in all ordinary cases, for the first few days, twofold: first, to revive and restore,
in the main, the general routine of classes and exercises pursued by his predecessor in the
same school; and, secondly, while doing this, to become as fully acquainted with his scholars
as possible.

It is best, then, ordinarily, for the teacher to begin the school as his predecessor closed
it, and make the transition to his own perhaps more improved method a gradual one. In some
cases a different course is wise undoubtedly, as, for example, where a teacher is commencing
a private school, on a previously well-digested plan of his own, or where one who has had experience,
and has confidence in his power to bring his new pupils promptly and at once into the system
of classification and instruction which he prefers. It is difficult, however, to do this, and
requires a good deal of address and decision. It is far easier and safer, and in almost all
cases better, in every respect, for a young teacher to revive and restore the former arrangements
in the main, and take his departure from them. He may afterward make changes, as he may find
them necessary or desirable, and even bring the school soon into a very different state from
that in which he finds it; but it will generally be more pleasant for himself, and better for
the school, to avoid the shock of a sudden and entire revolution.

The first thing, then, when the scholars are ready to be employed, is to set them at work in
classes or upon lessons, as they would have been employed had the former teacher continued
in charge of the school. To illustrate clearly how this may be done, we may give the following
dialogue:

Teacher. Can any one of the boys inform me what was the first lesson that the former master
used to hear in the morning?

The boys are silent, looking to one another.

Teacher. Did he hear any recitation immediately after school began?

Boys (faintly, and with hesitation). No, sir.

Teacher. How long was it before he began to hear lessons?

Several boys simultaneously. "About half an hour." "A little while." "Quarter of an hour."

"What did he do at this time?"

"Set copies," "Looked over sums," and various other answers are perhaps given.

The teacher makes a memorandum of this, and then inquires,

"And what lesson came after this?"

"Geography."

"All the boys in this school who studied Geography may rise."

A considerable number rise.

"Did you all recite together?"

"No, sir."

"There are two classes, then?"

"Yes. sir." "Yes, sir." "More than two."

"All who belong to the class that recites first in the morning may remain standing; the rest
may sit."

The boys obey, and eight or ten of them remain standing. The teacher calls upon one of them
to produce his book, and assigns them a lesson in regular course. He then requests some one
of the number to write out, in the course of the day, a list of the class, and to bring it
with him to the recitation the next morning.

"Are there any other scholars in the school who think it would be well for them to join this
class?"

In answer to this question probably some new scholars might rise, or some hitherto belonging
to other classes, who might be of suitable age and qualifications to be transferred. If these
individuals should appear to be of the proper standing and character, they might at once be
joined to the class in question, and directed to take the same lesson.

In the same manner, the other classes would pass in review before the teacher, and he would
obtain a memorandum of the usual order of exercises, and in a short time set all his pupils
at work preparing for the lessons of the next day. He would be much aided in this by the previous
knowledge which he would have obtained by private conversation, as recommended under a former
head. Some individual cases would require a little special attention, such as new scholars,
small children, and others; but he would be able, before a great while, to look around him
and see his whole school busy with the work he had assigned them, and his own time, for the
rest of the morning, in a great degree at his own command.

I ought to say, however, that it is not probable that he would long continue these arrangements
unaltered. In hearing the different classes recite, he would watch for opportunities for combining
them, or discontinuing those where the number was small; he would alter the times of recitation,
and group individual scholars into classes, so as to bring the school, in a very short time,
into a condition corresponding more nearly with his own views. All this can be done very easily
and pleasantly when the wheels are once in motion; for a school is like a ship in one respect--most
easily steered in the right direction when under sail.

By this plan, also, the teacher obtains what is almost absolutely necessary at the commencement
of his labors, time for observation. It is of the first importance that he should become acquainted,
as early as possible, with the characters of the boys, especially to learn who those are which
are most likely to be troublesome. There always will be a few who will require special watch
and care, and generally there will be only a few. A great deal depends on finding these individuals
out in good season, and bringing the pressure of a proper authority to bear upon them soon.
By the plan I have recommended of not attempting to remodel the school wholly at once, the
teacher obtains time for noticing the pupils, and learning something about their individual
characters. In fact, so important is this, that it is the plan of some teachers, whenever they
commence a new school, to let the boys have their own way, almost entirely, for a few days,
in order to find out fully who the idle and mischievous are. This is, perhaps, going a little
too far; but it is certainly desirable to enjoy as many opportunities for observation as can
be secured on the first few days of the school.

6. Make it, then, a special object of attention, during the first day or two, to discover who
the idle and mischievous individuals are. They will have generally seated themselves together
in little knots; for, as they are aware that the new teacher does not know them, they will
imagine that, though perhaps separated before, they can now slip together again without any
trouble. It is best to avoid, if possible, an open collision with any of them at once, in order
that they may be the better observed. Whenever, therefore, you see idleness or play, endeavor
to remedy the evil for the time by giving the individual something special to do, or by some
other measure, without, however, seeming to notice the misconduct. Continue thus adroitly to
stop every thing disorderly, while, at the same time, you notice and remember where the tendencies
to disorder exist.

By this means, the individuals who would cause most of the trouble and difficulty in the discipline
of the school will soon betray themselves, and those whose fidelity and good behavior can be
relied upon will also be known. The names of the former should be among the first that the
teacher learns, and their characters should be among the first which he studies. The most prominent
among them--those apparently most likely to make trouble--he should note particularly, and
make inquiries out of school respecting them, their characters, and their education at home,
so as to become acquainted with them as early and as fully as possible, for he must have this
full acquaintance with them before he is prepared to commence any decided course of discipline
with them. The teacher often does irreparable injury by rash action at the outset. He sees,
for instance, a boy secretly eating an apple which he has concealed in his hand, and which
he bites with his book before his mouth, or his head under the lid of his desk. It is perhaps
the first day of the school, and the teacher thinks he had better make an example at the outset,
and calls the boy out, knowing nothing about his general character, and inflicts some painful
or degrading punishment before all the school. A little afterward, as he becomes gradually
acquainted with the boy, he finds that he is of mild, gentle disposition, generally obedient
and harmless, and that his offense was only an act of momentary thoughtlessness, arising from
some circumstances of peculiar temptation at the time; a boy in the next seat, perhaps, had
just before given him the apple. The teacher regrets, when too late, the hasty punishment.
He perceives that instead of having the influence of salutary example upon the other boys,
it must have shocked their sense of justice, and excited dislike toward a teacher so quick
and severe, rather than of fear of doing wrong themselves. It would be safer to postpone such
decided measures a little--to avoid all open collisions, if possible, for a few days. In such
a case as the above, the boy might be kindly spoken to in an under tone, in such a way as to
show both the teacher's sense of the impropriety of disorder, and also his desire to avoid
giving pain to the boy. If it then turns out that the individual is ordinarily a well-disposed
boy, all is right, and if he proves to be habitually disobedient and troublesome, the lenity
and forbearance exercised at first will facilitate the effect aimed at by subsequent measures.
Avoid, then, for the few first days, all open collision with any of your pupils, that you may
have opportunity for minute and thorough observation.

And here the young teacher ought to be cautioned against a fault which beginners are very prone
to fall into, that of forming unfavorable opinions of some of their pupils from their air and
manner before they see any thing in their conduct which ought to be disapproved. A boy or girl
comes to the desk to ask a question or make a request, and the teacher sees in the cast of
countenance, or in the bearing or tone of the individual, something indicating a proud, or
a sullen, or an ill-humored disposition, and conceives a prejudice, often entirely without
foundation, which weeks perhaps do not wear away. Every experienced teacher can recollect numerous
cases of this sort, and he learns, after a time, to suspend his judgment. Be cautious, therefore,
on this point, and in the survey of your pupils which you make during the first few days of
your school, trust to nothing but the most sure and unequivocal evidences of character, for
many of your most docile and faithful pupils will be found among those whose appearance at
first prepossessed you strongly against them.

One other caution ought also to be given. Do not judge too severely in respect to the ordinary
cases of misconduct in school. The young teacher almost invariably does judge too severely.
While engaged himself in hearing a recitation, or looking over a "sum," he hears a stifled
laugh, and, looking up, sees the little offender struggling with the muscles of his countenance
to restore their gravity. The teacher is vexed at the interruption, and severely rebukes or
punishes the boy, when, after all, the offense, in a moral point of view, was an exceedingly
light one--at least it might very probably have been so. In fact, a large proportion of the
offenses against order committed in school are the mere momentary action of the natural buoyancy
and life of childhood. This is no reason why they should be indulged, or why the order and
regularity of the school should be sacrificed, but it should prevent their exciting feelings
of anger or impatience, or very severe reprehension. While the teacher should take effectual
measures for restraining all such irregularities, he should do it with the tone and manner
which will show that he understands their true moral character, and deals with them, not as
heinous sins, which deserve severe punishment, but as serious inconveniences, which he is compelled
to repress.

There are often cases of real moral turpitude in school, such as where there is intentional,
willful mischief, or disturbance, or habitual disobedience, and there may even be, in some
cases, open rebellion. Now the teacher should show that he distinguishes these cases from such
momentary acts of thoughtlessness as we have described, and a broad distinction ought to be
made in the treatment of them. In a word, then, what we have been recommending under this head
is, that the teacher should make it his special study, for his first few days in school, to
acquire a knowledge of the characters of his pupils, to learn who are the thoughtless ones,
who the mischievous, and who the disobedient and rebellious, and to do this with candid, moral
discrimination, and with as little open collision with individuals as possible.

7. Another point to which the teacher ought to give his early attention is to separate the
bad boys as soon as he can from one another. The idleness and irregularity of children in school
often depends more on accidental circumstances than on character. Two boys may be individually
harmless and well-disposed, and yet they may be of so mercurial a temperament that, together,
the temptation to continual play will be irresistible. Another case that more often happens
is where one is actively and even intentionally bad, and is seated next to an innocent, but
perhaps thoughtless boy, and contrives to keep him always in difficulty. Now remove the former
away, where there are no very frail materials for him to act upon, and place the latter where
he is exposed to no special temptation, and all would be well.

This is all very obvious, and known familiarly to all teachers who have had any experience.
But beginners are not generally so aware of it at the outset as to make any direct and systematic
efforts to examine the school with reference to its condition in this respect. It is usual
to go on, leaving the boys to remain seated as chance or their own inclinations grouped them,
and to endeavor to keep the peace among the various neighborhoods by close supervision, rebukes,
and punishment. Now these difficulties may be very much diminished by looking a little into
the arrangement of the boys at the outset, and so modifying it as to diminish the amount of
temptation to which the individuals are exposed.

This should be done, however, cautiously, deliberately, and with good-nature, keeping the object
of it a good deal out of view. It must be done cautiously and deliberately, for the first appearances
are exceedingly fallacious in respect to the characters of the different children. You see,
perhaps, some indications of play between two boys upon the same seat, and hastily conclude
that they are disorderly boys, and must be separated. Something in the air and manner of one
or both of them confirms this impression, and you take the necessary measures at once. You
then find, when you become more fully acquainted with them, that the appearances which you
observed were only momentary and accidental, and that they would have been as safe together
as any two boys in the school. And perhaps you will even find that, by their new position,
you have brought one or the other into circumstances of peculiar temptation. Wait, therefore,
before you make such changes, till you have ascertained actual character, doing this, however,
without any unnecessary delay.

In such removals, too, it is well, in many cases, to keep the motive and design of them as
much as possible out of view; for by expressing suspicion of a boy, you injure his character
in his own opinion and in that of others, and tend to make him reckless. Besides, if you remove
a boy from a companion whom he likes, avowedly to prevent his playing, you offer him an inducement,
if he is a bad boy, to continue to play in his new position for the purpose of thwarting you,
or from the influence of resentment. It would be wrong, indeed, to use any subterfuge or duplicity
of any kind to conceal your object, but you are not bound to explain it; and in the many changes
which you will be compelled to make in the course of the first week for various purposes, you
may include many of these without explaining particularly the design or intention of any of them.

In some instances, however, you may frankly state the whole case without danger, provided it
is done in such a manner as not to make the boy feel that his character is seriously injured
in your estimation. It must depend upon the tact and judgment of the teacher to determine upon
the particular course to be pursued in the several cases, though he ought to keep these general
principles in view in all.

In one instance, for example, he will see two boys together, James and Joseph we will call
them, exhibiting a tendency to play, and after inquiring into their characters, he will find
that they are good-natured, pleasant boys, and that he had better be frank with them on the
subject. He calls one of them to his desk, and perhaps the following dialogue ensues:

"James, I am making some changes in the seats, and thought of removing you to another place.
Have you any particular preference for that seat?"

The question is unexpected, and James hesitates. He wishes to sit next to Joseph, but doubts
whether it is quite prudent to avow it; so he says, slowly and with hesitation,

"No, sir, I do not know that I have."

"If you have any reason, I wish you would tell me frankly, for I want you to have such a seat
as will be pleasant to you."

James does not know what to say. Encouraged, however, by the good-humored tone and look which
the master assumes, he says, timidly,

"Joseph and I thought we should like to sit together, if you are willing."

"Oh! you and Joseph are particular friends, then, I suppose?"

"Why, yes, sir."

"I am not surprised, then, that you want to sit together, though, to tell the truth, that is
rather a reason why I should separate you."

"Why, sir?"

"Because I have observed that when two great friends are seated together, they are always more
apt to whisper and play. Have you not observed it?"

"Why, yes, sir."

"You may go and ask Joseph to come here."

When the two boys make their appearance again, the teacher continues:

"Joseph, James tells me that you and he would like to sit together, and says you are particular
friends; but I tell him," he adds, smiling, "that that is rather a reason for separating you.
Now if I should put you both into different parts of the school, next to boys that you are
not acquainted with, it would be a great deal easier for you to be still and studious than
it is now. Do you not think so yourselves?"

The boys look at one another and smile.

"However, there is one way you can do. You can guard against the extra temptation by extra
care; and, on the whole, as I believe you are pretty good boys, I will let you have your choice.
You may stay as you are, and make extra exertion to be perfectly regular and studious, or I
will find seats for you where it will be a great deal easier for you to be so. Which do you
think you should rather do?"

The boys hesitate, look at one another, and presently say that they had rather sit together.

"Well," said the teacher, "it is immaterial to me whether you sit together or apart, if you
are only good boys, so you may take your seats and try it a little while. If you find it too
hard work to be studious and orderly together, I can make a change hereafter. I shall soon see."

Such a conversation will have many good effects. It will make the boys expect to be watched,
without causing them to feel that their characters have suffered. It will stimulate them to
greater exertion to avoid all misconduct, and it will prepare the way for separating them afterward
without awakening feelings of resentment, if the experiment of their sitting together should fail.

Another case would be managed, perhaps, in a little different way, where the tendency to play
was more decided. After speaking to the individuals mildly two or three times, you see them
again at play. You ask them to wait that day after school and come to your desk.

They have, then, the rest of the day to think occasionally of the difficulty they have brought
themselves into, and the anxiety and suspense which they will naturally feel will give you
every advantage for speaking to them with effect; and if you should be engaged a few minutes
with some other business after school, so that they should have to stand a little while in
silent expectation, waiting for their turn, it would contribute to the permanence of the effect.

"Well, boys," at length you say, with a serious but frank tone of voice, "I saw you playing
in a disorderly manner to-day, and, in the first place, I wish you to tell me honestly all
about it. I am not going to punish you, but I wish you to be open and honest about it. What
were you doing?"

The boys hesitate.

"George, what did you have in your hand?"

"A piece of paper."

"And what were you doing with it?"

George. William was trying to take it away from me.

"Was there any thing on it?"

"Yes, sir."

"What?"

George looks down, a little confused.

William. George had been drawing some pictures on it.

"I see each of you is ready to tell of the other's fault, but it would be much more honorable
if each was open in acknowledging his own. Have I ever had to speak to you before for playing
together in school?"

"Yes, sir, I believe you have," says one, looking down.

"More than once?"

"Yes, sir."

"More than twice?"

"I do not recollect exactly; I believe you have."

"Well, now, what do you think I ought to do next?"

The boys have nothing to say.

"Do you prefer sitting together, or are you willing to have me separate you?"

"We should rather sit together, sir, if you are willing," says George.

"I have no objection to your sitting together, if you could only resist the temptation to play.
I want all the boys in the school to have pleasant seats."

There is a pause, the teacher hesitating what to do.

"Suppose, now, I were to make one more experiment, and let you try to be good boys in your
present seat, would you really try?"

"Yes, sir," "Yes, sir, we will," are the replies.

"And if I should find that you still continue to play, and should have to separate you, will
you move into your new seats pleasantly, and with good-humor, feeling that I have done right
about if?"

"Yes, sir, we will."

Thus it will be seen that there may be cases where the teacher may make arrangements for separating
his scholars, on an open and distinct understanding with them in respect to the cause of it.
We have given these cases, not that exactly such ones will be very likely to occur, or that,
when they do, the teacher is to manage them in exactly the way here described, but to exhibit
more clearly to the reader than could be done by any general description, the spirit and tone
which a teacher ought to assume toward his pupils. We wished to exhibit this in contrast with
the harsh and impatient manner which teachers too often assume in such a case, as follows:

"John Williams and Samuel Smith, come here to me!" exclaims the master, in a harsh, impatient
tone, in the midst of the exercises of the afternoon.

The scholars all look up from their work. The culprits slowly rise from their seats, and with
a sullen air come down to the floor.

"You are playing, boys, all the time, and I will not have it. John, do you take your books,
and go and sit out there by the window; and, Samuel, you come and sit here on this front seat;
and if I catch you playing again, I shall certainly punish you severely."

The boys make the move with as much rattling and distention to make a noise; and when they
get their new seats, and the teacher is again engaged upon his work, they exchange winks and
nods, and in ten minutes are slyly cannonading each other with paper balls.

In regard to all the directions that have been given under this head, I ought to say again,
before concluding it, that they are mainly applicable to the case of beginners and of small
schools. The general principles are, it is true, of universal application, but it is only where
a school is of moderate size that the details of position, in respect to individual scholars,
can be minutely studied. More summary processes are necessary, I am aware, when the school
is very large, and the time of the teacher is incessantly engaged.

8. In some districts in New England the young teacher will find one or more boys, generally
among the larger ones, who will come to the school with the express determination to make a
difficulty if they can. The best way is generally to face these individuals at once in the
most direct and open manner, and, at the same time, with perfect good-humor and kindness of
feeling and deportment toward them personally. An example or two will best illustrate what I mean.

A teacher heard a rapping noise repeatedly one day, just after he had commenced his labors,
under such circumstances as to lead him to suppose it was designed. He did not appear to notice
it, but remained after school until the scholars had all gone, and then made a thorough examination.
He found, at length, a broken place in the plastering, where a lath was loose, and a string
was tied to the end of it, and thence carried along the wall, under the benches, to the seat
of a mischievous boy, and fastened to a nail. By pulling the string he could spring the lath,
and then let it snap back to its place. He left every thing as it was, and the next day, while
engaged in a lesson, he heard the noise again.

He rose from his seat.

The scholars all looked up from their books.

"Did you hear that noise?" said he.

"Yes, sir."

"Do you know what it is?"

"No, sir."

"Very well; I only wished to call your attention to it. I may perhaps speak of it again by-and-by."

He then resumed his exercise as if nothing had happened. The guilty boy was agitated and confused,
and was utterly at a loss to know what to do. What could the teacher mean? Had he discovered
the trick? and, if so, what was he going to do?

He grew more and more uneasy, and resolved that, at all events, it was best for him to retreat.
Accordingly, at the next recess, as the teacher had anticipated, he went slyly to the lath,
cut the string, then returned to his seat, and drew the line in, rolled it up, and put it in
his pocket. The teacher, who was secretly watching him, observed the whole manoeuvre.

At the close of the school, when the books were laid aside, and all was silence, he treated
the affair thus:

"Do you remember the noise to which I called your attention early this afternoon"?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will explain it to you now. One of the boys tied a string to a loose lath in the side of
the room, and then, having the end of it at his seat, he was pulling it to make a noise to
disturb us."

The scholars all looked astonished, and then began to turn round toward one another to see
who the offender could be. Suffren, and some half dozen of other French nautical heroes, because
rightly they did us all the mischief they could (which was really
great), are names justly reverenced in England.

On the same principle, La Pucelle d'Orleans, the victorious enemy of England, has been destined
to receive her deepest commemoration from the magnanimous justice
of Englishmen.

But, really, as the name was so exceedingly common, few people will
detect a mystery in calling a boy by the name of Jack, though it does
seem mysterious to call a girl Jack.



"Then why should any boy or girl wish to give me trouble or pain?"

There was a pause. The guilty individual expected that the next thing would be to call him
out for punishment.

"Now what do you think I ought to do with such a boy?"

No answer.

"Perhaps I ought to punish him, but I am very unwilling to do that. I concluded to try another
plan--to treat him with kindness and forbearance. So I called your attention to it this afternoon,
to let him know that I was observing it, and to give him an opportunity to remove the string.
And he did. He went, in the recess, and cut off the string. I shall not tell you his name,
for I do not wish to injure his character. All I want is to have him a good boy."

A pause.

"I think I shall try this plan, for he must have some feelings of honor and gratitude, and
if he has, he certainly will not try to give me pain or trouble again after this. And now I
shall say no more about it, nor think any more about it; only, to prove that it is all as I
say, if you look there under that window after school, you will see the lath with the end of
the string round it, and, by pulling it, you can make it snap." 

For some time this Birmingham machine ran along by our side--a piece
of familiarity that already of itself seemed to me sufficiently Jacobinical.

But all at once a movement of the horses announced a desperate intention of leaving us behind. "Do you
see that?" I said to the coachman.--"I see," was his short answer. He was wide awake,--yet he
waited longer than seemed prudent; for the horses of our audacious opponent had a disagreeable
air of freshness and power.


The next day, soon after the boys had gone out, he took his hat and followed them, and, turning
round a corner of the school-house, found the boys standing around the young rebel, who was
sitting upon a log, shaving the handle of the club smooth with his pocket-knife. He was startled
at the unexpected appearance of the teacher, and the first impulse was to hide his club behind
him; but it was too late, and, supposing that the teacher was ignorant of his designs, he went
on sullenly with his work, feeling, however, greatly embarrassed.

"Pleasant day, boys," said the teacher. "This is a fine sunny nook for you to talk in.

"Seems to me, however, you ought to have a better seat than this old log," continued he, taking
his seat at the same time by the side of the boy.

"Not so bad a seat, however, after all. What are you making, Joseph?"

Joseph mumbled out something inarticulate by way of reply. "I have got a sharper knife," said
he, drawing his penknife out of his pocket. And then, "Let me try it," he continued, gently
taking the club out of Joseph's hand.

The boys looked surprised, some exchanged nods and winks, others turned away to conceal a laugh;
but the teacher engaged in conversation with them, and soon put them all at their ease except
poor Joseph, who could not tell how this strange interview was likely to end.

In the mean time, the teacher went on shaving the handle smooth and rounding the ends. "You
want," said he, "a rasp or coarse file for the ends, and then you could finish it finely. But
what are you making this formidable club for?"

Joseph was completely at a loss what to say. He began to show evident marks of embarrassment
and confusion.

"I know what it is for; it is to defend yourself against me with. Is it not, boys?" said he,
appealing to the others.

A faint "Yes, sir" or two was the reply.

"Well, now, Joseph, it will be a great deal better for us both to be friends than to be enemies.
You had better throw this club away, and save yourself from punishment by being a good boy.
Come, now," said he, handing him back his club, "throw it over into the field as far as you
can, and we will all forget that you ever made it."

Joseph sat the picture of shame and confusion. Better feelings were struggling for admission,
and the case was decided by a broad-faced, good-natured-looking boy, who stood by his side,
saying almost involuntarily,

"Better throw it, Joe."

The club flew, end over end, into the field. Joseph returned to his allegiance, and never attempted
to rise in rebellion again.

The ways by which boys engage in open, intentional disobedience are, of course, greatly varied,
and the exact treatment will depend upon the features of the individual case; but the frankness,
the openness, the plain dealing, and the kind and friendly tone which it is the object of the
foregoing illustrations to exhibit, should characterize all.

9. We have already alluded to the importance of a delicate regard for the characters of the
boys in all the measures of discipline adopted at the commencement of a school. This is, in
fact, of the highest importance at all times, and is peculiarly so at the outset. A wound to
the feelings is sometimes inflicted by a single transaction which produces a lasting injury
to the character. Children are very sensitive to ridicule or disgrace, and some are most acutely
so. A cutting reproof administered in public, or a punishment which exposes the individual
to the gaze of others, will often burn far more deeply into the heart than the teacher imagines.

And it is often the cause of great and lasting injury, too. By destroying the character of
a pupil, you make him feel that he has nothing more to lose or gain, and destroy that kind
of interest in his own moral condition which alone will allure him to virtuous conduct. To
expose children to public ridicule or contempt tends either to make them sullen and despondent,
or else to arouse their resentment and to make them reckless and desperate. Most persons remember
through life some instances in their early childhood in which they were disgraced or ridiculed
at school, and the permanence of the recollection is a test of the violence of the effect.

Be very careful, then, to avoid, especially at the commencement of the school, publicly exposing
those who do wrong. Sometimes you may make the offense public, as in the case of the snapping
of the lath, described under a former head, while you kindly conceal the name of the offender.
Even if the school generally understand who he is, the injury of public exposure is almost
altogether avoided, for the sense of disgrace does not come nearly so vividly home to the mind
of a child from hearing occasional allusions to his offense by individuals among his playmates,
as when he feels himself, at a particular time, the object of universal attention and dishonor.
And then, besides, if the pupil perceives that the teacher is tender of his reputation, he
will, by a feeling somewhere between imitation and sympathy, begin to feel a little tender
of it too. Every exertion should be made, therefore, to lead children to value their character,
and to help them to preserve it, and especially to avoid, at the beginning, every unnecessary
sacrifice of it.

And yet there are cases where shame is the very best possible remedy for juvenile faults. If
a boy, for example, is self-conceited, bold, and mischievous, with feelings somewhat callous,
and an influence extensive and bad, an opportunity will sometimes occur to hold up his conduct
to the just reprobation of the school with great advantage. By this means, if it is done in
such a way as to secure the influence of the school on the right side, many good effects are
sometimes attained. His pride and self-conceit are humbled, his bad influence receives a very
decided check, and he is forced to draw back at once from the prominent stand he has occupied.

Richard Jones, for example, is a rude, coarse, self-conceited boy, often doing wrong both in
school and out, and yet possessed of that peculiar influence which a bad boy often contrives
to exert in school. The teacher, after watching some time for an opportunity to humble him,
one day overhears a difficulty among the boys, and, looking out of the window, observes that
he is taking away a sled from one of the little boys to slide down hill upon, having none of
his own. The little boy resists as well as he can, and complains bitterly, but it is of no avail.

At the close of the school that day, the teacher commences conversation on the subject as follows:

"Boys, do you know what the difference is between stealing and robbery?"

"Yes, sir."

"What!"

The boys hesitate, and look at one another.

"Suppose a thief were to go into a man's store in the daytime, and take away something secretly,
would it be stealing or robbery?"

"Stealing."

"Suppose he should meet him in the road, and take it away by force?"

"Then it would be robbery."

"Yes; when that which belongs to another is taken secretly, it is called stealing; when it
is taken openly or with violence, it is called robbery. Which, now, do you think is the worst?"

"Robbery."

"Yes, for it is more barefaced and determined--then it gives a great deal more pain to the
one who is injured. To-day I saw one of the boys in this school taking away another boy's sled,
openly and with violence."

The boys all look round toward Richard.

"Was that of the nature of stealing or robbery?

"Robbery," say the boys.

"Was it real robbery?"

They hesitate.

"If any of you think of any reason why it was not real robbery, you may name it."

"He gave the sled back to him," says one of the boys.

"Yes; and therefore, to describe the action correctly, we should not say Richard robbed a boy
of his sled, but that he robbed him of his sled for a time, or he robbed him of the use of
his sled. In the meantime, all this deistical confession of Joanna's, besides
being suicidal for the interest of her cause, is opposed to the depositions
upon both trials.

The very best witness called from first to last deposes that Joanna attended these rites of
her Church even too often; was taxed with doing so; and, by blushing,
owned the charge as a fact, though certainly not as a fault.

Joanna was a girl of natural piety, that saw God in forests and hills
and fountains, but did not the less seek him in chapels and consecrated
oratories.

This peasant girl was self-educated through her own natural meditativeness. If the reader turns
to that divine passage in "Paradise Regained" which Milton has put into the mouth of our Saviour
when first entering the wilderness, and musing upon the tendency of those great impulses growing
within himself-----

"Oh, what a multitude of thoughts at once Awakened in me swarm, while I consider What from within
I feel myself, and hear What from without comes often to my ears, Ill sorting with my present
state compared! When I was yet a child, no childish play To me was pleasing; all my mind was
set Serious to learn and know, and thence to do, What might be public
good; myself I thought Born to that end----"

he will have some notion
of the vast reveries which brooded over the heart of Joanna in early
girlhood, when the wings were budding that should carry her from Orleans
to Rheims; when the golden chariot was dimly revealing itself that
should carry her from the kingdom of France Delivered to the Eternal
Kingdom.

 To secure this, he must
avoid all harsh and exaggerated expressions or direct reproaches, and while he is mild, and
gentle, and forbearing himself, lead the boys to understand and feel the nature of the sin
which he exposes. The opportunities for doing this to advantage will, however, be rare. Generally
it will be best to manage cases of discipline more privately, so as to protect the characters
of those that offend.

The teacher should thus, in accordance with the directions we have given, commence his labors
with careful circumspection, patience, frankness, and honest good-will toward every individual
of his charge. He will find less difficulty at the outset than he would have expected, and
soon have the satisfaction of perceiving that a mild but most efficient government is quietly
and firmly established in the little kingdom over which he is called to reign.

THE END.

