Today in all its artistic perfection and beauty it stands here to be revealed to the public
gaze. It is proper that the citizens of Connecticut should know how much of this result they
owe to the intelligent zeal of Mr. Cleveland, the mover of the resolution in the Legislature,
who in the commission, and before he became a member of it, has spared neither time nor effort
to procure a memorial worthy of the hero and of the State. And I am sure that I speak the unanimous
sentiment of the commission in the regret that the originator of this statue could not have
seen the consummation of his idea, and could not have crowned it with the one thing lacking
on this occasion, the silver words of eloquence we always heard from his lips, that compact,
nervous speech, the perfect union of strength and grace; for who so fitly as the lamented Hubbard
could have portrayed the moral heroism of the Martyr-Spy?

This is not a portrait statue. There is no likeness of Nathan Hale extant. The only known miniature
of his face, in the possession of the lady to whom he was betrothed at the time of his death,
disappeared many years ago. The artist was obliged, therefore, to create an ideal figure, aided
by a few fragmentary descriptions of Hale's personal appearance. His object has been to represent
an American youth of the period, an American patriot and scholar, whose manly beauty and grace
tradition loves to recall, to represent in face and in bearing the moral elevation of character
that made him conspicuous among his fellows, and to show forth, if possible, the deed that
made him immortal. For it is the deed and the memorable last words we think of when we think
of Hale. I know that by one of the canons of art it is held that sculpture should rarely fix
a momentary action; but if this can be pardoned in the Laocoon, where suffering could not otherwise
be depicted to excite the sympathy of the spectator, surely it can be justified in this case,
where, as one may say, the immortality of the subject rests upon a single act, upon a phrase,
upon the attitude of the moment. For all the man's life, all his character, flowered and blossomed
into immortal beauty in this one supreme moment of self-sacrifice, triumph, defiance. The ladder
of the gallows-tree on which the deserted boy stood, amidst the enemies of his country, when
he uttered those last words which all human annals do not parallel in simple patriotism,--the
ladder I am sure ran up to heaven, and if angels were not seen ascending and descending it
in that gray morning, there stood the embodiment of American courage, unconquerable, American
faith, invincible, American love of country, unquenchable, a new democratic manhood in the
world, visible there for all men to take note of, crowned already with the halo of victory
in the Revolutionary dawn. Oh, my Lord Howe! it seemed a trifling incident to you and to your
bloodhound, Provost Marshal Cunningham, but those winged last words were worth ten thousand
men to the drooping patriot army. Oh, your Majesty, King George the Third! here was a spirit,
could you but have known it, that would cost you an empire, here was an ignominious death that
would grow in the estimation of mankind, increasing in nobility above the fading pageantry
of kings.

On the 21st of April, 1775, a messenger, riding express from Boston to New York with the tidings
of Lexington and Concord, reached New London. The news created intense excitement. A public
meeting was called in the court-house at twilight, and among the speakers who exhorted the
people to take up arms at once, was one, a youth not yet twenty years of age, who said, "Let
us march immediately, and never lay down our arms until we have obtained our independence,"--one
of the first, perhaps the first, of the public declarations of the purpose of independence.
It was Nathan Hale, already a person of some note in the colony, of a family then not unknown
and destined in various ways to distinction in the Republic. A kinsman of the same name lost
his life in the Louisburg fight. He had been for a year the preceptor of the Union Grammar
School at New London. The morning after the meeting he was enrolled as a volunteer, and soon
marched away with his company to Cambridge.

Nathan Hale, descended from Robert Hale who settled in Charlestown in 1632, a scion of the
Hales of Kent, England, was born in Coventry, Connecticut, on the 6th of June, 1755, the sixth
child of Richard Hale and his wife Elizabeth Strong, persons of strong intellect and the highest
moral character, and Puritans of the strictest observances. Brought up in this atmosphere,
in which duty and moral rectitude were the unquestioned obligations in life, he came to manhood
with a character that enabled him to face death or obloquy without flinching, when duty called,
so that his behavior at the last was not an excitement of the moment, but the result of ancestry,
training, and principle. Feeble physically in infancy, he developed into a robust boy, strong
in mind and body, a lively, sweet-tempered, beautiful youth, and into a young manhood endowed
with every admirable quality. In feats of strength and agility he recalls the traditions of
Washington; he early showed a remarkable avidity for knowledge, which was so sought that he
became before he was of age one of the best educated young men of his time in the colonies.
He was not only a classical scholar, with the limitations of those days; but, what was then
rare, he made scientific attainments which greatly impressed those capable of judging, and
he had a taste for art and a remarkable talent as an artist. His father intended him for the
ministry. He received his preparatory education from Dr. Joseph Huntington, a classical scholar
and the pastor of the church in Coventry, entered Yale College at the age of sixteen, and graduated
with high honors in a class of sixty, in September, 1773. At the time of his graduation his
personal appearance was notable.

Dr. Jared Sparks, who knew several of Hale's intimate friends, writes of him:

   "Possessing genius, taste, and order, he became distinguished as a
   scholar; and endowed in an eminent degree with those graces and
   gifts of Nature which add a charm to youthful excellence, he gained
   universal esteem and confidence. To high moral worth and
   irreproachable habits were joined gentleness of manner, an ingenuous
   disposition, and vigor of understanding. No young man of his years
   put forth a fairer promise of future usefulness and celebrity; the
   fortunes of none were fostered more sincerely by the generous good
   wishes of his superiors."

It was remembered at Yale that he was a brilliant debater as well as scholar. At his graduation
he engaged in a debate on the question, "Whether the education of daughters be not, without
any just reason, more neglected than that of the sons." "In this debate," wrote James Hillhouse,
one of his classmates, "he was the champion of the daughters, and most ably advocated their
cause. You may be sure that he received the plaudits of the ladies present."

Hale seems to have had an irresistible charm for everybody. He was a favorite in society; he
had the manners and the qualities that made him a leader among men and gained him the admiration
of women. He was always intelligently busy, and had the Yankee ingenuity,--he "could do anything
but spin," he used to say to the girls of Coventry, laughing over the spinning wheel. There
is a universal testimony to his alert intelligence, vivacity, manliness, sincerity, and winningness.

It is probable that while still an under-graduate at Yale, he was engaged to Alice Adams, who
was born in Canterbury, a young lady distinguished then as she was afterwards for great beauty
and intelligence. After Hale's death she married Mr. Eleazer Ripley, and was left a widow at
the age of eighteen, with one child, who survived its father only one year. She married, the
second time, William Lawrence, Esq., of Hartford, and died in this city, greatly respected
and admired, in 1845, aged eighty-eight. It is a touching note of the hold the memory of her
young hero had upon her admiration that her last words, murmured as life was ebbing, were,
"Write to Nathan."

Hale's short career in the American army need not detain us. After his flying visit as a volunteer
to Cambridge, he returned to New London, joined a company with the rank of lieutenant, participated
in the siege of Boston, was commissioned a captain in the Nineteenth Connecticut Regiment in
January, 1776, performed the duties of a soldier with vigilance, bravery, and patience, and
was noted for the discipline of his company. In the last dispiriting days of 1775, when the
terms of his men had expired, he offered to give them his month's pay if they would remain
a month longer. He accompanied the army to New York, and shared its fortunes in that discouraging
spring and summer. Shortly after his arrival Captain Hale distinguished himself by the brilliant
exploit of cutting out a British sloop, laden with provisions, from under the guns of the man-of-war
"Asia," sixty-four, lying in the East River, and bringing her triumphantly into slip. During
the summer he suffered a severe illness.

The condition of the American army and cause on the 1st of September, 1776, after the retreat
from Long Island, was critical. The army was demoralized, clamoring in vain for pay, and deserting
by companies and regiments; one-third of the men were without tents, one-fourth of them were
on the sick list. On the 7th, Washington called a council of war, and anxiously inquired what
should be done. On the 12th it was determined to abandon the city and take possession of Harlem
Heights. The British army, twenty-five thousand strong, admirably equipped, and supported by
a powerful naval force, threatened to envelop our poor force, and finish the war in a stroke.
Washington was unable to penetrate the designs of the British commander, or to obtain any trusty
information of the intentions or the movements of the British army. Information was imperatively
necessary to save us from destruction, and it could only be obtained by one skilled in military
and scientific knowledge and a good draughtsman, a man of quick eye, cool head, tact, sagacity,
and courage, and one whose judgment and fidelity could be trusted. Washington applied to Lieutenant-Colonel
Knowlton, who summoned a conference of officers in the name of the commander-in-chief, and
laid the matter before them. No one was willing to undertake the dangerous and ignominious
mission. Knowlton was in despair, and late in the conference was repeating the necessity, when
a young officer, pale from recent illness, entered the room and said, "I will undertake it."
It was Captain Nathan Hale. Everybody was astonished. His friends besought him not to attempt
it. In vain. Hale was under no illusion. He silenced all remonstrances by saying that he thought
he owed his country the accomplishment of an object so important and so much desired by the
commander-in-chief, and he knew no way to obtain the information except by going into the enemy's
camp in disguise.

