Is there anything of value taken away? Let me run over now in parallel fashion another catalogue
to place opposite this one, so that we may see as to what has been our loss and as to whether
there has been any gain.

In the place of the little, petty universe of Hebrew dream, what have we now? 

It is said that once in China was ruled by a cruel emperor, domineering and intolerant, so no one
could understand or something, his life was safe, because he wanted to be alone be the only perfect
in everything. Who could have more than him, the remedy he had. This Kaiser also had a body like
all Kaiser doctor, whose name was Jofuku. This was an even learned Mr. and extraordinarily clever,
but the emperor sought to kill him because he doctor Prudence was afraid.
 I have pictured to you, in very bald outline, some of the conceptions of God
that have been held in the past. What is our God to-day? The heart, the life, the soul, of
this infinite universe; justice that means justice; power that means power; love that surpasses
all our imagination of love; a God who is eternal goodness; who from the beginning has folded
his child man to his heart, whispering all of truth that he could understand, breathing into
him all of life that he could contain, inspiring him with all love and tenderness that he could
appreciate or employ, and so, in this way, leading him and guiding him through the ages, year
by year and century by century, still to something better and finer and higher; a God, not
off somewhere in the heavens, to whom we must send a messenger; not a God separated from us
by some great gulf that we must bridge by some supposed atonement; a God nearer to us than
our breath; a God who hears the whisper of our want, who understands the dawning wish or aspiration
before it takes form or shape; a God who loves us better than we love ourselves or love those
who are dearest to us; a God who knows better what we need than we know ourselves, and is more
ready to give us than fathers are to give good gifts to their children. Is there any loss here?

In the third place, the new man that has come into modern thought. Not the broken fragments
of a perfect Adam; not a man so crippled intellectually that, as they have been telling us
for centuries, it was impossible for him to find the truth, or to know it when he did find
it; not a being so depraved, morally, that he never desires any good, and never loves anything
which is sweet and fine; a being totally depraved, a being who, as one passage in the Old Testament
tells us, is so corrupt his very prayer is a sin; conceived, born, in evil, and all his thoughts
tainted, and drifting towards that which is wicked. Not this kind of a man. A man who has been
on the planet hundreds of thousands of years, who has been learning by experience, who has
been animal, who has been cruel, but who at every step has been trying to find the light, has
been becoming a little truer and better; a being who has evolved all that is sweetest and finest
in the history of the world; who has made no end of mistakes, who has committed no end of crimes,
but who has learned through these processes, and at last has given us some specimens of what
is possible by way of development in Abraham and Moses and Elijah and David and Isaiah, and
a long line of prophets and seers of the Old Testament time; not perfect, but magnificent types
of actual men; who has developed in other nations such men as Gautama, the heroes and teachers
of China, like Confucius; then Aristotle, Plato, Socrates; the noble men of Rome; who has given
us in the modern world the great poets, the great discoverers, the great philanthropists; those
devoted to the highest, sweetest things; musicians and artists; who has given us Shakspere,
who has given us, crowning them all, as I believe, by the moral beauty and grandeur of his
love, the Nazarene, Jesus, our elder brother, Son of God, and helper of his fellow-man; this
humanity that has never fallen; that has been climbing up from the beginning, and not sinking
down. 

"Tell me, where is the key for the little door?" he asked Marietta.

"I do not see it, but here is the key to the castle's front gate,
which unlocks the great door .

You can escape that way."

Giulio took the keys and rushed out of the box.

"Lower the wall," he shouted to his soldiers, "I finally have the
key."

A moment passed while he tried to open the door with a small key. There was complete silence;
he had picked the wrong key and took the other; and finally he opened the palace, door: but at
the moment when he lifted the iron bar, he took a bullet in the right arm. He immediately saw that
his arm couldn't manage the effort.

"Take away the iron bars," he shouted to his men.

He hadn't even needed to say it.

In light of the gun shot, they had noticed that the extreme end of the bent iron rod, lifted at
the fixed ring, was already halfway out of the gate.

Immediately three or four strong arms lifted the iron rod, as the ring dropped to them from
the extreme end of it. Now one of the gates could open slightly; the corporal came in and said
softly to Giulio: "There is nothing to be done anymore, we are only
three or four without wounds, five are dead."

"I've lost blood," said Giulio, "I feel that I'm going to faint, let me
be carried."

While Giulio spoke to the brave corporal, the soldiers of the guard
fired three or four rifle shots and the corporal fell dead.

Luckily, Ugone had heard Giulio; he called two soldiers to carry the captain. But as he was
still conscious, he ordered them to carry him. through the garden to the little door. The soldiers
cursed at this command, but they obeyed. "A hundred sequins to the man which opens this door,"
cried Giulio. But they withstood the onslaught of three angry men.

One of the old gardener fired incessantly from a window on the second
floor with the gun and ruined their attempts.

After the pointless efforts to open the door, Giulio was completely unconscious; Ugone told the soldiers
that he must be carried off hastily.

He even went to the lodge of the gatekeeper's sister and threw the
little Marietta inside of it, telling her in a threatening voice
to go away and never to reveal who she had recognized.

He took the straw from the bed, broke a few chairs and set the room on fire. When the fire was burning
well, he ran as fast as he could, through the middle of the gun shots of the monastery courtyard.
A hundred fifty yards away from the fight, he found the whole unconscious
captain. After several minutes they were out of town. Ugone observed:
He had only four soldiers with him.

He
sent two back to the city with orders to fire five minutes of gun shots.
"Try to recover your wounded comrades," he told them. "Leave the city
before daytime, we follow the footpath over Croce Rossa. If you're somewhere
you can light a fire, don't."
 He verily believed that
God had forsaken him; and yet he held fast to his trust, to his truth, to his faithfulness,
even when swooning away into the unconsciousness of death.

There is faith, and there is faithfulness; and he shares this with thousands of others. There
are thousands of men who have suffered more than Jesus did dying for his own truth; thousands
of martyrs who, with his name on their lips, have gone through greater torture than he did.
All these, whoever has been faithful, whoever has suffered for the right, whoever has been
true, has helped to work out the atonement, the reconciliation, of the world with God, showing
the beauty of truth and bringing men into that admiration of it that helps them to come into
accord with the divine life.

Then one more point. Instead of the wail of the damned that is never, through all eternity,
for one moment hushed in silence, we place the song of the redeemed, an eternal hope for every
child born of the race. We do not believe it is possible for a human soul ultimately to be
lost. Why? Because we believe in God. God either can save all souls or he cannot. If he can
and will not, then he is not God. If he would and cannot, then he is not God. Let us reverently
say it: he is under an infinite obligation to his own self, to his own righteousness, to his
own truth, his own power, his own love, his own character, to see to it that all souls, some
time, are reconciled to him.

This does not mean a poor, cheap, an easy salvation. It means that every broken law must have
its consequences so long as it remains broken. It means that in this world and through all
worlds the law- breaker is to be followed by the natural and necessary results of his thoughts,
of his words, of his deeds; but it means that in this punishment the pain is a part of the
divine love. For the love of God makes it absolutely necessary that the object of that love
shall be delivered from sin and wrong, and brought into reconciliation with himself; and the
pain, the necessary results of wrongdoing, are a part of the divine tenderness, a part of the
divine faithfulness, a part of the divine love. So we believe that through darkness or through
light, through joy or through sorrow, some time, somewhere, every child of God shall be brought
into his presence, ready to sing the song of peace and joy and reconciled love.

Now, friends, I have gone over all the main points of the theology of our question. I have
told you what I think the results of modern study have taken away. I have indicated to you
what I believe is to come and take the place of these things that are absolutely gone. Ask
yourselves seriously, if you are not one of us, is there a single one of these things that
modern investigation is threatening that you really care to keep? If you could choose between
the two systems and have your choice settle the validity of them, would you not choose the
second, and be grateful to bid good-by to the first?

Remember, however, at the end let me say, as I did at the beginning, that, if these things
pass away and the other finer things come in their places, Unitarianism is not to be charged
by its enemies with destroying the old, neither is it to take the credit on the part of its
friends for having created all the new. Note 4: The farmers, boatmen, etc. still wear Rice Straw in rainy weather,
    a coat made of straw which keeps you warm and dry. The jacket is
    shaped like a cap and is 1/2 to 3/4 meters long.
    
    

  Hotaru [1].

A family of worms lived in a lotus flower which stood in a big pond:
Father, mother, and daughter.

The daughter, "Little Hotaru" was a gentle soul.

  

When the weather was nice and pleasant, she would go to the large lotus leaf walk, where there
was a beautiful garden.

She often listened to the concert of frogs that lived there. It was dark, so their lanterns illuminated
the area, radiating such a heavenly light that even the mood had to
hide in shame.

Since little Hotaru was very beautiful, they knew that soon they would be swarmed with suitors. During
the day, no one approached her.

During the evening no one approached her while she sat dreaming because they left her in the dark without
a lantern so she couldn't see anyone. Had they just given her lantern a little light, then there
would have been much ado over here.

Finally they gave her lantern a light and there was a great deal of noise: chirping, humming,
buzzing, fluttering, etc. Then they all came to see the beautiful Hotaru and ask her to be their
wife. There were butterflies, beetles, bees, flying insects of every type, all present and showing
off their skills to try and find favor in Hotaru's eyes.

This remained for a while and although she enjoyed it and was flattered
to be so sought after at first, the constant intrusion became quite
a nuisance. They no longer had any time for themselves and she never
had even a single hour to devote to themselves, to dream undisturbed,
so they decided to stop it all. People have a perfect right to organize on the basis of
their particular beliefs, and to keep out of their organization those persons who do not happen
to agree with them. But, and here is a most important consideration, if these beliefs seem
to us who are outside to be vital; if they appear to concern us, to touch our well-being, our
future hopes, then we certainly have a right to study those beliefs, to criticise them, to
put them to the test to see whether they are well founded, whether they have any adequate basis
of support.

And, still further, if the people holding a certain set of beliefs tell us that they are inspired
of God, that they are spokesmen for God, that they have had committed to them a certain definite
deposit of faith for the benefit of the world; if they tell us that, unless we agree with them,
unless we accept the conditions and come into their organization, then we are opposed to God,
are endangering our own souls, and are enemies of the human race, then it becomes not merely
our right to look into these matters: does it not become our most solemn duty? Are we not under
the highest of all obligations to decide for ourselves one way or the other as to whether these
claims are valid? For, if they are, then there is nothing so important for us as that we should
accept them and live in accordance with them, join the societies that are organized on them
as a basis, do our utmost to extend their acceptance throughout the world.

If they are not valid, then we ought to do our very best to prove this also, and help those
who are in bondage to these false ideas to attain their liberty, in order that they may join
with us in finding out that which is true, in order that together we may work for the discovery
of the will of God, and that we may co-operate in helping the world to find and obey that will.

You would suppose from the ordinary assumption of those who hold the old creeds, and who have
organized their churches on these creeds, as foundation stones, that there had been at the
outset a clear, a definite revelation of truth, that it had been unquestioned, that it had
come with credentials enough to satisfy the world that the speakers spoke by authority, and
that the matter had from the beginning been well understood.

It is assumed that we who do not hold these ideas are wilfully wrong, that we are not inclined
to accept the divine truth, that it is on account of the hardness and wickedness of our hearts,
and that we prefer evil rather than good. We are told that we might know, if we would, that
the matter is definite, and has been perfectly well settled from the beginning. This, I say,
is the assumption.

Let us now, then, investigate the matter for a little while, just as calmly, just as simply,
just as dispassionately as we are able.

