This comfort Mr. Delaplaine kept to himself, and on the second day out, the food which was
served to them being most wretchedly cooked, Dame Charter ventured into the galley to see if
she could do anything in the way of improvement.

"I think you may eat this," she said, when she returned to Kate, "but I don't think that anything
on board is fit for you. When I went to the kitchen, I came near dropping dead right in the
doorway; that cook, Mistress Kate, is the most terrible creature of all the pirates that ever
were born. His eyes are blistering green and his beard is all twisted into points, with the
ends stuck fast with blood, which has never been washed off. He roars like a lion, with shining
teeth, but he speaks very fair, Mistress Kate; you would be amazed to hear how fair he speaks.
He told me, and every word he said set my teeth on edge with its grating, that he wanted to
know how I liked the meals cooked; that he would do it right if there were things on board
to do it with. Which there are not, Mistress Kate. And when he was beatin' up that batter for
me and I asked him if he was not tired workin' so hard, he pulled up his sleeve and showed
me his arm, which was like a horse's leg, all covered with hair, and asked me if I thought
it was likely he could tear himself with a spoon. I'm sure he would give us better food if
he could, for he leaned over and whispered to me, like a gust of wind coming in through the
door, that the captain was in a very hard case, having lately lost everything he had at the
gaming-table, and therefore had not the money to store the ship as he would have done."

"Oh, don't talk about that, Dame Charter," said Kate; "if we can get enough to eat, no matter
what it is, we must be satisfied and think only of our great joy in sailing to my father and
to your Dickory."

That afternoon Captain Ichabod found Kate by herself on deck, and he made bold to sit down
by her; and before he knew what he was about, he was telling her his whole story. She listened
carefully to what he said. He touched but lightly upon his wickednesses, although they were
plain enough to any listener of sense, and bemoaned his fearful passion for gaming, which was
sure to bring him to misery one day or another.

"When I have staked my vessel and have lost it," said he, "then there will be an end of me."

"But why don't you sell your vessel before you lose it," said Kate, "and become a farmer?"

His eyes brightened. "I never thought of that," said he. "Bedad--excuse me, Miss--some day
when I've got a little together and can pay my men I'll sell this sloop and buy a farm, bedad--I
beg your pardon, Miss--I'll buy a farm."

Kate smiled, but it was easy to see that Captain Ichabod was in earnest.

The next day Captain Ichabod came to Mr. Delaplaine and took him to one side. "I want to speak
to you," he said, "about a bit of business."

"You may have noticed, sir, that we are somewhat short of provisions, and the way of it is
this. The night before we sailed, hoping to make a bold stroke at the card-table and thereby
fit out my vessel in a manner suitable to the entertainment of a gentleman and ladies, I lost
every penny I had. I did hope that our provisions would last us a few days longer, but I am
disappointed, sir. That cook of mine, who is a soft-hearted fellow, his neck always ready for
the heel of a woman, has thrown overboard even the few stores we had left for you, the good
Dame Charter having told him they were not fit to eat. And more, sir, even my men are grumbling.
So I thought I would speak to you and explain that it would be necessary for us to overhaul
a merchantman and replenish our food supply. It can be done very quietly, sir, and I don't
think that even the ladies need be disturbed."

Mr. Delaplaine stared in amazement. "Do you mean to say," he exclaimed, "that you want me to
consent to your committing piracy for our benefit?"

"Yes, sir," answered the captain, "that's what I suppose you would call it; but that's my business."

"Now, sir, I wish you to know that I am a Christian and a gentleman," said Mr. Delaplaine.

"That's all very true, bedad," said Captain Ichabod, "but you're also another thing; you're
a human being, and you must eat."

"This is terrible," exclaimed the merchant, "that at my time of life I should consent to a
felony at sea, and to profit by it. I cannot bear to think of the wickedness and the disgrace
of it."

"Most respected sir," said Ichabod, "if the fellows behave themselves properly and don't offer
to fight us, then there'll be no wickedness, bedad. I can make a good enough show of men to
frighten any ordinary merchant crew so that not a blow need be struck. And that is what I expect
to do, sir. I would not have any disturbance before ladies, you may be sure of that, bedad.
We bear down upon a vessel; we order her to surrender; we take what we want, and we let her
go. Truly, there's no wickedness in that! And as for the disgrace, we can all better bear that
than starve."

Mr. Delaplaine looked at the pirate without a word. He could not comprehend how a man with
such a frank and honest face could thus avow his dishonest principles. But as he gazed and
wondered the thought of a scheme flashed across the mind of the merchant, a thoroughly business-like
scheme. This bold young pirate captain might seize upon such supplies as they were in need
of, but he, Felix Delaplaine, of Spanish Town, Jamaica, would pay for them. Thus might their
necessities be relieved and their consciences kept clean. But he said nothing of this to Ichabod;
the pirate might deem such a proceeding unprofessional and interpose some objection. Payment
would be the merchant's part of the business, and he would attend to it himself. A look of
resignation now came over Mr. Delaplaine's face.

"Captain," said he, "I must yield to your reason; it is absolutely necessary that we shall
not starve."

Ichabod's face shone and he held out his hand. "Bedad, sir," he cried, "I honour you as a bold
gentleman and a kind one. I will instantly lay my course somewhat to the eastward, and I promise
you, sir, it will not be long before we run across some of these merchant fellows. I beg you,
sir, speak to your ladies and tell them that there will be no unpleasant commotion; we may
draw our swords and make a fierce show, but, bedad, I don't believe there'll be any fighting.
We shall want so little--for I would not attempt to take a regular prize with ladies on board--that
the fellows will surely deliver what we demand, the quicker to make an end of it."

"If you are perfectly sure," said Mr. Delaplaine, "that you can restrain your men from violence,
I would like to be a member of your boarding party; it would be a rare experience for me."

Now Captain Ichabod fairly shouted with delight.

"Bravo! Bravo!" he exclaimed; "I didn't dream, sir, that you were a man of such a noble spirit.
You shall go with us, sir. Your presence will aid greatly in making our hoped-for capture a
most orderly affair; no one can look upon you, bedad, without knowing that you are a high-minded
and honourable man, and would not take a box or case from any one if you did not need it. Now,
sir, we shall put about, and by good fortune we may soon sight a merchantman. Even if it be
but a coastwise trader, it may serve our purpose."

Mr. Delaplaine, with something of a smile upon his sedate face, hurried to Kate, who was upon
the quarter-deck.

"My dear, we are about to introduce a little variety into our dull lives. As soon as we can
overhaul a merchantman we shall commit a piracy. But don't turn pale; I have arranged it all."

"You!" exclaimed the wide-eyed Kate.

"Yes," said her uncle, and he told his tale.

"And remember this, my dear," he added; "if we cannot pay, we do not eat. I shall be as relentless
as the bloody Blackbeard; if they take not my money, I shall swear to Ichabod that we touch
not their goods."

"And are you sure," she said, "that there will be no bloodshed?"

"I vouch for that," said he, "for I shall lead the boarding party."

She took him by both hands. "Why," she said, "it need be no more than laying in goods from
a store-house; and I cannot but be glad, dear uncle, for I am so very, very hungry."

Now Dame Charter came running and puffing. "Do you know," she cried, "that there is to be a
piracy? The word has just been passed and the cook told me. There is to be no bloodshed, and
the other ship will not be burned and the people will not be made to walk a plank. The captain
has given those orders, and he is very firm, swearing, I am told, much more than is his wont.
It is dreadful, it is awful just to think about, but the provisions are gone, and it is absolutely
necessary to do something, and it will really be very exciting. The cook tells me he will put
me in a good place where I cannot be hurt and where I shall see everything. And, Mistress Kate
and Master Delaplaine, I dare say he can take care of you too."

Kate looked at her uncle as if to ask if she might tell the good woman what sort of a piracy
this was to be, but he shook his head. It would not do to interfere any more than was necessary
with the regular progress of events. The captain came up, excited. "Even now, bedad," he cried,
"there are two sails in sight--one far north, and the other to the eastward, beating up this
way. This one we shall make for. We have the wind with us, which is a good thing, for the Restless
is a bad sailer and has lost many a prize through that fault. And now, Miss," he said, addressing
Kate, "I shall have to ask your leave to take down that English flag and run up our Jolly Roger.
It will be necessary, for if the fellows fear not our long guns, they may change their course
and get away from us."

"That will be right," said Kate; "if we're going to be pirates, we might as well be pirates
out and out."

Captain Ichabod glowed with delight. "What a girl this was, and what an uncle!"

It was not long, for the Restless had a fair wind, before the sail to the eastward came fully
into sight. She was, in good truth, a merchantman, and not a large one. Dame Charter, very
much excited, wondered what she would have on board.

"The cook tells me," said she to Kate, "that sometimes ships from the other side of the ocean
carry the most astonishing and beautiful things."

"But we shall not see these things," said Kate, "even if that ship carries them. We shall take
but food, and shall not unnecessarily despoil them of that. We may be pirates, but we shall
not be wicked."

"It is hard to see the difference," said Dame Charter, with a sigh, "but we must eat. The cook
tells me that they have made peaceful prizes before now. This they do when they want some particular
thing, such as food or money, and care not for the trouble of stripping the ship, putting all
on board to death, and then setting her on fire. The cook never does any boarding himself,
so he says, but he stands on the deck here, armed with his great axe, which likes him better
than a cutlass, and no matter what happens, he defends his kitchen."

"From his looks," said Kate, "I should imagine him to be the fiercest fighter among them all."

"But that is not so," said Dame Charter; "he tells me that he is of a very peaceable mind and
would never engage in any broils or fights if he could help it. Look! look!" she cried, "they're
running out their long brass guns; and do you see that other ship, how her sails are fluttering
in the wind? And there, that little spot at the top of her mast; that's her flag, and it is
coming down! Down, down it comes, and I must run to the cook and ask him what will happen next."

CHAPTER XXXI

MR. DELAPLAINE LEADS A BOARDING PARTY

Steadily southward sailed the brig Black Swan which bore upon its decks the happy Mander family
and our poor friend Dickory, carrying with him his lifelong destiny in the shape of the blood-stained
letter from Captain Vince.

The sackcloth draperies of Lucilla, with the red cord lightly tied about them, had given place
to a very ordinary gown fashioned by her mother and herself, which added so few charms to her
young face and sparkling eyes that Dickory often thought that he wished there were some bushes
on deck so that she might stand behind them and let him see only her face, as he had seen it
when first he met her. But he saw the pretty face a great deal, for Lucilla was very anxious
to know things, and asked many questions about Barbadoes, and also asked if there was any probability
that the brig would go straight on to that lovely island without bothering to stop at Jamaica.
It was during such talks as this that Dickory forgot, when he did forget, the blood-stained
letter that he carried with him always.

Our young friend still wore the naval uniform, although in coming on the brig he had changed
it for some rough sailor's clothes. But Lucilla had besought him to be again a brave lieutenant.

They sailed and they sailed, and there was but little wind, and that from the south and against
them. But Lucilla did not complain at their slow progress. The slowest vessel in the world
was preferable just now to a desert island which never moved.

Davids was at the wheel and Mander stood near him. These old friends had not yet finished talking
about what had happened in the days since they had seen each other. Mrs. Mander sat, not far
away, still making clothes, and the little Lena was helping her in her childlike way. Lucilla
and Dickory were still talking about Barbadoes. There never was a girl who wanted to know so
much about an island as that girl wanted to know about Barbadoes.

Suddenly there was a shout from above.

"What's that?" asked Mander.

"A sail," said Davids, peering out over the sea but able to see nothing. Lucilla and Dickory
did not cease talking. At that moment Lucilla did not care greatly about sails, there was so
much to be said about Barbadoes.

There was a good deal of talking forward, and after a while the captain walked to the quarter-deck.
He was a gruff man and his face was troubled.

"I am sorry to say," he growled, "that the ship we have sighted is a pirate; she flies the
black flag."

Now there was no more talk about Barbadoes, or what had happened to old friends, and the sewing
dropped on the deck. Those poor Manders were chilled to the soul. Were they again to be taken
by pirates?

"Captain," cried Mander, "what can we do, can we run away from them?"

"We could not run away from their guns," growled the captain, "and there is nothing to do.
They intend to take this brig, and that's the reason they have run up their skull and bones.
They are bearing directly down upon us with a fair wind; they will be firing a gun presently,
and then I shall lay to and wait for them."

Mander stepped towards Dickory and Lucilla; his voice was husky as he said: "We cannot expect,
my dear, that we shall again be captured by forbearing pirates. I shall kill my wife and little
daughter rather than they shall fall into the bloody hands of ordinary pirates, and to you,
sir, I will commit the care of my Lucilla. If this vessel is delivered over to a horde of savages,
I pray you, plunge your dirk into her heart."

"Yes," said Lucilla, clinging to the arm of Dickory, "if those fierce pirates shall attack
us, we will die together."

Dickory shook his head. In an awful moment such as this he could hold out no illusions. "No,"
said he, "I cannot die with you; I have a duty before me, and until it is accomplished I cannot
willingly give up my life. I must rather be even a pirate's slave than that. But I will accept
your father's charge; should there be need, I will kill you."

"Thank you very much," said Lucilla coolly.

To the surprise of the people on the Black Swan there came no shot from the approaching pirate;
but as she still bore down upon them, running before the wind, the captain of the brig lay
to and lowered his flag. Submission now was all there was before them. No man on the brig took
up arms, nor did the crew form themselves into any show of resistance; that would have but
made matters worse.

As the pirate vessel came on, nearer and nearer, a great number of men could be seen stretched
along her deck, and some brass cannon were visible trained upon the unfortunate brig.

But, to the surprise of the captain of the Black Swan, and of nearly everybody on board of
her, the pirate did not run down upon her to make fast and board. Instead of that, she put
about into the wind and lay to less than a quarter of a mile away. Then two boats were lowered
and filled with men, who rowed towards the brig.

"They have special reasons for our capture," said the captain to those who were crowding about
him; "he may be well laden now with plunder, and comes to us for our gold and silver. Or it
may be that he merely wants the brig. If that be so, he can quickly rid himself of us."

That was a cruel speech when women had to hear it, but the captain was a rough fellow.

The boats came on as quietly as if they were about to land at a neighbouring pier. Dickory
and Lucilla cautiously peeped over the rail, Dickory without his hat, and Lucilla, hiding herself,
all but a part of her face, behind him; the Manders crouched together on the deck, the father
with glaring eyes and a knife in his hand. The crew stood, with their hats removed and their
chins lowered, waiting for what might happen next.

Up to this time Dickory had shown no signs of fear, although his mind was terribly tossed and
disturbed; for, whatever might happen to him, it possibly would be the end of that mission
which was now the only object of his life. But he grated his teeth together and awaited his fate.

But now, as the boats came nearer, he began to tremble, and gradually his knees shook under him.

"I would not have believed that he was such a coward as that," thought Lucilla.

The boats neared the ship and were soon made fast; every help was offered by the crew of the
brig, and not a sign of resistance was shown. The leader of the pirates mounted to the deck,
followed by the greater part of his men.

For a moment Captain Ichabod glanced about him, and then, addressing the captain of the brig,
he said: "This is all very well. I am glad to see that you have sense enough to take things
as you find them, and not to stir up a fracas and make trouble. I overhauled you that I might
lay in a stock of provisions, and some wine and spirits besides, having no desire, if you treat
us rightly, to despoil you further. So, we shall have no more words about it, bedad, and if
you will set your men to work to get on deck such stores as my quarter-master here may demand
of you, we shall get through this business quickly. In the meantime, lower two or three boats,
so that your men can row the goods over to my vessel."

The captain of the Black Swan simply bowed his head and turned away to obey orders, while Captain
Ichabod stepped a little aft and began to survey the captured vessel. As soon as his back was
turned, the captain of the brig was approached by a very respectable elderly gentleman, apparently
not engaged either in the mercantile marine or in piratical pursuits, who stopped him and said:
"Sir, my name is Felix Delaplaine, merchant, of Spanish Town, Jamaica. I am, against my will,
engaged in this piratical attack upon your vessel, but I wish to assure you privately that
I will not consent to have you robbed of your property, and that, although some of your provisions
may be taken by these pirates, I here promise, as an honourable gentleman, to pay you the full
value of all that they seize upon."

The captain of the Black Swan had no opportunity to make an answer to this most extraordinary
statement, for at that moment a naval officer, shouting at the top of his voice, came rushing
towards the respectable gentleman who had just been making such honourable proposals. Almost
at the same moment there was a great shout from Captain Ichabod, who, drawing his cutlass from
its sheath, raised the glittering blade and dashed in pursuit of the naval gentleman.

"Hold there! Hold there!" cried the pirate. "Don't you touch him; don't you lay your hand upon
him!"

But Ichabod was not quick enough. Dickory, swift as a stag, stretched out both his arms and
threw them around the neck of the amazed Mr. Delaplaine.

Now the pirate Ichabod reached the two; his great sword went high in air, and was about to
descend upon the naval person, whoever he was, who had made such an unprovoked attack upon
his honoured passenger, when his arm was caught by some one from behind. Turning, with a great
curse, his eyes fell upon the face of a young girl.

"Oh, don't kill him! Don't kill him!" she cried, "he will hurt nobody; he is only hugging the
old gentleman."

Captain Ichabod looked from the girl to the two men, who were actually embracing each other.
Dickory's back was towards him, but the face of Mr. Delaplaine fairly glowed with delight.

"Oho!" said Ichabod, turning to Lucilla, "and what does this mean, bedad?"

"I don't know," she answered, "but the gentleman in the uniform is a good man. Perhaps the
other one is his father."

"To my eyes," said Captain Ichabod, "this is a most fearsome mix."

The Mander family, and nearly everybody else on board, crowded about the little group, gazing
with all their eyes but asking no questions.

"Captain Ichabod," exclaimed Mr. Delaplaine, holding Dickory by the hand, "this is one of the
two persons you were taking us to find. This is Dickory Charter, the son of good Dame Charter,
now on your vessel. He went away with Blackbeard, and we were in search of him."

"Oho!" cried Captain Ichabod, "by my life I believe it. That's the young fellow that Blackbeard
dressed up in a cocked hat and took away with him."

"I am the same person, sir," said Dickory.

"So far so good," said Captain Ichabod. "I am very glad that I did not bring down my cutlass
on you, which I should have done, bedad, had it not been for this young woman."

Now up spoke Mr. Delaplaine. "We have found you, Dickory," he cried, "but what can you tell
us of Major Bonnet?"

"Ay, ay," added Captain Ichabod, "there's another one we're after; where's the runaway Sir
Nightcap?"

"Alas!" said Dickory, "I do not know. I escaped from Blackbeard, and since that day have heard
nothing. I had supposed that Captain Bonnet was in your company, Mr. Delaplaine."

Now the captain of the Black Swan pushed himself forward. "Is it Captain Bonnet, lately of
the pirate ship Revenge, that you're talking about?" he asked. "If so, I may tell you something
of him. I am lately from Charles Town, and the talk there was that Blackbeard was lying outside
the harbour in Stede Bonnet's old vessel, and that Bonnet had lately joined him. I did not
venture out of port until I had had certain news that these pirates had sailed northward. They
had two or three ships, and the talk was that they were bound to the Virginias, and perhaps
still farther north. They were fitted out for a long cruise."

"Gone again!" exclaimed Mr. Delaplaine in a hoarse voice. "Gone again!"

Captain Ichabod's face grew clouded.

"Gone north of Charles Town," he exclaimed, "that's bad, bedad, that's very bad. You are sure
he did not sail southward?" he asked of the captain of the brig.

That gruff mariner was in a strange state of mind. He had just been captured by a pirate, and
in the next moment had made, what might be a very profitable sale, to a respectable merchant,
of the goods the pirate was about to take from him. Moreover, the said pirate seemed to be
in the employ of said merchant, and altogether, things seemed to him to be in as fearsome a
mix as they had seemed to Captain Ichabod, but he brought his mind down to the question he
had been asked.

"No doubt about that," said he; "there were some of his men in the town--for they are afraid
of nobody--and they were not backward in talking."

"That upsets things badly," said Captain Ichabod, without unclouding his brow. "With my slow
vessel and my empty purse, bedad, I don't see how I am ever goin' to catch Blackbeard if he
has gone north. Finding Blackbeard would have been a handful of trumps to me, but the game
seems to be up, bedad."

The captain of the brig and Ichabod's quarter-master went away to attend to the transfer of
the needed goods to the Restless. Mander, with his wife and little daughter, were standing
together gazing with amazement at the strange pirates who had come aboard, while Lucilla stepped
up to Dickory, who stood silent, with his eyes on the deck.

"Can you tell me what this means?" said she.

For a moment he did not answer, and then he said: "I don't know everything myself, but I must
presently go on board that vessel."

"What!" exclaimed Lucilla, stepping back. "Is she there?"

"Yes," said Dickory.

CHAPTER XXXII

THE DELIVERY OF THE LETTER

The sea was smooth and the wind light, and the transfer of provisions from the Black Swan to
the pirate sloop, which two ships now lay as near each other as safety would permit, was accomplished
quietly.

During the progress of the transfer Captain Ichabod's boat was rowed back to his ship, and
its arrival was watched with great interest by everybody on board that pirate sloop. Kate and
Dame Charter, as well as all the men who stood looking over the rail, were amazed to see a
naval officer accompanying the captain and Mr. Delaplaine on their return. But that amazement
was greatly increased when that officer, as soon as he set foot upon the deck, removed his
hat and made directly for Dame Charter, who, with a scream loud enough to frighten the fishes,
enfolded him in her arms and straightway fainted. It was like a son coming up out of the sea,
sure enough, as she afterward stated. Kate, recognising Dickory, hurried to him with a scream
of her own and both hands outstretched, but the young fellow, who seemed greatly distressed
at the unconscious condition of his mother, did not greet Mistress Bonnet with the enthusiastic
delight which might have been expected under the circumstances. He seemed troubled and embarrassed,
which, perhaps, was not surprising, for never before had he seen his mother faint.

Kate was about to offer some assistance, but as the good Dame now showed signs of returning
consciousness, she thought it would be better to leave the two together, and in a state of
amazement she was hurrying to her uncle when Dickory rose from the side of his mother and stopped
her.

"I have a letter for you," he said, in a husky voice.

"A letter?" she cried, "from my father?"

"No," said he, "from Captain Vince." And he handed her the blood-stained missive.

Kate turned pale and stared at him; here was horrible mystery. The thought flashed through
the young girl's mind that the wicked captain had killed her father and had written to tell her so.

"Is my father dead?" she gasped.

"Not that I know of," said Dickory.

"Where is he?" she cried.

"I do not know," was the answer.

She stood, holding the letter, while Dickory returned to his mother. Mr. Delaplaine saw her
standing thus, pale and shocked, but he did not hasten to her. He had sad things to say to
her, for his practical mind told him that it would not be possible to continue the search for
her father, he having put himself out of the reach of Captain Ichabod and his inefficient sloop.
If Dickory had said anything about her father which had so cast her down, how much harder would
it be for him when he had to tell her the whole truth.

But Kate did not wait for further speech from anybody. She gave a great start, and then rushed
down the companion-way to her cabin. There, with her door shut, she opened the letter. This
was the letter, written in lead pencil, in an irregular but bold hand, with some letters partly
dimmed where the paper had been damp:

     "At the very end of my life I write to you that you have escaped
     the fiercest love that ever a man had for a woman. I shall carry
     this love with me to hell, if it may be, but you have escaped it.
     This escape is a blessing, and now that I cannot help it I give it
     to you. Had I lived, I should have shed the blood of every one whom
     you loved to gain you and you would have cursed me. So love me now
     for dying.

                               "Yours, anywhere and always,
                                       CHRISTOPHER VINCE."

Kate put down the letter and some colour came into her face; she bowed her head in thankful prayer.

"He is dead," she said, "and now he cannot harm my father." That was the only thought she had
regarding this hot-brained and infatuated lover. He was dead, her father was safe from him.
How he died, how Dickory came to bring the letter, how anything had happened that had happened
except the death of Captain Vince, did not at this moment concern her. Not until now had she
known how the fear of the vengeful captain of the Badger had constantly been with her.

Over and over again Dickory told his tale to his mother. She interrupted him so much with her
embraces that he could not explain things clearly to her, but she did not care, she had him
with her. He was with her, and she had fast hold of him, and she would never let him go again.
What mattered it what sort of clothes he wore, or where he had escaped from--a family on a
desert island or from a pirate crew? She had him, and her happiness knew no bounds. Dickory
was perfectly willing to stay with her and to talk to her. He did not care to be with anybody
else, not even with Mistress Kate, who had taken so much interest in him all the time he had
been away; though, of course, not so much interest as his own dear mother.

Then the good Dame Charter, being greatly recovered and so happy, began to talk of herself.
Slipping in a disjointed way over her various experiences, she told her dear boy, in strictest
confidence, that she was very much disappointed in the way pirates took ships. She thought
it was going to be something very exciting that she would remember to the end of her days,
and wake up in the middle of the night and scream when she thought of it, but it was nothing
of the kind; not a shot was fired, not a drop of blood shed; there was not even a shout or
a yell or a scream for mercy. It was all like going into the pantry to get the flour and the
sugar. She was all the time waiting for something to happen, and nothing ever did. Dickory
smiled, but it was like watered milk.

"I do not understand such piracy," he said, "but supposed, dear mother, that these pirates
had taken that ship in the usual way, I being on board."

At this he was clasped so tightly to his mother's breast that he could say no more.

The boats plied steadily between the two vessels, and on one of the trips Mr. Delaplaine went
over to the brig on business, and also glad to escape for a little the dreaded interview which
must soon come between himself and his niece.

"Now, sir," said the merchant to the captain of the brig, "you will make a bill against me
for the provisions which are being taken to that pirate, but I hope you have reserved a sufficient
store of food for your own maintenance until you reach a port, and that of myself and two women
who wish to sail with you, craving most earnestly that you will land us in Jamaica or in some
place convenient of access to that island."

"Which I can do," said the captain, "for I am bound to Kingston; and as to subsistence, shall
have plenty."

On the brig Mr. Delaplaine found Captain Ichabod, who had come over to superintend operations,
and who was now talking to the pretty girl who had seized him by the arm when he was about
to slay the naval officer.

"I would talk with you, captain," said the merchant, "on a matter of immediate import." And
he led the pirate away from the pretty girl.

The matter to be discussed was, indeed, of deep import.

"I am loath to say it, sir," said Mr. Delaplaine, "when I think of the hospitality and most
exceptional kindness with which you have treated me and my niece, and for which we shall feel
grateful all our lives, but I think you will agree with me that it would be useless for us
to pursue the search after that most reprehensible person, my brother-in-law, Bonnet. There
can be no doubt, I believe, that he and Blackbeard have left the vicinity of Charles Town,
and have gone, we know not where."

"No doubt of that, bedad," said Ichabod, knitting his brows as he spoke; "if Blackbeard had
been outside the harbour, this brig would not have been here."

"And, therefore, sir," continued Mr. Delaplaine, "I have judged it to be wise, and indeed necessary,
for us to part company with you, sir, and to take passage on this brig, which, by a most fortunate
chance, is bound for Kingston. My niece, I know, will be greatly disappointed by this course
of events, but we have no choice but to fall in with them."

"I don't like to agree with you," said the captain, "but, bedad, I am bound to do it. I am
disappointed myself, sir, but I have been disappointed so often that I suppose I ought to be
used to it. If I had caught up with Blackbeard I should have been all right, and after I had
settled your affairs--and I know I could have done that--I think I would have joined him. But
all I can do now is to hammer along at the business, take prizes in the usual way, and wait
for Blackbeard to come south again, and then I'll either sell out or join him."

"It is a great pity, sir," said Mr. Delaplaine, "a great pity--"

"Yes, it is," interrupted Ichabod, "it's a very great pity, sir, a very great pity. If I had
known more about ships when I bought the Restless I would have had a faster craft, and by this
time I might have been a man of comfortable means. But that sloop over there, bedad, is so
slow, that many a time, sir, I have seen a fat merchantman sail away from her and leave us,
in spite of our guns, cursing and swearing, miles behind. I am sorry to have you leave me,
sir, and with your ladies; but, as you say, here's your chance to get home, and I don't know
when I could give you another."

Mr. Delaplaine replied courteously and gratefully, and by the next boat he went back to the
Restless. Captain Ichabod, his brow still clouded by the approaching separation, walked over
to Lucilla and continued his conversation with her about the island of Barbadoes, a subject
of which he knew very little and she nothing.

When Kate returned to the deck she found Dickory alone, Dame Charter having gone to talk to
the cook about the wonderful things which had happened, of which she knew very little and he
nothing at all.

"Dickory," said Kate, "I want to talk to you, and that quickly. I have heard nothing of what
has happened to you. How did you get possession of the letter you brought me, and what do you
know of Captain Vince?"

"I can tell you nothing," he said, without looking at her, "until you tell me what I ought
to know about Captain Vince." And as he said this he could not help wondering in his heart
that there were no signs of grief about her.

"Ought to know?" she repeated, regarding him earnestly. "Well, you and I have been always good
friends, and I will tell you." And then she told him the story of the captain of the Badger;
of his love-making and of his commission to sail upon the sea and destroy the pirate ship Revenge,
and all on board of her.

"And now," she said, as she concluded, "I think it would be well for you to read this letter."
And she handed him the missive he had carried so long and with such pain. He read the bold,
uneven lines, and then he turned and looked upon her, his face shining like the morning sky.

"Then you have never loved him?" he gasped.

"Why should I?" said Kate.

In spite of the fact that there were a great many people on board that pirate sloop who might
see him; in spite of the fact that there were people in boats plying upon the water who might
notice his actions, Dickory fell upon his knees before Kate, and, seizing her hand, he pressed
it to his lips.

"Why should I?" said Kate, quietly drawing her hand from him, "for I have a devoted lover already--Master
Martin Newcombe, of Barbadoes."

Dickory, repulsed, rose to his feet, but his face did not lose its glow. He had heard so much
about Martin Newcombe that he had ceased to mind him.

"To think of it!" he cried, "to think how I stood and watched him fight; how I admired and
marvelled at his wonderful strength and skill, his fine figure, and his flashing eye! How my
soul went out to him, how I longed that he might kill that scoundrel Blackbeard! And all the
time he was your enemy, he was my enemy, he was a viler wretch than even the bloody pirate
who killed him. Oh, Kate, Kate! if I had but known."

"Miss Kate, if you please," said the girl. "And it is well, Dickory, you did not know, for
then you might have jumped upon him and stuck him in the back, and that would have been dishonourable."

"He thought," said Dickory, not in the least abashed by his reproof, "that the Revenge was
commanded by your father, for he sprang upon the deck, shouting for the captain, and when he
saw Blackbeard I heard him exclaim in surprise, 'A sugar-planter!'"

"And he would have killed my father?" said Kate, turning pale at the thought.

"Yes," replied Dickory, "he would have killed any man except the great Blackbeard. And to think
of it! I stood there watching them, and wishing that vile Englishman the victory. Oh, Kate!
you should have seen that wonderful pirate fight. No man could have stood before him." Then,
with sparkling eyes and waving arms, he told her of the combat. When he had finished, the souls
of these two young people were united in an overpowering admiration, almost reverence, for
the prowess and strength of the wicked and bloody pirate who had slain the captain of the Badger.

When Mr. Delaplaine came on board, Kate, who had been waiting, took him aside.

"Uncle," she exclaimed, "I have great news. Captain Vince is dead. At last he came up with
the Revenge, but instead of finding my father in command he found Blackbeard, who killed him.
Now my father is safe!"

The good man scarcely knew what to say to this bright-faced girl, whose father's safety was
all the world to her. If he had heard that his worthless and wicked brother-in-law had been
killed, it would have been trouble and sorrow for the present, but it would have been peace
for the future. But he was a Christian gentleman and a loving uncle, and he banished this thought
from his heart. He listened to Kate as she rapidly went on talking, but he did not hear her;
his mind was busy with the news he had to tell her--the news that she must give up her loving
search and go back with him to Spanish Town.

"And now, uncle," said Kate, "there's another thing I want to say to you. Since this great
grief has been lifted from my soul, since I know that no wrathful and vindictive captain of
a man-of-war is scouring the seas, armed with authority to kill my father and savage for his
life, I feel that it is not right for me to put other people who are so good to me to sad discomfort
and great expense to try to follow my father into regions far away, and to us almost unknown.

"Some day he will come back into this part of the world, and I hope he may return disheartened
and weary of his present mode of life, and then I may have a better chance of winning him back
to the domestic life he used to love so much. But he is safe, uncle, and that is everything
now, and so I came to say to you that I think it would be well for us to relieve this kind
Captain Ichabod from the charges and labours he has taken upon himself for our sakes and, if
it be possible, engage that ship yonder to take us back to Jamaica; she was sailing in that
direction, and her captain might be induced to touch at Kingston. This is what I have been
thinking about, dear uncle, and do you not agree with me?"

High rose the spirits of the good Mr. Delaplaine; banished was all the overhanging blackness
of his dreaded interview with Kate. The sky was bright, her soul was singing songs of joy and
thankfulness, and his soul might join her. He never appreciated better than now the blessings
which might be shed upon humanity by the death of a bad man. His mind even gambolled a little
in his relief.

"But, Kate," he said, "if we leave that kind Captain Ichabod, and he be not restrained by our
presence, then, my dear, he will return to his former evil ways, and his next captures will
not be like this one, but like ordinary piracies, sinful in every way."

"Uncle," said Kate, looking up into his face, "it is too much to ask of one young girl to undertake
the responsibilities of two pirates; I hope some day to be of benefit to my poor father, but
when it comes to Captain Ichabod, kind as he has been, I am afraid I will have to let him go
and manage the affairs of his soul for himself."

Her uncle smiled upon her. Now that he was to go back to his home and take this dear girl with
him, he was ready to smile at almost anything. That he thought one pirate much better worth
saving than the other, and that his choice did not agree with that of his niece, was not for
him even to think about at such a happy moment. It was not long after this conversation that
the largest boat belonging to the Restless was rowed over to the brig, and in it sat, not only
Kate, Dame Charter, and Dickory, but Captain Ichabod, who would accompany his guests to take
proper leave of them. The crew of the pirate sloop crowded themselves along her sides, and
even mounted into her shrouds, waving their hats and shouting as the boat moved away. The cook
was the loudest shouter, and his ragged hat waved highest. And, as Dame Charter shook her handkerchief
above her head and gazed back at her savage friend, there was a moisture in her eyes. Up to
this moment she never would have believed that she would have grieved to depart from a pirate
vessel and to leave behind a pirate cook.

Lucilla watched carefully the newcomers as they ascended to the deck of the Black Swan. "That
is the girl," she said to herself, "and I am not surprised."

A little later she remarked to Captain Ichabod, who sat by her: "Are they mother and daughter,
those two?"

"Oh, no," said he. "Mistress Bonnet is too fine a lady and too beautiful to be daughter to
that old woman, who is her attendant and the mother of the young fellow in the cocked hat."

"Too fine and beautiful!" repeated Lucilla.

"I greatly grieve to leave you all," continued the young pirate captain, "although some of
you I have known so short a time. It will be very lonely when I sail away with none to speak
to save the bloody dogs I command, who may yet throttle me. And it is to Barbadoes you go to
settle with your family?"

"That is our destination," said Lucilla, "but I know not if we shall find the money to settle
there; we were taken by pirates and lost everything."

Now the captain of the brig came up to Ichabod and informed him that the goods he demanded
had been delivered on board his vessel, and that the brig was ready to sail. It was the time
for leave-taking, but Ichabod was tardy. Presently he approached Kate, and drew her to one side.

"Dear lady," he said, and his voice was hesitating, while a slight flush of embarrassment appeared
on his face, "you may have thought, dear lady," he repeated, "you may have thought that so
fair a being as yourself should have attracted during the days we have sailed together--may
have attracted, bedad, I mean--the declared admiration even of a fellow like myself, we being
so much together; but I had heard your story, fair lady, and of the courtship paid you by Captain
Vince of the corvette Badger--whose family I knew in England--and, acknowledging his superior
claims, I constantly refrained, though not without great effort (I must say that much for myself,
fair lady), from--from--"

"Addressing me, I suppose you mean," said Kate. "What you say, kind captain, redounds to your
honour, and I thank you for your noble consideration, but I feel bound to tell you that there
was never anything between me and Captain Vince, and he is now dead."

The young pirate stepped back suddenly and opened wide his eyes. "What!" he exclaimed, "and
all the time you were--"

"Not free," she interrupted with a smile, "for I have a lover on the island of Barbadoes."

"Barbadoes," repeated Captain Ichabod, and he bade Kate a most courteous farewell.

All the good-byes had been said and good wishes had been wished, when, just as he was about
to descend to his boat, Captain Ichabod turned to Lucilla. "And it is truly to Barbadoes you
go?" he asked.

"Yes," said she, "I think we shall certainly do that."

Now his face flushed. "And do you care for that fellow in the cocked hat?"

Here was a cruel situation for poor Lucilla. She must lie or lose two men. She might lose them
anyway, but she would not do it of her own free will, and so she lied.

"Not a whit!" said Lucilla.

The eyes of Ichabod brightened as he went down the side of the brig.

CHAPTER XXXIII

BLACKBEARD GIVES GREENWAY SOME DIFFICULT WORK

The great pirate Blackbeard, inactive and taking his ease, was seated on the quarter-deck of
his fine vessel, on which he had lately done some sharp work off the harbour of Charles Town.
He was now commanding a small fleet. Besides the ship on which he sailed, he had two other
vessels, well manned and well laden with supplies from his recent captures. Satisfied with
conquest, he was sailing northward to one of his favourite resorts on the North Carolina coast.

To this conquering hero now came Ben Greenway, the Scotchman, touching his hat.

"And what do you want?" cried the burly pirate. "Haven't they given you your prize-money yet,
or isn't it enough?"

"Prize-money!" exclaimed Greenway. "I hae none o' it, nor will I hae any. What money I hae--an'
it is but little--came to me fairly."

"Oho!" cried Blackbeard, "and you have money then, have you? Is it enough to make it worth
my while to take it?"

"Ye can count it an' see, whenever ye like," said Ben. "But it isna money that I came to talk
to ye about. I came to ask ye, at the first convenient season, to put me on board that ship
out there, that I may be in my rightful place by the side o' Master Bonnet."

"And what good are you to him, or he to you," asked the pirate, with a fine long oath, "that
I should put myself to that much trouble?"

"I have the responsibeelity o' his soul on my hands," said Ben, "an' since we left Charles
Town I hae not seen him, he bein' on ane ship an' I on anither."

"And very well that is too," said Blackbeard, "for I like each of you better separate. And
now look ye, me kirk bird, you have not done very well with your 'responsibeelities' so far,
and you might as well make up your mind to stop trying to convert that sneak of a Nightcap
and take up the business of converting me. I'm in great need of it, I can tell you."

"You!" cried Ben.

"I tell you, yes," shouted Blackbeard, "it is I, myself, that I am talking about. I want to
be converted from the evil of my ways, and I have made up my mind that you shall do it. You
are a good and a pious man, and it is not often that I get hold of one of that kind; or, if
I do, I slice off his head before I discover his quality."

"I fear me," said the truthful Scotchman, "that the job is beyond my abeelity."

"Not a bit of it, not a bit of it," shouted the pirate. "I am fifty times easier to work upon
than that Nightcap man of yours, and a hundred times better worth the trouble. I put no trust
in that downfaced farmer. When he shouts loudest for the black flag he is most likely to go
into priestly orders, and the better is he reformed the quicker is he to rob and murder. He
is of the kind the devil wants, but it is of no use for any one to show him the way there,
he is well able to find it for himself. But it is different with me, you canny Scotchman, it
is different with me. I am an open-handed and an open-mouthed scoundrel, and I never pretended
to be anything else. When you begin reforming me you will find your work half done."

The Scotchman shook his head. "I fear me--" he said.

"No, you don't fear yourself," cried Blackbeard, "and I won't have it; I don't want any of
that lazy piety on board my vessel. If you don't reform me, and do it rightly, I'll slice off
both your ears."

At this moment a man came aft, carrying a great tankard of mixed drink. Blackbeard took it
and held it in his hand.

"Now then, you balking chaplain," he cried, "here's a chance for you to begin. What would you
have me do? Drain off this great mug and go slashing among my crew, or hurl it, mug and all--"

"Nay, nay," cried Greenway, "but rather give half o' it to me; then will it no' disturb your
brain, an' mine will be comforted."

"Heigho!" cried Blackbeard. "Truly you are a better chaplain than I thought you. Drain half
this mug and then, by all the powers of heaven and hell, you shall convert me. Now, look ye,"
said the pirate, when the mug was empty, "and hear what a brave repentance I have already begun.
I am tired, my gay gardener, of all these piracies; I have had enough of them. Even now, my
spoils and prizes are greater than I can manage, and why should I strive to make them more?
I told you of my young lieutenant, who ran away and who gave his carcass to the birds of prey
rather than sail with me and marry my strapping daughter. I liked that fellow, Greenway, and
if he had known what was well for him there might be some reason for me to keep on piling up
goods and money, but there's cursed little reason for it now. I have merchandise of value at
Belize and much more of it in these ships, besides money from Charles Town which ought to last
an honest gentleman for the rest of his days."

"Ay," said Ben, "but an honest gentleman is sparing of his expenditures."

"And you think I am not that kind of a man, do you?" shouted the pirate. "But let me tell you
this. I am sailing now for Topsail Inlet, on the North Carolina coast, and I am going to run
in there, disperse this fleet, sell my goods, and--"

"Be hanged?" interpolated Greenway in surprise.

"Not a bit of it, you croaking crow!" roared the pirate. "Not a bit of it. Don't you know,
you dull-head, that our good King George has issued a proclamation to the Brethren of the Coast
to come in and behave themselves like honest citizens and receive their pardon? I have done
that once, and so I know all about it; but I backslid, showing that my conversion was badly done."

"It must hae been a poor hand that did the job for ye," said Greenway, "for truly the conversion
washed off in the first rain."

The pirate laughed a great laugh. "The fact is," he said, "I did the work myself, and knowing
nothing about it made a bad botch of it, but this time it will be different. I am going to
give the matter into your hands, and I shall expect you to do it well. If I become not an honest
gentleman this time you shall pay for it, first with your ears and then with your head."

"An' ye're goin' to keep me by ye?" said Greenway, with an expression not of the best.

"Truly so," said Blackbeard. "I shall make you my clerk as long as I am a pirate, for I have
much writing and figuring work to be done, and after that you shall be my chaplain. And whether
or not your work will be easier than it is now, it is not for me to say."

The Scotchman was about to make an exclamation which might not have been complimentary, but
he restrained himself.

"An' Master Bonnet?" he asked. "If ye go out o' piracy he may go too, and take the oath."

"Of course he may," cried the pirate, "and of course he shall; I will see to that myself. Then
I will give him back his ship, for I don't want it, and let him become an honest merchant."

"Give him back his ship!" exclaimed Greenway, his countenance downcast. "That will be puttin'
into his hands the means o' beginnin' again a life o' sin. I pray ye, don't do that."

Blackbeard leaned back and laughed. "I swear that I thought it would be one of the very first
steps in conversion for me to give back to the fellow the ship which is his own and which I
have taken from him. But fear not, my noble pirate's clerk; he is not the man that I am; he
is a vile coward, and when he has taken the oath he will be afraid to break it. Moreover--"

"And if, with that ship," said Greenway, his eyes beginning to sparkle, "he become an honest
merchant--"

"I don't trust him," said Blackbeard; "he is a knave and a sharper, and there is no truth in
him. But when you have settled up my business, my clerk, and have gotten me well converted,
I will send you away with him, and you shall take up again the responsibility of his soul."

The Scotchman clapped his horny hands together. "And once I get him back to Bridgetown, I will
burn his cursed ship!"

"Heigho!" cried Blackbeard, "and that will be your way of converting him? You know your business,
my royal chaplain, you know it well." And with that he gave Greenway a tremendous slap on the
back which would have dashed to the deck an ordinary man, but Ben Greenway was a Scotchman,
tough as a yew-tree.

CHAPTER XXXIV

CAPTAIN THOMAS OF THE ROYAL JAMES

When Blackbeard's little fleet anchored in Topsail Inlet, Stede Bonnet, who had not been informed
of the intentions of the pirate, was a good deal puzzled. Since joining Blackbeard's fleet
in the vessel which came up from Belize, Bonnet had considered himself very shabbily treated,
and his reasons for that opinion were not bad. During the engagements off Charles Town his
services had not been required and his opinion had not been consulted, Blackbeard having no
use for the one and no respect for the other. The pirate captain had taken a fancy to Ben Greenway,
while his contempt for the Scotchman's master increased day by day; and it was for this reason
that Greenway had been taken on board the flag-ship, while Bonnet remained on one of the smaller
vessels.

Bonnet was in a discontented and somewhat sulky mood, but when Blackbeard's full plans were
made known to him and he found that he might again resume command of his own vessel, the Revenge,
if he chose to do so, his eyes began to sparkle once more.

Ben Greenway soon resumed his former position with Bonnet, for it did not take Blackbeard very
long to settle up his affairs, and in a very short time he became tired of the work of conversion;
or, to speak more correctly, of the bore of talking about it. Bonnet was glad to have the Scotchman
back again, although he never ceased to declare his desire to get rid of this faithful friend
and helper; for, when the Revenge again came into his hands, there were many things to be done,
and few people to help him do it.

"It will be merchandise an' fair trade this time," said Ben, "an' ye'll find it no' so easy
as your piracies, though safer. An' when ye're off to see the Governor an' hae got your pardon,
it'll be a happy day, Master Bonnet, for ye an' for your daughter, an' for your brother-in-law
an' everybody in Bridgetown wha either knew ye or respected ye."

"No more of that," cried Bonnet. "I did not say I was going to Bridgetown, or that I wanted
anybody there to respect me. It is my purpose to fit out the Revenge as a privateer and get
a commission to sail in her in the war between Spain and the Allies. This will be much more
to my taste, Ben Greenway, than trading in sugar and hides."

Greenway was very grave.

"There is so little difference," said he, "between a privateer an' a pirate that it is a great
strain on a common mind to keep them separate; but a commission from the king is better than
a commission from the de'il, an' we'll hope there won't be much o' a war after all is said
an' done."

There was not much intercourse between Blackbeard and Bonnet at Topsail Inlet. The pirate was
on very good terms with the authorities at that place, who for their own sakes cared not much
to interfere with him, and Bonnet had his own work in hand and industriously engaged in it.
He went to Bath and got his pardon; he procured a clearance for St. Thomas, where he freely
announced his intention to take out a commission as privateer, and he fitted out his vessel
as best he could. Of men he had not many, but when he left the inlet he sailed down to an island
on the coast, where Blackbeard, having had too many men on his return from Charles Town, had
marooned a large number of the sailors belonging to his different crews, finding this the easiest
way of getting rid of them. Bonnet took these men on board with the avowed intention of taking
them to St. Thomas, and then he set sail upon the high seas as free and untrammelled as a fish-hawk
sweeping over the surface of a harbour with clearance papers tied to his leg.

Stede Bonnet had changed very much since he last trod the quarter-deck of the Revenge as her
captain. He was not so important to look at, and he put on fewer airs of authority, but he
issued a great many more commands. In fact, he had learned much about a sailor's life, of navigation
and the management of a vessel, and was far better able to command a ship than he had ever
been before. He had had a long rest from the position of a pirate captain, and he had not failed
to take advantage of the lessons which had been involuntarily given him by the veteran scoundrels
who had held him in contempt. He was now, to a great extent, sailing-master as well as captain
of the Revenge; but Ben Greenway, who was much given to that sort of thing, undertook to offer
Bonnet some advice in regard to his course.

"I am no sailor," said he, "but I ken a chart when I see it, an' it is my opeenion that there
is no need o' your sailin' so far to the east before ye turn about southward. There is naething
much stickin' out from the coast between here an' St. Thomas."

Bonnet looked at the Scotchman with lofty contempt.

"Perhaps you can tell me," said he, "what there is stickin' out from the coast between here
and Ocracoke Inlet, where you yourself told me that Blackbeard had gone with the one sloop
he kept for himself?"

"Blackbeard!" shouted the Scotchman, "an' what in the de'il have ye got to do wi' Blackbeard?"

"Do with that infernal dog?" cried Bonnet, "I have everything to do with him before I do aught
with anybody or anything besides. He stole from me my possessions, he degraded me from my position,
he made me a laughing-stock to my men, and he even made me blush and bow my head with shame
before my daughter and my brother-in-law, two people in whose sight I would have stood up grander
and bolder than before any others in the world. He took away from me my sword and he gave me
instead a wretched pen; he made me nothing where I had been everything. He even ceased to consider
me any more than if I had been the dirty deck under his feet. And then, when he had done with
my property and could get no more good out of it, he cast it to me in charity as a man would
toss a penny to a beggar. Before I sail anywhere else, Ben Greenway," continued Bonnet, "I
sail for Ocracoke Inlet, and when I sight Blackbeard's miserable little sloop I shall pour
broadside after broadside into her until I sink his wretched craft with his bedizened carcass
on board of it."

"But wi' your men stand by ye?" cried Greenway. "Ye're neither a pirate nor a vessel o' war
to enter into a business like that."

Bonnet swore one of his greatest oaths. "There is no business nor war for me, Ben Greenway,"
he cried, "until I have taught that insolent Blackbeard what manner of man I am."

Ben Greenway was very much disheartened. "If Blackbeard should sink the Revenge instead of
Master Bonnet sinking him," he said to himself, "and would be kind enough to maroon my old
master an' me, it might be the best for everybody after all. Master Bonnet is vera humble-minded
an' complacent when bad fortune comes upon him, an' it is my opeenion that on a desert island
I could weel manage him for the good o' his soul."

But there were no vessels sunk on that cruise. Blackbeard had gone, nobody knew where, and
after a time Bonnet gave up the search for his old enemy and turned his bow southward. Now
Ben Greenway's countenance gleamed once more.

"It'll be a glad day at Spanish Town when Mistress Kate shall get my letter."

"And what have you been writing to her?" cried Bonnet.

"I told her," said Ben Greenway, "how at last ye hae come to your right mind, an' how ye are
a true servant o' the king, wi' your pardon in your pocket an' your commission waitin' for
ye at St. Thomas, an' that, whatever else ye may do at sea, there'll be no more black flag
floatin' over your head, nor a see-saw plank wobblin' under the feet o' onybody else. The days
o' your piracies are over, an' ye're an honest mon once more."

"You wrote her that?" said Bonnet, with a frown.

"Ay," said Greenway, "an' I left it in the care o' a good mon, whose ship is weel on its way
to Kingston by this day."

That afternoon Captain Bonnet called all his men together and addressed them.

He made a very good speech, a better one than that delivered when he first took real command
of the Revenge after sailing out of the river at Bridgetown, and it was listened to with respectful
and earnest interest. In brief manner he explained to all on board that he had thrown to the
winds all idea of merchandising or privateering; that his pardon and his ship's clearance were
of no value to him except he should happen to get into some uncomfortable predicament with
the law; that he had no idea of sailing towards St. Thomas, but intended to proceed up the
coast to burn and steal and rob and slay wherever he might find it convenient to do so; that
he had brought the greater part of his crew from the desert island where Blackbeard had left
them because he knew that they were stout and reckless fellows, just the sort of men he wanted
for the piratical cruise he was about to begin; and that, in order to mislead any government
authorities who by land or sea might seek to interfere with him, he had changed the name of
the good old Revenge to the Royal James, while its captain, once Stede Bonnet, was now to be
known on board and everywhere else as Captain Thomas, with nothing against him. He concluded
by saying that all that had been done on that ship from the time she first hoisted the black
flag until the present moment was nothing at all compared to the fire and the blood and the
booty which should follow in the wake of that gallant vessel, the Royal James, commanded by
Captain Thomas.

The men looked at each other, but did not say much. They were all pirates, although few of
them had regularly started out on a piratical career, and there was nothing new to them in
this sort of piratical dishonour. In the little cruise after Blackbeard their new captain had
shown himself to be a good man, ready with his oaths and very certain about what he wanted
done. So, whenever Stede Bonnet chose to run up the Jolly Roger, he might do it for all they cared.

Poor Ben Greenway sat apart, his head bowed upon his hands.

"You seem to be in a bad case, old Ben," said Bonnet, gazing down upon him, "but you throw
yourself into needless trouble. As soon as I lay hold of some craft which I am willing shall
go away with a sound hull, I will put you on board of her and let you go back to the farm.
I will keep you no longer among these wicked people, Ben Greenway, and in this wicked place."

Ben shook his head. "I started wi' ye an' I stay wi' ye," said he, "an' I'll follow ye to the
vera gates o' hell, but farther than that, Master Bonnet, I willna go; at the gates o' hell
I leave ye!"

CHAPTER XXXV

A CHAPTER OF HAPPENINGS

For happiness with a flaw in it, it was a very fair happiness which now hung over the Delaplaine
home near Spanish Town. Kate Bonnet's father was still a pirate, but there was no Captain Vince
in hot pursuit of him, seeking his blood. Kate could sing with the birds and laugh with Dickory
whenever she thought of the death of the wicked enemy. This was not, it may be thought, a proper
joy for a young maiden's heart, but it came to Kate whether she would or not; the change was
so great from the fear which had possessed her before.

The old home life began again, although it was a very quiet life. Dickory went into Mr. Delaplaine's
counting-house, but it was hard for the young man to doff the naval uniform which had been
bestowed upon him by Blackbeard, for he knew he looked very well in it, and everybody else
thought so and told him so; but it could not be helped, and with all convenient speed he discarded
his cocked hat and all the rest of it, and clothed himself in the simple garb of a merchant's
clerk, although it might be said, that in all the West Indies, at that day, there was no clerk
so good-looking as was Dickory. Dame Charter was so thankful that her boy had come safely through
all his troubles, so proud of him, and so eminently well satisfied with his present position,
that she asked nothing of her particular guardian angel but that Stede Bonnet might stay away.
If, after tiring of piracy, that man came back, as his relatives wished him to do, the good
dame was sure he would make mischief of some sort, and as like as not in the direction of her
Dickory. If this evil family genius should be lost at sea or should disappear from the world
in some equally painless and undisgraceful fashion, Dame Charter was sure that she could in
a reasonable time quiet the grief of poor Kate; for what right-minded damsel could fail to
mingle thankfulness with her sorrow that a kind death should relieve a parent from the sins
and disgraces which in life always seemed to open up in front of him.

About this time there came a letter from Barbadoes, which was of great interest to everybody
in the household. It was from Master Martin Newcombe, and of course was written to Kate, but
she read many portions of it to the others. The first part of the epistle was not read aloud,
but it was very pleasant for Kate to read it to herself. This man was a close lover and an
ardent one. Whatever had happened to her fortunes, nothing had interfered with his affection;
whatever he had said he still bravely stood by, and to whatever she had objected in the way
of obstacles he had paid no attention whatever.

In the parts of the letter read to her uncle and the others, Master Newcombe told how, not
having heard from them for so long, he had been beginning to be greatly troubled, but the arrival
of the Black Swan, which, after touching at Kingston, had continued her course to Barbadoes,
had given him new life and hope; and it was his intention, as soon as he could arrange his
affairs, to come to Jamaica, and there say by word of mouth and do, in his own person, so much
for which a letter was totally inadequate. The thought of seeing Kate again made him tremble
as he walked through his fields. This was read inadvertently, and Dickory frowned. Dame Charter
frowned too. She had never supposed that Master Newcombe would come to Spanish Town; she had
always looked upon him as a very worthy young farmer; so worthy that he would not neglect his
interest by travelling about to other islands than his own. She did not know exactly how her
son felt about all this, nor did she like to ask him, but Dickory saved her the trouble.

"If that Newcombe comes here," he said, "I am going to fight him."

"What!" cried his mother. "You would not do that. That would be terrible; it would ruin everything."

"Ruin what?" he asked.

His mother answered diplomatically. "It would ruin all your fine opportunities in this family."

Dickory smiled with a certain sarcastic hardness. "I don't mean," said he, "that I am going
to hack at him with a sword, because neither he nor I properly know how to use swords, and
after the wonderful practice that I have seen, I would not want to prove myself a bungler even
if the other man were a worse one. No, mother, I mean to fight with him by all fair means to
gain the hand of my dear Kate. I love her, and I am far more worthy of her than he is. He is
not a well-disposed man, being rough and inconsiderate in his speech." Dickory had never forgiven
the interview by the river bank when he had gone to see Madam Bonnet. "And as to his being
a stout lover, he is none of it. Had he been that, he would long ago have crossed the little
sea between Barbadoes and here."

"Do you mean, you foolish boy," exclaimed Dame Charter, "to say that you presume to love our
Mistress Kate?" And her eyes glowed upon him with all the warmth of a mother's pride, for this
was the wish of her heart, and never absent from it.

"Ay, mother," said Dickory, "I shall fight for her; I shall show her that I am worthier than
he is and that I love her better. I shall even strive for her if that mad pirate comes back
and tries to overset everything."

"Oh, do it before that!" cried Dame Charter, anxiety in every wrinkle. "Do it before that!"

Mr. Delaplaine was a little troubled by the promised visit from Barbadoes. He had heard of
Master Newcombe as being a most estimable young man, but the fault about him, in his opinion,
was that he resided not in Jamaica. For a long time the good merchant had lived his own life,
with no one to love him, and he now had with him his sister's child, whom he had come to look
upon as a daughter, and he did not wish to give her up. It was true that it might be possible,
under favourable pressure, to induce young Newcombe to come to Jamaica and settle there, but
this was all very vague. Had he had his own way, he would have driven from Kate every thought
of love or marriage until the time when his new clerk, Dickory Charter, had become a young
merchant of good standing, worthy of such a wife. Then he might have been willing to give Kate
to Dickory, and Dickory would have given her to him, and they might have all been happy. That
is, if that hare-brained Bonnet did not come home.

The Delaplaine family did not go much into society at that time, for people had known about
the pirate and his ship, the Revenge, and the pursuit upon which Captain Vince of the royal
corvette Badger had been sent. They had all heard, too, of the death of Captain Vince, and
some of them were not quite certain whether he had been killed by the pirate Bonnet or another
desperado equally dangerous. Knowing all this, although if they had not known it they would
scarcely have found it out from the speech of their neighbours, the Delaplaines kept much to
themselves. And they were happy, and the keynote of their happiness was struck by Kate, whose
thankful heart could never forget the death of Captain Vince.

Mr. Delaplaine made his proper visit to Spanish Town, to carry his thanks and to tell the Governor
how things had happened to him; and the Governor still showed his interest in Mistress Kate
Bonnet, and expressed his regret that she had not come with her uncle, which was a very natural
wish indeed for a governor of good taste.

This is a chapter of happenings, and the next happening was a letter from that good man, Ben
Greenway, and it told the most wonderful, splendid, and glorious news that had ever been told
under the bright sun of the beautiful West Indies. It told that Captain Stede Bonnet was no
longer a pirate, and that Kate was no longer a pirate's daughter. These happy people did not
join hands and dance and sing over the great news, but Kate's joy was so great that she might
have done all these things without knowing it, so thankful was she that once again she had
a father. This rapture so far outshone her relief at the news of the death of Captain Vince
that she almost forgot that that wicked man was safe and dead. Kate was in such a state of
wild delight that she insisted that her uncle should make another visit to the Governor's house
and take her with him, that she herself might carry the Governor the good news; and the Governor
said such heart-warming things when he heard it that Kate kissed him in very joy. But as Dickory
was not of the party, this incident was not entered as part of the proceedings.

Now society, both in Spanish Town and Kingston, opened its arms and insisted that the fair
star of Barbadoes should enter them, and there were parties and dances and dinners, and it
might have been supposed that everybody had been a father or a mother to a prodigal son, so
genial and joyful were the festivities--Kate high above all others.

At some of these social functions Dickory Charter was present, but it is doubtful whether he
was happier when he saw Kate surrounded by gay admirers or when he was at home imagining what
was going on about her.

There was but one cloud in the midst of all this sunshine, and that was that Mr. Delaplaine,
Dame Charter, and her son Dickory could not forget that it was now in the line of events that
Stede Bonnet would soon be with them, and beyond that all was chaos.

And over the seas sailed the good ship the Royal James, Captain Thomas in command.

CHAPTER XXXVI

THE TIDE DECIDES

It was now September, and the weather was beautiful on the North Carolina coast. Captain Thomas
(late Bonnet) of the Royal James (late Revenge) had always enjoyed cool nights and invigorating
morning air, and therefore it was that he said to his faithful servitor, Ben Greenway, when
first he stepped out upon the deck as his vessel lay comfortably anchored in a little cove
in the Cape Fear River, that he did not remember ever having been in a more pleasant harbour.
This well-tried pirate captain--Stede Bonnet, as we shall call him, notwithstanding his assumption
of another name--was in a genial mood as he drank in the morning air.

From his point of view he had a right to be genial; he had a right to be pleased with the scenery
and the air; he had a right to swear at the Scotchman, and to ask him why he did not put on
a merrier visage on such a sparkling morning, for since he had first started out as Captain
Thomas of the Royal James he had been a most successful pirate. He had sailed up the Virginia
coast; he had burned, he had sunk, he had robbed, he had slain; he had gone up the Delaware
Bay, and the people in ships and the people on the coasts trembled even when they heard that
his black flag had been sighted.

No man could now say that the former captain of the Revenge was not an accomplished and seasoned
desperado. Even the great Blackbeard would not have cared to give him nicknames, nor dared
to play his blithesome tricks upon him; he was now no more Captain Nightcap to any man. His
crew of hairy ruffians had learned to understand that he knew what he wanted, and, more than
that, he knew how to order it done. They listened to his great oaths and they respected him.
This powerful pirate now commanded a small fleet, for in the cove where lay his flag-ship also
lay two good-sized sloops, manned by their own crews, which he had captured in Delaware Bay
and had brought down with him to this quiet spot, a few miles up the Cape Fear River, where
now he was repairing his own ship, which had had a hard time of it since she had again come
into his hands.

For many a long day the sound of the hammer and the saw had mingled with the song of the birds,
and Captain Bonnet felt that in a day or two he might again sail out upon the sea, conveying
his two prizes to some convenient mart, while he, with his good ship, freshened and restored,
would go in search of more victories, more booty, and more blood.

"Greenway, I tell you," said Bonnet, continuing his remarks, "you are too glum; you've got
the only long face in all this, my fleet. Even those poor fellows who man my prizes are not
so solemn, although they know not, when I have done with them, whether I shall maroon them
to quietly starve or shall sink them in their own vessels."

"But I hae no such reason to be cheerful," said Ben. "I hae bound mysel' to stand by ye till
ye hae gone to the de'il, an' I hae no chance o' freein' mysel' from my responsibeelities by
perishin' on land or in the sea."

"If anything could make me glum, Ben Greenway, it would be you," said the other; "but I am
getting used to you, and some of these days when I have captured a ship laden with Scotch liquors
and Scotch plaids I believe that you will turn pirate yourself for the sake of your share of
the prizes."

"Which is likely to be on the same mornin' that ye turn to be an honest mon," said Ben; "but
I am no' in the way o' expectin' miracles."

On went the pounding and the sawing and the hammering and the swearing and the singing of birds,
although the latter were a little farther away than they had been, and in the course of the
day the pirate captain, erect, scrutinizing, and blasphemous, went over his ship, superintending
the repairs. In a day or two everything would be finished, and then he and his two prizes could
up sail and away. It was a beautiful harbour in which he lay, but he was getting tired of it.

There were great prospects before our pirate captain. Perhaps he might have the grand good
fortune to fall in with that low-born devil, Blackbeard, who, when last he had been heard from,
commanded but a small vessel, fearing no attack upon this coast. What a proud and glorious
moment it would be when a broadside and another and another should be poured in upon his little
craft from the long guns of the Royal James.

Bonnet was still standing, reflecting, with bright eyes, upon this dazzling future, and wondering
what would be the best way of letting the dastardly Blackbeard know whose guns they were which
had sunk his ship, when a boat was seen coming around the headland. This was one of his own
boats, which had been posted as a sentinel, and which now brought the news that two vessels
were coming in at the mouth of the river, but that as the distance was great and the night
was coming on they could not decide what manner of craft they were.

This information made everybody jump, on board the Royal James, and the noise of the sawing
and the hammering ceased as completely as had the songs of the birds. In a few minutes that
quick and able mariner, Bonnet, had sent three armed boats down the river to reconnoitre. If
the vessels entering the river were merchantmen, they should not be allowed to get away; but
if they were enemies, although it was difficult to understand how enemies could make their
appearance in these quiet waters, they must be attended to, either by fight or flight.

When the three boats came back, and it was late before they appeared, every man upon the Royal
James was crowded along her side to hear the news, and even the people on the prizes knew that
something had happened, and stood upon every point of vantage, hoping that in some way they
could find out what it was.

The news brought by the boats was to the effect that two vessels, not sailing as merchantmen
and well armed and manned, were now ashore on sand-bars, not very far above the mouth of the
river. Now Bonnet swore bravely. If the work upon his vessels had been finished he would up
anchor and away and sail past these two grounded ships, whatever they were and whatever they
came for. He would sail past them and take with him his two prizes; he would glide out to sea
with the tide, and he would laugh at them as he left them behind. But the Royal James was not
ready to sail.

The tide was now low; five hours afterward, when it should be high, those two ships, whatever
they were, would float again, and the Royal James, whatever her course of action should be,
would be cut off from the mouth of the river. This was a greater risk than even a pirate as
bold as Bonnet would wish to run, and so there was no sleep that night on the Royal James.
The blows of the hammers and the sounds of the saws made a greater noise than they had ever
done before, so that the night birds were frightened and flew shrieking away. Every man worked
with all the energy that was in him, for each hairy rascal had reason to believe that if the
vessel they were on did not get out of the river before the two armed strangers should be afloat
there might be hard times ahead for them. Even Ben Greenway was aroused. "The de'il shall not
get him any sooner than can be helped," he said to himself, and he hammered and sawed with
the rest of them.

On his stout and well-armed sloop the Henry, Mr. William Rhett, of Charles Town, South Carolina,
paced anxiously all night. Frequently from the sand-bar on which his vessel was grounded he
called over to his other sloop, also fast grounded, giving orders and asking questions. On
both vessels everybody was at work, getting ready for action when the tide should rise.

Some weeks before the wails and complaints of a tortured sea-coast had come down from the Jersey
shores to South Carolina, asking for help at the only place along that coast whence help could
come. A pirate named Thomas was working his way southward, spreading terror before him and
leaving misery behind. These appeals touched the hearts of the people of Charles Town, already
sore from the injuries and insults inflicted upon them by Blackbeard in those days when Bonnet
sat silently on the pirate ship, doing nothing and learning much.

There was no hesitancy; for their own sake and for the sake of their commerce, this new pirate
must not come to Charles Town harbour, and an expedition of two vessels, heavily armed and
well manned and commanded by Mr. William Rhett, was sent northward up the coast to look for
the pirate named Thomas and to destroy him and his ship. Mr. Rhett was not a military man,
nor did he belong to the navy. He was a citizen capable of commanding soldiers, and as such
he went forth to destroy the pirate Thomas.

Mr. Rhett met people enough along the coast who told him where he might find the pirate, but
he found no one to tell him how to navigate the dangerous waters of the Cape Fear River, and
so it was that soon after entering that fine stream he and his consort found themselves aground.

Mr. Rhett was quite sure that he had discovered the lair of the big game he was looking for.
Just before dark, three boats, well filled with men, had appeared from up the river, and they
had looked so formidable that everything had been made ready to resist an attack from them.
They retired, but every now and then during the night, when there was quiet for a few minutes,
there would come down the river on the wind the sound of distant hammering and the noise of saws.

It was after midnight before the Henry and the Sea Nymph floated free, but they anchored where
they were and waited for the morning. Whether they would sail up the river after the pirate
or whether he would come down to them, daylight would show.

Mr. Rhett's vessels had been at anchor for five hours, and every man on board of them were
watching and waiting, when daylight appeared and showed them a tall ship, under full sail,
rounding the distant headland up the river. Now up came their anchors and their sails were
set. The pirate was coming!

Whatever the Royal James intended to do, Mr. Rhett had but one plan, and that was to meet the
enemy as soon as possible and fight him. So up sailed the Henry and up sailed the Sea Nymph,
and they pressed ahead so steadily to meet the Royal James that the latter vessel, in carrying
out what was now her obvious intention of getting out to sea, was forced shoreward, where she
speedily ran upon a bar. Then, from the vessels of Charles Town there came great shouts of
triumph, which ceased when first the Henry and then the Sea Nymph ran upon other bars and remained
stationary.

Here was an unusual condition--three ships of war all aground and about to begin a battle,
a battle which would probably last for five hours if one or more of the stationary vessels
were not destroyed before that time. It was soon found, however, that there would only be two
parties to the fight, for the Sea Nymph was too far away to use her guns. The Royal James had
an advantage over her opponents, since, when she slightly careened, her decks were slanted
away from the enemy, while the latter's were presented to her fire.

At it they went, hot and heavy. Bonnet and his men now knew that they were engaged with commissioned
war vessels, and they fought for their lives. Mr. Rhett knew that he was fighting Thomas, the
dreaded pirate of the coast, and he felt that he must destroy him before his vessel should
float again. The cannon roared, muskets blazed away, and the combatants were near enough even
to use pistols upon each other. Men died, blood flowed, and the fight grew fiercer and fiercer.

Bonnet roared like an incarnate devil; he swore at his men, he swore at the enemy, he swore
at his bad fortune, for had he not missed the channel the game would have been in his own hands.

So on they fought, and the tide kept steadily rising. The five hours must pass at last, and
the vessel which first floated would win the day.

The five hours did pass, and the Henry floated, and Bonnet swore louder and more fiercely than
before. He roared to his men to fire and to fight, no matter whether they were still aground
or not, and with many oaths he vowed that if any one of them showed but a sign of weakening
he would cut him down upon the spot. But the hairy scoundrels who made up the crew of the Royal
James had no idea of lying there with their ship on its side, while two other ships--for the
Sea Nymph was now afloat--should sail around them, rake their decks, and shatter them to pieces.
So the crew consulted together, despite their captain's roars and oaths, and many of them counselled
surrender. Their vessel was much farther inshore than the two others, and no matter what happened
afterward they preferred to live longer than fifteen or twenty minutes.

But Bonnet quailed not before fate, before the enemy, or before his crew; if he heard another
word of surrender he would fire the magazine and blow the ship to the sky with every man in
it. Raising his cutlass in air, he was about to bring it down upon one of the cowards he berated,
when suddenly he was seized by two powerful hands, which pinned his arms behind him. With a
scream of rage, he turned his head and found that he was in the grasp of Ben Greenway.

"Let go your sword, Master Bonnet," said Ben; "it is o' no use to ye now, for ye canna get
awa' from me. I'm nae older than ye are, though I look it, an' I've got the harder muscles.
Ye may be makin' your way steadily an' surely to the gates o' hell an' it mayna be possible
that I can prevent ye, but I'm not goin' to let ye tumble in by accident so long as I've got
two arms left to me."

Pale, haggard, and writhing, Stede Bonnet was disarmed, and the Jolly Roger came down.

CHAPTER XXXVII

BONNET AND GREENWAY PART COMPANY

It was three days after this memorable combat--for the vessels engaged in it needed considerable
repairs--when Mr. Rhett of Charles Town sailed down the Cape Fear River with his five vessels--the
two with which he had entered it, the pirate Royal James, and the two prizes of the latter,
which had waited quietly up the river to see how matters were going to turn out.

On the Henry sailed the pirate Thomas, now discovered to be the notorious Stede Bonnet, and
a very quiet and respectful man he was. As has been seen before, Bonnet was a man able to adapt
himself to circumstances. There never was a more demure counting-house clerk than was Bonnet
at Belize; there never was an humbler dependent than the almost unnoticed Bonnet after he had
joined Blackbeard's fleet before Charles Town, and there never was a more deferential and respectful
prisoner than Stede Bonnet on board the Henry. It was really touching to see how this cursing
and raging pirate deported himself as a meek and uncomplaining gentleman.

There was no prison-house in Charles Town, but Stede Bonnet's wicked crew, including Ben Greenway--for
his captors were not making any distinctions in regard to common men taken on a pirate ship--were
clapped into the watch-house--and a crowded and uncomfortable place it was--and put under a
heavy and military guard. The authorities were, however, making distinctions where gentlemen
of family and owners of landed estates were concerned, no matter if they did happen to be taken
on a pirate ship, and Major Bonnet of Barbadoes was lodged in the provost marshal's house,
in comfortable quarters, with only two sentinels outside to make him understand he was a prisoner.

The capture of this celebrated pirate created a sensation in Charles Town, and many of the
citizens were not slow to pay the unfortunate prisoner the attentions due to his former position
in society. He was very well satisfied with his treatment in Charles Town, which city he had
never before had the pleasure of visiting.

The attentions paid to Ben Greenway were not pleasing; sometimes he was shoved into one corner
and sometimes into another. He frequently had enough to eat and drink, but very often this
was not the case. Bonnet never inquired after him. If he thought of him at all, he hoped that
he had been killed in the fight, for if that were the case he would be rid of his eternal preachments.

Greenway made known the state of his own case whenever he had a chance to do so, but his complaints
received no attention, and he might have remained with the crew of the Royal James as long
as they were shut up in the watch-house had not some of the hairy cut-throats themselves taken
pity upon him and assured the guards that this man was not one of them, and that they knew
from what they had heard him say and seen him do that there was no more determined enemy of
piracy in all the Western continent. So it happened, that after some weeks of confinement Greenway
was let out of the watch-house and allowed to find quarters for himself.

The first day the Scotchman was free he went to the provost-marshal's house and petitioned
an interview with his old master, Bonnet.

"Heigho!" cried the latter, who was comfortably seated in a chair reading a letter. "And where
do you come from, Ben Greenway? I had thought you were dead and buried in the Cape Fear River."

"Ye did not think I was dead," replied Ben, "when I seized ye an' held ye an' kept ye from
buryin' yoursel' in that same river."

Bonnet waved his hand. "No more of that," said he; "I was unfortunate, but that is over now
and things have turned out better than any man could have expected."

"Better!" exclaimed Ben. "I vow I know not what that means."

Bonnet laughed. He was looking very well; he was shaved, and wore a neat suit of clothes.

"Ben Greenway," said he, "you are now looking upon a man of high distinction. At this moment
I am the greatest pirate on the face of the earth. Yes, Greenway, the greatest pirate on the
face of the earth. I have a letter here, which was received by the provost-marshal and which
he gave me to read, which tells that Blackbeard, the first pirate of his age, is dead. Therefore,
Ben Greenway, I take his place, and there is no living pirate greater than I am."

"An' ye pride yoursel' on that, an' at this moment?" asked Ben, truly amazed.

"That do I," said Bonnet. "And think of it, Ben Greenway, that presumptuous, overbearing Blackbeard
was killed, and his head brought away sticking up on the bow of a vessel. What a rare sight
that must have been, Ben! Think of his long beard, all tied up with ribbons, stuck up on the
bow of a ship!"

"An' ye are now the head de'il on earth?" said Ben.

"You can put it that way, if you like," said Bonnet, "but I am not so looked upon in this town.
I am an honoured person. I doubt very much if any prisoner in this country was ever treated
with the distinction that is shown me, but I don't wonder at it; I have the reputation of two
great pirates joined in one--the pirate Bonnet, of the dreaded ship Revenge, and the terrible
Thomas of the Royal James. My man, there are people in this town who have been to me and who
have said that a man so famous should not even be imprisoned. I have good reason to believe
that it will not be long before pardon papers are made out for me, and that I may go my way."

"An' your men?" asked Greenway. "Will they go free or will they be hung like common pirates?"

Bonnet frowned impatiently. "I don't want to hear anything about the men," he said; "of course
they will be hung. What could be done with them if they were not hung? But it is entirely different
with me. I am a most respectable person, and, now that I am willing to resign my piratical
career, having won in it all the glory that can come to one man, that respectability must be
considered."

"Weel, weel," said the Scotchman; "an' when it comes that respectabeelity is better for a man's
soul an' body than righteousness, then I am no fit counsellor for ye, Master Bonnet," and he
took his leave.

The next morning, when Ben Greenway left his lodging he found the town in an uproar. The pirate
Bonnet had bribed his sentinels and, with some others, had escaped. Ben stood still and stamped
his foot. Such infamy, such perfidy to the authorities who had treated him so well, the Scotchman
could not at first imagine, but when the truth became plain to him, his face glowed, his eye
burned; this vile conduct of his old master was a triumph to Ben's principles. Wickedness was
wickedness, and could not be washed away by respectability.

The days passed on; Bonnet was recaptured, more securely imprisoned, put upon trial, found
guilty, and, in spite of the efforts of the advocates of respectability, was condemned to be
hung on the same spot where nearly all the members of his pirate crew had been executed.

During all this time Ben Greenway kept away from his old master; he had borne ill-treatment
of every kind, but the deception practised upon him when, at his latest interview, Bonnet talked
to him of his respectability, having already planned an escape and return to his evil ways,
was too much for the honest Scotchman. He had done with this man, faithless to friend and foe,
to his own blood, and even to his own bad reputation.

But not quite done. It was but half an hour before the time fixed for the pirate's execution
that Ben Greenway gained access to him.

"What!" cried Bonnet, raising his head from his hands. "You here? I thought I had done with you!"

"Ay, I am here," said Ben Greenway. "I hae stood by ye in good fortune an' in bad fortune,
an' I hae never left ye, no matter what happened; an' I told ye I would follow ye to the gates
o' hell, but I could go no farther. I hae kept my word an' here I stop. Fareweel!"

"The only comfortable thing about this business," said Bonnet, "is to know that at last I am
rid of that fellow!"

CHAPTER XXXVIII

AGAIN DICKORY WAS THERE

There were indeed gay times in Spanish Town, and with the two loads lifted from her heart,
Kate helped very much to promote the gaiety. If this young lady had wished to make a good colonial
match, she had opportunities enough for so doing, but she was not in that frame of mind, and
encouraged no suitor.

But, bright as she was, she was not so bright as on that great and glorious day when she received
Ben Greenway's letter, telling her that her father was no longer a pirate. There were several
reasons for this gradually growing twilight of her happiness, and one was that no letter came
from her father. To be sure, there were many reasons why no letter should come. There were
no regular mails in these colonies which could be depended upon, and, besides, the new career
of her father, sailing as a privateer under the king's flag, would probably make it very difficult
for him to send a letter to Jamaica by any regular or irregular method. Moreover, her father
was a miserable correspondent, and always had been. Thus she comforted herself and was content,
though not very well content, to wait.

Then there was another thing which troubled her, when she thought of it. That good man and
steady lover, Martin Newcombe, had written that he was coming to Spanish Town, and she knew
very well what he was coming for and what he would say, but she did not know what she would
say to him; and the thought of this troubled her. In a letter she might put off the answer
for which he had been so long and patiently waiting, but when she met him face to face there
could be no more delay; she must tell him yes or no, and she was not ready to do this.

There was so much to think of, so many plans to be considered in regard to going back to Barbadoes
or staying in Jamaica, that really she could not make up her mind, at least not until she had
seen her father. She would be so sorry if Mr. Newcombe came to Spanish Town before her father
should arrive, or at least before she should hear from him.

Then there was another thing which added to the twilight of these cheerful days, and this Kate
could scarcely understand, because she could see no reason why it should affect her. The Governor,
whom they frequently met in the course of the pleasant social functions of the town, looked
troubled, and was not the genial gentleman he used to be. Of course he had a right to his own
private perplexities and annoyances, but it grieved Kate to see the change in him. He had always
been so cordial and so cheerful; he was now just as kind as ever, perhaps a little more so,
in his manner, but he was not cheerful.

Kate mentioned to her uncle the changed demeanour of the Governor, but he could give no explanation;
he had heard of no political troubles, but supposed that family matters might easily have saddened
the good man.

He himself was not very cheerful, for day after day brought nearer the time when that uncertain
Stede Bonnet might arrive in Jamaica, and what would happen after that no man could tell. One
thing he greatly feared, and that was, that his dear niece, Kate, might be taken away from
him. Dame Charter was not so very cheerful either. Only in one way did she believe in Stede
Bonnet, and that was, that after some fashion or another he would come between her and her
bright dreams for her dear Dickory.

And so there were some people in Spanish Town who were not as happy as they had been.

Still there were dinners and little parties, and society made itself very pleasant; and in
the midst of them all a ship came in from Barbadoes, bringing a letter from Martin Newcombe.

A strange thing about this letter was that it was addressed to Mr. Delaplaine and not to Miss
Kate Bonnet. This, of course, proved the letter must be on business; and, although he was with
his little family when he opened his letter, he thought it well to glance at it before reading
it aloud. The first few lines showed him that it was indeed a business letter, for it told
of the death of Madam Bonnet, and how the writer, Martin Newcombe, as a neighbour and friend
of the family, had been called in to take temporary charge of her effects, and, having done
so, he hastened to inform Mr. Delaplaine of his proceedings and to ask advice. This letter
he now read aloud, and Kate and the others were greatly interested therein, although they cautiously
forbore the expression of any opinion which might rise in their minds regarding this turn of
affairs.

Having finished these business details, Mr. Delaplaine went on and read aloud, and in the succeeding
portion of the letter Mr. Newcombe begged Mr. Delaplaine to believe that it was the hardest
duty of his whole life to write what he was now obliged to write, but that he knew he must
do it, and therefore would not hesitate. At this the reader looked at his niece and stopped.

"Go on," cried Kate, her face a little flushed, "go on!"

The face of Mr. Delaplaine was pale, and for a moment he hesitated, then, with a sudden jerk,
he nerved himself to the effort and read on; he had seen enough to make him understand that
the duty before him was to read on.

Briefly and tersely, but with tears in the very ink, so sad were the words, the writer assured
Mr. Delaplaine that his love for his niece had been, and was, the overpowering impulse of his
life; that to win this love he had dared everything, he had hoped for everything, he had been
willing to pass by and overlook everything, but that now, and it tore his heart to write it,
his evil fortune had been too much for him; he could do anything for the sake of his love that
a man with respect for himself could do, but there was one thing at which he must stop, at
which he must bow his head and submit to his fate--he could not marry the daughter of an executed
felon.

Thus came to that little family group the news of the pirate Bonnet's death. There was more
of the letter, but Mr. Delaplaine did not read it.

Kate did not scream, nor moan, nor faint, but she sat up straight in her chair and gazed, with
a wild intentness, at her uncle. No one spoke. At such a moment condolence or sympathy would
have been a cruel mockery. They were all as pale as chalk. In his heart, Mr. Delaplaine said:
"I see it all; the Governor must have known, and he loved her so he could not break her heart."

In the midst of the silence, in the midst of the chalky whiteness of their faces, in the midst
of the blackness which was settling down upon them, Kate Bonnet still sat upright, a coldness
creeping through every part of her. Suddenly she turned her head, and in a voice of wild entreaty
she called out: "Oh, Dickory, why don't you come to me!"

In an instant Dickory was there, and, cold and lifeless, Kate Bonnet was in his arms.

CHAPTER XXXIX

THE BLESSINGS WHICH COME FROM THE DEATH OF THE WICKED

It was three weeks after Martin Newcombe's letter came before Ben Greenway arrived in Spanish
Town. He had had a hard time to get there, having but little money and no friends to help him;
but he had a strong heart and an earnest, and so he was bound to get there at last; and, although
Kate saw no visitors, she saw him. She was not dressed in mourning; she could not wear black
for herself.

She greeted the Scotchman with earnestness; he was a friend out of the old past, but she gave
him no chance to speak first.

"Ben," she exclaimed, "have you a message for me?"

"No message," he replied, "but I hae somethin' on my heart I wish to say to ye. I hae toiled
an' laboured an' hae striven wi' mony obstacles to get to ye an' to say it."

She looked at him, with her brows knit, wondering if she should allow him to speak; then, with
the words scarcely audible between her tightly closed lips, she said: "Ben, what is it?"

"It is this, an' no more nor less," replied the Scotchman; "he was never fit to be your father,
an' it is not fit now for ye to remember him as your father. I was faithful to him to the vera
last, but there was no truth in him. It is an abomination an' a wickedness for ye to remember
him as your father!"

Kate spoke no word, nor did she shed a tear.

"It was my heart's desire ye should know it," said the Scotchman, "an' I came mony a weary
league to tell ye so."

"Ben," said she, "I think I have known it for a long time, but I would not suffer myself to
believe it; but now, having heard your words, I am sure of it."

"Uncle," said she an hour afterward, "I have no father, and I never had one."

With tears in his eyes he folded her to his breast, and peace began to rise in his soul. No
greater blessing can come to really good people than the absolute disappearance of the wicked.

And the wickedness which had so long shadowed and stained the life of Kate Bonnet was now removed
from it. It was hard to get away from the shadow and to wipe off the stain, but she was a brave
girl and she did it.

In this work of her life--a work which if not accomplished would make that life not worth the
living--Kate was much helped by Dickory; and he helped her by not saying a word about it or
ever allowing himself, when in her presence, to remember that there had been a shadow or a
stain. And if he thought of it at all when by himself, his only feeling was one of thankfulness
that what had happened had given her to him.

Even the Governor brightened. He had striven hard to keep from Kate the news which had come
to him from Charles Town, suppressing it in the hopes that it might reach her more gradually
and with less terrible effect than if he told it, but now that he knew that she knew it the
blessings which are shed abroad by the disappearance of the wicked affected him also, and he
brightened. There were no functions for Kate, but she brightened, striving with all her soul
to have this so, for her own sake as well as that of others. As for Mr. Delaplaine, Dame Charter,
and Dickory, they brightened without any trouble at all, the disappearance of the wicked having
such a direct and forcible effect upon them.

Dickory Charter, who matured in a fashion which made everybody forget that Kate Bonnet was
eleven months his senior, entered into business with Mr. Delaplaine, and Jamaica became the
home of this happy family, whose welfare was founded, as on a rock, upon the disappearance
of the wicked.

Here, then, was a brave girl who had loved her father with a love which was more than that
of a daughter, which was the love of a mother, of a wife; who had loved him in prosperity and
in times of sorrow and of shame; who had rejoiced like an angel whenever he turned his footsteps
into the right way, and who had mourned like an angel whenever he went wrong. She had longed
to throw her arms around her father's neck, to hold him to her, and thus keep off the hangman's
noose. Her courage and affection never waned until those arms were rudely thrust aside and
their devoted owner dastardly repulsed.

True to herself and to him, she loved her father so long as there was anything parental in
him which she might love; and, true to herself, when he had left her nothing she might love,
she bowed her head and suffered him, as he passed out of his life, to pass out of her own.

CHAPTER XL

CAPTAIN ICHABOD PUTS THE CASE

In the river at Bridgetown lay the good brig King and Queen, just arrived from Jamaica. On
her deck was an impatient young gentleman, leaning over the rail and watching the approach
of a boat, with two men rowing and a passenger in the stern.

This impatient young man was Dickory Charter, that morning arrived at Bridgetown and not yet
having been on shore. He came for the purpose of settling some business affairs, partly on
account of Miss Kate Bonnet and partly for his mother.

As the boat came nearer, Dickory recognised one of the men who were rowing and hailed him.

"Heigho! Tom Hilyer," he cried, "I am right glad to see you on this river again. I want a boat
to go to my mother's house; know you of one at liberty?"

The man ceased rowing for a moment and then addressed the passenger in the stern, who, having
heard what he had to say, nodded briefly.

"Well, well, Dick Charter!" cried out the man, "and have you come back as governor of the colony?
You look fine enough, anyway. But if you want a boat to go to your mother's old home, you can
have a seat in this one; we're going there, and our passenger does not object."

"Pull up here," cried Dickory, and in a moment he had dropped into the bow of the boat, which
then proceeded on its way.

The man in the stern was fairly young, handsome, sunburned, and well dressed in a suit of black.
When Dickory thanked him for allowing him to share his boat the passenger in the stern nodded
his head with a jerk and an air which indicated that he took the incident as a matter of course,
not to be further mentioned or considered.

The men who rowed the boat were good oarsmen, but they were not thoroughly acquainted with
the cove, especially at low tide, and presently they ran upon a sand-bar. Then uprose the passenger
in the stern and began to swear with an ease and facility which betokened long practice. Dickory
did not swear, but he knit his brows and berated himself for not having taken the direction
of the course into his own hands, he who knew the river and the cove so well. The tide was
rising but Dickory was too impatient to sit still and wait until it should be high enough to
float the boat. That was his old home, that little house at the head of the cove, and he wanted
to get there, he wanted to see it. Part of the business which brought him to Barbadoes concerned
that little house. With a sudden movement he made a dive at his shoes and stockings and speedily
had them lying at the bottom of the boat. Then he stepped overboard and waded towards the shore.
In some of the deeper places he wetted the bottom of his breeches, but he did not mind that.
The passenger in the stern sat down, but he continued to swear.

Presently Dickory was on the dry sand, and running up to that cottage door. A little back from
the front of the house and in the shade there was a bench, and on this bench there sat a girl,
reading. She lifted her head in surprise as Dickory approached, for his bare feet had made
no noise, then she stood up quickly, blushing.

"You!" she exclaimed.

"Yes," cried Dickory; "and you look just the same as when you first put your head above the
bushes and talked to me."

"Except that I am more suitably clothed," she said.

And she was entirely right, for her present dress was feminine, and extremely becoming.

Dickory did not wish to say anything more on this subject, and so he remarked: "I have just
arrived at the town, and I came directly here."

Lucilla blushed again.

"This is my old home," added Dickory.

"But you knew we were here?" she asked, with a hesitating look of inquiry.

"Oh, yes," said he, "I knew that the house had been let to your father."

Now she changed colour twice--first red, then white. "Are you," she said, "I mean ... the other,
is she--"

"I left her in Jamaica," said Dickory, "but I am going to marry her."

For a moment the rim of her hat got between the sun and her face, and one could not decide
very well whether her countenance was red or white.

"I am very glad to find you here," said Dickory, "and may I see your father and mother?"

"Yes," said she, "but they are both in the field with my young sister. But who is this man
walking up the shore? And is that the boat you came in?"

"It is," said Dickory. "We stuck fast, but I was in such a hurry that I waded ashore. I don't
know the man; he had hired the boat, and kindly took me in, I was in such haste to get here."

For a moment Lucilla bent her eyes on the ground. "In such haste to get here!" she said to
herself; then she raised her head and exclaimed: "Oh, I know that man; he is the pirate captain
who captured the Belinda, which afterward brought us here." And with both hands outstretched,
she ran to meet him.

The face of Captain Ichabod glowed with irrepressible delight; one might have thought he was
about to embrace the young woman, notwithstanding the presence of Dickory and the two boatmen,
but he did everything he could do before witnesses to express his joy.

Dickory now stepped up to Captain Ichabod. "Oh, now I know you," cried he, and he held out
his hand. "You were very kind indeed to my friends, and they have spoken much about you. This
is my old home; this is the house where I was born."

"Yes, yes, indeed," said Captain Ichabod, "a very good house, bedad, a very good house." But
hesitating a little and addressing Lucilla: "You don't live here alone, do you?"

The girl laughed.

"Oh, no," she cried. "My father and mother will be here presently; in fact, I see them coming."

"That's very well," said Ichabod, "very well indeed. It's quite right that they should live
with you. I remember them now; they were on the ship with you."

"Oh, yes," said Lucilla, still laughing.

"Quite right, quite right," said Ichabod; "that was very right."

"I will go meet your father and mother and the dear little Lena; I remember them so well,"
said Dickory. He started to run off in spite of his bare feet, but he had gone but a little
way when Lucilla stopped him. She looked up at him, and this time her face was white.

"Are you sure," said she, "that everything is settled between you and that other girl?"

"Very sure," said Dickory, looking kindly upon her and remembering how pretty she had looked
when he first saw her face over the bushes.

She did not say anything, but turned and walked back to Captain Ichabod. She found that tall
gentleman somewhat agitated; he seemed to have a great deal on his mind which he wished to
say, feeling, at the same time, that he ought to say everything first.

"That's your father and mother," said he, "stopping to talk to the young man who was born here?"

"Yes," she answered, "and they will be with us presently."

"Very good, very good, that's quite right," said Captain Ichabod hurriedly; "but before they
come, I want to say--that is, I would like you to know--that I have sold my ship. I am not
a pirate any longer, I am a sugar-planter, bedad. Beg your pardon! That is, I intend to be
one. You remember that you once talked to me about sugar-planting in Barbadoes, and so I am
here. I want to find a good sugar plantation, to buy it, and live on it; I heard that you were
stopping on this side of the river, and so I came here."

"But there is no sugar plantation here," said Lucilla, very demurely.

"Oh, no," said Ichabod, "oh, no, of course not; but you are here, and I wanted to find you;
a sugar plantation would be of no use without you."

She looked at him, still very demurely. "I don't quite understand you," she said. She turned
her head a little and saw that her family and Dickory were slowly moving towards the house.
She knew that with diffident persons no time should be lost, for, if interrupted, it often
happened that they did not begin again.

"Then I suppose," she said, her face turned up towards him, but her eyes cast down, "that you
are going to say that you would like to marry me?"

"Of course, of course," exclaimed Ichabod; "I thought you knew that that is what I came here
for, bedad."

"Very well, then," said Lucilla, turning her eyes to the face of the man she had dreamed of
in many happy nights. "No, no," she added quickly, "you must not kiss me; they are all coming,
and there are the two boatmen."

He did not kiss her, but later he made up for the omission.

The moment Mrs. Mander saw Captain Ichabod and her daughter standing together she knew exactly
what had happened; she had noticed things on board the Belinda. She hurried up to Lucilla and
drew her aside.

"My dear," she whispered, with a frightened face, "you cannot marry a pirate; you never, never
can!"

"Dear mother," said Lucilla, "he is not a pirate; he has sold his ship and is going to be a
sugar-planter."

Now they all came up and heard these words of Lucilla.

"Yes, indeed," said Captain Ichabod, "you may not suppose it, but your daughter and I are about
to marry, and will plant sugar together. Now, I want to buy a plantation. Where is that young
man who was born here, bedad?"

Dickory advanced, laughing. Here was a fine opportunity, a miraculous opportunity, of disposing
of the Bonnet estate, which was part of the business which had brought him here. So he told
the beaming captain that he knew of a fine plantation up the river, which he thought would
suit him.

"Very good," said Captain Ichabod. "I have a boat here; let us go and look at the place, and
if it suits us I will buy it, bedad."

So with Mrs. Mander and her husband beside her, and with Lucilla and the captain by her, the
boat was rowed up the river, with Dickory and young Lena in the bow.

When the boat reached the Bonnet estate it was run up on the shore near the shady spot where
Kate Bonnet had once caught a fish. Then they all stepped out upon the little beach, even the
oarsmen made the boat fast and joined the party, who started to walk up to the house. Suddenly
Captain Ichabod stopped and said to Mr. Mander: "I don't think I care to walk up that hill,
you know; and if you and your good wife will look over that house and cast your eyes about
the place, I will buy it, if you say so: you know a good deal more about such things than I
do, bedad. I suppose, of course, that will suit you?" he said to Lucilla.

It suited Lucilla exactly. They sat in the shade in the very place where Kate had sat when
she saw Master Newcombe crossing the bridge.

A small boat came down the river, rowed by a young man. As he passed the old Bonnet property
he carelessly cast his eyes shoreward, but his heart took no interest in what he saw there.
What did it matter to him if two lovers sat there in the shade, close to the river's brink?
His sad soul now took no interest in lovers. He had just been up the river to arrange for the
sale of his plantation to one of his neighbours. He had decided to leave the island of Barbadoes
and to return to England.

The house suited Captain Ichabod exactly, when Mrs. Mander told him about it, and Lucilla agreed
with him because she was always accustomed to trust her mother in such things.

So they all got into the boat and rowed back to Dickory's old home, and on the way Captain
Ichabod told Dickory that when they returned together to the town he would pay him for the
plantation, having brought specie sufficient for the purpose.

It was a gay party in the boat as they rowed down the river; it was a gay party at the house
when they reached it, and they would have all taken supper together had the Manders been prepared
for such hospitality; but they were poor, having taken the place upon a short lease and having
had but few returns so far. But they were all going to live at the old Bonnet place, and happiness
shone over everything. It was twilight, and the two young men were about to walk down to the
boat, one of them promising to come again early in the morning, when Lucilla approached Dickory.

"Where are you going to live with that girl?" she asked in a low voice.

"In Jamaica," said he.

"I am glad of it," she replied, quite frankly.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were well content, those Jamaica people, when Ben Greenway came to live with them. It
had been proposed at one time that he should go to his old Bridgetown home and take charge
of the place as he used to, but the good Scotchman demurred to this.

"I hae served ane master before he became a pirate," he said, "an' I don't want to try anither
after he has finished bein' ane. If I serve ony mon, let him be one wha has been righteous,
wha is righteous now, an' wha will continue in righteousness."

"Then serve Mr. Delaplaine," said Dickory.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Manders soon removed to the little house where Dickory was born. The mansion of their daughter
and her husband was a hospitable place and a lively, but the life there was so wayward, erratic,
and eccentric that it did not suit their sober lives and the education of their young daughter.
So they dwelt contentedly in the cottage at the head of the cove, and there was much rowing
up and down the river.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was upon a fine morning that the ex-pirate Ichabod thus addressed a citizen of the town:

"Yes, sir, I know well who once lived in the house I own. I knew the man myself; I knew him
at Belize. He was a dastardly knave, and would have played false to the sun, the moon, and
the stars had they shown him an opportunity, bedad. But I also knew his daughter; she sailed
on my ship for many days, and her presence blessed the very boards she trod on. She is a most
noble lady; and if you will not admit, sir, that her sweet spirit and pure soul have not banished
from this earth every taint of wickedness left here by her father, then, sir, bedad, stand
where you are and draw!"

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

RECENT FICTION.

SOME WOMEN I HAVE KNOWN.

By MAARTEN MAARTENS, author of "God's Fool," etc. With Frontispiece. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

THE WAGE OF CHARACTER.

By JULIEN GORDON, author of "Mrs. Clyde," etc. With Portrait. 12mo. Cloth, $1.25.

     Julien Gordon's new novel is a story of the world of fashion and
     intrigue, written with an insight, an epigrammatic force, and a
     realization of the dramatic and the pathetic as well as more
     superficial phases of life, that stamp the book as one immediate
     and personal in its interest and convincing in its appeal to the
     minds and to the sympathies of readers.

THE QUIBERON TOUCH.

A Romance of the Sea. By CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY, author of "For the Freedom of the Sea," "The
Grip of Honor," etc. With Frontispiece. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "This story has a real beauty; it breathes of the sea. Fenimore
     Cooper would not be ashamed to own a disciple in the school of
     which he was master in these descriptions of the tug of war as it
     was in the eighteenth century between battle-ships under
     sail."--New York Mail and Express.

SHIPMATES.

A Volume of Salt-Water Fiction. By MORGAN ROBERTSON, author of "Masters of Men," etc. With
Frontispiece. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     When Mr. Robertson writes of the sea, the tang of the brine and the
     snap of the sea-breeze are felt behind his words. The adventures
     and mysteries of sea life, the humors and strange complications
     possible in yachting, the inner tragedies of the foks'l, the
     delightful adventures of Finnegan in war, and the original
     developments in the course of true love at sea, are among the vivid
     pictures that make up a volume so vital in its interests and
     dramatic in its situations, so delightful in its quaint humor and
     so vigorous and stirring throughout, that it will be read by sea
     lovers for its full flavor of the sea, and by others as a
     refreshing tonic.

A NEST OF LINNETS.

By F. FRANKFORT MOORE, author of "The Jessamy Bride," "A Gray Eye or So," etc. Illustrated.
12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "That 'A Nest of Linnets' is bright, clever, and well written
     follows as a matter of course, considering that it was written by
     F. Frankfort Moore."--Philadelphia Telegraph.

THE ETERNAL CITY.

By HALL CAINE, author of "The Christian," "The Manxman," "The Bondman," "The Deemster," etc.
12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "A powerful novel, inspired by a lofty conception, and carried out
     with unusual force. It is the greatest thing that Hall Caine has
     ever attempted."--Brooklyn Eagle.

THE TELLER.

By EDWARD NOYES WESTCOTT, author of "David Harum." Illustrated, 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

     The publishers of "David Harum" have the pleasure of presenting the
     only other story written by the lamented Edward Noyes Westcott. Mr.
     Westcott's business life lay with practical financial matters, and
     in "The Teller" he has drawn upon his knowledge of life in a bank.

WHEN LOVE FLIES OUT O' THE WINDOW.

By LEONARD MERRICK. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper, 50 cents.

     "The attention of the reader is held from start to finish, because
     the whole plot is original, and one can not tell what is going to
     happen next."--Washington Times.

THE BELEAGUERED FOREST.

By ELIA W. PEATTIE. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "'The Beleaguered Forest' is not a novel--it is a romance; it is
     not a romance--it is a poem."--Chicago Post.

SHACKLETT.

A Story of American Politics. By WALTER BARR. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "As a picture of American political life and possibilities it is
     wonderfully vivid and truthful."--Brooklyn Eagle.

FOUR-LEAVED CLOVER.

By MAXWELL GRAY, author of "The Silence of Dean Maitland." 12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper, 50 cents.

     "An honest piece of work by a story-teller who knows her trade
     thoroughly.... It is a book which ought to be in every
     hammock."--Pittsburg Commercial Gazette.

A WOMAN ALONE.

By MRS. W.K. CLIFFORD, author of "Love Letters of a Worldly Woman." 12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper,
50 cents.

     "Mrs. Clifford is an adroit writer, whose knowledge of the world
     and whose brilliancy have not destroyed in her a simple tenderness
     to which every sensitive reader must respond."--Chicago Tribune.

MILLS OF GOD.

By ELINOR MACARTNEY LANE. Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "It is a good novel in comparison with even the best in current
     American fiction. Its author, in this her maiden effort, easily
     takes her place among the Churchills and the Johnstons and the
     Runkles."--New York Herald.

THE SEAL OF SILENCE.

By ARTHUR R. CONDER. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00; paper, 50 cents.

     "A novel of marked originality, of extraordinary strength.... I
     recommend this very dramatic and exciting story, with its quaint
     love interest and its dry, quiet humor, to all lovers of a good
     story capitally conceived and happily told."--GEORGE S.
     GOODWIN, in Philadelphia Item.

THE MAN WHO KNEW BETTER.

By T. GALLON, author of "Tatterley," etc. Illustrated by Gordon Browne. 8vo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "The best Christmas story that has appeared since the death of
     Charles Dickens.... It is an admirably written story, and merits
     warm welcome and broad recognition."--Baltimore Sun.

UNDER THE SKYLIGHTS.

By HENRY B. FULLER, author of "The Chevalier of Pensieri-Vani," "The Cliff Dwellers," etc.
12mo. Deckle edge, gilt top, $1.50.

     The charming humor, delightful flavor, and refined quality of Mr.
     Fuller's work impart a peculiar zest to this subtly satirical
     picture of the extraordinary vicissitudes of arts and letters in a
     Western metropolis.

THE APOSTLES OF THE SOUTHEAST.

By FRANK T. BULLEN, author of "The Cruise of the Cachalot," "Idyls of the Sea," etc. 12mo.
Cloth, $1.50.

     "Mr. Bullen writes with a sympathy and pathetic touch rare indeed.
     His characters are living ones, his scenes full of life and
     realism, and there is not a page in the whole book which is not
     brimful of deepest interest."--Philadelphia Item.

THE ALIEN.

By F.F. MONTRÉSOR, author of "Into the Highways and Hedges," etc. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

     "May be confidently commended to the most exacting reader as an
     absorbing story, excellently told."--Kansas City Star.

WHILE CHARLIE WAS AWAY.

By MRS. POULTNEY BIGELOW. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

     Mrs. Bigelow tells a wonderfully vivid story of a woman in London
     "smart" life whose hunger for love involves her in perils, but
     finds a true way out in the end.

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.