 In most cases the parturition will be natural and easy, and the less the cow is disturbed or meddled
with, the better.

She will do better without help than with it; but she should be watched, in order to see that
no difficulty occurs which may require aid and attention.

'He was quite comfortable when we left him, Mrs. Sarratt. There's a wonderful difference, even
since yesterday, in his mind. He's beginning to remember everything. He knows you're coming.
He said--"Give her my dear love, and tell her I'm not going to have my supper till she comes.
She shall give it me." Think of that! It's like a miracle. Three weeks ago, he never spoke,
he knew nobody.'

Nelly's white face trembled, but she said nothing. Howson put her into the foremost car, and
they were soon off, threading their way through the busy streets of the base, while the Sister
followed with Cicely.

'Oh, it was cruel not to let Mrs. Sarratt know earlier!' said the Sister indignantly, in answer
to a hurried question from Cicely as soon as they were alone. 'She might have had three weeks
with him, and now there can only be a day or two. What was Miss Cookson about? Even if she
were just mistaken, she might at least have brought her sister over to see for herself--instead
of preventing it by every means in her power. A most extraordinary woman!'

Cicely felt her way in reply. She really knew nothing except what Farrell had been able hurriedly
to say to Marsworth at Windermere station--which had been afterwards handed on to her. Farrell
himself was entirely mystified. 'The only motive I can suggest'--he had said to Marsworth--'is
that Miss Cookson had an insane dislike of her brother-in-law. But, even so, why did she do it?'

Why, indeed? Cicely now heard the whole story from her companion; and her shrewd mind very
soon began to guess at reasons. She had always observed Bridget's complaisance towards her
brother, and even towards herself--a clumsy complaisance which had never appealed at all either
to her or him. And she had noticed many small traits and incidents that seemed to shew that
Bridget had resented her sister's marriage, and felt bitterly that Nelly might have done far
better for herself. Also that there was a strong taste for personal luxury in Bridget, which
seemed entirely lacking in Nelly.

'She wanted Willy's money!'--thought Cicely--'and couldn't get it for herself. So when poor
Sarratt disappeared, she saw a way of getting it through Nelly. Not a bad idea!--if you are
to have ideas of that kind. But then, why behave like an idiot when Providence had done the
thing for you?'

That was really the puzzle. George Sarratt was dying. Why not let poor Nelly have her last
weeks with him in peace, and then--in time--marry her safely and lawfully to Willy?

But Cicely had again some inkling of Bridget's probable reply. She had not been intimate with
Nelly for more than a year without realising that she was one of those creatures--so rare in
our modern world--who do in truth live and die by their affections. The disappearance of her
husband had very nearly killed her. In the first winter after he was finally reported as 'Missing--believed
killed,' and when she had really abandoned hope, the slightest accident--a bad chill--an attack
of childish illness--any further shock--might have slit the thin-spun life in a few days or
weeks. The Torquay doctor had told Hester that she was on the brink of tuberculosis, and if
she were exposed to infection would certainly develop it. Since then she had gained greatly
in vitality and strength. If only Fate had left her alone! 'With happiness and Willy, she'd
have been all right!' thought Cicely, who was daily accustomed to watch the effect of mind
on body in her brother's hospital.