And the sheriffs promptly echoed it.  Presently the General elbowed his way through the crowd
of spectators, with his arms full of law-books, and on his ears fell an order from the judge
which was the first respectful recognition of his high official dignity that had ever saluted
them, and it trickled pleasantly through his whole system:

"Way for the United States Attorney!"

The witnesses were called--legislators, high government officers, ranchmen, miners, Indians,
Chinamen, negroes.  Three fourths of them were called by the defendant Morgan, but no matter,
their testimony invariably went in favor of the plaintiff Hyde.  Each new witness only added
new testimony to the absurdity of a man's claiming to own another man's property because his
farm had slid down on top of it.  Then the Morgan lawyers made their speeches, and seemed to
make singularly weak ones --they did really nothing to help the Morgan cause.  And now the
General, with exultation in his face, got up and made an impassioned effort; he pounded the
table, he banged the law-books, he shouted, and roared, and howled, he quoted from everything
and everybody, poetry, sarcasm, statistics, history, pathos, bathos, blasphemy, and wound up
with a grand war-whoop for free speech, freedom of the press, free schools, the Glorious Bird
of America and the principles of eternal justice! [Applause.]

When the General sat down, he did it with the conviction that if there was anything in good
strong testimony, a great speech and believing and admiring countenances all around, Mr. Morgan's
case was killed. Ex-Governor Roop leant his head upon his hand for some minutes, thinking,
and the still audience waited for his decision.  Then he got up and stood erect, with bended
head, and thought again.  Then he walked the floor with long, deliberate strides, his chin
in his hand, and still the audience waited.  At last he returned to his throne, seated himself,
and began impressively:

"Gentlemen, I feel the great responsibility that rests upon me this day. This is no ordinary
case.  On the contrary it is plain that it is the most solemn and awful that ever man was called
upon to decide. Gentlemen, I have listened attentively to the evidence, and have perceived
that the weight of it, the overwhelming weight of it, is in favor of the plaintiff Hyde.  I
have listened also to the remarks of counsel, with high interest--and especially will I commend
the masterly and irrefutable logic of the distinguished gentleman who represents the plaintiff.
But gentlemen, let us beware how we allow mere human testimony, human ingenuity in argument
and human ideas of equity, to influence us at a moment so solemn as this.  Gentlemen, it ill
becomes us, worms as we are, to meddle with the decrees of Heaven.  It is plain to me that
Heaven, in its inscrutable wisdom, has seen fit to move this defendant's ranch for a purpose.
We are but creatures, and we must submit.  If Heaven has chosen to favor the defendant Morgan
in this marked and wonderful manner; and if Heaven, dissatisfied with the position of the Morgan
ranch upon the mountain side, has chosen to remove it to a position more eligible and more
advantageous for its owner, it ill becomes us, insects as we are, to question the legality
of the act or inquire into the reasons that prompted it.  No--Heaven created the ranches and
it is Heaven's prerogative to rearrange them, to experiment with them around at its pleasure.
It is for us to submit, without repining.

"I warn you that this thing which has happened is a thing with which the sacrilegious hands
and brains and tongues of men must not meddle. Gentlemen, it is the verdict of this court that
the plaintiff, Richard Hyde, has been deprived of his ranch by the visitation of God!  And
from this decision there is no appeal."

Buncombe seized his cargo of law-books and plunged out of the court-room frantic with indignation.
He pronounced Roop to be a miraculous fool, an inspired idiot.  In all good faith he returned
at night and remonstrated with Roop upon his extravagant decision, and implored him to walk
the floor and think for half an hour, and see if he could not figure out some sort of modification
of the verdict.  Roop yielded at last and got up to walk.  He walked two hours and a half,
and at last his face lit up happily and he told Buncombe it had occurred to him that the ranch
underneath the new Morgan ranch still belonged to Hyde, that his title to the ground was just
as good as it had ever been, and therefore he was of opinion that Hyde had a right to dig it
out from under there and--

The General never waited to hear the end of it.  He was always an impatient and irascible man,
that way.  At the end of two months the fact that he had been played upon with a joke had managed
to bore itself, like another Hoosac Tunnel, through the solid adamant of his understanding.

CHAPTER XXXV.

When we finally left for Esmeralda, horseback, we had an addition to the company in the person
of Capt. John Nye, the Governor's brother.  He had a good memory, and a tongue hung in the
middle.  This is a combination which gives immortality to conversation.  Capt. John never suffered
the talk to flag or falter once during the hundred and twenty miles of the journey.  In addition
to his conversational powers, he had one or two other endowments of a marked character.  One
was a singular "handiness" about doing anything and everything, from laying out a railroad
or organizing a political party, down to sewing on buttons, shoeing a horse, or setting a broken
leg, or a hen.  Another was a spirit of accommodation that prompted him to take the needs,
difficulties and perplexities of anybody and everybody upon his own shoulders at any and all
times, and dispose of them with admirable facility and alacrity--hence he always managed to
find vacant beds in crowded inns, and plenty to eat in the emptiest larders.  And finally,
wherever he met a man, woman or child, in camp, inn or desert, he either knew such parties
personally or had been acquainted with a relative of the same.  Such another traveling comrade
was never seen before.  I cannot forbear giving a specimen of the way in which he overcame
difficulties.  On the second day out, we arrived, very tired and hungry, at a poor little inn
in the desert, and were told that the house was full, no provisions on hand, and neither hay
nor barley to spare for the horses--must move on.  The rest of us wanted to hurry on while
it was yet light, but Capt. John insisted on stopping awhile. We dismounted and entered.  There
was no welcome for us on any face. Capt. John began his blandishments, and within twenty minutes
he had accomplished the following things, viz.: found old acquaintances in three teamsters;
discovered that he used to go to school with the landlord's mother; recognized his wife as
a lady whose life he had saved once in California, by stopping her runaway horse; mended a
child's broken toy and won the favor of its mother, a guest of the inn; helped the hostler
bleed a horse, and prescribed for another horse that had the "heaves"; treated the entire party
three times at the landlord's bar; produced a later paper than anybody had seen for a week
and sat himself down to read the news to a deeply interested audience.  The result, summed
up, was as follows: The hostler found plenty of feed for our horses; we had a trout supper,
an exceedingly sociable time after it, good beds to sleep in, and a surprising breakfast in
the morning--and when we left, we left lamented by all!  Capt. John had some bad traits, but
he had some uncommonly valuable ones to offset them with.

Esmeralda was in many respects another Humboldt, but in a little more forward state.  The claims
we had been paying assessments on were entirely worthless, and we threw them away.  The principal
one cropped out of the top of a knoll that was fourteen feet high, and the inspired Board of
Directors were running a tunnel under that knoll to strike the ledge.  The tunnel would have
to be seventy feet long, and would then strike the ledge at the same dept that a shaft twelve
feet deep would have reached!  The Board were living on the "assessments."  [N.B.--This hint
comes too late for the enlightenment of New York silver miners; they have already learned all
about this neat trick by experience.]  The Board had no desire to strike the ledge, knowing
that it was as barren of silver as a curbstone.  This reminiscence calls to mind Jim Townsend's
tunnel.  He had paid assessments on a mine called the "Daley" till he was well-nigh penniless.
Finally an assessment was levied to run a tunnel two hundred and fifty feet on the Daley, and
Townsend went up on the hill to look into matters. 

"You, ma tante, preach better than any preacher."

"Do you know what?" said Mariette.

"Come into my box to-morrow."

"I am afraid I shall not be able to."

The footman interrupted the conversation by announcing a visitor.

It was the secretary of a philanthropic society of which the Countess was president.

"Oh, that is the dullest of men. I think I shall receive him out there,
and return to you later on. Mariette, give him his tea," said the
Countess, and left the room, with her quick, wriggling walk.

Mariette
took the glove off her firm, rather flat hand, the fourth finger of
which was covered with rings.

"Want any?" she said, taking hold of
the silver teapot, under which a spirit lamp was burning, and extending
her little finger curiously.

We took up various claims, and commenced shafts and tunnels on them, but never finished any
of them.  We had to do a certain amount of work on each to "hold" it, else other parties could
seize our property after the expiration of ten days.  We were always hunting up new claims
and doing a little work on them and then waiting for a buyer--who never came.  We never found
any ore that would yield more than fifty dollars a ton; and as the mills charged fifty dollars
a ton for working ore and extracting the silver, our pocket-money melted steadily away and
none returned to take its place.  We lived in a little cabin and cooked for ourselves; and
altogether it was a hard life, though a hopeful one--for we never ceased to expect fortune
and a customer to burst upon us some day.

At last, when flour reached a dollar a pound, and money could not be borrowed on the best security
at less than eight per cent a month (I being without the security, too), I abandoned mining
and went to milling. That is to say, I went to work as a common laborer in a quartz mill, at
ten dollars a week and board.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

I had already learned how hard and long and dismal a task it is to burrow down into the bowels
of the earth and get out the coveted ore; and now I learned that the burrowing was only half
the work; and that to get the silver out of the ore was the dreary and laborious other half
of it. We had to turn out at six in the morning and keep at it till dark. This mill was a six-stamp
affair, driven by steam.  Six tall, upright rods of iron, as large as a man's ankle, and heavily
shod with a mass of iron and steel at their lower ends, were framed together like a gate, and
these rose and fell, one after the other, in a ponderous dance, in an iron box called a "battery."
Each of these rods or stamps weighed six hundred pounds.  One of us stood by the battery all
day long, breaking up masses of silver-bearing rock with a sledge and shoveling it into the
battery.  The ceaseless dance of the stamps pulverized the rock to powder, and a stream of
water that trickled into the battery turned it to a creamy paste.  The minutest particles were
driven through a fine wire screen which fitted close around the battery, and were washed into
great tubs warmed by super-heated steam--amalgamating pans, they are called. The mass of pulp
in the pans was kept constantly stirred up by revolving "mullers."  A quantity of quicksilver
was kept always in the battery, and this seized some of the liberated gold and silver particles
and held on to them; quicksilver was shaken in a fine shower into the pans, also, about every
half hour, through a buckskin sack.  Quantities of coarse salt and sulphate of copper were
added, from time to time to assist the amalgamation by destroying base metals which coated
the gold and silver and would not let it unite with the quicksilver.

All these tiresome things we had to attend to constantly.  Streams of dirty water flowed always
from the pans and were carried off in broad wooden troughs to the ravine.  One would not suppose
that atoms of gold and silver would float on top of six inches of water, but they did; and
in order to catch them, coarse blankets were laid in the troughs, and little obstructing "riffles"
charged with quicksilver were placed here and there across the troughs also.  These riffles
had to be cleaned and the blankets washed out every evening, to get their precious accumulations--and
after all this eternity of trouble one third of the silver and gold in a ton of rock would
find its way to the end of the troughs in the ravine at last and have to be worked over again
some day. There is nothing so aggravating as silver milling.  There never was any idle time
in that mill.  There was always something to do.  It is a pity that Adam could not have gone
straight out of Eden into a quartz mill, in order to understand the full force of his doom
to "earn his bread by the sweat of his brow."  Every now and then, during the day, we had to
scoop some pulp out of the pans, and tediously "wash" it in a horn spoon--wash it little by
little over the edge till at last nothing was left but some little dull globules of quicksilver
in the bottom.  If they were soft and yielding, the pan needed some salt or some sulphate of
copper or some other chemical rubbish to assist digestion; if they were crisp to the touch
and would retain a dint, they were freighted with all the silver and gold they could seize
and hold, and consequently the pan needed a fresh charge of quicksilver.  When there was nothing
else to do, one could always "screen tailings."  That is to say, he could shovel up the dried
sand that had washed down to the ravine through the troughs and dash it against an upright
wire screen to free it from pebbles and prepare it for working over.

The process of amalgamation differed in the various mills, and this included changes in style
of pans and other machinery, and a great diversity of opinion existed as to the best in use,
but none of the methods employed, involved the principle of milling ore without "screening
the tailings."  Of all recreations in the world, screening tailings on a hot day, with a long-handled
shovel, is the most undesirable.

At the end of the week the machinery was stopped and we "cleaned up." That is to say, we got
the pulp out of the pans and batteries, and washed the mud patiently away till nothing was
left but the long accumulating mass of quicksilver, with its imprisoned treasures.  This we
made into heavy, compact snow-balls, and piled them up in a bright, luxurious heap for inspection.
Making these snow-balls cost me a fine gold ring--that and ignorance together; for the quicksilver
invaded the ring with the same facility with which water saturates a sponge--separated its
particles and the ring crumbled to pieces.

We put our pile of quicksilver balls into an iron retort that had a pipe leading from it to
a pail of water, and then applied a roasting heat. The quicksilver turned to vapor, escaped
through the pipe into the pail, and the water turned it into good wholesome quicksilver again.
Quicksilver is very costly, and they never waste it.  On opening the retort, there was our
week's work--a lump of pure white, frosty looking silver, twice as large as a man's head. 
Perhaps a fifth of the mass was gold, but the color of it did not show--would not have shown
if two thirds of it had been gold.  We melted it up and made a solid brick of it by pouring
it into an iron brick-mould.

By such a tedious and laborious process were silver bricks obtained. This mill was but one
of many others in operation at the time.  The first one in Nevada was built at Egan Canyon
and was a small insignificant affair and compared most unfavorably with some of the immense
establishments afterwards located at Virginia City and elsewhere.

From our bricks a little corner was chipped off for the "fire-assay"--a method used to determine
the proportions of gold, silver and base metals in the mass.  This is an interesting process.
The chip is hammered out as thin as paper and weighed on scales so fine and sensitive that
if you weigh a two-inch scrap of paper on them and then write your name on the paper with a
course, soft pencil and weigh it again, the scales will take marked notice of the addition.

Then a little lead (also weighed) is rolled up with the flake of silver and the two are melted
at a great heat in a small vessel called a cupel, made by compressing bone ashes into a cup-shape
in a steel mold.  The base metals oxydize and are absorbed with the lead into the pores of
the cupel.  A button or globule of perfectly pure gold and silver is left behind, and by weighing
it and noting the loss, the assayer knows the proportion of base metal the brick contains.
He has to separate the gold from the silver now.  The button is hammered out flat and thin,
put in the furnace and kept some time at a red heat; after cooling it off it is rolled up like
a quill and heated in a glass vessel containing nitric acid; the acid dissolves the silver
and leaves the gold pure and ready to be weighed on its own merits.  Then salt water is poured
into the vessel containing the dissolved silver and the silver returns to palpable form again
and sinks to the bottom.  Nothing now remains but to weigh it; then the proportions of the
several metals contained in the brick are known, and the assayer stamps the value of the brick
upon its surface.

The sagacious reader will know now, without being told, that the speculative miner, in getting
a "fire-assay" made of a piece of rock from his mine (to help him sell the same), was not in
the habit of picking out the least valuable fragment of rock on his dump-pile, but quite the
contrary.  I have seen men hunt over a pile of nearly worthless quartz for an hour, and at
last find a little piece as large as a filbert, which was rich in gold and silver--and this
was reserved for a fire-assay!  Of course the fire-assay would demonstrate that a ton of such
rock would yield hundreds of dollars--and on such assays many an utterly worthless mine was sold.

Assaying was a good business, and so some men engaged in it, occasionally, who were not strictly
scientific and capable.  One assayer got such rich results out of all specimens brought to
him that in time he acquired almost a monopoly of the business.  But like all men who achieve
success, he became an object of envy and suspicion.  The other assayers entered into a conspiracy
against him, and let some prominent citizens into the secret in order to show that they meant
fairly.  Then they broke a little fragment off a carpenter's grindstone and got a stranger
to take it to the popular scientist and get it assayed.  In the course of an hour the result
came--whereby it appeared that a ton of that rock would yield $1,184.40 in silver and $366.36
in gold!

