So the Princess prattled on without needing much reply, until her namesake had finished her
work, with which she was well pleased, and promised to remember her.  To Anne it was an absolute
marvel how she could thus talk when she knew that her husband had deserted her father in his
need, and that things were in a most critical position.

The Queen could not refrain from a sigh of relief when her step- daughter had retired to the
Cockpit; and after seeking her sleepless bed, she begged Anne, "if it did not too much incommode
her, to read to her from the Gospel."

The next day was Sunday, and Anne felt almost as if deserting her cause, when going to the
English service in Whitehall Chapel Royal, now almost emptied except of the Princess's suite,
and some of these had the bad taste and profanity to cough and chatter all through the special
prayer drawn up by the Archbishop for the King's safety.

People were not very reverent, and as all stood up at the end of the Advent Sunday service
to let the Princess sweep by in her glittering green satin petticoat, peach-coloured velvet
train, and feather- crowned head, she laid a hand on Anne's arm, and whispered, "Follow me
to my closet, little Woodford."

There was no choice but to obey, as the Queen would not require her reader till after dinner,
and Anne followed after the various attendants, who did not seem very willing to forward a
private interview with a possible rival, though, as Anne supposed, the object must be to convey
some message to the Queen.  By the time she arrived and had been admitted to the inner chamber
or dressing-room, the Princess had thrown off her more cumbrous finery, and sat at ease in
an arm-chair.  She nodded her be-curled head, and said, "You can keep a secret, little Woodie?"

"I can, madam, but I do not love one," said Anne, thinking of her most burthensome one.

"Well, no need to keep this long.  You are a good young maiden, and my own poor mother's godchild,
and you are handy and notable.  You deserve better preferment than ever you will get in that
Popish household, where your religion is in danger.  Now, I am not going to be in jeopardy
here any longer, nor let myself be kept hostage for his Highness.  Come to my rooms at bedtime.
Slip in when I wish the Queen good-night, and I'll find an excuse.  Then you shall come with
me to--no, I'll not say where, and I'll make your fortune, only mum's the word."

"But--Your Royal Highness is very good, but I am sworn to the Prince and Queen.  I could not
leave them without permission."

"Prince!  Prince!  Pretty sort of a Prince.  Prince of brickbats, as Churchill says.  Nay,
girl, don't turn away in that fashion. Consider.  Your religion is in danger."

"Nay, madam, my religion would not be served by breaking my oath."

"Pooh!  What's your oath to a mere pretender?  Besides, consider your fortune.  Rocker to a
puling babe--even if he was what they say he is.  And don't build on the Queen's favour--even
if she remains what she is now, she is too much beset with Papists and foreigners to do anything
for you."

"I do not," Anne began to say, but the Princess gave her no time.

"Besides, pride will have a fall, and if you are a good maid, and hold your tongue, and serve
me well in this strait, I'll make you my maid of honour, and marry you so that you shall put
Lady before your name.  Ay, and get good preferment for your uncle, who has had only a poor
stall from the King here."

Anne repressed an inclination to say this was not the way in which her uncle would wish to
get promotion, and only replied, "Your Royal Highness is very good, but--"

Whereat the Princess, in a huff, exclaimed, "Oh, very well, if you choose to be torn to pieces
by the mob, and slaughtered by the priests, like poor Godfrey, and burnt by the Papists at
last, unless you go to Mass, you may stay for aught I care, and joy go with you. I thought
I was doing you a kindness for my poor mother's sake, but it seems you know best.  If you like
to cast in your lot with the Pope, I wash my hands of you."

Accordingly Anne courtesied herself off, not seriously alarmed as to the various catastrophes
foretold by the Princess, though a little shaken in nerves.  Here then was another chance of
promotion, certainly without treason to her profession of faith, but so offered that honour
could not but revolt against it, though in truth poor Princess Anne was neither so foolish
nor so heartless a woman as she appeared in the excitement to which an uneasy conscience, the
expectation of a great enterprise, and a certain amount of terror had worked her up; but she
had high words again in the evening, as was supposed, with the Queen.  Certainly Anne found
her own Royal Mistress weeping and agitated, though she only owned to being very anxious about
the health of the King, who had had a second violent attack of bleeding at the nose, and she
did not seem consoled by the assurances of her elder attendants that the relief had probably
saved him from a far more dangerous attack.  Again Anne read to her till a late hour, but next
morning was strangely disturbed.

The Royal household had not been long dressed, and breakfast had just been served to the ladies,
when loud screams were heard, most startling in the unsettled and anxious state of affairs.
The Queen, pale and trembling, came out of her chamber with her hair on her shoulders.  "Tell
me at once, for pity's sake.  Is it my husband or my son?" she asked with clasped hands, as
two or three of the Princess's servants rushed forward.

"The Princess, the Princess!" was the cry, "the priests have murdered her."

"What have you done with her, madam?" rudely demanded Mrs. Buss, one of the lost lady's nurses.

Mary Beatrice drew herself up with grave dignity, saying, "I suppose your mistress is where
she likes to be.  I know nothing of her, but I have no doubt that you will soon hear of her."

There was something in the Queen's manner that hushed the outcry in her presence, but the women,
with Lady Clarendon foremost of them, continued to seek up and down the two palaces as if they
thought the substantial person of the Princess Anne could be hidden in a cupboard.

Anne, in the first impulse, exclaimed, "She is gone!"

In a moment Mrs. Royer turned, "Gone, did you say?  Do you know it?"

"You knew it and kept it secret!" cried Lady Strickland.

"A traitor too!" said Lady Oglethorpe, in her vehement Irish tone. "I would not have thought
it of Nanny Moore's daughter!" and she turned her eyes in sad reproach on Anne.

"If you know, tell me where she is gone," cried Mrs. Buss, and the cry was re-echoed by the
other women, while Anne's startled "I cannot tell!  I do not know!" was unheeded.

Only the Queen raising her hand gravely said, "Silence!  What is this?"

"Miss Woodford knew."

"And never told!" cried the babble of voices.

"Come hither, Mistress Woodford," said the Queen.  "Tell me, do you know where Her Highness is?"

"No, please your Majesty," said Anne, trembling from head to foot. "I do not know where she is."

"Did you know of her purpose?"

"Your Majesty pardon me.  She called me to her closet yesterday and pledged me to secrecy before
I knew what she would say."

"Only youthful inexperience will permit that pledge to be implied in matters of State," said
the Queen.  "Continue, Mistress Woodford; what did she tell you?"

"She said she feared to be made a hostage for the Prince of Denmark, and meant to escape, and
she bade me come to her chamber at night to go with her."

"And wherefore did you not?  You are of her religion," said the Queen bitterly.

"Madam, how could I break mine oath to your Majesty and His Royal Highness?"

"And you thought concealing the matter according to that oath?  Nay, nay, child, I blame you
not.  It was a hard strait between your honour to her and your duty to the King and to me,
and I cannot but be thankful to any one who does regard her word.  But this desertion will
be a sore grief to His Majesty."

Mary Beatrice was fairer-minded than the women, who looked askance at the girl, Princess Anne's
people resenting that one of the other household should have been chosen as confidante, and
the Queen's being displeased that the secret had been kept.  But at that moment frightful yells
and shouts arose, and a hasty glance from the windows showed a mass of men, women, and children
howling for their Princess.  They would tear down Whitehall if she were not delivered up to
them.  However, a line of helmeted Life-guards on their heavy horses was drawn up between,
with sabres held upright, and there seemed no disposition to rush upon these.  Lord Clarendon,
uncle to the Princess, had satisfied himself that she had really escaped, and he now came out
and assured the mob, in a stentorian voice, that he was perfectly satisfied of his niece's
safety, waving the letter she had left on her toilet-table.

The mob shouted, "Bless the Princess!  Hurrah for the Protestant faith!  No warming-pans!"
but in a good-tempered mood; and the poor little garrison breathed more freely; but Anne did
not feel herself forgiven.  She was in a manner sent to Coventry, and treated as if she were
on the enemy's side.  Never had her proud nature suffered so much, and she shed bitter tears
as she said to herself, "It is very unjust!  What could I have done?  How could I stop Her
Highness from speaking?  Could they expect me to run in and accuse her?  Oh, that I were at
home again!  Mother, mother, you little know!  Of what use am I now?"

It was the very question asked by Hester Bridgeman, whom she found packing her clothes in her room.

"Take care that this is sent after me," she said, "when a messenger I shall send calls for it."

"What, you have your dismissal?"

"No, I should no more get it than you have done.  They cannot afford to let any one go, you
see, or they will have to dress up the chambermaids to stand behind the Queen's chair.  I have
settled it with my cousin, Harry Bridgeman, I shall mix with the throng that come to ask for
news, and be off with him before the crowd breaks in, as they will some of these days, for
the guards are but half- hearted.  My Portia, why did not you take a good offer, and go with
the Princess?"

"I thought it would be base."

"And much you gained by it!  You are only suspected and accused."

"I can't be a rat leaving a sinking ship."

"That is courteous, but I forgive it, Portia, as I know you will repent of your folly.  But
you never did know which side to look for the butter."

Perhaps seeing how ugly desertion and defection looked in others made constancy easier to Anne,
much as she longed for the Close at Winchester, and she even thought with a hope of the Golden
Lamb, Gracechurch, as an immediate haven sure to give her a welcome.

Her occupation of reading to the Queen was ended by the King's return, so physically exhausted
by violent nose-bleeding, so despondent at the universal desertion, and so broken-hearted at
his daughter's defection, that his wife was absorbed in attending upon him.

Anne began to watch for an opportunity to demand a dismissal, which she thought would exempt
her from all blame, but she was surprised and a little dismayed by being summoned to the King
in the Queen's chamber.  He was lying on a couch clad in a loose dressing-gown instead of his
laced coat, and a red night-cap replacing his heavy peruke, and his face was as white and sallow
as if he were recovering from a long illness.

"Little godchild," he said, holding out his hand as Anne made her obeisance, "the Queen tells
me you can read well.  I have a fancy to hear."

Immensely relieved at the kindness of his tone, Anne courtesied, and murmured out her willingness.

"Read this," he said; "I would fain hear this; my father loved it. Here."

Anne felt her task a hard one when the King pointed to the third Act of Shakespeare's Richard II.

There she fairly broke down, and sobbed.

"Little one, little one," said James, you are sorry for poor Richard, eh?"

"Oh, sir!" was all she could say.

"And you are in disgrace, they tell me, because my daughter chose to try to entice you away,"
said James, "and you felt bound not to betray her.  Never mind; it was an awkward case of conscience,
and there's not too much faithfulness to spare in these days.  We shall know whom to trust
to another time.  Can you continue now?  I would take a lesson how, 'with mine own hands to
give away my crown.'"

It was well for Anne that fresh tidings were brought in at that moment, and she had to retire,
with the sore feeling turned into an enthusiastic pity and loyalty, which needed the relief
of sobs and mental vows of fidelity.  She felt herself no longer in disgrace with her Royal
master and mistress, but she was not in favour with her few companions left--all who could
not get over her secrecy, and thought her at least a half traitor as well as a heretic.

Whitehall was almost in a state of siege, the turbulent mob continually coming to shout, 'No
Popery!' and the like, though they proceeded no farther.  The ministers and other gentlemen
came and went, but the priests and the ladies durst not venture out for fear of being recognised
and insulted, if not injured.  Bad news came in from day to day, and no tidings of the Prince
of Wales being in safety in France.  Once Anne received a letter from her uncle, which cheered
her much.

DEAR CHILD--So far as I can gather, your employment is at an end, if it be true as reported
that the Prince of Wales is at Portsmouth, with the intent that he should be carried to France;
but the gentlemen of the navy seem strongly disposed to prevent such a transportation of the
heir of the realm to a foreign country.  I fear me that you are in a state of doubt and anxiety,
but I need not exhort your good mother's child to be true and loyal to her trust and to the
Anointed of the Lord in all things lawful at all costs.  If you are left in any distress or
perplexity, go either to Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe's house, or to that of my good old friend,
the Dean of Westminster; and as soon as I hear from you I will endeavour to ride to town and
bring you home to my house, which is greatly at a loss without its young mistress.

The letter greatly refreshed Anne's spirits, and gave her something to look forward to, giving
her energy to stitch at a set of lawn cuffs and bands for her uncle, and think with the more
pleasure of a return that his time of residence at Winchester lay between her and that vault
in the castle.

There were no more attempts made at her conversion.  Every one was too anxious and occupied,
and one or more of the chiefly obnoxious priests were sent privately away from day to day.
While summer friends departed, Anne often thought of Bishop Ken's counsel as to loyalty to
Heaven and man.

KEBLE.

The news was even worse and worse in that palace of despondency and terror.  Notice had arrived
that Lord Dartmouth was withheld from despatching the young Prince to France by his own scruples
and those of the navy; and orders were sent for the child's return.  Then came a terrible alarm.
The escort sent to meet him were reported to have been attacked by the rabble on entering London
and dispersed, so that each man had to shift for himself.

There was a quarter of an hour which seemed many hours of fearful suspense, while King and
Queen both knelt at their altar, praying in agony for the child whom they pictured to themselves
in the hands of the infuriated mob, too much persuaded of his being an imposture to pity his
unconscious innocence.  No one who saw the blanched cheeks and agonised face of Mary Beatrice,
or James's stern, mute misery, could have believed for a moment in the cruel delusion that
he was no child of theirs.

The Roman Catholic women were with them.  To enter the oratory would in those circumstances
have been a surrender of principle, but none the less did Anne pray with fervent passion in
her chamber for pity for the child, and comfort for his parents.  At last there was a stir,
and hurrying out to the great stair, Anne saw a man in plain clothes replying in an Irish accent
to the King, who was supporting the Queen with his arm.  Happily the escort had missed the
Prince of Wales.  They had been obliged to turn back to London without meeting him, and from
that danger he had been saved.

A burst of tears and a cry of fervent thanksgiving relieved the Queen's heart, and James gave
eager thanks instead of the reprimand the colonel had expected for his blundering.

A little later, another messenger brought word that Lord and Lady Powys had halted at Guildford
with their charge.  A French gentleman, Monsieur de St. Victor, was understood to have undertaken
to bring him to London--understood--for everything was whispered rather than told among the
panic-stricken women.  No one who knew the expectation could go to bed that night except that
the King and Queen had--in order to disarm suspicion--to go through the accustomed ceremonies
of the coucher.  The ladies sat or lay on their beds intently listening, as hour after hour
chimed from the clocks.

At last, at about three in the morning, the challenge of the sentinels was heard from point
to point.  Every one started up, and hurried almost pell-mell towards the postern door.  The
King and Queen were both descending a stair leading from the King's dressing- room, and as
the door was cautiously opened, it admitted a figure in a fur cloak, which he unfolded, and
displayed the sleeping face of the infant well wrapped from the December cold.

With rapture the Queen gathered him into her arms, and the father kissed him with a vehemence
that made him awake and cry.  St. Victor had thought it safer that his other attendants should
come in by degrees in the morning, and thus Miss Woodford was the only actually effective nursery
attendant at hand.  His food was waiting by the fire in his own sleeping chamber, and thither
he was carried.  There the Queen held him on her lap, while Anne fed him, and he smiled at
her and held out his arms.

The King came, and making a sign to Anne not to move, stood watching.

Presently he said, "She has kept one secret, we may trust her with another."

"Oh, not yet, not yet," implored the Queen.  "Now I have both my treasures again, let me rest
in peace upon them for a little while."

The King turned away with eyes full of tears while Anne was lulling the child to sleep.  She
wondered, but durst not ask the Queen, where was the tiler's wife; but later she learnt from
Miss Dunord, that the woman had been so terrified by the cries of the multitude against the
'pretender,' and still more at the sight of the sea, that she had gone into transports of fright,
implored to go home, and perhaps half wilfully, become useless, so that the weaning already
commenced had to be expedited, and the fretfulness of the poor child had been one of the troubles
for some days.  However, he seemed on his return to have forgotten his troubles, and Anne had
him in her arms nearly all the next day.

It was not till late in the evening that Anne knew what the King had meant.  Then, while she
was walking up and down the room, amusing the little Prince with showing by turns the window
and his face in a large mirror, the Queen came in, evidently fresh from weeping, and holding
out her arms for him, said, after looking to see that there was no other audience--

"Child, the King would repose a trust in you.  He wills that you should accompany me to-night
on a voyage to France to put this little angel in safety."

"As your Majesty will," returned Anne; "I will do my best."

"So the King said.  He knew his brave sailor's daughter was worthy of his trust, and you can
speak French.  It is well, for we go under the escort of Messieurs de Lauzun and St. Victor.
Be ready at midnight.  Lady Strickland or the good Labadie will explain more to you, but do
not speak of this to anyone else.  You have leave now," she added, as she herself carried the
child towards his father's rooms.

The maiden's heart swelled at the trust reposed in her, and the King's kind words, and she
kept back the sense of anxiety and doubt as to so vague a future.  She found Mrs. Labadie lying
on her bed awake, but trying to rest between two busy nights, and she was then told that there
was to be a flight from the palace of the Queen and Prince at midnight, Mrs. Labadie and Anne
alone going with them, though Lord and Lady Powys and Lady Strickland, with the Queen's Italian
ladies, would meet them on board the yacht which was waiting at Gravesend.  The nurse advised
Anne to put a few necessary equipments into a knapsack bound under a cloak, and to leave other
garments with her own in charge of Mr. Labadie, who would despatch them with those of the suite,
and would follow in another day with the King.  Doubt or refusal there could of course be none
in such circumstances, and a high-spirited girl like Anne could not but feel a thrill of heart
at selection for such confidential and signal service at her age, scarcely seventeen.  Her
one wish was to write to her uncle what had become of her.  Mrs. Labadie hardly thought it
safe, but said her husband would take charge of a note, and if possible, post it when they
were safe gone, but nothing of the King's plans must be mentioned.

The hours passed away anxiously, and yet only too fast.  So many had quitted the palace that
there was nothing remarkable in packing, but as Anne collected her properties, she could not
help wondering whether she should ever see them again.  Sometimes her spirit rose at the thought
of serving her lovely Queen, saving the little Prince, and fulfilling the King's trust; at
others, she was full of vague depression at the thought of being cut off from all she knew
and loved, with seas between, and with so little notice to her uncle, who might never learn
where she was; but she knew she had his approval in venturing all, and making any sacrifice
for the King whom all deserted; and she really loved her Queen and little Prince.

The night came, and she and Mrs. Labadie, fully equipped in cloaks and hoods, waited together,
Anne moving about restlessly, the elder woman advising her to rest while she could.  The little
Prince, all unconscious of the dangers of the night, or of his loss of a throne, lay among
his wraps in his cradle fast asleep.

By and by the door opened, and treading softly in came the King in his dressing-gown and night-cap,
the Queen closely muffled, Lady Strickland also dressed for a journey, and two gentlemen, the
one tall and striking-looking, the other slim and dark, in their cloaks, namely, Lauzun and
St. Victor.

It was one of those supreme moments almost beyond speech or manifestation of feeling.

The King took his child in his arms, kissed him, and solemnly said to Lauzun, "I confide my
wife and son to you."

Both Frenchmen threw themselves on their knees kissing his hand with a vow of fidelity.  Then
giving the infant to Mrs. Labadie, James folded his wife in his arms in a long mute embrace;
Anne carried the basket containing food for the child; and first with a lantern went St. Victor,
then Lauzun, handing the Queen; Mrs. Labadie with the child, and Anne following, they sped
down the stairs, along the great gallery, with steps as noiseless as they could make them,
down another stair to a door which St. Victor opened.

A sentry challenged, sending a thrill of dismay through the anxious hearts, but St. Victor
had the word, and on they went into the privy gardens, where often Anne had paced behind Mrs.
Labadie as the Prince took his airing.  Startling lights from the windows fell on them, illuminating
the drops of rain that plashed round them on that grim December night, and their steps sounded
on the gravel, while still the babe, sheltered under the cloak, slept safely.  Another door
was reached, more sentries challenged and passed; here was a street whose stones and silent
houses shone for a little space as St. Victor raised his lantern and exchanged a word with
a man on the box of a carriage.

One by one they were handed in, the Queen, the child, the nurse, Anne, and Lauzun, St. Victor
taking his place outside.  As if in a dream they rattled on through the dark street, no one
speaking except that Lauzun asked the Queen if she were wet.

It was not far before they stopped at the top of the steps called the Horseferry.  A few lights
twinkled here and there, and were reflected trembling in the river, otherwise a black awful
gulf, from which, on St. Victor's cautious hail, a whistle ascended, and a cloaked figure with
a lantern came up the steps glistening in the rain.

One by one again, in deep silence, they were assisted down, and into the little boat that rocked
ominously as they entered it.  There the women crouched together over the child unable to see
one another, Anne returning the clasp of a hand on hers, believing it Mrs. Labadie's, till
on Lauzun's exclaiming, "Est ce que j'incommode sa Majeste?" the reply showed her that it was
the Queen's hand that she held, and she began a startled "Pardon, your Majesty," but the sweet
reply in Italian was, "Ah, we are as sisters in this stress."

The eager French voice of Lauzun went on, in undertones certainly, but as if he had not the
faculty of silence, and amid the plash of the oars, the rush of the river, and the roar of
the rain, it was not easy to tell what he said, his voice was only another of the noises, though
the Queen made little courteous murmurs in reply.  It was a hard pull against wind and tide
towards a little speck of green light which was shown to guide the rowers; and when at last
they reached it, St. Victor's hail was answered by Dusions, one of the servants, and they drew
to the steps where he held a lantern.

"To the coach at once, your Majesty."

"It is at the inn--ready--but I feared to let it stand."

Lauzun uttered a French imprecation under his breath, and danced on the step with impatience,
only restrained so far as to hand out the Queen and her two attendants.  He was hotly ordering
off Dusions and St. Victor to bring the coach, when the former suggested that they must find
a place for the Queen to wait in where they could find her.

"What is that dark building above?"

"Lambeth Church," Dusions answered.

"Ah, your Protestant churches are not open; there is no shelter for us there," sighed the Queen.

"There is shelter in the angle of the buttress; I have been there, your Majesty," said Dusions.

Thither then they turned.

"What can that be?" exclaimed the Queen, starting and shuddering as a fierce light flashed
in the windows and played on the wall.

"It is not within, madame," Lauzun encouraged; "it is reflected light from a fire somewhere
on the other side of the river."

"A bonfire for our expulsion.  Ah! why should they hate us so?" sighed the poor Queen.

"'Tis worse than that, only there's no need to tell Her Majesty so," whispered Mrs. Labadie,
who, in the difficulties of the ascent, had been fain to hand the still-sleeping child to Anne.
"'Tis the Catholic chapel of St. Roque.  The heretic miscreants!"

"Pray Heaven no life be lost," sighed Anne.

Sinister as the light was, it aided the poor fugitives at that dead hour of night to find an
angle between the church wall and a buttress where the eaves afforded a little shelter from
the rain, which slackened a little, when they were a little concealed from the road, so that
the light need not betray them in case any passenger was abroad at such an hour, as two chimed
from the clock overhead.

The women kept together close against the wall to avoid the drip of the eaves.  Lauzun walked
up and down like a sentinel, his arms folded, and talking all the while, though, as before,
his utterances were only an accompaniment to the falling rain and howling wind; Mary Beatrice
was murmuring prayers over the sleeping child, which she now held in the innermost corner;
Anne, with wide-stretched eyes, was gazing into the light cast beyond the buttress by the fire
on the opposite side, when again there passed across it that form she had seen on All Saints'
Eve--the unmistakable phantom of Peregrine.

It was gone into the darkness in another second; but a violent start on her part had given
a note of alarm, and brought back the Count, whose walk had been in the opposite direction.

"What was it?  Any spy?"

"Oh no--no--nothing!  It was the face of one who is dead," gasped Anne.

"The poor child's nerve is failing her," said the Queen gently, as Lauzun drawing his sword
burst out--

"If it be a spy it shall be the face of one who is dead;" and he darted into the road, but
returned in a few moments, saying no one had passed except one of the rowers returning after
running up to the inn to hasten the coach; how could he have been seen from the church wall?
The wheels were heard drawing up at that moment, so that the only thought was to enter it as
quickly as might be in the same order as before, after which the start was made, along the
road that led through the marshes of Lambeth; and then came the inquiry-- an anxious one--whom
or what mademoiselle, as Lauzun called her, had seen.

"O monsieur!" exclaimed the poor girl in her confusion, her best French failing, "it was nothing--no
living man."

"Can mademoiselle assure me of that?  The dead I fear not, the living I would defy."

"He lives not," said she in an undertone, with a shudder.

"But who is he that mademoiselle can be so certain?" asked the Frenchman.

"Oh!  I know him well enough," said Anne, unable to control her voice.

"Mademoiselle must explain herself," said M. de Lauzun.  "If he be spirit--or phantom--there
is no more to say, but if he be in the flesh, and a spy--then--"  There was a little rattle
of his sword.

"Speak, I command," interposed the Queen; "you must satisfy M. le Comte."

Thus adjured, Anne said in a low voice of horror:  "It was a gentleman of our neighbourhood;
he was killed in a duel last summer!"

"Ah!  You are certain?"

"I had the misfortune to see the fight," sighed Anne.

"That accounts for it," said the Queen kindly.  "If mademoiselle's nerves were shaken by such
a remembrance, it is not wonderful that it should recur to her at so strange a watch as we
have been keeping."

"It might account for her seeing this revenant cavalier in any passenger," said Lauzun, not
satisfied yet.

"No one ever was like him," said Anne.  "I could not mistake him."

"May I ask mademoiselle to describe him?" continued the count.

Feeling all the time as if this first mention were a sort of betrayal, Anne faltered the words:
"Small, slight, almost misshapen--with a strange one-sided look--odd, unusual features."

Lauzun's laugh jarred on her.  "Eh! it is not a flattering portrait. Mademoiselle is not haunted
by a hero of romance, it appears, so much as by a demon."

"And none of those monsieur has employed in our escape answer to that description?" asked the
Queen.

"Assuredly not, your Majesty.  Crooked person and crooked mind go together, and St. Victor
would only have trusted to your big honest rowers of the Tamise.  I think we may be satisfied
that the demoiselle's imagination was excited so as to evoke a phantom impressed on her mind
by a previous scene of terror.  Such things have happened in my native Gascony."

Anne was fain to accept the theory in silence, though it seemed to her strange that at a moment
when she was for once not thinking of Peregrine, her imagination should conjure him up, and
there was a strong feeling within her that it was something external that had flitted across
the shadow, not a mere figment of her brain, though the notion was evidently accepted, and
she could hear a muttering of Mrs. Labadie that this was the consequence of employing young
wenches with their whims and megrims.

The Count de Lauzun did his best to entertain the Queen with stories of revenants in Gascony
and elsewhere, and with reminiscences of his eleven years' captivity at Pignerol, and his intercourse
with Fouquet; but whenever in aftertimes Anne Woodford tried to recall her nocturnal drive
with this strange personage, the chosen and very unkind husband of the poor old Grande Mademoiselle,
she never could recollect anything but the fierce glare of his eyes in the light of the lamps
as he put her to that terrible interrogation.

The talk was chiefly monologue.  Mrs. Labadie certainly slept, perhaps the Queen did so too,
and Anne became conscious that she must have slumbered likewise, for she found every one gazing
at her in the pale morning dawn and asking why she cried, "O Charles, hold!"

As she hastily entreated pardon, Lauzun was heard to murmur, "Je parie que le revenant se nomme
Charles," and she collected her senses just in time to check her contradiction, recollecting
that happily such a name as Charles revealed nothing.  The little Prince, who had slumbered
so opportunely all night, awoke and received infinite praise, and what he better appreciated,
the food that had been provided for him.  They were near their journey's end, and it was well,
for people were awakening and going to their work as they passed one of the villages, and once
the remark was heard, "There goes a coach full of Papists."

However, no attempt was made to stop the party, and as it would be daylight when they reached
Gravesend, the Queen arranged her disguise to resemble, as she hoped, a washerwoman--taking
off her gloves, and hiding her hair, while the Prince, happily again asleep, was laid in a
basket of linen.  Anne could not help thinking that she thus looked more remarkable than if
she had simply embarked as a lady; but she meant to represent the attendant of her Italian
friend Countess Almonde, whom she was to meet on board.

Leaving the coach outside a little block of houses, the party reached a projecting point of
land, where three Irish officers received them, and conducted them to a boat.  Then, wrapped
closely in cloaks from the chill morning air, they were rowed to the yacht, on the deck of
which stood Lord and Lady Powys, Lady Strickland, Pauline Dunord, and a few more faithful followers,
who had come more rapidly.  There was no open greeting nor recognition, for the captain and
crew were unaware whom they were carrying, and, on the discovery, either for fear of danger
or hope of reward, might have captured such a prize.

Therefore all the others, with whispered apologies, were hoisted up before her, and Countess
Almonde had to devise a special entreaty that the chair might be lowered again for her poor
laundress as well as for the other two women.

The yacht, which had been hired by St. Victor, at once spread her sails; Mrs. Labadie conversed
with the captain while the countess took the Queen below into the stifling crowded little cabin.
It was altogether a wretched voyage; the wind was high, and the pitching and tossing more or
less disabled everybody in the suite.  The Queen was exceedingly ill, so were the countess
and Mrs. Labadie.  Nobody could be the least effective but Signora Turini, who waited on her
Majesty, and Anne, who was so far seasoned by excursions at Portsmouth that she was capable
of taking sole care of the little Prince, as the little vessel dashed along on her way with
her cargo of alarm and suffering through the Dutch fleet of fifty vessels, none of which seemed
to notice her--perhaps by express desire not to be too curious as to English fugitives.

Between the care of the little one, who needed in the tossing of the ship to be constantly
in arms though he never cried and when awake was always merry, and the giving as much succour
as possible to her suffering companions, Anne could not either rest or think, but seemed to
live in one heavy dazed dream of weariness and endurance, hardly knowing whether it were day
or night, till the welcome sound was heard that Calais was in sight.

Then, as well as they could, the poor travellers crawled from the corners, and put themselves
in such array as they could contrive, though the heaving of the waves, as the little yacht
lay to, did not conduce to their recovery.  The Count de Lauzun went ashore as soon as a boat
could be lowered to apprise M. Charot, the Governor of Calais, of the guest he was to receive,
and after an interval of considerable discomfort, in full view of the massive fortifications,
boats came off to bring the Queen and her attendants on shore, this time as a Queen, though
she refused to receive any honours.  Lady Strickland, recovering as soon as she was on dry
land, resumed her Prince, who was fondled with enthusiastic praises for his excellent conduct
on the voyage.

Anne could not help feebly thinking some of the credit might be due to her, since she had held
him by land and water nearly ever since leaving Whitehall, but she was too much worn out by
her nights of unrest, and too much battered and beaten by the tossings of her voyage, to feel
anything except in a languid half-conscious way, under a racking headache; and when the curious
old house where they were to rest was reached, and all the rest were eating with ravenous appetites,
she could taste nothing, and being conducted by a compassionate Frenchwoman in a snow-white
towering cap to a straw mattress spread on the ground, she slept the twenty-four hours round
without moving.

CHAPTER XXI: EXILE

"'Oh, who are ye, young man?' she said. 'What country come ye frae?' 'I flew across the sea,'
he said; ''Twas but this very day.'"

Old Ballad.

Five months had passed away since the midnight flight from England, when Anne Woodford was
sitting on a stone bench flanked with statues in the stately gardens of the Palace of St. Germain,
working away at some delicate point lace, destined to cover some of the deficiencies of her
dress, for her difficulties were great, and these months had been far from happy ones.

The King was in Ireland, the Queen spent most of the time of his absence in convents, either
at Poissy or Chaillot, carrying her son with her to be the darling of the nuns, who had for
the most part never even seen a baby, and to whom a bright lively child of a year old was a
perfect treasure of delight.  Not wishing to encumber the good Sisters with more attendants
than were needful, the Queen only took with her one lady governess, one nurse, and one rocker,
and this last naturally was Pauline Dunord, both a Frenchwoman and a Roman Catholic.

This was in itself no loss to Anne.  Her experience of the nunnery at Boulogne, where had been
spent three days in expectation of the King, had not been pleasant.  The nuns had shrunk from
her as a heretic, and kept their novices and pensionnaires from the taint of communication
with her; and all the honour she might have deserved for the Queen's escape seemed to have
been forfeited by that moment of fear, which in the telling had become greatly exaggerated.

It was true that the Queen had never alluded to it; but probably through Mrs. Labadie, it had
become current that Miss Woodford had been so much alarmed under the churchyard wall that her
fancy had conjured up a phantom and she had given a loud scream, which but for the mercy of
the Saints would have betrayed them all.

Anne was persuaded that she had done nothing worse than give an involuntary start, but it was
not of the least use to say so, and she began to think that perhaps others knew better than
she did. Miss Dunord, who had never been more than distantly polite to her in England, was
of course more thrown with her at St. Germain, and examined her closely.  Who was it?  What
was it?  Had she seen it before?  It was of no use to deny.  Pauline knew she had seen something
on that All Saints' Eve.  Was it true that it was a lover of hers, and that she had seen him
killed in a duel on her account? Who would have imagined it in cette demoiselle si sage!  Would
she not say who it was!

But though truth forced more than one affirmative to be pumped out of Anne, she clung to that
last shred of concealment, and kept her own counsel as to the time, place, and persons of the
duel, and thus she so far offended Pauline as to prevent that damsel from having any scruples
in regarding her as an obnoxious and perilous rival, with a dark secret in her life.  Certainly
Miss Dunord did earnestly assure her that to adopt her Church, invoke the Saints, and have
Masses for the dead was the only way to lay such ghosts; but Anne remained obdurate, and thus
was isolated, for there were very few Protestants in the fugitive Court, and those were of
too high a degree to consort with her.  Perhaps that undefined doubt of her discretion was
against her; perhaps too her education and knowledge of languages became less useful to the
Queen when surrounded by French, for she was no longer called upon to act as reader; and the
little Prince, during his residence in the convent, had time to forget her and lose his preference
for her.  She was not discharged, but except for taking her turn as a nursery-maid when the
Prince was at St. Germain, she was a mere supernumerary, nor was there any salary forthcoming.
The small amount of money she had with her had dwindled away, and when she applied to Lady
Strickland, who was kinder to her than any one else, she was told that the Queen was far too
much distressed for money wherewith to aid the King to be able to pay any one, and that they
must all wait till the King had his own again.  Her clothes were wearing out, and scarcely
in condition for attendance on the Prince when he was shown in state to the King of France.
Worse than all, she seemed entirely cut off from home. She had written several times to her
uncle when opportunity seemed to offer, but had never heard from him, and she did not know
whether her letters could reach him, or if he were even aware of what had become of her.  People
came with passports from England to join the exiled Court, but no one returned thither, or
she would even have offered herself as a waiting-maid to have a chance of going back. Lady
Strickland would have forwarded her, but no means or opportunity offered, and there was nothing
for it but to look to the time that everybody declared to be approaching when the King was
to be reinstated, and they would all go home in triumph.

Meanwhile Anne Woodford felt herself a supernumerary, treated with civility, and no more, as
she ate her meals with a very feminine Court, for almost all the gentlemen were in Ireland
with the King. She had a room in the entresol to herself, in Pauline's absence, and here she
could in turn sit and dream, or mend and furbish up her clothes--a serious matter now--or read
the least scrap of printed matter in her way, for books were scarcer than even at Whitehall;
and though her 'mail' had safely been forwarded by Mr. Labadie, some jealous censor had abstracted
her Bible and Prayer-book.  Probably there was no English service anywhere in France at that
time, unless among the merchants at Bordeaux--certainly neither English nor Reformed was within
her reach--and she had to spend her Sundays in recalling all she could, and going over it,
feeling thankful to the mother who had made her store Psalms, Gospels, and Collects in her
memory week by week.

She was so far forgotten that active attempts to convert her had been dropped, except by Pauline.
Perhaps it was thought that isolation would be effectual, but in fact the sight of popular
Romanism not kept in check by Protestant surroundings shocked her, and made her far more averse
to change than when she saw it at its best at Whitehall.  In fine, the end of her ambition
had been neglect and poverty, and the real service that she had rendered was unacknowledged,
and marred by that momentary alarm.  No wonder she felt sore.

She had never once been to Paris, and seldom beyond the gardens, which happily were free in
the absence of the Queen, and always had secluded corners apart from the noble terraces, safe
from the intrusion of idle gallants.  Anne had found a sort of bower of her own, shaded by
honeysuckles and wild roses, where she could sit looking over the slopes and the windings of
the Seine and indulge her musings and longings.

The lonely life brought before her all the anxieties that had been stifled for the time by
the agitations of the escape.  Again and again she lived over the scene in the ruins.  Again
and again she recalled those two strange appearances, and shivering at the thought of the anniversary
that was approaching in another month, still felt sometimes that, alive or dead, Peregrine's
would be a home face, and framed to herself imaginary scenes in which she addressed him, and
demanded whether he could not rest in his unhallowed grave.  What would Bishop Ken say?  Sometimes
even she recollected the strange theory which had made him crave execution from the late King,
seven years, yes, a little more than seven years ago, and marvel whether at that critical epoch
he had indeed between life and death been snatched away to his native land of faery.  Imagination
might well run riot in the solitary, unoccupied condition to which she was reduced; and she
also brooded much over the fragments of doubtful news which reached her.

Something was said of all loyal clergy being expelled and persecuted, and this of course suggested
those sufferings of the clergy during the Commonwealth, of which she had often heard, making
her very anxious about her uncle, and earnestly long for wings to fly to him.  The Archfields
too!  Had Charles returned, and did that secret press upon him as it did upon her?  Did Lucy
think herself utterly forgotten and cast aside, receiving no word or message from her friend?
"Perhaps," thought Anne, "they fancy me sailing about at Court in silks and satins, jewels
and curls, and forgetting them all, as I remember Lucy said I should when she first heard that
I was going to Whitehall.  Nay, and I even took pleasure in the picture of myself so decked
out, though I never, never meant to forget her.  Foolish, worse than foolish, that I was! 
And to think that I might now be safe and happy with good Lady Russell, near my uncle and all
of them.  I could almost laugh to think how my fine notions of making my fortune have ended
in sitting here, neglected, forgotten, banished, almost in rags!  I suppose it was all self-
seeking, and that I must take it meekly as no more than I deserve. But oh, how different! how
different is this captivity!  'Oh that I had wings like a dove, for then would I flee away,
and be at rest.' Swallow, swallow! you are sweeping through the air.  Would that my spirit
could fly like you! if only for one glimpse to tell me what they are doing.  Ah! there's some
one coming down this unfrequented walk, where I thought myself safe.  A young gentleman!  I
must rise and go as quietly as I can before he sees me.  Nay," as the action following the
impulse, she was gathering up her work, "'tis an old abbe with him! no fear!  Abbe?  Nay, 'tis
liker to an English clergyman!  Can a banished one have strayed hither?  The younger man is
in mourning.  Could it be?  No graver, older, more manly--Oh!"

"Anne!  Anne!  We have found you!"

"Mr. Archfield!  You!"

And as Charles Archfield, in true English fashion, kissed her cheek, Anne fairly choked with
tears of joy, and she ever after remembered that moment as the most joyful of her life, though
the joy was almost agony.

"This is Mistress Anne Woodford, sir," said Charles, the next moment.  "Allow me, madam, to
present Mr. Fellowes, of Magdalen College."

Anne held out her hand, and courtesied in response to the bow and wave of the shovel hat.

"How did you know that I was here?" she said.

"Doctor Woodford thought it likely, and begged us to come and see whether we could do anything
for you," said Charles; "and you may believe that we were only too happy to do so.  A lady
to whom we had letters, who is half English, the Vicomtesse de Bellaise, was so good as to
go to the convent at Poissy and discover for us from some of the suite where you were."

"My uncle--my dear uncle--is he well?"

"Quite well, when last we heard," said Charles.  "That was at Florence, nearly a month ago."

"And all at Fareham, are they well?"

"All just as usual," said Charles, "at the last hearing, which was at the same time.  I hoped
to have met letters at Paris, but no doubt the war prevents the mails from running."

"Ah!  I have never had a single letter," said Anne.  "Did my uncle know anything of me?  Has
he never had one of mine?"

"Up to the time when he wrote, last March, that is to say, he had received nothing.  He had
gone to London to make inquiries--"

"Ah! my dear good uncle!"

"And had ascertained that you had been chosen to accompany the Queen and Prince in their escape
from Whitehall.  You have played the heroine, Miss Anne."

"Oh! if you knew--"

"And," said Mr. Fellowes, "both he and Sir Philip Archfield requested us, if we could make
our way home through Paris, to come and offer our services to Mistress Woodford, in case she
should wish to send intelligence to England, or if she should wish to make use of our escort
to return home."

"Oh sir! oh sir! how can I thank you enough!  You cannot guess the happiness you have brought
me," cried Anne with clasped hands, tears welling up again.

"You will come with us then," cried Charles.  "I am sure you ought.  They have not used you
well, Anne; how pale and thin you have grown."

"That is only pining!  I am quite well, only home-sick," she said with a smile.  "I am sure
the Queen will let me go.  I am nothing but a burthen now.  She has plenty of her own people,
and they do not like a Protestant about the Prince."

"There is Madame de Bellaise," said Mr. Fellowes, "advancing along the walk with Lady Powys.
Let me present you to her."

"You have succeeded, I see," a kind voice said, as Anne found herself making her courtesy to
a tall and stately old lady, with a mass of hair of the peculiar silvered tint of flaxen mixed
with white.

"I am sincerely glad," said Lady Powys, "that Miss Woodford has met her friends."

"Also," said Madame de Bellaise, "Lady Powys is good enough to say that if mademoiselle will
honour me with a visit, she gives permission for her to return with me to Paris."

This was still greater joy, except for that one recollection, formidable in the midst of her
joy, of her dress.  Did Madame de Bellaise divine something? for she said, "These times remind
me of my youth, when we poor cavalier families well knew what sore straits were.  If mademoiselle
will bring what is most needful, the rest can be sent afterwards."

Making her excuses for the moment, Anne with light and gladsome foot sped along the stately
alley, up the stairs to her chamber, round which she looked much as if it had been a prison
cell, fell on her knees in a gush of intense thankfulness, and made her rapid preparations,
her hands trembling with joy, and a fear that she might wake to find all again a dream.  She
felt as if this deliverance were a token of forgiveness for her past wilfulness, and as if
hope were opened to her once more.  Lady Powys met her as she came down, and spoke very kindly,
thanking her for her services, and hoping that she would enjoy the visit she was about to make.

"Does your ladyship think Her Majesty will require me any longer?" asked Anne timidly.

"If you wish to return to the country held by the Prince of Orange," said the Countess coldly,
"you must apply for dismissal to Her Majesty herself."

Anne perceived from the looks of her friends that it was no time for discussing her loyalty,
and all taking leave, she was soon seated beside Madame de Bellaise, while the coach and four
rolled down the magnificent avenue, and scene after scene disappeared, beautiful and stately
indeed, but which she was as glad to leave behind her as if they had been the fetters and bars
of a dungeon, and she almost wondered at the words of admiration of her companions.

Madame de Bellaise sat back, and begged the others to speak English, saying that it was her
mother tongue, and she loved the sound of it, but really trying to efface herself, while the
eager conversation between the two young people went on about their homes.

Charles had not been there more recently than Anne, and his letters were at least two months
old, but the intelligence in them was as water to her thirsty soul.  All was well, she heard,
including the little heir of Archfield, though the young father coloured a little, and shuffled
over the answers to the inquiries with a rather sad smile.  Charles was, however, greatly improved.
He had left behind him the loutish, unformed boy, and had become a handsome, courteous, well-mannered
gentleman.  The very sight of him handing Madame de Bellaise in and out of her coach was a
wonder in itself when Anne recollected how he had been wont to hide himself in the shrubbery
to prevent being called upon for such services, and how uncouthly in the last extremity he
would perform them.

Madame de Bellaise was inhabiting her son's great Hotel de Nidemerle.  He was absent in garrison,
and she was presiding over the family of grandchildren, their mother being in bad health. 
So much Anne heard before she was conducted to a pleasant little bedroom, far more home-like
and comfortable than in any of the palaces she had inhabited.  It opened into another, whence
merry young voices were heard.

"That is the apartment of my sister's youngest daughter," said Madame de Bellaise, "Noemi Darpent.
I borrowed her for a little while to teach her French and dancing, but now that we are gone
to war, they want to have her back again, and it will be well that she should avail herself
of the same escort as yourself.  All will then be selon les convenances, which had been a difficulty
to me," she added with a laugh.

Then opening the door of communication she said; "Here, Noemi, we have found your countrywoman,
and I put her under your care.  Ah! you two chattering little pies, I knew the voices were
yours.  This is my granddaughter, Marguerite de Nidemerle, and my niece--a la mode de Bretagne--Cecile
d'Aubepine, all bestowing their chatter on their cousin."

Noemi Darpent was a tall, fair, grave-faced maiden, some years over twenty, and so thoroughly
English that it warmed Anne's heart to look at her, and the other two were bright little Frenchwomen--
Marguerite a pretty blonde, Cecile pale, dark, and sallow, but full of life.  Both were at
the age at which girls were usually in convents, but as Anne learnt, Madame de Bellaise was
too English at heart to give up the training of her grandchildren, and she had an English governess
for them, daughter to a Romanist cavalier ruined by sequestration.

She was evidently the absolute head of the family.  Her daughter-in- law was a delicate little
creature, who scarcely seemed able to bear the noise of the family at the long supper-table,
when all talked with shrill French voices, from the two youths and their abbe tutor down to
the little four-year-old Lolotte in her high chair.  But to Anne, after the tedious formality
of the second table at the palace, stiff without refinement, this free family life was perfectly
delightful and refreshing, though as yet she was too much cramped, as it were, by long stiffness,
silence, and treatment as an inferior to join, except by the intelligent dancing of her brown
eyes, and replies when directly addressed.

After Mrs. Labadie's homeliness, Pauline's exclusive narrowness, Jane's petty frivolity, Hester's
vulgar worldliness, and the general want of cultivation in all who treated her on an equality,
it was like returning to rational society; and she could not but observe that Mr. Archfield
altogether held his own in conversation with the rest, whether in French or English.  Little
more than a year ago he would hardly have opened his mouth, and would have worn the true bumpkin
look of contemptuous sheepishness.  Now he laughed and made others laugh as readily and politely
as--Ah!  With whom was she comparing him?  Did the thought of poor Peregrine dwell on his mind
as it did upon hers?  But perhaps things were not so terrible to a man as to a woman, and he
had not seen those apparitions!  Indeed, when not animated, she detected a certain thoughtful
melancholy on his brow which certainly had not belonged to former times.

Mr. Fellowes early made known to Anne that her uncle had asked him to be her banker, and the
first care of her kind hostess was to assist her in supplying the deficiencies of her wardrobe,
so that she was able to go abroad without shrinking at her own shabby appearance.

The next thing was to take her to Poissy to request her dismissal from the Queen, without which
it would be hardly decorous to depart, though in point of fact, in the present state of affairs,
as Noemi said, there was nothing to prevent it.

"No," said Mr. Fellowes; "but for that reason Miss Woodford would feel bound to show double
courtesy to the discrowned Queen."

"And she has often been very kind to me--I love her much," said Anne.

"Noemi is a little Whig," said Madame de Bellaise.  "I shall not take her with us, because
I know her father would not like it, but to me it is only like the days of my youth to visit
an exiled queen. Will these gentlemen think fit to be of the party?"

"Thank you, madam, not I," said the Magdalen man.  "I am very sorry for the poor lady, but
my college has suffered too much at her husband's hands for me to be very anxious to pay her
my respects; and if my young friend will take my advice, neither will he.  It might be bringing
his father into trouble."

To this Charles agreed, so M. L'Abbe undertook to show them the pictures at the Louvre, and
Anne and Madame de Bellaise were the only occupants of the carriage that conveyed them to the
great old convent of Poissy, the girl enjoying by the way the comfort of the kindness of a
motherly woman, though even to her there could be no confiding of the terrible secret that
underlay all her thoughts. Madame de Bellaise, however, said how glad she was to secure this
companionship for her niece.  Noemi had been more attached than her family realised to Claude
Merrycourt, a neighbour who had had the folly, contrary to her prudent father's advice, to
rush into Monmouth's rebellion, and it had only been by the poor girl's agony when he suffered
under the summary barbarities of Kirke that her mother had known how much her heart was with
him.  The depression of spirits and loss of health that ensued had been so alarming that when
Madame de Bellaise, after some months, paid a long visit to her sister in England, Mrs. Darpent
had consented to send the girl to make acquaintance with her French relations, and try the
effect of change of scene.  She had gone, indifferent, passive, and broken- hearted, but her
aunt had watched over her tenderly, and she had gradually revived, not indeed into a joyous
girl, but into a calm and fairly cheerful woman.

When she had left home, France and England were only too closely connected, but now they were
at daggers drawn, and probably would be so for many years, and the Revolution had come so suddenly
that Madame de Bellaise had not been able to make arrangements for her niece's return home,
and Noemi was anxiously waiting for an opportunity of rejoining her parents.

The present plan was this.  Madame de Bellaise's son, the Marquis de Nidemerle, was Governor
of Douai, where his son, the young Baron de Ribaumont, with his cousin, the Chevalier d'Aubepine,
were to join him with their tutor, the Abbe Leblanc.  The war on the Flemish frontier was not
just then in an active state, and there were often friendly relations between the commandants
of neighbouring garrisons, so that it might be possible to pass a party on to the Spanish territory
with a flag of truce, and then the way would be easy.  This passing, however, would be impossible
for Noemi alone, since etiquette would not permit of her thus travelling with the two young
gentlemen, nor could she have proceeded after reaching Douai, so that the arrival of the two
Englishmen and the company of Miss Woodford was a great boon.  Madame de Bellaise had already
despatched a courier to ask her son whether he could undertake the transit across the frontier,
and hoped to apply for passports as soon as his answer was received.  She told Anne her niece's
history to prevent painful allusions on the journey.

"Ah, madame!" said Anne, "we too have a sad day connected with that unfortunate insurrection.
We grieved over Lady Lisle, and burnt with indignation."

"M. Barillon tells me that her judge, the Lord Chancellor, was actually forced to commit himself
to the Tower to escape being torn to pieces by the populace, and it is since reported that
he has there died of grief and shame.  I should think his prison cell must have been haunted
by hundreds of ghosts."

"I pray you, madame! do you believe that there are apparitions?"

"I have heard of none that were not explained by some accident, or else were the produce of
an excited brain;" and Anne said no more on that head, though it was a comfort to tell of her
own foolish preference for the chances of Court preferment above the security of Lady Russell's
household, and Madame de Bellaise smiled, and said her experience of Courts had not been too
agreeable.

And thus they reached Poissy, where Queen Mary Beatrice had separate rooms set apart for visitors,
and thus did not see them from behind the grating, but face to face.

"You wish to leave me, signorina," she said, using the appellation of their more intimate days,
as Anne knelt to kiss her hand.  "I cannot wonder.  A poor exile has nothing wherewith to reward
the faithful."

"Ah! your Majesty, that is not the cause; if I were of any use to you or to His Royal Highness."

"True, signorina; you have been faithful and aided me to the best of your power in my extremity,
but while you will not embrace the true faith I cannot keep you about the person of my son
as he becomes more intelligent.  Therefore it may be well that you should leave us, until such
time as we shall be recalled to our kingdom, when I hope to reward you more suitably.  You
loved my son, and he loved you--perhaps you would like to bid him farewell."

For this Anne was very grateful, and the Prince was sent for by the mother, who was too proud
of him to miss any opportunity of exhibiting him to an experienced mother and grandmother like
the vicomtesse.  He was a year old, and had become a very beautiful child, with large dark
eyes like his mother's, and when Mrs. Labadie carried him in, he held out his arms to Anne
with a cry of glad recognition that made her feel that if she could have been allowed the charge
of him she could hardly have borne to part with him.  And when the final leave-taking came,
the Queen made his little hand present her with a little gold locket, containing his soft hair,
with a J in seed pearls outside, in memory, said Mary Beatrice, of that night beneath the church
wall.

"Ah, yes, you had your moment of fear, but we were all in terror, and you hushed him well."

Thus with another kiss to the white hand, returned on her own forehead, ended Anne Jacobina's
Court life.  Never would she be Jacobina again--always Anne or sweet Nancy!  It was refreshing
to be so called, when Charles Archfield let the name slip out, then blushed and apologised,
while she begged him to resume it, which he was now far too correct to do in public.  Noemi
quite readily adopted it.

"I am tired of fine French names," she said:  "an English voice is quite refreshing; and do
you call me Naomi, not Noemi.  I did not mind it so much at first, because my father sometimes
called me so, after his good old mother, who was bred a Huguenot, but it is like the first
step towards home to hear Naomi--Little Omy, as my brothers used to shout over the stairs."

That was a happy fortnight.  Madame de Bellaise said it would be a shame to let Anne have spent
a half year in France and have seen nothing, so she took the party to the theatre, where they
saw the Cid with extreme delight.  She regretted that the season was so far advanced that the
winter representations of Esther, at St. Cyr by the young ladies, were over, but she invited
M. Racine for an evening, when Mr. Fellowes took extreme pleasure in his conversation, and
he was prevailed on to read some of the scenes. She also used her entree at Court to enable
them to see the fountains at Versailles, which Winchester was to have surpassed but for King
Charles's death.

"Just as well otherwise," remarked Charles to Anne.  "These fine feathers and flowers of spray
are beautiful enough in themselves, but give me the clear old Itchen not tortured into playing
tricks, with all the trout killed; and the open down instead of all these terraces and marble
steps where one feels as cramped as if it were a perpetual minuet.  And look at the cost! 
Ah! you will know what I mean when we travel through the country."

Another sight was from a gallery, whence they beheld the King eat his dinner alone at a silver-loaded
table, and a lengthy ceremony it was.  Four plates of soup to begin with, a whole capon with
ham, followed by a melon, mutton, salad, garlic, pate de foie gras, fruit, and confitures.
Charles really grew so indignant, that, in spite of his newly-acquired politeness, Anne, who
knew his countenance, was quite glad when she saw him safe out of hearing.

"The old glutton!" he said; "I should like to put him on a diet of buckwheat and sawdust like
his poor peasants for a week, and then see whether he would go on gormandising, with his wars
and his buildings, starving his poor.  It is almost enough to make a Whig of a man to see what
we might have come to.  How can you bear it, madame?"

"Alas! we are powerless," said the Vicomtesse.  "A seigneur can do little for his people, but
in Anjou we have some privileges, and our peasants are better off than those you have seen,
though indeed I grieved much for them when first I came among them from England."

She was perhaps the less sorry that Paris was nearly emptied of fashionable society since her
guest had the less chance of uttering dangerous sentiments before those who might have repeated
them, and much as she liked him, she was relieved when letters came from her son undertaking
to expedite them on their way provided they made haste to forestall any outbreak of the war
in that quarter.

Meantime Naomi and Anne had been drawn much nearer together by a common interest.  The door
between their rooms having some imperfection in the latch swung open as they were preparing
for bed, and Anne was aware of a sound of sobbing, and saw one of the white- capped, short-petticoated
femmes de chambre kneeling at Naomi's feet, ejaculating, "Oh, take me! take me, mademoiselle!
Madame is an angel of goodness, but I cannot go on living a lie.  I shall do something dreadful."

"Poor Suzanne! poor Suzanne!" Naomi was answering:  "I will do what I can, I will see if it
is possible--"

They started at the sound of the step, Suzanne rising to her feet in terror, but Naomi, signing
to Anne and saying, "It is only Mademoiselle Woodford, a good Protestant, Suzanne.  Go now;
I will see what can be done; I know my aunt would like to send a maid with us."

Then as Suzanne went out with her apron to her eyes, and Anne would have apologised, she said,
"Never mind; I must have told you, and asked your help.  Poor Suzanne, she is one of the Rotrous,
an old race of Huguenot peasants whom my aunt always protected; she would protect any one,
but these people had a special claim because they sheltered our great-grandmother, Lady Walwyn,
when she fled after the S. Barthelemi.  When the Edict of Nantes was revoked, the two brothers
fled.  I believe she helped them, and they got on board ship, and brought a token to my father;
but the old mother was feeble and imbecile, and could not move, and the monks and the dragoons
frightened and harassed this poor wench into what they called conforming.  When the mother
died, my aunt took Suzanne and taught her, and thought she was converted; and indeed if all
Papists were like my aunt it would not be so hard to become one."

"Oh yes!  I know others like that."

"But this poor Suzanne, knowing that she only was converted out of terror, has always had an
uneasy conscience, and the sight of me has stirred up everything.  She says, though I do not
know if it be true, that she was fast drifting into bad habits, when finding my Bible, though
it was English and she could not read it, seems to have revived everything, and recalled the
teaching of her good old father and pastor, and now she is wild to go to England with us."

"You will take her?" exclaimed Anne.

"Of course I will.  Perhaps that is what I was sent here for.  I will ask her of my aunt, and
I think she will let me have her.  You will keep her secret, Anne."

"Indeed I will."

Madame de Bellaise granted Suzanne to her niece without difficulty, evidently guessing the
truth, but knowing the peril of the situation too well to make any inquiry.  Perhaps she was
disappointed that her endeavours to win the girl to her Church had been ineffectual, but to
have any connection with one 'relapsed' was so exceedingly perilous that she preferred to ignore
the whole subject, and merely let it be known that Suzanne was to accompany Mademoiselle Darpent,
and this was only disclosed to the household on the very last morning, after the passports
had been procured and the mails packed, and she hushed any remark of the two English girls
in such a decided manner as quite startled them by the manifest need of caution.

"We should have come to that if King James were still allowed to have his own way," said Naomi.

"Oh no! we are too English," said Anne.

"Our generation might not see it," said Naomi; "but who can be safe when a Popish king can
override law?  Oh, I shall breathe more freely when I am on the other side of the Channel.
My aunt is much too good for this place, and they don't approve of her, and keep her down."

CHAPTER XXII: REVENANTS

"But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again! I'll cross it, though it blast me."

Hamlet.

Floods of tears were shed at the departure of the two young officers of sixteen and seventeen.
The sobs of the household made the English party feel very glad when it was over and the cavalcade
was in motion.  A cavalcade it was, for each gentleman rode and so did his body-servant, and
each horse had a mounted groom.  The two young officers had besides each two chargers, requiring
a groom and horse boy, and each conducted half a dozen fresh troopers to join the army.  A
coach was the regulation mode of travelling for ladies, but both the English girls had remonstrated
so strongly that Madame de Bellaise had consented to their riding, though she took them and
Suzanne the first day's journey well beyond the ken of the Parisians in her own carriage, as
far as Senlis, where there was a fresh parting with the two lads, fewer tears, and more counsel
and encouragement, with many fond messages to her son, many to her sister in England, and with
affectionate words to her niece a whisper to her to remember that she would not be in a Protestant
country till she reached Holland or England.

The last sight they had of the tall dignified figure of the old lady was under the arch of
the cathedral, where she was going to pray for their safety.  Suzanne was to ride on a pillion
behind the Swiss valet of Mr. Fellowes, whom Naomi had taken into her confidence, and the two
young ladies each mounted a stout pony.  Mr. Fellowes had made friends with the Abbe Leblanc,
who was of the old Gallican type, by no means virulently set against Anglicanism, and also
a highly cultivated man, so that they had many subjects in common, besides the question of
English Catholicity.  The two young cousins, Ribaumont and D'Aubepine, were chiefly engaged
in looking out for sport, setting their horses to race with one another, and the like, in which
Charles Archfield sometimes took a share, but he usually rode with the two young ladies, and
talked to them very pleasantly of his travels in Italy, the pictures and antiquities which
had made into an interesting reality the studies that he had hated when a boy, also the condition
of the country he had seen with a mind which seemed to have opened and enlarged with a sudden
start beyond the interests of the next fox-hunt or game at bowls.  All were, as he had predicted,
greatly shocked at the aspect of the country through which they passed:  the meagre crops ripening
for harvest, the hay- carts, sometimes drawn by an equally lean cow and woman, the haggard
women bearing heavy burthens, and the ragged, barefooted children leading a wretched cow or
goat to browse by the wayside, the gaunt men toiling at road-mending with their poor starved
horses, or at their seigneur's work, alike unpaid, even when drawn off from their own harvests.
And in the villages the only sound buildings were the church and presbytere by its side, the
dwellings being miserable hovels, almost sunk into the earth, an old crone or two, marvels
of skinniness, spinning at the door, or younger women making lace, and nearly naked children
rushing out to beg.  Sometimes the pepper-box turrets of a chateau could be seen among distant
woods, or the walls of a cloister, with a taper spire in the midst, among greener fields; and
the towns were approached through long handsome avenues, and their narrow streets had a greater
look of prosperity, while their inns, being on the way to the place of warfare, were almost
luxurious, with a choice of dainty meats and good wines.  Everywhere else was misery, and Naomi
said it was the vain endeavour to reform the source of these grievances that had forced her
father to become an exile from his native country, and that he had much apprehended that the
same blight might gradually be brought over his adopted land, on which Charles stood up for
the constitution, and for the resolute character of Englishmen, and Anne, as in duty bound,
for the good intentions of her godfather.  Thus they argued, and Anne not only felt herself
restored to the company of rational beings, but greatly admired Charles's sentiments and the
ability with which he put them forward, and now and then the thought struck her, and with a
little twinge of pain of which she was ashamed, would Naomi Darpent be the healer of the wound
nearly a year old, and find in him consolation for the hero of her girlhood?  Somehow there
would be a sense of disappointment in them both if so it were.

At length the spires and towers of Douai came in sight, fenced in by stern lines of fortification
according to the science of Vauban-- smooth slopes of glacis, with the terrible muzzles of
cannon peeping out on the summits of the ramparts, and the line of salient angle and ravelin
with the moat around, beautiful though formidable.  The Marquis de Nidemerle had sent a young
officer and sergeant's party to meet the travellers several miles off, and bring them unquestioned
through the outposts of the frontier town, so closely watched in this time of war, and at about
half a mile from the gates he himself, with a few attendants, rode out all glittering and clanking
in their splendid uniforms and accoutrements.  He doffed his hat with the heavy white plume,
and bowed his greeting to the ladies and clergymen, but both the young Frenchmen, after a military
salute, hastily dismounted and knelt on one knee, while he sprang from his horse, and then,
making the sign of the Cross over his son, raised him, and folding him in his arms pressed
him to his breast and kissed him on each cheek, not without tears, then repeated the same greeting
with young D'Aubepine.  He then kissed the hand of his belle cousine, whom, of course, he knew
already, and bowed almost to the ground on being presented to Mademoiselle Woodford, a little
less low to Monsieur Archfield, who was glad the embracing was not to be repeated, politely
received Mr. Fellowes, and honoured the domestic abbe with a kindly word and nod.  The gradation
was amusing, and he was a magnificent figure, with his noble horse and grand military dress,
while his fine straight features, sunburnt though naturally fair, and his tall, powerful frame,
well became his surroundings--'a true white Ribaumont,' as Naomi said, as she looked at the
long fair hair drawn back and tied with ribbon.  "He is just like the portrait of our great-grandfather
who was almost killed on the S. Barthelemi!"  However, Naomi had no more time to talk of him,
for he rode by her side inquiring for his mother, wife, and children, but carefully doing the
honours to the stranger lady and gentleman.

Moat and drawbridge there were at Portsmouth, and a sentry at the entrance, but here there
seemed endless guards, moats, bridges, and gates, and there was a continual presenting of arms
and acknowledging of salutes as the commandant rode in with the travellers.  It was altogether
a very new experience in life.  They were lodged in the governor's quarters in the fortress,
where the accommodation for ladies was of the slenderest, and M. de Nidemerle made many apologies,
though he had evidently given up his own sleeping chamber to the two ladies, who would have
to squeeze into his narrow camp-bed, with Suzanne on the floor, and the last was to remain
there entirely, there being no woman with whom she could have her meals.  The ladies were invited
to sup with the staff, and would, as M. de Nidemerle assured them, be welcomed with the greatest
delight.  So Naomi declared that they must make their toilette do as much justice as possible
to their country; and though full dress was not attainable, they did their best with ribbons
and laces, and the arrangement of her fair locks and Anne's brown ones, when Suzanne proved
herself an adept; the ladies meantime finding no small amusement in the varieties of swords,
pistols, spurs, and other accoutrements, for which the marquis had apologised, though Naomi
told him that they were the fittest ornaments possible.

"And my cousin Gaspard is a really good man," she said, indicating to her friend the little
shrine with holy-water stoup, ivory crucifix, print of the Madonna, two or three devotional
books, and the miniatures of mother, wife, and children hung not far off; also of two young
cavaliers, one of whom Naomi explained to be the young father whom Gaspard could not recollect,
the other, that of the uncle Eustace, last Baron Walwyn and Ribaumont, of whom her own mother
talked with such passionate affection, and whose example had always been a guiding star to
the young marquis.

He came to their door to conduct them down to supper, giving his arm to Miss Woodford as the
greatest stranger, while Miss Darpent was conducted by a resplendent ducal colonel.  The supper-room
was in festal guise, hung round with flags, and the table adorned with flowers; a band was
playing, and never had either Anne or Naomi been made so much of.  All were eagerly talking,
Charles especially so, and Anne thought, with a thrill, "Did he recollect that this was the
very anniversary of that terrible 1st of July?"

It was a beautiful summer evening, and the supper taking place at five o'clock there was a
considerable time to spare afterwards, so that M. de Nidemerle proposed to show the strangers
the place, and the view from the ramparts.

"In my company you can see all well," he said, "but otherwise there might be doubts and jealousies."

He took them through the narrow Flemish streets of tall houses with projecting upper stories,
and showed them that seminary which was popularly supposed in England to be the hotbed of truculent
plots, but where they only saw a quiet academic cloister and an exquisite garden, green turf,
roses and white lilies in full perfection, and students flitting about in cassocks and square
caps, more like an Oxford scene, as Mr. Fellowes said, than anything he had yet seen. He was
joined by an English priest from his own original neighbourhood.  The Abbe Leblanc found another
acquaintance, and these two accompanied their friends to the ramparts.  The marquis had a great
deal to hear from his cousin about his home, and thus it happened that Charles Archfield and
Anne found themselves more practically alone together than they had yet been.  As they looked
at the view over the country, he told her of a conversation that he had had with an officer
now in the French army, but who had served in the Imperial army against the Turks, and that
he had obtained much useful information.

"Useful?" asked Anne.

"Yes.  I have been watching for the moment to tell you, Anne; I have resolved what to do. 
I intend to make a few campaigns there against the enemy of Christendom."

"O Mr. Archfield!" was all she could say.

"See here, I have perceived plainly that to sink down into my lady's eldest son is no wholesome
life for a man with all his powers about him.  I understand now what a set of oafs we were
to despise the poor fellow you wot of, because he was not such a lubber as ourselves.  I have
no mind to go through the like."

"You are so different; it could not be the same."

"Not quite; but remember there is nothing for me to do.  My father is still an active man,
and I am not old enough to take my part in public affairs, even if I loved greatly either the
Prince of Orange or King James.  I could not honestly draw my sword for either.  I have no
estate to manage, my child's inheritance is all in money, and it would drive me mad, or worse,
to go home to be idle.  No; I will fight against the common enemy till I have made me a name,
and won reputation and standing; or if I should not come back, there's the babe at home to
carry on the line."

"Oh, sir! your father and mother--Lucy--all that love you.  What will they say?"

"It would only put them to needless pain to ask them.  I shall not. I shall write explaining
all my motives--all except one, and that you alone know, Anne."

She shuddered a little, and felt him press her arm tightly.  They had fallen a good deal behind
the marquis and his cousin, and were descending as twilight fell into a narrow, dark, lonely
street, with all the houses shut up.  "No one has guessed, have they?" she faltered.

"Not that I know of.  But I cannot--no!  I cannot go home, to have that castle near me, and
that household at Oakwood.  I see enough in my dreams without that."

"See!  Ah, yes!"

"Then, Anne, you have suffered then too--guiltless as you are in keeping my terrible secret!
I have often thought and marvelled whether it were so with you."

She was about to tell him what she had seen, when he began, "There is one thing in this world
that would sweeten and renew my life--and that?"

Her heart was beating violently at what was so suddenly coming on her, when at that instant
Charles broke off short with "Good Heavens!  What's that?"

On the opposite side of the street, where one of the many churches stood some way back, making
an opening, there was a figure, essentially the same that Anne had seen at Lambeth, but bare-headed,
clad apparently in something long and white, and with a pale bluish light on the ghastly but
unmistakable features.

She uttered a faint gasping cry scarcely audible, Charles's impulse was to exclaim, "Man or
spirit, stand!" and drawing his sword to rush across the street; but in that second all had
vanished, and he only struck against closed doors, which he shook, but could not open.

"Mr. Archfield!  Oh, come back!  I have seen it before," entreated Anne; and he strode back,
with a gesture of offering her support, and trembling, she clung to his arm.  "It does not
hurt," she said. "It comes and goes--"

"You have seen it before!"

"Twice."

No more could be said, for through the gloom the white plume and gold-laced uniform of the
marquis were seen.  He had missed them, and come back to look for them, beginning to apologise.

"I am confounded at having left Mademoiselle behind.--Comment!"--as the sound betrayed that
Charles was sheathing his sword.  "I trust that Monsieur has met with no unpleasant adventure
from my people."

"Oh, no, Monsieur," was the answer, as he added--

"One can never be sure as to these fiery spirits towards an Englishman in the present state
of feeling, and I blame myself extremely for having permitted myself to lose sight of Monsieur
and Mademoiselle."

"Indeed, sir, we have met with no cause of complaint," said Charles, adding as if casually,
"What is that church?"

"'Tis the Jesuits' Church," replied the governor.  "There is the best preaching in the town,
they say, and Jansenists as we are, I was struck with the Lenten course."

Anne went at once to her room on returning to the house.  Naomi, who was there already, exclaimed
at her paleness, and insisted on administering a glass of wine from what the English called
the rere supper, the French an encas, the substantial materials for which had been left in
the chamber.  Then Anne felt how well it had been for her that her fellows at the palace had
been so uncongenial, for she could hardly help disclosing to Naomi the sight she had seen,
and the half-finished words she had heard.  It was chiefly the feeling that she could not bear
Naomi to know of the blood on Charles's hand which withheld her in her tumult of feeling, and
made her only entreat, "Do not ask me, I cannot tell you."  And Naomi, who was some years older,
and had had her own sad experience, guessed perhaps at one cause for her agitation, and spared
her inquiries, though as Anne, tired out by the long day, and forced by their close quarters
to keep herself still, dropped asleep, strange mutterings fell from her lips about "The vault--the
blood--come back.  There he is.  The secret has risen to forbid.  O, poor Peregrine!"

Between the July heat, the narrow bed, and the two chamber fellows, Anne had little time to
collect her thoughts, except for the general impression that if Charles finished what he had
begun to say, the living and the dead alike must force her to refuse, though something within
foreboded that this would cost her more than she yet durst perceive, and her heart was ready
to spring forth and enclose him as it were in an embrace of infinite tenderness, above all
when she thought of his purpose of going to those fearful Hungarian wars.

But after the hot night, it was a great relief to prepare for an early start.  M. de Nidemerle
had decided on sending the travellers to Tournay, the nearest Spanish town, on the Scheldt,
since he had some acquaintance with the governor, and when no campaign was actually on foot
the courtesies of generous enemies passed between them.  He had already sent an intimation
of his intention of forwarding an English kinswoman of his own with her companions, and bespoken
the good offices of his neighbour, and they were now to set off in very early morning under
the escort of a flag of truce, a trumpeter, and a party of troopers, commanded by an experienced
old officer with white moustaches and the peaked beard of the last generation, contrasting
with a face the colour of walnut wood.

The marquis himself and his son, however, rode with the travellers for their first five miles,
through a country where the rich green of the natural growth showed good soil, all enamelled
with flowers and corn crops run wild; but the villages looked deserted, the remains of burnt
barns and houses were frequent, and all along that frontier, it seemed as if no peaceful inhabitants
ventured to settle, and only brigands often rendered such by misery might prowl about.  The
English party felt as if they had never understood what war could be.

However, in a melancholy orchard run wild, under the shade of an apple-tree laden with young
fruit, backed by a blackened gable half concealed by a luxuriant untrimmed vine, the avant
couriers of the commandant had cleared a space in the rank grass, and spread a morning meal,
of cold pate, fowl and light wines, in which the French officers drank to the good journey
of their friends, and then when the horses had likewise had their refreshment the parting took
place with much affection between the cousins.  The young Ribaumont augured that they should
meet again when he had to protect Noemi in a grand descent on Dorsetshire in behalf of James,
and she merrily shook her fist at him and defied him, and his father allowed that they were
a long way from that.

M. de Nidemerle hinted to Mr. Archfield that nobody could tell him more about the war with
the Turks than M. le Capitaine Delaune, who was, it appeared, a veteran Swiss who had served
in almost every army in Europe, and thus could give information by no means to be neglected.
So that, to Anne's surprise and somewhat to her mortification, since she had no knowledge of
the cause, she saw Charles riding apart with this wooden old veteran, who sat as upright as
a ramrod on his wiry-looking black horse, leaving her to the company of Naomi and Mr. Fellowes.
Did he really wish not to pursue the topic which had brought Peregrine from his grave?  It
would of course be all the better, but it cost her some terrible pangs to think so.

There were far more formalities and delays before the travellers could cross the Tournay bridge
across the Scheldt.  They were brought to a standstill a furlong off, and had to wait while
the trumpeter rode forward with the white flag, and the message was referred to the officer
on guard, while a sentry seemed to be watching over them.  Then the officer came to the gateway
of the bridge, and Captain Delaune rode forward to him, but there was still a long weary waiting
in the sun before he came back, after having shown their credentials to the governor, and then
he was accompanied by a Flemish officer, who, with much courtesy, took them under his charge,
and conducted them through all the defences, over the bridge, and to the gate where their baggage
had to be closely examined.  Naomi had her Bible in her bosom, or it would not have escaped;
Anne heartily wished she had used the same precaution on her flight from England, but she had
not, like her friend, been warned beforehand.

When within the city there was more freedom, and the Fleming conducted the party to an inn,
where, unlike English inns, they could not have a parlour to themselves, but had to take their
meals in common with other guests at a sort of table d'hote, and the ladies had no refuge but
their bedroom, where the number of beds did not promise privacy.  An orderly soon arrived with
an invitation to Don Carlos Arcafila to sup with the Spanish governor, and of course the invitation
could not be neglected.  The ladies walked about a little in the town with Mr. Fellowes, looking
without appreciation at the splendid five-towered cathedral, but recollecting with due English
pride that the place had been conquered by Henry VIII. Thence they were to make for Ostend,
where they were certain of finding a vessel bound for England.

It was a much smaller party that set forth from Tournay than from Paris, and soon they fell
into pairs, Mr. Fellowes and Naomi riding together, sufficiently out of earshot of the others
for Charles to begin--

"I have not been able to speak to you, Anne, since that strange interruption--if indeed it
were not a dream."

"Oh, sir, it was no dream!  How could it be?"

"How could it, indeed, when we both saw it, and both of us awake and afoot, and yet I cannot
believe my senses."

"Oh, I can believe it only too truly!  I have seen him twice before. I thought you said you had."

"Merely in dreams, and that is bad enough."

"Are you sure? for I was up and awake."

"Are you sure?  I might ask again.  I was asleep in bed, and glad enough to shake myself awake.
Where were you?"

"Once on Hallowmas Eve, looking from the window at Whitehall; once when waiting with the Queen
under the wall of Lambeth Church, on the night of our flight."

"Did others see him then?"

"I was alone the first time.  The next time when he flitted across the light, no one else saw
him; but they cried out at my start.  Why should he appear except to us?"

"That is true," muttered Charles.

"And oh, sir, those two times he looked as he did in life--not ghastly as now.  There can be
no doubt now that--"

"What, sweet Anne?"

"Sir, I must tell you!  I could bear it no longer, and I did consult the Bishop of Bath and Wells."

"Any more?" he asked in a somewhat displeased voice.

"No one, not a soul, and he is as safe as any of the priests here; he regards a confession
in the same way.  Mr. Archfield, forgive me. He seemed divinely sent to me on that All Saints'
day!  Oh, forgive me!" and tears were in her eyes.

"He is Dr. Ken--eh?  I remember him.  I suppose he is as safe as any man, and a woman must
have some relief.  You have borne enough indeed," said Charles, greatly touched by her tears.
"What did he say?"

"He asked, was I certain of the--death," said she, bringing out the word with difficulty; "but
then I had only seen it at Whitehall; and these other appearances, in such places too, take
away all hope that it is otherwise!"

"Assuredly," said Charles; "I had not the least doubt at the moment. I know I ran my sword
through his body, and felt a jar that I believe was his backbone," he said with a shudder,
"and he fell prone and breathless; but since I have seen more of fencing, and heard more of
wounds, the dread has crossed me that I acted as an inexperienced lad, and that I ought to
have tried whether the life was in him, or if he could be recovered.  If so, I slew him twice,
by launching him into that pit.  God forgive me!"

"Is it so deep?" asked Anne, shuddering.  "I know there is a sort of step at the top; but I
always shunned the place, and never looked in."

"There are two or three steps at the top, but all is broken away below.  Sedley and I once
threw a ball down, and I am sure it dropped to a depth down which no man could fall and live.
I believe there once were underground passages leading to the harbour on one hand, and out
to Portsdown Hill on the other, but that the communication was broken away and the openings
destroyed when Lord Goring was governor of Portsmouth, to secure the castle.  Be that as it
may, he could not have been living after he reached that floor. I heard the thud, and the jingle
of his sword, and it will haunt me to my dying day."

"And yet you never intended it.  You did it in defence of me.  You did not mean to strike thus
hard.  It was an accident."

"Would that I could so feel it!" he sighed.  "Nay, of course I had no evil design when my poor
little wife drove me out to give you her rag of ribbon, or whatever it was; but I hated as
well as despised the fellow.  He had angered me with his scorn--well deserved, as now I see--of
our lubberly ways.  She had vexed me with her teasing commendations--out of harmless mischief,
poor child.  I hated him more every time you looked at him, and when I had occasion to strike
him I was glad of it.  There was murder in my heart, and I felt as if I were putting a rat
or a weasel out of the way when I threw him down that pit.  God forgive me!  Then, in my madness,
I so acted that in a manner I was the death of that poor young thing."

"No, no, sir.  Your mother had never thought she would live."

"So they say; but her face comes before me in reproach.  There are times when I feel myself
a double murderer.  I have been on the point of telling all to Mr. Fellowes, or going home
to accuse myself.  Only the thought of my father and mother, and of leaving such a blight on
that poor baby, has withheld me; but I cannot go home to face the sight of the castle."

"No," said Anne, choked with tears.

"Nor is there any suspicion of the poor fellow's fate," he added.

"Not that I ever heard."

"His family think him fled, as was like enough, considering the way in which they treated him,"
said Charles.  "Nor do I see what good it would do them to know the truth."

"It would only be a grief and bitterness to all."

"I hope I have repented, and that God accepts my forgiveness," said Charles sadly.  "I am banishing
myself from all I love, and there is a weight on me for life; but, unless suspicion falls on
others, I do not feel bound to make it worse for all by giving myself up.  Yet those appearances--to
you, to me, to us both!  At such a moment, too, last night!"

"Can it be because of his unhallowed grave?" said Anne, in a low voice of awe.

"If it were!" said Charles, drawing up his horse for a moment in thought.  "Anne, if there
be one more appearance, the place shall be searched, whether it incriminate me or not.  It
would be adding to all my wrongs towards the poor fellow, if that were the case."

"Even if he were found," said Anne, "suspicion would not light on you.  And at home it will
be known if he haunts the place.  I will-- "

"Nay, but, Anne, he will not interrupt me now.  I have much more to say.  I want you to remember
that we were sweethearts ere ever I, as a child of twelve, knew that I was contracted to that
poor babe, and bidden to think only of her.  Poor child!  I honestly did my best to love her,
so far as I knew how, and mayhap we could have rubbed on through life passably well as things
go.  But--but--It skills not talking of things gone by, except to show that it is a whole heart--
not the reversion of one that is yours for ever, mine only love."

"Oh, but--but--I am no match for you."

"I've had enough of grand matches."

"Your father would never endure it."

"My father would soon rejoice.  Besides, if we are wedded here--say at Ostend--and you make
me a home at Buda, or Vienna, or some place at our winter quarters, as my brave wench will,
my father will be glad enough to see us both at home again."

"No; it cannot be.  It would be plain treachery to your parents; Mr. Fellowes would say so.
I am sure he would not marry us."

"There are English chaplains.  Is that all that holds you back?"

"No, sir.  If the Archbishop of Canterbury were here himself, it could not make it other than
a sin, and an act of mean ingratitude, for me, the Prince's rocker, to take advantage of their
goodness in permitting you to come and bring me home--to do what would be pain, grief, and
shame to them."

"Never shame."

"What is wrong is shame!  Cannot you see how unworthy it would be in me, and how it would grieve
my uncle that I should have done such a thing?"

"Love would override scruples."

"Not true love."

"True!  Then you own to some love for me, Anne."

"I do--not--know.  I have guarded--I mean--cast away--I mean--never entertained any such thought
ever since I was old enough to know how wicked it would be."

"Anne!  Anne!" (in an undertone very like rapture), "you have confessed all!  It is no sin
now.  Even you cannot say so."

She hung her head and did not answer, but silence was enough for him.

"It is enough!" he said; "you will wait.  I shall know you are waiting till I return in such
sort that nothing can be denied me. Let me at least have that promise."

"You need not fear," murmured Anne.  "How could I need?  The secret would withhold me, were
there nothing else."

"And there is something else?  Eh, sweetheart?  Is that all I am to be satisfied with?"

"Oh sir!--Mr. Archfield, I mean--O Charles!" she stammered.

Mr. Fellowes turned round to consult his pupil as to whether the halt should be made at the
village whose peaked roofs were seen over the fruit trees.

But when Anne was lifted down from the steed it was with no grasp of common courtesy, and her
hand was not relinquished till it had been fervently kissed.

Charles did not again torment her with entreaties to share his exile.  Mayhap he recognised,
though unwillingly, that her judgment had been right, but there was no small devotion in his
whole demeanour, as they dined, rode, and rested on that summer's day amid fields of giant
haycocks, and hostels wreathed with vines, with long vistas of sleek cows and plump dappled
horses in the sheds behind. The ravages of war had lessened as they rode farther from the frontier,
and the rich smiling landscape lay rejoicing in the summer sunshine; the sturdy peasants looked
as if they had never heard of marauders, as they herded their handsome cattle and responded
civilly when a draught of milk was asked for the ladies.

There was that strange sense of Eden felicity that sometimes comes with the knowledge that
the time is short for mutual enjoyment in full peace.  Charles and Anne would part, their future
was undefined; but for the present they reposed in the knowledge of each other's hearts, and
in being together.  It was as in their childhood, when by tacit consent he had been Anne's
champion from the time she came as a little Londoner to be alarmed at rough country ways, and
to be easily scared by Sedley.  It had been then that Charles had first awakened to the chivalry
of the better part of boyhood's nature, instead of following his cousin's lead, and treating
girls as creatures meant to be bullied.  Many a happy reminiscence was shared between the two
as they rode together, and it was not till the pale breadth of sea filled their horizon, broken
by the tall spires and peaked gables and many-windowed steep roofs of Ostend, that the future
was permitted to come forward and trouble them.  Then Anne's heart began to feel that persistence
in her absolute refusal was a much harder thing than at the first, when the idea was new and
strange to her.  And there were strange yearnings that Charles should renew the proposal, mixed
with dread of herself and of her own resolution in case of his doing so.  As her affections
embraced him more and more she pictured him sick, wounded, dying, out of reach of all, among
Germans, Hungarians, Turks,--no one at hand to comfort him or even to know his fate.

There was even disappointment in his acquiescence, though her better mind told her that it
was in accordance with her prayer against temptation.  Moreover, he was of a reserved nature,
not apt to discuss what was once fixed, and perhaps it showed that he respected her judgment
not to try to shake her decision.  Though for once love had carried him away, he might perhaps
be grateful to her for sparing him the perplexities of dragging her about with him and of giving
additional offence to his parents.  The affection born of lifelong knowledge is not apt to
be of the vehement character that disregards all obstacles or possible miseries to the object
thereof. Yet enough feeling was betrayed to make Naomi whisper at night, "Sweet Nan, are you
not some one else's sweet?"

And Anne, now with another secret on her heart, only replied with embraces, and, "Do not talk
of it!  I cannot tell how it is to be. I cannot tell you all."

Naomi was discreet enough only to caress.

With strict formalities at outworks, moat, drawbridge, and gates, and the customary inquisitorial
search of the luggage, the travellers were allowed to repair to a lofty inn, with the Lion
of Flanders for its sign, and a wide courtyard, the successive outside galleries covered with
luxuriant vines.  Here, as usual, though the party of females obtained one bedroom together,
the gentlemen had to share one vast sleeping chamber with a variety of merchants, Dutch, Flemish,
Spanish, and a few English.  Meals were at a great table d'hote in the public room, opening
into the court, and were shared by sundry Spanish, Belgic, and Swiss officers of the garrison,
who made this their mess-room.  Two young English gentlemen, like Charles Archfield, making
the grand tour, whom he had met in Italy, were delighted to encounter him again, and still
more so at the company of English ladies.

"No wonder the forlorn widower has recovered his spirits!" Anne heard one say with a laugh
that made her blush and turn away; and there was an outcry that after a monopoly of the fair
ones all the way from Paris, the seats next to them must be yielded.

Anne was disappointed, and could not bring herself to be agreeable to the obtrusive cavalier
with the rich lace cravat and perfumed hair, both assumed in her honour.

The discussion was respecting the vessels where a passage might be obtained.  The cavaliers
were to sail in a couple of days for London, but another ship would go out of harbour with
the tide on the following day for Southampton, and this was decided on by acclamation by the
Hampshire party, though no good accommodation was promised them.

There was little opportunity for a tete-a-tetes, for the young men insisted on escorting the
ladies to the picture galleries, palaces, and gardens, and Charles did not wish to reawaken
the observations that, according to the habits of the time, might not be of the choicest description.
Anne watched him under her eyelashes, and wondered with beating heart whether after all he
intended to return home, and there plead his cause, for he gave no token of intending to separate
from the rest.

The Hampshire Hog was to sail at daybreak, so the passengers went on board over night, after
supper, when the summer twilight was sinking down and the far-off west still had a soft golden
tint.

Anne felt Charles's arm round her in the boat and grasping her hand, then pulling off her glove
and putting a ring on her finger--all in silence.  She still felt that arm on the deck in the
confusion of men, ropes, and bales of goods, and the shouts and hails on all sides that nearly
deafened her.  There was imminent danger of being hurled down, if not overboard, among the
far from sober sailors, and Mr. Fellowes urged the ladies to go below at once, conducting Miss
Darpent himself as soon as he could ascertain where to go.  Anne felt herself almost lifted
down.  Then followed a strong embrace, a kiss on brow, lips, and either cheek, and a low hoarse
whisper--"So best!  Mine own!  God bless you,"--and as Suzanne came tumbling aft into the narrow
cabin, Anne found herself left alone with her two female companions, and knew that these blissful
days were over.

CHAPTER XXIII: FRENCH LEAVE

"When ye gang awa, Jamie,
   Far across the sea, laddie,
When ye gang to Germanie
   What will ye send to me, laddie?"

Huntingtower.

Fides was the posy on the ring.  That was all Anne could discover, and indeed only this much
with the morning light of the July sun that penetrated the remotest corners.  For the cabin
was dark and stifling, and there was no leaving it, for both Miss Darpent and her attendant
were so ill as to engross her entirely.

She could hardly leave them when there was a summons to a meal in the captain's cabin, and
there she found herself the only passenger able to appear, and the rest of the company, though
intending civility, were so rough that she was glad to retreat again, and wretched as the cabin
was, she thought it preferable to the deck.

Mr. Fellowes, she heard, was specially prostrated, and jokes were passing round that it was
the less harm, since it might be the worse for him if the crew found out that there was a parson
on board.

Thus Anne had to forego the first sight of her native land, and only by the shouts above and
the decreased motion of the vessel knew when she was within lee of the Isle of Wight, and on
entering the Solent could encourage her companions that their miseries were nearly over, and
help them to arrange themselves for going upon deck.

When at length they emerged, as the ship lay-to in sight of the red roofs and white steeples
of Southampton, and of the green mazes of the New Forest, Mr. Fellowes was found looking everywhere
for the pupil whom he had been too miserable to miss during the voyage. Neither Charles Archfield
nor his servant was visible, but Mr. Fellowes's own man coming forward, delivered to the bewildered
tutor a packet which he said that his comrade had put in his charge for the purpose.  In the
boat, on the way to land, Mr. Fellowes read to himself the letter, which of course filled him
with extreme distress.  It contained much of what Charles had already explained to Anne of
his conviction that in the present state of affairs it was better for so young a man as himself,
without sufficient occupation at home, to seek honourable service abroad, and that he thought
it would spare much pain and perplexity to depart without revisiting home.  He added full and
well-expressed thanks for all that Mr. Fellowes had done for him, and for kindness for which
he hoped to be the better all his life.  He enclosed a long letter to his father, which he
said would, he hoped, entirely exonerate his kind and much-respected tutor from any remissness
or any participation in the scheme which he had thought it better on all accounts to conceal
till the last.

"And indeed," said poor Mr. Fellowes, "if I had had any inkling of it, I should have applied
to the English Consul to restrain him as a ward under trust.  But no one would have thought
it of him.  He had always been reasonable and docile beyond his years, and I trusted him entirely.
I should as soon have thought of our President giving me the slip in this way.  Surely he came
on board with us."

"He handed me into the boat," said Miss Darpent.  "Who saw him last? Did you, Miss Woodford?"

Anne was forced to own that she had seen him on board, and her cheeks were in spite of herself
such tell-tales that Mr. Fellowes could not help saying, "It is not my part to rebuke you,
madam, but if you were aware of this evasion, you will have a heavy reckoning to pay to the
young man's parents."

"Sir," said Anne, "I knew indeed that he meant to join the Imperial army, but I knew not how
nor when."

"Ah, well!  I ask no questions.  You need not justify yourself to me, young lady; but Sir Philip
and Lady Archfield little knew what they did when they asked us to come by way of Paris.  Not
that I regret it on all accounts," he added, with a courteous bow to Naomi which set her blushing
in her turn.  He avoided again addressing Miss Woodford, and she thought with consternation
of the prejudice he might excite against her.  It had been arranged between the two maidens
that Naomi should be a guest at Portchester Rectory till she could communicate with Walwyn,
and her father or brother could come and fetch her.

They landed at the little wharf, among the colliers, and made their way up the street to an
inn, where, after ordering a meal to satisfy the ravenous sea-appetite, Mr. Fellowes, after
a few words with Naomi, left the ladies to their land toilet, while he went to hire horses
for the journey.

Then Naomi could not help saying, "O Anne!  I did not think you would have done this.  I am
grieved!"

"You do not know all," said Anne sadly, "or you would not think so hardly."

"I saw you had an understanding with him.  I see you have a new ring on your finger; but how
could I suppose you would encourage an only son thus to leave his parents?"

"Hush, hush, Naomi!" cried Anne, as the uncontrollable tears broke out.  "Don't you believe
that it is quite as hard for me as for them that he should have gone off to fight those dreadful
blood-thirsty Turks?  Indeed I would have hindered him, but that--but that--I know it is best
for him.  No!  I can't tell you why, but I know it is; and even to the very last, when he helped
me down the companion- ladder, I hoped he might be coming home first."

"But you are troth-plight to him, and secretly?"

"I am not troth-plight; I know I am not his equal, I told him so, but he thrust this ring on
me in the boat, in the dark, and how could I give it back!"

Naomi shook her head, but was more than half-disarmed by her friend's bitter weeping.  Whether
she gave any hint to Mr. Fellowes Anne did not know, but his manner remained drily courteous,
and as Anne had to ride on a pillion behind a servant she was left in a state of isolation
as to companionship, which made her feel herself in disgrace, and almost spoilt the joy of
dear familiar recognition of hill, field, and tree, after her long year's absence, the longest
year in her life, and substituted the sinking of heart lest she should be returning to hear
of misfortune and disaster, sickness or death.

Her original plan had been to go on with Naomi to Portchester at once, if by inquiry at Fareham
she found that her uncle was at home, but she perceived that Mr. Fellowes decidedly wished
that Miss Darpent should go first to the Archfields, and something within her determined first
to turn thither in spite of all there was to encounter, so that she might still her misgivings
by learning whether her uncle was well.  So she bade the man turn his horse's head towards
the well-known poplars in front of Archfield House.

The sound of the trampling horses brought more than one well-known old 'blue-coated serving-man'
into the court, and among them a woman with a child in her arms.  There was the exclamation,
"Mistress Anne!  Sure Master Charles be not far behind," and the old groom ran to help her down.

"Oh!  Ralph, thanks.  All well?  My uncle?"

"He is here, with his Honour," and in scarcely a moment more Lucy, swift of foot, had flown
out, and had Anne in her embrace, and crying out--

"Ah, Charles! my brother!  I don't see him."

Anne was glad to have no time to answer before she was in her uncle's arms.  "My child, at
last!  God bless thee!  Safe in soul and body!"

Sir Philip was there too, greeting Mr. Fellowes, and looking for his son, and with the cursory
assurance that Mr. Archfield was well, and that they would explain, a hasty introduction of
Miss Darpent was made, and all moved in to where Lady Archfield, more feeble and slow of movement,
had come into the hall, and the nurse stood by with the little heir to be shown to his father,
and Sedley Archfield stood in the background.  It was a cruel moment for all, when the words
came from Mr. Fellowes, "Sir, I have to tell you, Mr. Archfield is not here.  This letter,
he tells me, is to explain."

There was an outburst of exclamation, during which Sir Philip withdrew into a window with his
spectacles to read the letter, while all to which the tutor or Anne ventured to commit themselves
was that Mr. Archfield had only quitted them without notice on board the Hampshire Hog.

The first tones of the father had a certain sound of relief, "Gone to the Imperialist army
to fight the Turks in Hungary!"

Poor Lady Archfield actually shrieked, and Lucy turned quite pale, while Anne caught a sort
of lurid flush of joy on Sedley Archfield's features, and he was the first to exclaim, "Undutiful
young dog!"

"Tut! tut!" returned Sir Philip, "he might as well have come home first, and yet I do not know
but that it is the best thing he could do.  There might have been difficulties in the way of
getting out again, you see, my lady, as things stand now.  Ay! ay! you are in the right of
it, my boy.  It is just as well to let things settle themselves down here before committing
himself to one side or the other.  'Tis easy enough for an old fellow like me who has to let
nothing go but his Commission of the Peace, but not the same for a stirring young lad; and
he is altogether right as to not coming back to idle here as a rich man.  It would be the ruin
of him.  I am glad he has the sense to see it.  I was casting about to obtain an estate for
him to give him occupation."

"But the wars," moaned the mother; "if he had only come home we could have persuaded him."

"The wars, my lady!  Why, they will be a feather in his cap; and may be if he had come home,
the Dutchman would have claimed him for his, and let King James be as misguided as he may,
I cannot stomach fighting against his father's son for myself or mine.  No, no; it was the
best thing there was for the lad to do.  You shall hear his letter, it does him honour, and
you, too, Mr. Fellowes.  He could not have written such a letter when he left home barely a
year ago."

Sir Philip proceeded to read the letter aloud.  There was a full explanation of the motives,
political and private, only leaving out one, and that the most powerful of all of those which
led Charles Archfield to absent himself for the present.  He entreated pardon for having made
the decision without obtaining permission from his father on returning home; but he had done
so in view of possible obstacles to his leaving England again, and to the belief that a brief
sojourn at home would cause more grief and perplexity than his absence.  He further explained,
as before, his reasons for secrecy towards his travelling companion, and entreated his father
not to suppose for a moment that Mr. Fellowes had been in any way culpable for what he could
never have suspected; warmly affectionate messages to mother and sister followed, and an assurance
of feeling that 'the little one' needed for no care or affection while with them.

Lady Archfield was greatly disappointed, and cried a great deal, making sure that the poor
dear lad's heart was still too sore to brook returning after the loss of his wife, who had
now become the sweetest creature in the world; but Sir Philip's decision that the measure was
wise, and the secrecy under the circumstances so expedient as to be pardonable, prevented all
public blame; Mr. Fellowes, however, was drawn apart, and asked whether he suspected any other
motive than was here declared, and which might make his pupil unwilling to face the parental
brow, and he had declared that nothing could have been more exemplary than the whole demeanour
of the youth, who had at first gone about as one crushed, and though slowly reviving into cheerfulness,
had always been subdued, until quite recently, when the meeting with his old companion had
certainly much enlivened his spirits.  Poor Mr. Fellowes had been rejoicing in the excellent
character he should have to give, when this evasion had so utterly disconcerted him, and it
was an infinite relief to him to find that all was thought comprehensible and pardonable.

Anne might be thankful that none of the authorities thought of asking her the question about
hidden motives; and Naomi, looking about with her bright eyes, thought she had perhaps judged
too hardly when she saw the father's approval, and that the mother and sister only mourned
at the disappointment at not seeing the beloved one.

The Archfields would not hear of letting any of the party go on to Portchester that evening.
Dr. Woodford, who had ridden over for consultation with Sir Philip, must remain, he would have
plenty of time for his niece by and by, and she and Miss Darpent must tell them all about the
journey, and about Charles; and Anne must tell them hundreds of things about herself that they
scarcely knew, for not one letter from St. Germain had ever reached her uncle.

How natural it all looked! the parlour just as when she saw it last, and the hall, with the
long table being laid for supper, and the hot sun streaming in through the heavy casements.
She could have fancied it yesterday that she had left it, save for the plump rosy little yearling
with flaxen curls peeping out under his round white cap, who had let her hold him in her arms
and fondle him all through that reading of his father's letter.  Charles's child!  He was her
prince indeed now.

He was taken from her and delivered over to Lady Archfield to be caressed and pitied because
his father would not come home 'to see his grand-dame's own beauty,' while Lucy took the guests
upstairs to prepare for supper, Naomi and her maid being bestowed in the best guest-chamber,
and Lucy taking her friend to her own, the scene of many a confabulation of old.

"Oh, how I love it!" cried Anne, as the door opened on the well- known little wainscotted abode.
"The very same beau-pot.  One would think they were the same clove gillyflowers as when I went
away."

"O Anne, dear, and you are just the same after all your kings and queens, and all you have
gone through;" and the two friends were locked in another embrace.

"Kings and queens indeed!  None of them all are worth my Lucy."

"And now, tell me all; tell me all, Nancy, and first of all about my brother.  How does he
look, and is he well?"

"He looks!  O Lucy, he is grown such a noble cavalier; most like the picture of that uncle
of yours who was killed, and that Sir Philip always grieves for."

"My father always hoped Charley would be like him," said Lucy.  "You must tell him that.  But
I fear he may be grave and sad."

"Graver, but not sad now."

"And you have seen him and talked to him, Anne?  Did you know he was going on this terrible
enterprise?"

"He spoke of it, but never told me when."

"Ah!  I was sure you knew more about it than the old tutor man.  You always were his little
sweetheart before poor little Madam came in the way, and he would tell you anything near his
heart.  Could you not have stopped him?"

"I think not, Lucy; he gave his reasons like a man of weight and thought, and you see his Honour
thinks them sound ones."

"Oh yes; but somehow I cannot fancy our Charley doing anything for grand, sound, musty reasons,
such as look well marshalled out in a letter."

"You don't know how much older he is grown," said Anne, again, with the tell-tale colour in
her cheeks.  "Besides, he cannot bear to come home."

"Don't tell me that, Nan.  My mother does not see it; but though he was fond of poor little
Madam in a way, and tried to think himself more so, as in duty bound, she really was fretting
and wearing the very life--no, perhaps not the life, but the temper--out of him. What I believe
it to be the cause is, that my father must have been writing to him about that young gentlewoman
in the island that he is so set upon, because she would bring a landed estate which would give
Charles something to do.  They say that Peregrine Oakshott ran away to escape wedding his cousin;
Charley will banish himself for the like cause."

"He said nothing of it," said Anne.

"O Anne, I wish you had a landed estate!  You would make him happier than any other, and would
love his poor little Phil!  Anne! is it so?  I have guessed!" and Lucy kissed her on each cheek.

"Indeed, indeed I have not promised.  I know it can never, never be-- and that I am not fit
for him.  Do not speak of it, Lucy?  He spoke of it once as we rode together--"

"And you could not be so false as to tell him you did not love him? No, you could not?" and
Lucy kissed her again.

"No," faltered Anne; "but I would not do as he wished.  I have given him no troth-plight. 
I told him it would never be permitted.  And he said no more, but he put this ring on my finger
in the boat without a word.  I ought not to wear it; I shall not."

"Oh yes, you shall.  Indeed you shall.  No one need understand it but myself, and it makes
us sisters.  Yes, Anne, Charley was right. My father will not consent now, but he will in due
time, if he does not hear of it till he wearies to see Charles again.  Trust it to me, my sweet
sister that is to be."

"It is a great comfort that you know," said Anne, almost moved to tell her the greater and
more perilous secret that lay in the background, but withheld by receiving Lucy's own confidence
that she herself was at present tormented by her cousin Sedley's courtship. He was still, more's
the pity, she said, in garrison at Portsmouth, but there were hopes of his regiment being ere
long sent to the Low Countries, since it was believed to be more than half inclined to King
James.  In the meantime he certainly had designs on Lucy's portion, and as her father never
believed half the stories of his debaucheries that were rife, and had a kindness for his only
brother's orphan, she did not feel secure against his yielding so as to provide for Sedley
without continuance in the Dutch service.

"I could almost follow the example of running away!" said Lucy.

"I suppose," Anne ventured to say, faltering, "that nothing has been heard of poor Mr. Oakshott."

"Nothing at all.  His uncle's people, who have come home from Muscovy, know nothing of him,
and it is thought he may have gone off to the plantations.  The talk is that Mistress Martha
is to be handed on to the third brother, but that she is not willing."  It was clear that there
could have been no spectres here, and Lucy went on, "But you have told me nothing yet of yourself
and your doings, my Anne.  How well you look, and more than ever the Court lady, even in your
old travelling habit.  Is that the watch the King gave you?"

In private and in public there was quite enough to tell on that evening for intimate friends
who had not met for a year, and one of whom had gone through so many vicissitudes.  Nor were
the other two guests by any means left out of the welcome, and the evening was a very happy one.

Mr. Fellowes intimated his intention of going himself to Walwyn with the news of Miss Darpent's
arrival, and Naomi accepted the invitation to remain at Portchester till she could be sent
for from home.

It was not till the next morning that Anne Woodford could be alone with her uncle.  As she
came downstairs in the morning she saw him waiting for her; he held out his hands, and drew
her out with him into the walled garden that lay behind the house.

"Child! dear child!" said he, "you are welcome to my old eyes.  May God bless you, as He has
aided you to be faithful alike to Him and to your King through much trial."

"Ah, sir!  I have sorely repented the folly and ambition that would not heed your counsel."

"No doubt, my maid; but the spirit of humility and repentance hath worked well in you.  I fear
me, however, that you are come back to further trials, since probably Portchester may be no
longer our home."

"Nor Winchester?"

"Nor Winchester."

"Then is this new King going to persecute as in the old times you talk of?  He who was brought
over to save the Church!"

"He accepts the English Church, my maid, so far as it accepts him. All beneficed clergy are
required to take the oath of allegiance to him before the first of August, now approaching,
under pain of losing their preferments.  Many of my brethren, even our own Bishop and Dean,
think this merely submission to the powers that be, and that it may be lawfully done; but as
I hear neither the Archbishop himself, nor my good old friends Doctors Ken and Frampton can
reconcile it to their conscience, any more than my brother Stanbury, of Botley, nor I, to take
this fresh oath, while the King to whom we have sworn is living.  Some hold that he has virtually
renounced our allegiance by his flight.  I cannot see it, while he is fighting for his crown
in Ireland.  What say you, Anne, who have seen him; did he treat his case as that of an abdicated
prince?"

"No, sir, certainly not.  All the talk was of his enjoying his own again."

"How can I then, consistently with my duty and loyalty, swear to this William and Mary as my
lawful sovereigns?  I say not 'tis incumbent on me to refuse to live under them a peaceful
life, but make oath to them as my King and Queen I cannot, so long as King James shall live.
True, he has not been a friend to the Church, and has wofully trampled on the rights of Englishmen,
but I cannot hold that this absolves me from my duty to him, any more than David was freed
from duty to Saul.  So, Anne, back must we go to the poverty in which I was reared with your
own good father."

Anne might grieve, but she felt the gratification of being talked to by her uncle as a woman
who could understand, as he had talked to her mother.

"The first of August!" she repeated, as if it were a note of doom.

"Yes; I hear whispers of a further time of grace, but I know not what difference that should
make.  A Christian man's oath may not be broken sooner or later.  Well, poverty is the state
blessed by our Lord, and it may be that I have lived too much at mine ease; but I could wish,
dear child, that you were safely bestowed in a house of your own."

"So do not I," said Anne, "for now I can work for you."

He smiled faintly, and here Mr. Fellowes joined them; a good man likewise, but intent on demonstrating
the other side of the question, and believing that the Popish, persecuting King had forfeited
his rights, so that there need be no scruple as to renouncing what he had thrown up by his
flight.  It was an endless argument, in which each man could only act according to his own
conscience, and endeavour that this conscience should be as little biassed as possible by worldly
motives or animosity.

Mr. Fellowes started at once with his servant for Walwyn, and Naomi accompanied the two Woodfords
to Portchester.  In spite of the cavalier sentiments of her family, Naomi had too much of the
spire of her Frondeur father to understand any feeling for duty towards the King, who had so
decidedly broken his covenant with his people, and moreover had so abominably treated the Fellows
of Magdalen College; and her pity for Anne as a sufferer for her uncle's whim quite angered
her friend into hot defence of him and his cause.

The dear old parsonage garden under the gray walls, the honeysuckle and monthly roses trailing
over the porch, the lake-like creek between it and green Portsdown Hill, the huge massive keep
and towers, and the masts in the harbour, the Island hills sleeping in blue summer haze--Anne's
heart clave to them more than ever for the knowledge that the time was short and that the fair
spot must be given up for the right's sake.  Certainly there was some trepidation at the thought
of the vault, and she had made many vague schemes for ascertaining that which her very flesh
trembled at the thought of any one suspecting; but these were all frustrated, for since the
war with France had begun, the bailey had been put under repair and garrisoned by a detachment
of soldiers, the vault had been covered in, there was a sentry at the gateway of the castle,
and the postern door towards the vicarage was fastened up, so that though the parish still
repaired to church through the wide court solitary wanderings there were no longer possible,
nor indeed safe for a young woman, considering what the soldiery of that period were.

The thought came over her with a shudder as she gazed from her window at the creek where she
remembered Peregrine sending Charles and Sedley adrift in the boat.

The tide was out, the mud glistened in the moonlight, but nothing was to be seen more than
Anne had beheld on many a summer night before, no phantom was evoked before her eyes, no elfin-like
form revealed his presence, nor did any spirit take shape to upbraid her with his unhallowed
grave, so close at hand.

No, but Naomi Darpent, yearning for sympathy, came to her side, caressed her on that summer
night, and told her that Mr. Fellowes had gone to ask her of her father, and though she could
never love again as she had once loved, she thought if her parents wished it, she could be
happy with so good a man.

CHAPTER XXIV: IN THE MOONLIGHT

I have had a dream this evening, While the white and gold were fleeting, But I need not, need
not tell it. Where would be the good?

Requiescat in Pace.--JEAN INGELOW.

Anne Woodford sat, on a sultry summer night, by the open window in Archfield House at Fareham,
busily engaged over the tail of a kite, while asleep in a cradle in the corner of the room
lay a little boy, his apple-blossom cheeks and long flaxen curls lying prone upon his pillow
as he had tossed when falling asleep in the heat.

The six years since her return had been eventful.  Dr. Woodford had adhered to his view that
his oath of allegiance could not be forfeited by James's flight; and he therefore had submitted
to be ousted from his preferments, resigning his pleasant prebendal house, and his sea-side
home, and embracing poverty for his personal oath's sake, although he was willing to acquiesce
in the government of William and Mary, and perhaps to rejoice that others had effected what
he would not have thought it right to do.

Things had been softened to him as regarded his flock by the appointment of Mr. Fellowes to
Portchester, which was a Crown living, though there had been great demur at thus slipping into
a friend's shoes, so that Dr. Woodford had been obliged to asseverate that nothing so much
comforted him as leaving the parish in such hands, and that he blamed no man for seeing the
question of Divine right as he did in common with the Non-jurors.  The appointment opened the
way to the marriage with Naomi Darpent, and the pair were happily settled at Portchester.

Dr. Woodford and his niece found a tiny house at Winchester, near the wharf, with the clear
Itchen flowing in front and the green hills rising beyond, while in the rear were the ruins
of Wolvesey, and the buildings of the Cathedral and College.  They retained no servant except
black Hans, poor Peregrine's legacy, who was an excellent cook, and capable of all that Anne
could not accomplish in her hours of freedom.

It was a fall indeed from her ancient aspirations, though there was still that bud of hope
within her heart.  The united means of uncle and niece were so scanty that she was fain to
offer her services daily at Mesdames Reynaud's still flourishing school, where the freshness
of her continental experiences made her very welcome.

Dr. Woodford occasionally assisted some student preparing for the university, but this was
not regular occupation, and it was poorly paid, so that it was well that fifty pounds a year
went at least three times as far as it would do in the present day.  Though his gown and cassock
lost their richness and lustre, he was as much respected as ever.  Bishop Mews often asked
him to Wolvesey, and allowed him to assist the parochial clergy when it was not necessary to
utter the royal name, the vergers marshalled him to his own stall at daily prayers, and he
had free access to Bishop Morley's Cathedral library.

The Archfield family still took a house in the Close for the winter months, and there a very
sober-minded and conventional courtship of Lucy took place by Sir Edmund Nutley, a worthy and
well-to-do gentleman settled on the borders of Parkhurst Forest, in the Isle of Wight.

Anne, with the thought of her Charles burning within her heart, was a little scandalised at
the course of affairs.  Sir Edmund was a highly worthy man, but not in his first youth, and
ponderous--a Whig, moreover, and an intimate friend of the masterful governor of the island,
Lord Cutts, called the "Salamander."  He had seen Miss Archfield before at the winter and spring
Quarter Sessions, and though her father was no longer in the Commission of the Peace, the residence
at Winchester gave him opportunities, and the chief obstacle seemed to be the party question.
He was more in love than was the lady, but she was submissive, and believed that he would be
a kind husband.  She saw, too, that her parents would be much disappointed and displeased if
she made any resistance to so prosperous a settlement, and she was positively glad to be out
of reach of Sedley's addresses.  Such an entirely unenthusiastic acceptance was the proper
thing, and it only remained to provide for Lady Archfield's comfort in the loss of her daughter.

For this the elders turned at once to Anne Woodford.  Sir Philip made it his urgent entreaty
that the Doctor and his niece would take up their abode with him, and that Anne would share
with the grandmother the care of the young Philip, a spirited little fellow who would soon
be running wild with the grooms, without the attention that his aunt had bestowed on him.

Dr. Woodford himself was much inclined to accept the office of chaplain to his old friend,
who he knew would be far happier for his company; and Anne's heart bounded at the thought of
bringing up Charles's child, but that very start of joy made her blush and hesitate, and finally
surprise the two old gentlemen by saying, with crimson cheeks--

"Sir, your Honour ought to know what might make you change your mind.  There have been passages
between Mr. Archfield and me."

Sir Philip laughed.  "Ah, the rogue!  You were always little sweethearts as children.  Why,
Anne, you should know better than to heed what a young soldier says."

"No doubt you have other views for your son," said Dr. Woodford, "and I trust that my niece
has too much discretion and sense of propriety to think that they can be interfered with on
her account."

"Passages!" repeated Sir Philip thoughtfully.  "Mistress Anne, how much do you mean by that?
Surely there is no promise between you?"

"No, sir," said Anne; "I would not give any; but when we parted in Flanders he asked me to--to
wait for him, and I feel that you ought to know it."

"Oh, I understand!" said the baronet.  "It was only natural to an old friend in a foreign land,
and you have too much sense to dwell on a young man's folly, though it was an honourable scruple
that made you tell me, my dear maid.  But he is not come or coming yet, more's the pity, so
there is no need to think about it at present."

Anne's cheeks did not look as if she had attained that wisdom; but her conscience was clear,
since she had told the fact, and the father did not choose to take it seriously.  To say how
she herself loved Charles would have been undignified and nothing to the purpose, since her
feelings were not what would be regarded, and there was no need to mention her full and entire
purpose to wed no one else.  Time enough for that if the proposal were made.

So the uncle and niece entered on their new life, with some loss of independence, and to the
Doctor a greater loss in the neighbourhood of the Cathedral and its library; for after the
first year or two, as Lady Archfield grew rheumatic, and Sir Philip had his old friend to play
backgammon and read the Weekly Gazette, they became unwilling to make the move to Winchester,
and generally stayed at home all the winter.

Before this, however, Princess Anne had been at the King's House at Winchester for a short
time; and Lady Archfield paid due respects to her, with Anne in attendance.  With the royal
faculty of remembering everybody, the Princess recognised her namesake, gave her hand to be
kissed, and was extremely gracious.  She was at the moment in the height of a quarrel with
her sister, and far from delighted with the present regime.  She sent for Miss Woodford, and,
to Anne's surprise, laughed over her own escape from the Cockpit, adding, "You would not come,
child.  You were in the right on't.  There's no gratitude among them!  Had I known how I should
be served I would never have stirred a foot!  So 'twas you that carried off the child! Tell
me what he is like."

And she extracted by questions all that Anne could tell her of the life at St. Germain, and
the appearance of her little half-brother. It was impossible to tell whether she asked from
affectionate remorse or gossiping interest, but she ended by inquiring whether her father's
god-daughter were content with her position, or desired one--if there were a vacancy--in her
own household, where she might get a good husband.

Anne declined courteously and respectfully, and was forced to hint at an engagement which she
could not divulge.  She had heard Charles's expressions of delight at the arrangement which
gave his boy to her tender care, warming her heart.

Lady Archfield had fits of talking of finding a good husband for Anne Woodford among the Cathedral
clergy, but the maiden was so necessary to her, and so entirely a mother to little Philip,
that she soon let the idea drop.  Perhaps it was periodically revived, when, about three times
a year, there arrived a letter from Charles. He wrote in good spirits, evidently enjoying his
campaigns, and with no lack of pleasant companions, English, Scotch, and Irish Jacobites, with
whom he lived in warm friendship and wholesome emulation.  He won promotion, and the county
Member actually came out of his way to tell Sir Philip what he had heard from the Imperial
ambassador of young Archfield's distinguished services at the battle of Salankamen, only regretting
that he was not fighting under King William's colours.  Little Philip pranced about cutting
off Turks' heads in the form of poppies, 'like papa,' for whose safety Anne taught him to pray
night and morning.

Pride in his son's exploits was a compensation to the father, who declared them to be better
than vegetating over the sheepfolds, like Robert Oakshott, or than idling at Portsmouth, like
Sedley Archfield.

That young man's regiment had been ordered to Ireland during the campaign that followed the
battle of Boyne Water.  He had suddenly returned from thence, cashiered:  by his own story,
the victim of the enmity of the Dutch General Ginkel; according to another version, on account
of brutal excesses towards the natives and insolence to his commanding officer.  Courts-martial
had only just been introduced, and Sir Philip could believe in a Whig invention doing injustice
to a member of a loyal family, so that his doors were open to his nephew, and Sedley haunted
them whenever he had no other resource; but he spent most of his time between Newmarket and
other sporting centres, and contrived to get a sort of maintenance by bets at races, cock-fights,
and bull-baitings, and by extensive gambling.  Evil reports of him came from time to time,
but Sir Philip was loth to think ill of the son of his brother, or to forbode that as his grandson
grew older, such influence might be dangerous.

In his uncle's presence Sedley was on his good behaviour; but if he caught Miss Woodford without
that protection, he attempted rude compliments, and when repelled by her dignified look and
manner, sneered at the airs of my lady's waiting-woman, and demanded how long she meant to
mope after Charley, who would never look so low. "She need not be so ungracious to a poor soldier.
She might have to put up with worse."

Moreover, he deliberately incited Philip to mischief, putting foul words into the little mouth,
and likewise giving forbidden food and drink, lauding evil sports, and mocking at obedience
to any authority, especially Miss Woodford's.  Philip was very fond of his Nana, and in general
good and obedient; but what high-spirited boy is proof against the allurements of the only
example before him of young manhood, assuring him that it was manly not to mind what the women
said, nor to be tied to the apron-strings of his grand-dame's abigail?

The child had this summer thus been actually taken to the outskirts of a bull-fight, whence
he had been brought home in great disgrace by Ralph, the old servant who had been charged to
look after his out-door amusements, and to ride with him.  The grandfather was indeed more
shocked at the danger and the vulgarity of the sport than its cruelty, but Philip had received
his first flogging, and his cousin had been so sharply rebuked that--to the great relief of
Anne and of Lady Archfield--he had not since appeared at Fareham House.

The morrow would be Philip's seventh birthday, a stage which would take him farther out of
Anne's power.  He was no longer to sleep in her chamber, but in one of his own with Ralph for
his protector, and he was to begin Latin with Dr. Woodford.  So great was his delight that
he had gone to bed all the sooner in order to bring the great day more quickly, and Anne was
glad of the opportunity of finishing the kite, which was to be her present, for Ralph to help
him fly upon Portsdown Hill.

That great anniversary, so delightful to him, with pony and whip prepared for him--what a day
of confusion, distress, and wretchedness did it not recall to his elders?  Anne could not choose
but recall the time, as she sat alone in the window, looking out over the garden, the moon
beginning to rise, and the sunset light still colouring the sky in the north-west, just as
it had done when she returned home after the bonfire.  The events of that sad morning had faded
out of the foreground.  The Oakshott family seemed to have resigned themselves to the mystery
of Peregrine's fate.  Only his mother had declined from the time of his disappearance.  When
it was ascertained that his uncle had died in Russia, and that nothing had been heard of him
there, it seemed to bring on a fresh stage of her illness, and she had expired at last in Martha
Browning's arms, her last words being a blessing not only to Robert, but to Peregrine, and
a broken entreaty to her husband to forgive the boy, for he might have been better if they
had used him well.

Martha was then found to hold out against the idea of his being dead.  Little affection and
scant civility as she had received from him, her dutiful heart had attached itself to her destined
lord, and no doubt her imagination had been excited by his curious abilities, and her compassion
by the persecution he suffered at home.  At any rate, when, after a proper interval, the Major
tried to transfer her to his remaining son, she held out against it for a long interval, until
at last, after full three years, the desolation and disorganisation of Oakwood without a mistress,
a severe illness of the Major, and the distress of his son, so worked upon her feelings that
she consented to the marriage with Robert, and had ever since been the ruling spirit at Oakwood,
and a very different one from what had been expected--sensible, kindly, and beneficent, and
allowing the young husband more liberty and indulgence than he had ever known before.

The remembrance of Peregrine seemed to have entirely passed away, and Anne had been troubled
with no more apparitions, so that though she thought over the strange scene of that terrible
morning, the rapid combat, the hasty concealment, the distracted face of the unhappy youth,
it was with the thought that time had been a healer, and that Charles might surely now return
home.  And what then?

She raised her eyes to the open window, and what did she behold in the moonlight streaming
full upon the great tree rose below?  It was the same face and figure that had three times
startled her before, the figure dark and the face very white in the moonlight, but like nothing
else, and with that odd, one-sided feather as of old.  It had flitted ere she could point its
place--gone in a single flash-- but she was greatly startled!  Had it come to protest against
the scheme she had begun to indulge in on that very night of all nights, or had it merely been
her imagination?  For nothing was visible, though she leant from the window, no sound was to
be heard, though when she tried to complete her work, her hands trembled and the paper rustled,
so that Philip showed symptoms of wakening, and she had to defer her task till early morning.

She said nothing of her strange sight, and Phil had a happy successful birthday, flying the
kite with a propitious wind, and riding into Portsmouth on his new pony with grandpapa.  But
there was one strange event.  The servants had a holiday, and some of them went into Portsmouth,
black Hans, who never returned, being one. The others had lost sight of him, but had not been
uneasy, knowing him to be perfectly well able to find his way home; but as he never appeared,
the conclusion was that he must have been kidnapped by some ship's crew to serve as a cook.
He had not been very happy among the servants at Fareham, who laughed at his black face and
Dutch English, and he would probably have gone willingly with Dutchmen; but Anne and her uncle
were grieved, and felt as if they had failed in the trust that poor Sir Peregrine had left them.

CHAPTER XXV: TIDINGS FROM THE IRON GATES

"He has more cause to be proud.  Where is he wounded?"

Coriolanus.

It was a wet autumn day, when the yellow leaves of the poplars in front of the house were floating
down amid the misty rain; Dr. Woodford had gone two days before to consult a book in the Cathedral
library, and was probably detained at Winchester by the weather; Lady Archfield was confined
to her bed by a sharp attack of rheumatism.  Sir Philip was taking his after-dinner doze in
his arm- chair; and little Philip was standing by Anne, who was doing her best to keep him
from awakening his grandfather, as she partly read, partly romanced, over the high-crowned
hatted fishermen in the illustrations to Izaak Walton's Complete Angler.

He had just, caught by the musical sound, made her read to him a second time Marlowe's verses,

'Come live with me and be my love,'

and informed her that his Nana was his love, and that she was to watch him fish in the summer
rivers, when the servant who had been sent to meet His Majesty's mail and extract the Weekly
Gazette came in, bringing not only that, but a thick, sealed packet, the aspect of which made
the boy dance and exclaim, "A packet from my papa! Oh! will he have written an answer to my
own letter to him?"

But Sir Philip, who had started up at the opening of the door, had no sooner glanced at the
packet than he cried out, "'Tis not his hand!" and when he tried to break the heavy seals and
loosen the string, his hands shook so much that he pushed it over to Anne, saying, "You open
it; tell me if my boy is dead."

Anne's alarm took the course of speed.  She tore off the wrapper, and after one glance said,
"No, no, it cannot be the worst; here is something from himself at the end.  Here, sir."

"I cannot!  I cannot," said the poor old man, as the tears dimmed his spectacles, and he could
not adjust them.  "Read it, my dear wench, and let me know what I am to tell his poor mother."

And he sank into a chair, holding between his knees his little grandson, who stood gazing with
widely-opened blue eyes.

"He sends love, duty, blessing.  Oh, he talks of coming home, so do not fear, sir!" cried Anne,
a vivid colour on her cheeks.

"But what is it?" asked the father.  "Tell me first--the rest after."

"It is in the side--the left side," said Anne, gathering up in her agitation the sense of the
crabbed writing as best she could.  "They have not extracted the bullet, but when they have,
he will do well."

"God grant it!  Who writes?"

"Norman Graham of Glendhu--captain in his K. K. Regiment of Volunteer Dragoons.  That's his
great friend!  Oh, sir, he has behaved so gallantly!  He got his wound in saving the colours
from the Turks, and kept his hands clutched over them as his men carried him out of the battle."

Philip gave another little spring, and his grandfather bade Anne read the letter to him in detail.

It told how the Imperial forces had met a far superior number of Turks at Lippa, and had sustained
a terrible defeat, with the loss of their General Veterani, how Captain Archfield had received
a scimitar wound in the cheek while trying to save his commander, but had afterwards dashed
forward among the enemy, recovered the colours of the regiment, and by a desperate charge of
his fellow-soldiers, who were devotedly attached to him, had been borne off the field with
a severe wound on the left side.  Retreat had been immediately necessary, and he had been taken
on an ammunition waggon along rough roads to the fortress called the Iron Gates of Transylvania,
whence this letter was written, and sent by the messenger who was to summon the Elector of
Saxony to the aid of the remnant of the army.  It had not yet been possible to probe the wound,
but Charles gave a personal message, begging his parents not to despond but to believe him
recovering, so long as they did not see his servant return without him, and he added sundry
tender and dutiful messages to his parents, and a blessing to his son, with thanks for the
pretty letter he had not been able to answer (but which, his friend said, was lying spread
on his pillow, not unstained with blood), and he also told his boy always to love and look
up to her who had ever been as a mother to him.  Anne could hardly read this, and the scrap
in feeble irregular lines she handed to Sir Philip.  It was--

With all my heart I entreat pardon for all the errors that have grieved you.  I leave you my
child to comfort you, and mine own true love, whom yon will cherish.  She will cherish you
as a daughter, as she will be, with your consent, if God spares me to come home.  The love
of all my soul to her, my mother, sister, and you."

There was a scrawl for conclusion and signature, and Captain Graham added--

Writing and dictating have greatly exhausted him.  He would have said more, but he says the
lady can explain much, and he repeats his urgent entreaties that you will take her to your
heart as a daughter, and that his son will love and honour her.

There was a final postscript--

The surgeon thinks him better for having disburthened his mind.

"My child," said Sir Philip, with a long sigh, looking up at Anne, who had gathered the boy
into her arms, and was hiding her face against his little awe-struck head, "my child, have
you read?"

"No," faltered Anne.

"Read then."  And as she would have taken it, he suddenly drew her into his embrace and kissed
her as the eyes of both overflowed.  "My poor girl!" he said, "this is as hard to you as to
us!  Oh, my brave boy!" and he let her lay her head on his shoulder and held her hand as they
wept together, while little Phil stared for a moment or two at so strange a sight and then
burst out with a great cry--

"You shall not cry! you shall not! my papa is not dead!" and he stamped his little foot.  "No,
he isn't.  He will get well; the letter said so, and I will go and tell grandmamma."

The need of stopping this roused them both; Sir Philip, heavily groaning, went away to break
the tidings to his wife, and Anne went down on her knees on the hearth to caress the boy, and
help him to understand his father's state and realise the valorous deeds that would always
be a crown to him, and which already made the little fellow's eye flash and his fair head go
higher.

By and by she was sent for to Lady Archfield's room, and there she had again to share the grief
and the fears and try to dwell on the glory and the hopes.  When in a calmer moment the parents
interrogated her on what had passed with Charles, it was not in the spirit of doubt and censure,
but rather as dwelling on all that was to be told of one whom alike they loved, and finally
Sir Philip said, "I see, dear child, I would not believe how far it had gone before, though
you tried to tell me.  Whatever betide, you have won a daughter's place."

It was true that naturally a far more distinguished match would have been sought for the heir,
and he could hardly have carried out his purpose without more opposition than under their present
feelings, his parents supposed themselves likely to make, but they really loved Anne enough
to have yielded at last; and Lady Nutley, coming home with a fuller knowledge of her brother's
heart, prevented any reaction, and Anne was allowed full sympathies as a betrothed maiden,
in the wearing anxiety that continued in the absence of all intelligence.  On the principle
of doing everything to please him, she was even encouraged to write to Charles in the packet
in which he was almost implored to recover, though all felt doubts whether he were alive even
while the letters were in hand, and this doubt lasted long and long.  It was all very well
to say that as long as the servant did not return his master must be safe--perhaps himself
on the way home; but the journey from Transylvania was so long, and there were so many difficulties
in the way of an Englishman, that there was little security in this assurance.  And so the
winter set in while the suspense lasted; and still Dr. Woodford spoke Charles's name in the
intercessions in the panelled household chapel, and his mother and Anne prayed together and
separately, and his little son morning and evening entreated God to "Bless papa, and make him
well, and bring him home."

Thus passed more than six weeks, during which Sir Philip's attention was somewhat diverted
from domestic anxieties by an uninvited visit to Portchester from Mr. Charnock, who had once
been a college mate of Mr. Fellowes, and came professing anxiety, after all these years, to
renew the friendship which had been broken when they took different sides on the election of
Dr. Hough to the Presidency of Magdalen College.  From his quarters at the Rectory Mr. Charnock
had gone over to Fareham, and sounded Sir Philip on the practicability of a Jacobite rising,
and whether he and his people would join it. The old gentleman was much distressed, his age
would not permit him to exert himself in either cause, and he had been too much disturbed by
James's proceedings to feel desirous of his restoration, though his loyal heart would not permit
of his opposing it, and he had never overtly acknowledged William of Orange as his sovereign.

He could only reply that in the present state of his family he neither could nor would undertake
anything, and he urgently pleaded against any insurrection that could occasion a civil war.

There was reason to think that Sedley had no hesitation in promising to use all his influence
over his uncle's tenants, and considerably magnifying their extremely small regard to him--nay,
probably, dwelling on his own expectations.

At any rate, even when Charnock was gone, Sedley continued to talk big of the coming changes
and his own distinguished part in them. Indeed one very trying effect of the continued alarm
about Charles was that he took to haunting the place, and report declared that he had talked
loudly and coarsely of his cousin's death and his uncle's dotage, and of his soon being called
in to manage the property for the little heir--insomuch that Sir Edmund Nutley thought it expedient
to let him know that Charles, on going on active service soon after he had come of age, had
sent home a will, making his son, who was a young gentleman of very considerable property on
his mother's side, ward to his grandfather first, and then to Sir Edmund Nutley himself and
to Dr. Woodford.

CHAPTER XXVI: THE LEGEND OF PENNY GRIM

"O dearest Marjorie, stay at hame,
   For dark's the gate ye have to go,
For there's a maike down yonder glen
   Hath frightened me and many me."

HOGG.

"Nana," said little Philip in a meditative voice, as he looked into the glowing embers of the
hall fire, "when do fairies leave off stealing little boys?"

"I do not believe they ever steal them, Phil."

"Oh, yes they do;" and he came and stood by her with his great limpid blue eyes wide open.
"Goody Dearlove says they stole a little boy, and his name was Penny Grim."

"Goody Dearlove is a silly old body to tell my boy such stories," said Anne, disguising how
much she was startled.

"Oh, but Ralph Huntsman says 'tis true, and he knew him."

"How could he know him when he was stolen?"

"They put another instead," said the boy, a little puzzled, but too young to make his story
consistent.  "And he was an elf--a cross spiteful elf, that was always vexing folk.  And they
stole him again every seven years.  Yes--that was it--they stole him every seven years."

"Whom, Phil; I don't understand--the boy or the elf?" she said, half-diverted, even while shocked
at the old story coming up in such a form.

"The elf, I think," he said, bending his brows; "he comes back, and then they steal him again.
Yes; and at last they stole him quite-- quite away--but it is seven years, and Goody Dearlove
says he is to be seen again!"

"No!" exclaimed Anne, with an irrepressible start of dismay.  "Has any one seen him, or fancied
so?" she added, though feeling that her chance of maintaining her rational incredulity was gone.

"Goody Dearlove's Jenny did," was the answer.  "She saw him stand out on the beach at night
by moonlight, and when she screamed out, he was gone like the snuff of a candle."

"Saw him?  What was he like?" said Anne, struggling for the dispassionate tone of the governess,
and recollecting that Jenny Dearlove was a maid at Portchester Rectory.

"A little bit of a man, all twisty on one side, and a feather sticking out.  Ralph said they
always were like that;" and Phil's imitation, with his lithe, graceful little figure, of Ralph's
clumsy mimicry was sufficient to show that there was some foundation for this story, and she
did not answer at once, so that he added, "I am seven, Nana; do you think they will get me?"

"Oh no, no, Phil, there's no fear at all of that.  I don't believe fairies steal anybody, but
even old women like Goody Dearlove only say they steal little tiny babies if they are left
alone before they are christened."

The boy drew a long breath, but still asked, "Was Penny Grim a little baby?"

"So they said," returned Anne, by no means interfering with the name, and with a quailing heart
as she thought of the child's ever knowing what concern his father had in that disappearance.
She was by no means sorry to have the conversation broken off by Sir Philip's appearance, booted
and buskined, prepared for an expedition to visit a flock of sheep and their lambs under the
shelter of Portsdown Hill, and in a moment his little namesake was frisking round eager to
go with grandpapa.

"Well, 'tis a brisk frost.  Is it too far for him, think you, Mistress Anne?"

"Oh no, sir; he is a strong little man and a walk will only be good for him, if he does not
stand still too long and get chilled.  Run, Phil, and ask nurse for your thick coat and stout
shoes and leggings."

"His grandmother only half trusts me with him," said Sir Philip, laughing.  "I tell her she
was not nearly so careful of his father. I remember him coming in crusted all over with ice,
so that he could hardly get his clothes off, but she fancies the boy may have some of his poor
mother's weakliness about him."

"I see no tokens of it, sir."

"Grand-dames will be anxious, specially over one chick.  Heigho! Winter travelling must be
hard in Germany, and posts do not come. How now, my man!  Are you rolled up like a very Russian
bear?  The poor ewes will think you are come to eat up their lambs."

"I'll growl at them," said Master Philip, uttering a sound sufficient to disturb the nerves
of any sheep if he were permitted to make it, and off went grandfather and grandson together,
Sir Philip only pausing at the door to say--

"My lady wants you, Anne; she is fretting over the delay.  I fear, though I tell her it bodes
well."

Anne watched for a moment the hale old gentleman briskly walking on, the merry child frolicking
hither and thither round him, and the sturdy body-servant Ralph, without whom he never stirred,
plodding after, while Keeper, the only dog allowed to follow to the sheepfolds, marched decorously
along, proud of the distinction. Then she went up to Lady Archfield, who could not be perfectly
easy as to the precious grandchild being left to his own devices in the cold, while Sir Philip
was sure to run into a discussion with the shepherd over the turnips, which were too much of
a novelty to be approved by the Hampshire mind.  It was quite true that she could not watch
that little adventurous spirit with the same absence of anxiety as she had felt for her own
son in her younger days, and Anne had to devote herself to soothing and diverting her mind,
till Dr. Woodford knocked at the door to read and converse with her.

The one o'clock dinner waited for the grandfather and grandson, and when they came at last,
little Philip looked somewhat blue with cold and more subdued than usual, and his grandfather
observed severely that he had been a naughty boy, running into dangerous places, sliding where
he ought not, and then muttered under his breath that Sedley ought to have known better than
to have let him go there.

Discipline did not permit even a darling like little Phil to speak at dinner-time; but he fidgeted,
and the tears came into his eyes, and Anne hearing a little grunt behind Sir Philip's chair,
looked up, and was aware that old Ralph was mumbling what to her ears sounded like:  'Knew
too well.'  But his master, being slightly deaf, did not hear, and went on to talk of his lambs
and of how Sedley had joined them on the road, but had not come back to dinner.

Phil was certainly quieter than usual that afternoon, and sat at Anne's feet by the fire, filling
little sacks with bran to be loaded on his toy cart to go to the mill, but not chattering as
usual.  She thought him tired, and hearing a sort of sigh took him on her knee, when he rested
his fair little head on her shoulder, and presently said in a low voice--

"I've seen him."

"Who?  Not your father?  Oh, my child!" cried Anne, in a sudden horror.

"Oh no--the Penny Grim thing."

"What?  Tell me, Phil dear, how or where?"

"By the end of the great big pond; and he threw up his arms, and made a horrid grin."  The
boy trembled and hid his face against her.

"But go on, Phil.  He can't hurt you, you know.  Do tell me.  Where were you?"

"I was sliding on the ice.  Grandpapa was ever so long talking to Bill Shepherd, and looking
at the men cutting turnips, and I got cold and tired, and ran about with Cousin Sedley till
we got to the big pond, and we began to slide, and the ice was so nice and hard-- you can't
think.  He showed me how to take a good long slide, and said I might go out to the other end
of the pond by the copse, by the great old tree.  And I set off, but before I got there, out
it jumped, out of the copse, and waved its arms, and made that face."

He cowered into her bosom again and almost cried.  Anne knew the place, and was ready to start
with dismay in her turn.  It was such a pool as is frequent in chalk districts--shallow at
one end, but deep and dangerous with springs at the other.

"But, Phil dear," she said, "it was well you were stopped; the ice most likely would have broken
at that end, and then where would Nana's little man have been?"

"Cousin Sedley never told me not," said the boy in self-defence; "he was whistling to me to
go on.  But when I tumbled down Ralph and grandpapa and all did scold me so--and Cousin Sedley
was gone. Why did they scold me, Nana?  I thought it was brave not to mind danger--like papa."

"It is brave when one can do any good by it, but not to slide on bad ice, when one must be
drowned," said Anne.  "Oh, my dear, dear little fellow, it was a blessed thing you saw that,
whatever it was!  But why do you call it Pere--Penny Grim?"

"It was, Nana!  It was a little man--rather.  And one-sided looking, with a bit of hair sticking
out, just like the picture of Riquet- with-a-tuft in your French fairy-book."

This last was convincing to Anne that the child must have seen the phantom of seven years ago,
since he was not repeating the popular description he had given her in the morning, but one
quite as individual.  She asked if grandpapa had seen it.

"Oh no; he was in the shed, and only came out when he heard Ralph scolding me.  Was it a wicked
urchin come to steal me, Nana?"

"No, I think not," she answered.  "Whatever it was, I think it came because God was taking
care of His child, and warning him from sliding into the deep pool.  We will thank him, Phil.
'He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.'" And to that verse
she soothed the tired child till he fell asleep, and she could lay him on the settle, and cover
him with a cloak, musing the while on the strange story, until presently she started up and
repaired to the buttery in search of the old servant.

"Ralph, what is this Master Philip tells me?" she asked.  "What has he seen?"

"Well, Mistress Anne, that is what I can't tell--no, not I; but I knows this, that the child
has had a narrow escape of his precious life, and I'd never trust him again with that there
Sedley--no, not for hundreds of pounds."

"You really think, Ralph--?"

"What can I think, ma'am?  When I finds he's been a-setting that there child to slide up to
where he'd be drownded as sure as he's alive, and you see, if we gets ill news of Master Archfield
(which God forbid), there's naught but the boy atween him and this here place--and he over
head and ears in debt.  Be it what it might that the child saw, it saved the life of him."

"Did you see it?"

"No, Mistress Anne; I can't say as I did.  I only heard the little master cry out as he fell.
I was in the shed, you see, taking a pipe to keep me warm.  And when I took him up, he cried
out like one dazed.  'Twas Penny Grim, Ralph!  Keep me.  He is come to steal me." But Sir Philip
wouldn't hear nothing of it, only blamed Master Phil for being foolhardy, and for crying for
the fall, and me for letting him out of sight."

"And Mr. Sedley--did he see it?"

"Well, mayhap he did, for I saw him as white as a sheet and his eyes staring out of his head;
but that might have been his evil conscience."

"What became of him?"

"To say the truth, ma'am, I believe he be at the Brocas Arms, a- drowning of his fright--if
fright it were, with Master Harling's strong waters."

"But this apparition, this shape--or whatever it is?  What put it into Master Philip's head?
What has been heard of it?"

Ralph looked unwilling.  "Bless you, Mistress Anne, there's been some idle talk among the women
folk, as how that there crooked slip of Major Oakshott's, as they called Master Perry or Penny,
and said was a changeling, has been seen once and again.  Some says as the fairies have got
him, and 'tis the seven year for him to come back again.  And some says that he met with foul
play, and 'tis the ghost of him, but I holds it all mere tales, and I be sure 'twere nothing
bad as stopped little master on that there pond.  So I be."

Anne could not but be of the same mind, but her confusion, alarm, and perplexity were great.
It seemed strange, granting that this were either spirit or elf connected with Peregrine Oakshott,
that it should interfere on behalf of Charles Archfield's child, and on the sweet hypothesis
that a guardian angel had come to save the child, it was in a most unaccountable form.

And more pressing than any such mysterious idea was the tangible horror of Ralph's suggestion,
too well borne out by the boy's own unconscious account of the adventure.  It was too dreadful,
too real a peril to be kept to herself, and she carried the story to her uncle on his return,
but without speaking of the spectral warning. Not only did she know that he would not attend
to it, but the hint, heard for the first time, that Peregrine was supposed to have met with
foul play, sealed her lips, just when she still was hoping against hope that Charles might
be on the way home.  But that Ralph believed, and little Philip's own account confirmed, that
his cousin had incited the little heir to the slide that would have been fatal save for his
fall, she told with detail, and entreated that the grandfather might be warned, and some means
be found of ensuring the safety of her darling, the motherless child!

To her disappointment Dr. Woodford was not willing to take alarm. He did not think so ill of
Sedley as to believe him capable of such a secret act of murder, and he had no great faith
in Ralph's sagacity, besides that he thought his niece's nerves too much strained by the long
suspense to be able to judge fairly.  He thought it would be cruel to the grandparents, and
unjust to Sedley, to make such a frightful suggestion without further grounds during their
present state of anxiety, and as to the boy's safety, which Anne pleaded with an uncontrollable
passion of tears, he believed that it was provided for by watchfulness on the part of his two
constant guardians, as well as himself, since, even supposing the shocking accusation to be
true, Sedley would not involve himself in danger of suspicion, and it was already understood
that he was not a fit companion for his little cousin to be trusted with.  Philip had already
brought home words and asked questions that distressed his grandmother, and nobody was willing
to leave him alone with the ex- lieutenant.  So again the poor maiden had to hold her peace
under an added burthen of anxiety and many a prayer.

When the country was ringing with the tidings of Sir George Barclay's conspiracy for the assassination
of William III, it was impossible not to hope that Sedley's boastful tongue might have brought
him sufficiently under suspicion to be kept for a while under lock and key; but though he did
not appear at Fareham, there was reason to suppose that he was as usual haunting the taverns
and cockpits of Portsmouth.

No one went much abroad that winter.  Sir Philip, perhaps from anxiety and fretting, had a
fit of the gout, and Anne kept herself and her charge within the garden or the street of the
town.  In fact there was a good deal of danger on the roads.  The neighbourhood of the seaport
was always lawless, and had become more so since Sir Philip had ceased to act as Justice of
the Peace, and there were reports of highway robberies of an audacious kind, said to be perpetrated
by a band calling themselves the Black Gang, under a leader known as Piers Pigwiggin, who were
alleged to be half smuggler, half Jacobite, and to have their headquarters somewhere in the
back of the Isle of Wight, in spite of the Governor, the terrible Salamander, Lord Cutts, who
was, indeed, generally absent with the army.

CHAPTER XXVII: THE VAULT

"Heaven awards the vengeance due."

COWPER.

The weary days had begun to lengthen before the door of the hall was flung open, and little
Phil, forgetting his bow at the door, rushed in, "Here's a big packet from foreign parts! 
Harry had to pay ever so much for it."

"I have wellnigh left off hoping," sighed the poor mother.  "Tell me the worst at once."

"No fear, my lady," said her husband.  "Thank God!  'Tis our son's hand."

There was the silence for a moment of intense relief, and then the little boy was called to
cut the silk and break the seals.

Joy ineffable!  There were three letters--for Master Philip Archfield, for Mistress Anne Jacobina
Woodford, and for Sir Philip himself.  The old gentleman glanced over it, caught the words
'better,' and 'coming home,' then failed to read through tears of joy as before through tears
of sorrow, and was fain to hand the sheet to his old friend to be read aloud, while little
Philip, handling as a treasure the first letter he had ever received, though as yet he was
unable to decipher it, stood between his grandfather's knees listening as Dr. Woodford read--

DEAR AND HONOURED SIR--I must ask your pardon for leaving you without tidings so long, but
while my recovery still hung in doubt I thought it would only distress you to hear of the fluctuations
that I went through, and the pain to which the surgeons put me for a long time in vain.  Indeed
frequently I had no power either to think or speak, until at last with much difficulty, and
little knowledge or volition of my own, my inestimable friend Graham brought me to Vienna,
where I have at length been relieved from my troublesome companion, and am enjoying the utmost
care and kindness from my friend's mother, a near kinswoman, as indeed he is himself, of the
brave and lamented Viscount Dundee.  My wound is healing finally, as I hope, and though I have
not yet left my bed, my friends assure me that I am on the way to full and complete recovery,
for which I am more thankful to the Almighty than I could have been before I knew what suffering
and illness meant.  As soon as I can ride again, which they tell me will be in a fortnight
or three weeks, I mean to set forth on my way home.  I cannot describe to you how I am longing
after the sight of you all, nor how home-sick I have become.  I never had time for it before,
but I have lain for hours bringing all your faces before me, my father's, and mother's, my
sister's, and that of her whom I hope to call my own; and figuring to myself that of the little
one.  I have thought much over my past life, and become sensible of much that was amiss, and
while earnestly entreating your forgiveness, especially for having absented myself all these
years, I hope to return so as to be more of a comfort than I was in the days of my rash and
inconsiderate youth.  I am of course at present invalided, but I want to consult you, honoured
sir, before deciding whether it be expedient for me to resign my commission. How I thank and
bless you for the permission you have given me, and the love you bear to my own heart's joy,
no words can tell. It shall be the study of my life to be worthy of her and of you.-- And so
no more from your loving and dutiful son, CHARLES ARCHFIELD.

Having drunk in these words with her ears, Anne left Phil to have his note interpreted by his
grandparents, and fled away to enjoy her own in her chamber, yet it was as short as could be
and as sweet.

Mine own, mine own sweet Anne, sweetheart of good old days, your letter gave me strength to
go through with it.  The doctors could not guess why I was so much better and smiled through
all their torments.  These are our first, I hope our last letters, for I shall soon follow
them home, and mine own darling will be mine.-- Thine own, C. A.

She had but short time to dwell on it and kiss it, for little Philip was upon her, waving his
letter, which he already knew by heart; and galloping all over the house to proclaim the good
news to the old servants, who came crowding into the hall, trembling with joy, to ask if there
were indeed tidings of Mr. Archfield's return, whereupon the glad father caused his grandson
to carry each a full glass of wine to drink to the health of the young master.

Anne had at first felt only the surpassing rapture of the restoration of Charles, but there
ensued another delight in the security his recovery gave to the life of his son.  Sedley Archfield
would not be likely to renew his attempt, and if only on that account the good news should
be spread as widely as possible.  She was the first to suggest the relief it would be to Mr.
Fellowes, who had never divested himself of the feeling that he ought to have divined his pupil's
intention.

Dr. Woodford offered to ride to Portchester with the news, and Sir Philip, in the gladness
of his heart, proposed that Anne should go with him and see her friend.

Shall it be told how on the way Anne's mind was assailed by feminine misgivings whether three
and twenty could be as fair in her soldier's eyes as seventeen had been?  Old maidenhood came
earlier then than in these days, and Anne knew that she was looked upon as an old waiting-gentlewoman
or governess by the belles of Winchester. Her glass might tell her that her eyes were as softly
brown, her hair as abundant, her cheek as clear and delicately moulded as ever, but there was
no one to assure her that the early bloom had not passed away, and that she had not rather
gained than lost in dignity of bearing and the stately poise of the head, which the jealous
damsels called Court airs.  "And should he be disappointed, I shall see it in his eyes," she
said to herself, "and then his promise shall not bind him, though it will break my heart, and
oh! how hard to resign my Phil to a strange stepmother."  Still her heart was lighter than
for many a long year, as she cantered along in the brisk March air, while the drops left by
the departing frost glistened in the sunshine, and the sea lay stretched in a delicate gray
haze.  The old castle rose before her in its familiar home-like massiveness as they turned
towards the Rectory, where in that sheltered spot the well-known clusters of crocuses were
opening their golden hearts to the sunshine, and recalling the days when Anne was as sunny-hearted
as they, and she felt as if she could be as bright again.

In Mrs. Fellowes's parlour they found an unexpected guest, no other than Mrs. Oakshott.

'Gadding about' not being the fashion of the Archfield household, Anne had not seen the lady
for several years, and was agreeably surprised by her appearance.  Perhaps the marks of smallpox
had faded, perhaps motherhood had given expression, and what had been gaunt ungainliness in
the maiden had rounded into a certain importance in the matron, nor had her dress, though quiet,
any of the Puritan rigid ugliness that had been complained of, and though certainly not beautiful,
she was a person to inspire respect.

It was explained that she was waiting for her husband, who was gone with Mr. Fellowes to speak
to the officer in command of the soldiers at the castle.  "For," said she, "I am quite convinced
that there is something that ought to be brought to light, and it may be in that vault."

Anne's heart gave such a throb as almost choked her.

Dr. Woodford asked what the lady meant.

"Well, sir, when spirits and things 'tis not well to talk of are starting up and about here,
there, and everywhere, 'tis plain there must be cause for it."

"I do not quite take your meaning, madam."

"Ah, well! you gentlemen, reverend ones especially, are the last to hear such things.  There's
the poor old Major, he won't believe a word of it, but you know, Mistress Woodford.  I see
it in your face. Have you seen anything?"

"Not here, not now," faltered Anne.  "You have, Mrs. Fellowes?"

"I have heard of some foolish fright of the maids," said Naomi, "partly their own fancy, or
perhaps caught from the sentry.  There is no keeping those giddy girls from running after the
soldiers."

Perhaps Naomi hoped by throwing out this hint to conduct her visitors off into the safer topic
of domestic delinquencies, but Mrs. Oakshott was far too earnest to be thus diverted, and she
exclaimed, "Ah, they saw him, I'll warrant!"

"Him?" the Doctor asked innocently.

"Him or his likeness," said Mrs. Oakshott, "my poor brother-in-law, Peregrine Oakshott; you
remember him, sir?  He always said, poor lad, that you and Mrs. Woodford were kinder to him
than his own flesh and blood, except his uncle, Sir Peregrine.  For my part, I never did give
in to all the nonsense folk talked about his being a changeling or at best a limb of Satan.
He had more spirit and sense than the rest of them, and they led him the life of a dog, though
they knew no better.  If I had had him at Emsworth, I would have shown them what he was;" and
she sighed heavily.  "Well, I did not so much wonder when he disappeared, I made sure that
he could bear it no longer and had run away.  I waited as long as there was any reason, till
there should be tidings of him, and only took his brother at last because I found they could
not do without me at home."

Remarkable frankness! but it struck both the Doctor and Anne that if Peregrine could have submitted,
his life might have been freer and less unhappy than he had expected, though Mrs. Martha spoke
the broadest Hampshire.

Naomi asked, "Then you no longer think that he ran away?"

"No, madam; I am certain there was worse than that.  You remember the night of the bonfire
for the Bishops' acquittal, Miss Woodford?"

"Indeed I do."

"Well, he was never seen again after that, as you know.  The place was full of wild folk. 
There was brawling right and left."

"Were you there?" asked Anne surprised.

"Yes; in my coach with my uncle and aunt that lived with me, though, except Robin, none of
the young sparks would come near me, except some that I knew were after my pockets," said Martha,
with a good- humoured laugh.  "Properly frightened we were too by the brawling sailors ere
we got home!  Now, what could be more likely than that some of them got hold of poor Perry?
You know he always would go about with the rapier he brought from Germany, with amber set in
the hilt, and the mosaic snuff-box he got in Italy, and what could be looked for but that the
poor dear lad should be put out of the way for the sake of these gewgaws?"  This supposition
was gratifying to Anne, but her uncle must needs ask why Mrs. Oakshott thought so more than before.

"Because," she said impressively, "there is no doubt but that he has been seen, and not in
the flesh, once and again, and always about these ruins."

"By whom, madam, may I ask?"

"Mrs. Fellowes's maids, as she knows, saw him once on the beach at night, just there.  The
sentry, who is Tom Hart, from our parish, saw a shape at the opening of the old vault before
the keep and challenged him, when he vanished out of sight ere there was time to present a
musket.  There was once more, when one moonlight night our sexton, looking out of his cottage
window, saw what he declares was none other than Master Perry standing among the graves of
our family, as if, poor youth, he were asking why he was not among them. When I heard that,
I said to my husband, 'Depend upon it,' says I, 'he met with his death that night, and was
thrown into some hole, and that's the reason he cannot rest.  If I pay a hundred pounds for
it, I'll not give up till his poor corpse is found to have Christian burial, and I'll begin
with the old vault at Portchester!'  My good father, the Major, would not hear of it at first,
nor my husband either, but 'tis my money, and I know how to tackle Robin."

It was with strangely mingled feelings that Anne listened.  That search in the vault, inaugurated
by faithful Martha, was what she had always felt ought to be made, and she had even promised
to attempt it if the apparitions recurred.  The notion of the deed being attributed to lawless
sailors and smugglers or highwaymen, who were known to swarm in the neighbourhood, seemed to
remove all danger of suspicion.  Yet she could not divest herself of a vague sense of alarm
at this stirring up of what had slept for seven years.  Neither she nor her uncle deemed it
needful to mention the appearance seen by little Philip, but to her surprise Naomi slowly and
hesitatingly said it was very remarkable, that her husband having occasion to be at the church
at dusk one evening just after Midsummer, had certainly seen a figure close to Mrs. Woodford's
grave, and lost sight of it before he could speak of it.  He thought nothing more of it till
these reports began to be spread, but he had then recollected that it answered the descriptions
given of the phantom.

Here the ladies were interrupted by the appearance of Mr. Fellowes and Robert Oakshott, now
grown into a somewhat heavy but by no means foolish-looking young man.

"Well, madam," said he, in Hampshire as broad as his wife's, "you will have your will.  Not
that Captain Henslowe believes a word of your ghosts--not he; but he took fire when he heard
of queer sights about the castle.  He sent for the chap who stood sentry, and was downright
sharp on him for not reporting what he had seen, and he is ordering out a sergeant's party
to open the vault, so you may come and see, if you have any stomach for it."

"I could not but come!" said Madam Oakshott, who certainly did not look squeamish, but who
was far more in earnest than her husband, and perhaps doubted whether without her presence
the quest would be thorough.  Anne was full of dread, and almost sick at the thought of what
she might see, but she was far too anxious to stay away.  Mrs. Fellowes made some excuse about
the children for not accompanying them.

It always thrilled Anne to enter that old castle court, the familiar and beloved play-place
of her childhood, full of memories of Charles and of Lucy, and containing in its wide precincts
the churchyard where her mother lay.  She moved along in a kind of dream, glad to be let alone,
since Mr. Fellowes naturally attended Mrs. Oakshott, and Robert was fully occupied in explaining
to the Doctor that he only gave in to this affair for the sake of pacifying madam, since women
folk would have their little megrims.  Assuredly that tall, solid, resolute figure stalking
on in front, looked as little subject to megrims as any of her sex.  Her determination had
brought her husband thither, and her determination further carried the day, when the captain,
after staring at the solid-looking turf, stamping on the one stone that was visible, and trampling
down the bunch of nettles beside it, declared that the entrance had been so thoroughly stopped
that it was of no use to dig farther.  It was Madam Martha who demanded permission to offer
the four soldiers a crown apiece if they opened the vault, a guinea each if they found anything.
The captain could not choose but grant it, though with something of a sneer, and the work was
begun.  He walked up and down with Robert, joining in hopes that the lady would be satisfied
before dinner- time.  The two clergymen likewise walked together, arguing, as was their wont,
on the credibility of apparitions.  The two ladies stood in almost breathless watch, as the
bricks that had covered in the opening were removed, and the dark hole brought to light.  Contrary
to expectation, when the opening had been enlarged, it was found that there were several steps
of stone, and where they were broken away, there was a rude ladder.

A lantern was fetched from the guard-room in the bailey, and after much shaking and trying
of the ladder, one of the soldiers descended, finding the place less deep than was commonly
supposed, and soon calling out that he was at the bottom.  Another followed him, and presently
there was a shout.  Something was found!  "A rusty old chain, no doubt," grumbled Robert; but
his wife shrieked. It was a sword in its sheath, the belt rotted, the clasp tarnished, but
of silver.  Mrs. Oakshott seized it at once, rubbed away the dust from the handle, and brought
to light a glistening yellow piece of amber, which she mutely held up, and another touch of
her handkerchief disclosed on a silver plate in the scabbard an oak- tree, the family crest,
and the twisted cypher P. O.  Her eyes were full of tears, and she did not speak.  Anne, white
and trembling, was forced to sink down on the stone, unnoticed by all, while Robert Oakshott,
convinced indeed, hastily went down himself.  The sword had been hidden in a sort of hollow
under the remains of the broken stair.  Thence likewise came to light the mouldy remnant of
a broad hat and the quill of its plume, and what had once been a coat, even in its present
state showing that it had been soaked through and through with blood, the same stains visible
on the watch and the mosaic snuff-box.  That was all; there was no purse, and no other garments,
though, considering the condition of the coat, they might have been entirely destroyed by the
rats and mice.  There was indeed a fragment of a handkerchief, with the cypher worked on it,
which Mrs. Oakshott showed to Anne with the tears in her eyes:  "There!  I worked that, though
he never knew it.  No!  I know he did not like me!  But I would have made him do so at last.
I would have been so good to him.  Poor fellow, that he should have been lying there all this
time!"

Lying there; but where, then, was he?  No signs of any corpse were to be found, though one
after another all the gentlemen descended to look, and Mrs. Oakshott was only withheld by her
husband's urgent representations, and promise to superintend a diligent digging in the ground,
so as to ascertain whether there had been a hasty burial there.

Altogether, Anne was so much astonished and appalled that she could hardly restrain herself,
and her mind reverted to Bishop Ken's theory that Peregrine still lived; but this was contradicted
by the appearance at Douai, which did not rest on the evidence of her single perceptions.

Mrs. Fellowes sent out an entreaty that they would come to dinner, and the gentlemen were actually
base enough to wish to comply, so that the two ladies had no choice save to come with them,
especially as the soldiers were unwilling to work on without their meal. Neither Mrs. Oakshott
nor Anne felt as if they could swallow, and the polite pressure to eat was only preferable
in Anne's eyes to the conversation on the discoveries that had been made, especially the conclusion
arrived at by all, that though the purse and rings had not been found, the presence of the
watch and snuff-box precluded the idea of robbery.

"These would be found on the body," said Mr. Oakshott.  "I could swear to the purse.  You remember,
madam, your uncle bantering him about French ladies and their finery, asking whose token it
was, and how black my father looked?  Poor Perry, if my father could have had a little patience
with him, he would not have gone roaming about and getting into brawls, and we need not be
looking for him in yonder black pit."

"You'll never find him there, Master Robert," spoke out the old Oakwood servant, behind Mrs.
Oakshott's chair, free and easy after the manner of the time.

"And wherefore not, Jonadab?" demanded his mistress, by no means surprised at the liberty.

"Why, ma'am, 'twas the seven years, you sees, and in course when them you wot of had power
to carry him off, they could not take his sword, nor his hat, not they couldn't."

"How about his purse, then?" put in Dr. Woodford.

"I'll be bound you will find it yet, sir," responded Jonadab, by no means disconcerted, "leastways
unless some two-legged fairies have got it."

At this some of the party found it impossible not to laugh, and this so upset poor Martha's
composure that she was obliged to leave the table, and Anne was not sorry for the excuse of
attending her, although there were stings of pain in all her rambling lamentations and conjectures.

Very tardily, according to the feelings of the anxious women, was the dinner finished, and
their companions ready to take them out again.  Indeed, Madam Oakshott at last repaired to
the dining- parlour, and roused her husband from his glass of Spanish wine to renew the search.
She would not listen to Mrs. Fellowes's advice not to go out again, and Anne could not abstain
either from watching for what could not be other than grievous and mournful to behold.

The soldiers were called out again by their captain, and reinforced by the Rectory servant
and Jonadab.

There was an interval of anxious prowling round the opening.  Mr. Oakshott and the captain
had gone down again, and found, what the military man was anxious about, that if there were
passages to the outer air, they had been well blocked up and not re-opened.

Meantime the digging proceeded.

It was just at twilight that a voice below uttered an exclamation. Then came a pause.  The
old sergeant's voice ordered care and a pause, somewhere below the opening with, "Sir, the
spades have hit upon a skull."

There was a shuddering pause.  All the gentlemen except Dr. Woodford, who feared the chill,
descended again.  Mrs. Oakshott and Anne held each other's hands and trembled.

By and by Mr. Fellowes came up first.  "We have found," he said, looking pale and grave, "a
skeleton.  Yes, a perfect skeleton, but no more--no remains except a fine dust."

And Robert Oakshott following, awe-struck and sorrowful, added, "Yes, there he is, poor Perry--all
that is left of him--only his bones.  No, madam, we must leave him there for the present; we
cannot bring it up without preparation."

"You need not fear meddling curiosity, madam," said the captain.  "I will post a sentry here
to bar all entrance."

"Thanks, sir," said Robert.  "That will be well till I can bury the poor fellow with all due
respect by my mother and Oliver."

"And then I trust his spirit will have rest," said Martha Oakshott fervently.  "And now home
to your father.  How will he bear it, sir?"

"I verily believe he will sleep the quieter for knowing for a certainty what has become of
poor Peregrine," said her husband.

And Anne felt as if half her burthen of secrecy was gone when they all parted, starting early
because the Black Gang rendered all the roads unsafe after dark.

CHAPTER XXVIII: THE DISCLOSURE

"He looked about as one betrayed, What hath he done, what promise made? Oh! weak, weak moment,
to what end Can such a vain oblation tend?"

WORDSWORTH.

For the most part Anne was able to hold her peace and keep out of sight while Dr. Woodford
related the strange revelations of the vault with all the circumstantiality that was desired
by two old people living a secluded life and concerned about a neighbour of many years, whom
they had come to esteem by force of a certain sympathy in honest opposition.  The mystery occupied
them entirely, for though the murder was naturally ascribed to some of the lawless coast population,
the valuables remaining with the clothes made a strange feature in the case.

It was known that there was to be an inquest held on the remains before their removal, and
Dr. Woodford, both from his own interest in the question, and as family intelligencer, rode
to the castle. Sir Philip longed to go, but it was a cold wet day, and he had threatenings
of gout, so that he was persuaded to remain by the fireside.  Inquests were then always held
where the body lay, and the court of Portchester Castle was no place for him on such a day.

Dr. Woodford came home just before twilight, looking grave and troubled, and, much to Anne's
alarm, desired to speak to Sir Philip privately in the gun-room.  Lady Archfield took alarm,
and much distressed her by continually asking what could be the meaning of the interview, and
making all sorts of guesses.

When at last they came together into the parlour the poor lady looked so anxious and frightened
that her husband went up to her and said, "Do not be alarmed, sweetheart.  We shall clear him;
but those foolish fellows have let suspicion fall on poor Sedley."

Nobody looked at Anne, or her deadly paleness must have been remarked, and the trembling which
she could hardly control by clasping her hands tightly together, keeping her feet hard on the
floor, and setting her teeth.

Lady Archfield was perhaps less fond of the scapegrace nephew than was her husband, and she
felt the matter chiefly as it affected him, so that she heard with more equanimity than he
had done; and as they sat round the fire in the half-light, for which Anne was thankful, the
Doctor gave his narration in order.

"I found a large company assembled in the castle court, waiting for the coroner from Portsmouth,
though the sentry on guard would allow no one to go down, in spite of some, even ladies, I
am ashamed to say, who offered him bribes for the permission.  Everything, I heard, had been
replaced as we found it.  The poor Major himself was there, looking sadly broken, and much
needing the help of his son's arm.  'To think that I was blaming my poor son as a mere reprobate,
and praying for his conversion,' says he, 'when he was lying here, cut off without a moment
for repentance.'  There was your nephew, suspecting nothing, Squire Brocas, Mr. Eyre, of Botley
Grange, Mr. Biden, Mr. Larcom, and Mr. Bargus, and a good many more, besides Dr. James Yonge,
the naval doctor, and the Mayor of Portsmouth, and more than I can tell you.  When the coroner
came, and the jury had been sworn in, they went down and viewed the spot, and all that was
there.  The soldiers had put candles round, and a huge place it is, all built up with large
stones.  Then, as it was raining hard, they adjourned to the great room in the keep and took
the evidence. Robert Oakshott identified the clothes and the watch clearly enough, and said
he had no doubt that the other remains were Peregrine's; but as to swearing to a brother's
bones, no one could do that; and Dr. Yonge said in my ear that if the deceased were so small
a man as folks said, the skeleton could scarce be his, for he thought it had belonged to a
large-framed person.  That struck no one else, for naturally it is only a chirurgeon who is
used to reckon the proportion that the bones bear to the body, and I also asked him whether
in seven years the other parts would be so entirely consumed, to which he answered that so
much would depend on the nature of the soil that there was no telling.  However, jury and coroner
seemed to feel no doubt, and that old seafaring man, Tom Block, declared that poor Master Peregrine
had been hand and glove with a lot of wild chaps, and that the vault had been well known to
them before the gentlemen had had it blocked up.  Then it was asked who had seen him last,
and Robert Oakshott spoke of having parted with him at the bonfire, and never seen him again.
There, I fancy, it would have ended in a verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons
unknown, but Robert Oakshott must needs say, "I would give a hundred pounds to know who the
villain was."  And then who should get up but George Rackstone, with "Please your Honour, I
could tell summat."  The coroner bade swear him, and he deposed to having seen Master Peregrine
going down towards the castle somewhere about four o'clock that morning after the bonfire when
he was getting up to go to his mowing.  But that was not all.  You remember, Anne, that his
father's cottage stands on the road towards Portsmouth.  Well, he brought up the story of your
running in there, frightened, the day before the bonfire, when I was praying with his sick
mother, calling on me to stop a fray between Peregrine and young Sedley, and I had to get up
and tell of Sedley's rudeness to you, child."

"What was that?" hastily asked Lady Archfield.

"The old story, my lady.  The young officer's swaggering attempt to kiss the girl he meets
on the road.  I doubt even if he knew at the moment that it was my niece.  Peregrine was coming
by at the moment, and interfered to protect her, and swords were drawn.  I could not deny it,
nor that there was ill blood between the lads; and then young Brocas, who was later on Portsdown
than we were, remembered high words, and had thought to himself that there would be a challenge.
And next old Goody Spore recollects seeing Master Sedley and another soldier officer out on
the Portsmouth road early that morning.  The hay was making in the court then, and Jenny Light
remembered that when the haymakers came she raked up something that looked like a bloody spot,
and showed it to one of the others, but they told her that most likely a rabbit or a hare had
been killed there, and she had best take no heed.  Probably there was dread of getting into
trouble about a smugglers' fray.  Well, every one was looking askance at Master Sedley by this
time, and the coroner asked him if he had anything to say.  He spoke out boldly enough.  He
owned to the dispute with Peregrine Oakshott, and to having parted with him that night on terms
which would only admit of a challenge. He wrote a cartel that night, and sent it by his friend
Lieutenant Ainslie, but doubting whether Major Oakshott might not prevent its delivery, he
charged him to try to find Peregrine outside the house, and arrange with him a meeting on the
hill, where you know the duellists of the garrison are wont to transact such encounters. Sedley
himself walked out part of the way with his friend, but neither of them saw Peregrine, nor
heard anything of him.  So he avers, but when asked for his witness to corroborate the story,
he says that Ainslie, I fear the only person who could have proved an alibi--if so it were--was
killed at Landen; but, he added, certainly with too much of his rough way, it was a mere absurdity
to charge it upon him.  What should a gentleman have to do with private murders and robberies?
Nor did he believe the bones to be Perry Oakshott's at all.  It was all a bit of Whiggish spite!
He worked himself into a passion, which only added to the impression against him; and I own
I cannot wonder that the verdict has sent him to Winchester to take his trial.  Why, Anne,
child, how now?"

"'Tis a terrible story.  Take my essences, child," said Lady Archfield, tottering across, and
Anne, just saving herself from fainting by a long gasp at them, let herself be led from the
room. The maids buzzed about her, and for some time she was sensible of nothing but a longing
to get rid of them, and to be left alone to face the grievous state of things which she did
not yet understand. At last, with kind good-nights from Lady Archfield, such as she could hardly
return, she was left by herself in the darkness to recover from the stunned helpless feeling
of the first moment.

Sedley accused!  Charles to be sacrificed to save his worthless cousin, the would-be murderer
of his innocent child, who morally thus deserved to suffer!  Never, never!  She could not do
so.  It would be treason to her benefactors, nay, absolute injustice, for Charles had struck
in generous defence of herself; but Sedley had tried to allure the boy to his death merely
for his own advantage. Should she not be justified in simply keeping silence?  Yet there was
like an arrow in her heart, the sense of guilt in so doing, guilt towards God and truth, guilt
towards man and justice.  She should die under the load, and it would be for Charles.  Might
it only be before he came home, then he would know that she had perished under his secret to
save him.  Nay, but would he be thankful at being saved at the expense of his cousin's life?
If he came, how should she meet him?

The sense of the certain indignation of a good and noble human spirit often awakes the full
perception of what an action would be in the sight of Heaven, and Anne began to realise the
sin more than at first, and to feel the compulsion of truth.  If only Charles were not coming
home she could write to him and warn him, but the thought that he might be already on the way
had turned from joy to agony. "And to think," she said to herself, "that I was fretting as
to whether he would think me pretty!"

She tossed about in misery, every now and then rising on her knees to pray--at first for Charles's
safety--for she shrank from asking for Divine protection, knowing only too well what that would
be. Gradually, however, a shudder came over her at the thought that if she would not commit
her way unto the Lord, she might indeed be the undoing of her lover, and then once more the
higher sense of duty rose on her.  She prayed for forgiveness for the thought, and that it
might not be visited upon him; she prayed for strength to do what must be her duty, for safety
for him, and comfort to his parents, and so, in passing gusts of misery and apprehension, of
failing heart and recovered resolution, of anguish and of prayer, the long night at length
passed, and with the first dawn she arose, shaken and weak, but resolved to act on her terrible
resolution before it again failed her.

Sir Philip was always an early riser, and she heard his foot on the stairs before seven o'clock.
She came out on the staircase, which met the flight which he was descending, and tried to speak,
but her lips seemed too dry to part.

"Child! child! you are ill," said the old gentleman, as he saw her blanched cheek; "you should
be in bed this chilly morning.  Go back to your chamber."

"No, no, sir, I cannot.  Pray, your Honour, come here, I have something to say;" and she drew
him to the open door of his justice- room, called the gun-room.

"Bless me," he muttered, "the wench does not mean that she has got smitten with that poor rogue
my nephew!"

"Oh! no, no," said Anne, almost ready for a hysterical laugh, yet letting the old man seat
himself, and then dropping on her knees before him, for she could hardly stand, "it is worse
than that, sir; I know who it was who did that thing."

"Well, who?" he said hastily; "why have you kept it back so long and let an innocent man get
into trouble?"

"O Sir Philip!  I could not help it.  Forgive me;" and with clasped hands, she brought out
the words, "It was your son, Mr. Archfield;" and then she almost collapsed again.

"Child! child! you are ill; you do not know what you are saying.  We must have you to bed again.
I will call your uncle."

"Ah! sir, it is only too true;" but she let him fetch her uncle, who was sure to be at his
devotions in a kind of oratory on the farther side of the hall.  She had not gone to him first,
from the old desire to keep him clear of the knowledge, but she longed for such support as
he might give her, or at least to know whether he were very angry with her.

The two old men quickly came back together, and Dr. Woodford began, "How now, niece, are you
telling us dreams?" but he broke off as he saw the sad earnest of her face.

"Sir, it is too true.  He charged me to speak out if any one else were brought into danger."

"Come," said Sir Philip, testily; "don't crouch grovelling on the floor there.  Get up and
let us know the meaning of this.  Good heavens! the lad may be here any day."

Anne had much rather have knelt where she was, but her uncle raised her, and placed her in
a chair, saying, "Try to compose yourself, and tell us what you mean, and why it has been kept
back so long."

"Indeed he did not intend it," pleaded Anne; "it was almost an accident--to protect me--Peregrine
was--pursuing me."

"Upon my word, young mistress," burst out the father, "you seem to have been setting all the
young fellows together by the ears."

"I doubt if she could help it," said the Doctor.  "She tried to be discreet, but it was the
reason her mother--"

"Well, go on," interrupted poor Sir Philip, too unhappy to remember manners or listen to the
defence; "what was it? when was it?"

Anne was allowed then to proceed.  "It was the morning I went to London.  I went out to gather
some mouse-ear."

"Mouse-ear! mouse-ear!" growled he.  "Some one else's ear."

"It was for Lady Oglethorpe."

"It was," said her uncle, "a specific, it seems, for whooping-cough. I saw the letter, and knew--"

"Umph! let us hear," said Sir Philip, evidently with the idea of a tryst in his mind.  "No
wonder mischief comes of maidens running about at such hours.  What next?"

The poor girl struggled on:  "I saw Peregrine coming, and hoping he would not see me, I ran
into the keep, meaning to get home by the battlements out of his sight, but when I looked down
he and Mr. Archfield were fighting.  I screamed, but I don't think they heard me, and I ran
down; but I had fastened all the doors, and I was a long time getting out, and by that time
Mr. Archfield had dragged him to the vault and thrown him in.  He was like one distracted,
and said it must be hidden, or it would be the death of his wife and his mother, and what could
I do?"

"Is that all the truth?" said Sir Philip sternly.  "What brought them there--either of them?"

"Mr. Archfield came to bring me a pattern of sarcenet to match for poor young Madam in London."

No doubt Sir Philip recollected the petulant anger that this had been forgotten, but he was
hardly appeased.  "And the other fellow? Why, he was brawling with my nephew Sedley about you
the day before!"

"I do not think she was to blame there," said Dr. Woodford.  "The unhappy youth was set against
marrying Mistress Browning, and had talked wildly to my sister and me about wedding my niece."

"But why should she run away as if he had the plague, and set the foolish lads to fight?"

"Sir, I must tell you," Anne owned, "he had beset me, and talked so desperately that I was
afraid of what he might do in that lonely place and at such an hour in the morning.  I hoped
he had not seen me."

"Umph!" said Sir Philip, much as if he thought a silly girl's imagination had caused all the
mischief.

"When did he thus speak to you, Anne?" asked her uncle, not unkindly.

"At the inn at Portsmouth, sir," said Anne.  "He came while you were with Mr. Stanbury and
the rest, and wanted me to marry him and flee to France, or I know not where, or at any rate
marry him secretly so as to save him from poor Mistress Browning.  I could not choose but fear
and avoid him, but oh!  I would have faced him ten times over rather than have brought this
on--us all.  And now what shall I do? He, Mr. Archfield, when I saw him in France, said as
long as no one was suspected, it would only give more pain to say what I knew, but that if
suspicion fell on any one--" and her voice died away.

"He could not say otherwise," returned Sir Philip, with a groan.

"And now what shall I do? what shall I do?" sighed the poor girl. "I must speak truth."

"I never bade you perjure yourself," said Sir Philip sharply, but hiding his face in his hands,
and groaning out, "Oh, my son! my son!"

Seeing that his distress so overcame poor Anne that she could scarcely contain herself, Dr.
Woodford thought it best to take her from the room, promising to come again to her.  She could
do nothing but lie on her bed and weep in a quiet heart-broken way.  Sir Philip's anger seemed
to fill up the measure, by throwing the guilt back upon her and rousing a bitter sense of injustice,
and then she wept again at her cruel selfishness in blaming the broken-hearted old man.

She could hardly have come down to breakfast, so heavy were her limbs and so sick and faint
did every movement render her, and she further bethought herself that the poor old father might
not brook the sight of her under the circumstances.  It was a pang to hear little Philip prancing
about the house, and when he had come to her to say his prayers, she sent him down with a message
that she was not well enough to come downstairs, and that she wanted nothing, only to be quiet.

The little fellow was very pitiful, and made her cry again by wanting to know whether she had
gout like grandpapa or rheumatics like grandmamma, and then stroking her face, calling her
his dear Nana, and telling her of the salad in his garden that his papa was to eat the very
first day he came home.

By and by Dr. Woodford knocked at her door.  He had had a long conversation with poor old Sir
Philip, who was calmer now than under the first blow, and somewhat less inclined to anger with
the girl, who might indeed be the cause, but surely the innocent cause, of all.  The Doctor
had done his best to show that her going out had no connection with any of the youths, and
he thought Sir Philip would believe it on quieter reflection.  He had remembered too, signs
of self-reproach mixed with his son's grief for his wife, and his extreme relief at the plan
for going abroad, recollecting likewise that Charles had strongly disliked poor Peregrine,
and had much resented the liking which young Madam had shown for one whose attentions might
have been partly intended to tease the young husband.

"Of course," said Dr. Woodford, "the unhappy deed was no more than an unfortunate accident,
and if all had been known at first, probably it would so have been treated.  The concealment
was an error, but it is impossible to blame either of you for it."

"Oh never mind that, dear uncle!  Only tell me!  Must he--must Charles suffer to save that
man?  You know what he is, real murderer in heart!  Oh I know.  The right must be done!  But
it is dreadful!"

"The right must be done and the truth spoken at all costs.  No one knows that better than our
good old patron," said the Doctor; "but, my dear child, you are not called on to denounce this
young man as you seem to imagine, unless there should be no other means of saving his cousin,
or unless you are so questioned that you cannot help replying for truth's sake.  Knowing nothing
of all this, it struck others besides myself at the inquest that the evidence against Sedley
was utterly insufficient for a conviction, and if he should be acquitted, matters will only
be as they were before."

"Then you think I am not bound to speak--The truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth,"
she murmured in exceeding grief, yet firmly.

"You certainly may, nay, must keep your former silence till the trial, at the Lent Assizes.
I trust you may not be called on as a witness to the fray with Sedley, but that I may be sufficient
testimony to that.  I could testify to nothing else.  Remember, if you are called, you have
only to answer what you are asked, nor is it likely, unless Sedley have any suspicion of the
truth, that you will be asked any question that will implicate Mr. Archfield.  If so, God give
you strength my poor child, to be true to Him.  But the point of the trial is to prove Sedley
guilty or not guilty; and if the latter, there is no more to be said.  God grant it."

"But he--Mr. Archfield?"

"His father is already taking measures to send to all the ports to stop him on his way till
the trial is over.  Thus there will be no actual danger, though it is a sore disappointment,
and these wicked attempts of Charnock and Barclay put us in bad odour, so that it may be less
easy to procure a pardon than it once would have been.  So, my dear child, I do not think you
need be in terror for his life, even if you are obliged to speak out plainly."

And then the good old man knelt with Anne to pray for pardon, direction, and firmness, and
protection for Charles.  She made an entreaty after they rose that her uncle would take her
away--her presence must be so painful to their kind hosts.  He agreed with her, and made the
proposition, but Sir Philip would not hear of it. Perhaps he was afraid of any change bringing
suspicion of the facts, and he might have his fears of Anne being questioned into dangerous
admissions, besides which, he hoped to keep his poor old wife in ignorance to the last.  So
Anne was to remain at Fareham, and after that one day's seclusion she gathered strength to
be with the family as usual.  Poor old Sir Philip treated her with a studied but icy courtesy
which cut her to the heart; but Lady Archfield's hopes of seeing her son were almost worse,
together with her regrets at her husband's dejection at the situation of his nephew and the
family disgrace.  As to little Philip, his curious inquiries about Cousin Sedley being in jail
for murdering Penny Grim had to be summarily hushed by the assurance that such things were
not to be spoken about.  But why did Nana cry when he talked of papa's coming home?

All the neighbourhood was invited to the funeral in Havant Churchyard, the burial-place of
the Oakshotts.  Major Oakshott himself wrote to Dr. Woodford, as having been one of the kindest
friends of his poor son, adding that he could not ask Sir Philip Archfield, although he knew
him to be no partner in the guilt of his unhappy nephew, who so fully exemplified that Divine
justice may be slow, but is sure.

Dr. Woodford decided on accepting the invitation, not only for Peregrine's sake, but to see
how the land lay.  Scarcely anything remarkable, however, occurred, except that it was painful
to perceive the lightness of the coffin.  But just as the procession was starting from the
chapel for the churchyard, over the wall there came a strange peal of wild laughter.

"Oh, would not the unquiet spirit be at rest till it was avenged?" thought Anne when she was
told of it.

CHAPTER XXIX: THE ASSIZE COURT

"O terror! what hath she perceived?  O joy, What doth she look on? whom hath she perceived?"

WORDSWORTH.

Time wore away, and the Lent Assizes at Winchester had come.  Sir Philip had procured the best
legal assistance for his nephew, but in criminal cases, though the prisoner was allowed the
advice of counsel, the onus of defence rested upon himself.  To poor Anne's dismay, a subpoena
was sent to her, as well as to her uncle, to attend as a witness at the trial.  Sir Philip
was too anxious to endure to remain at a distance from Winchester, and they travelled in his
coach, Sir Edmund Nutley escorting them on horseback, while Lucy was left with her mother,
both still in blissful ignorance. They took rooms at the George Inn.  That night was a strange
and grievous one to Anne, trying hard to sleep so as to be physically capable of composure
and presence of mind, yet continually wakened by ghastly dreams, and then recollecting that
the sense of something terrible was by no means all a dream.

Very white, very silent, but very composed, she came to the sitting- room, and was constrained
by her uncle and Sir Philip to eat, much as it went against her.  On this morning Sir Philip
had dropped his sternness towards her, and finding a moment when his son-in-law was absent,
he said, "Child, I know that this is wellnigh, nay, quite as hard for you as for me.  I can
only say, Let no earthly regards hold you back from whatever is your duty to God and man. 
Speak the truth whatever betide, and leave the rest to the God of truth.  God bless you, however
it may be;" and he kissed her brow.

The intelligence that the trial was coming on was brought by Sedley's counsel, Mr. Simon Harcourt.
They set forth for the County Hall up the sharply-rising street, thronged with people, who
growled and murmured at the murderer savagely, Sir Philip, under the care of his son-in-law,
and Anne with her uncle.  Mr. Harcourt was very hopeful; he said the case for the prosecution
had not a leg to stand on, and that the prisoner himself was so intelligent, and had so readily
understood the line of defence to take, that he ought to have been a lawyer.  There would be
no fear except that it might be made a party case, and no stone was likely to be left unturned
against a gentleman of good loyal family.  Moreover Mr. William Cowper, whom Robert Oakshott,
or rather his wife, had engaged at great expense for the prosecution, was one of the most rising
of barristers, noted for his persuasive eloquence, and unfortunately Mr. Harcourt had not the
right of reply.

The melancholy party were conducted into court, Sir Philip and Sir Edmund to the seats disposed
of by the sheriff, beside the judge, strangely enough only divided by him from Major Oakshott.
The judge was Mr. Baron Hatsel, a somewhat weak-looking man, in spite of his red robes and
flowing wig, as he sat under his canopy beneath King Arthur's Round Table.  Sedley, perhaps
a little thinner since his imprisonment, but with the purple red on his face, and his prominent
eyes so hard and bold that it was galling to know that this was really the confidence of innocence.

Mr. Cowper was with great ability putting the case.  Here were two families in immediate neighbourhood,
divided from the first by political opinions of the strongest complexion; and he put the Oakshott
views upon liberty, civil and religious, in the most popular light.  The unfortunate deceased
he described as having been a highly promising member of the suite of the distinguished Envoy,
Sir Peregrine Oakshott, whose name he bore.  On the death of the eldest brother he had been
recalled, and his accomplishments and foreign air had, it appeared, excited the spleen of the
young gentlemen of the county belonging to the Tory party, then in the ascendant, above all
of the prisoner.  There was then little or no etiquette as to irrelevant matter, so that Mr.
Cowper could dwell at length on Sedley's antecedents, as abusing the bounty of his uncle, a
known bully expelled for misconduct from Winchester College, then acting as a suitable instrument
in those violences in Scotland which had driven the nation finally to extremity, noted for
his debaucheries when in garrison, and finally broken for insubordination in Ireland.

After this unflattering portrait, which Sedley's looks certainly did not belie, the counsel
went back to 1688, proceeded to mention several disputes which had taken place when Peregrine
had met Lieutenant Archfield at Portsmouth; but, he added with a smile, that no dart of malice
was ever thoroughly winged till Cupid had added his feather; and he went on to describe in
strong colours the insult to a young gentlewoman, and the interference of the other young man
in her behalf, so that swords were drawn before the appearance of the reverend gentleman her
uncle.  Still, he said, there was further venom to be added to the bolt, and he showed that
the two had parted after the rejoicings on Portsdown Hill with a challenge all but uttered
between them, the Whig upholding religious liberty, the Tory hotly defending such honour as
the King possessed, and both parting in anger.

Young Mr. Oakshott was never again seen alive, though his family long hoped against hope. 
There was no need to dwell on the strange appearances that had incited them to the search.
Certain it was, that after seven years' silence, the grave had yielded up its secrets.  Then
came the description of the discovery of the bones, and of the garments and sword, followed
by the mention of the evidence as to the blood on the grass, and the prisoner having been seen
in the neighbourhood of the castle at that strange hour.  He was observed to have an amount
of money unusual with him soon after, and, what was still more suspicious, after having gambled
this away, he had sold to a goldsmith at Southampton a ruby ring, which both Mr. and Mrs. Oakshott
could swear to have belonged to the deceased. In fact, when Mr. Cowper marshalled the facts,
and even described the passionate encounter taking place hastily and without witnesses, and
the subsequent concealment of guilt in the vault, the purse taken, and whatever could again
be identified hidden, while providentially the blocking up of the vault preserved the evidence
of the crime so long undetected and unavenged, it was hardly possible to believe the prisoner
innocent.

When the examination of the witnesses began, however, Sedley showed himself equal to his own
defence.  He made no sign when Robert Oakshott identified the clothes, sword, and other things,
and their condition was described; but he demanded of him sharply how he knew the human remains
to be those of his brother.

"Of course they were," said Robert.

"Were there any remains of clothes with them?"

"No."

"Can you swear to them?  Did you ever before see your brother's bones?"

At which, and at the witness's hesitating, "No, but--" the court began to laugh.

"What was the height of the deceased?"

"He reached about up to my ear," said the witness with some hesitation.

"What was the length of the skeleton?"

"Quite small.  It looked like a child's."

"My lord," said Sedley, "I have a witness here, a surgeon, whom I request may be called to
certify the proportion of a skeleton to the size of a living man."

Though this was done, the whole matter of size was so vague that there was nothing proved,
either as to the inches of Peregrine or those of the skeleton, but still Sedley made his point
that the identity of the body was unproved at least in some minds.  Still, there remained the
other articles, about which there was no doubt.

Mr. Cowper proceeded with his examination as to the disputes at Portsmouth, but again the prisoner
scored a point by proving that Peregrine had staked the ring against him at a cock-fight at
Southampton, and had lost it.

Dr. Woodford was called, and his evidence could not choose but to be most damaging as to the
conflict on the road at Portsmouth; but as he had not seen the beginning, 'Mistress Anne Jacobina
Woodford' was called for.

There she stood, tall and stately, almost majestic in the stiffness of intense self-restraint,
in her simple gray dress, her black silk hood somewhat back, her brown curls round her face,
a red spot in each cheek, her earnest brown eyes fixed on the clerk as he gabbled out the words
so awful to her, "The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth;" and her soul re-echoed
the words, "So help you God."

Mr. Cowper was courteous; he was a gentleman, and he saw she was no light-minded girl.  He
asked her the few questions needful as to the attack made on her, and the defence; but something
moved him to go on and ask whether she had been on Portsdown Hill, and to obtain from her the
account of the high words between the young men.  She answered each question in a clear low
voice, which still was audible to all.  Was it over, or would Sedley begin to torture her,
when so much was in his favour?  No!  Mr. Cowper--oh! why would he? was asking in an affirmative
tone, as if to clench the former evidence, "And did you ever see the deceased again?"

"Yes."  The answer was at first almost choked, then cleared into sharpness, and every eye turned
in surprise on the face that had become as white as her collar.

"Indeed!  And when?"

"The next morning," in a voice as if pronouncing her own doom, and with hands clinging tight
to the front of the witness-box as though in anguish.

"Where?" said the counsel, like inexorable fate.

"I will save the gentlewoman from replying to that question, sir;" and a gentleman with long
brown hair, in a rich white and gold uniform, rose from among the spectators.  "Perhaps I may
be allowed to answer for her, when I say that it was at Portchester Castle, at five in the
morning, that she saw Peregrine Oakshott slain by my hand, and thrown into the vault."

There was a moment of breathless amazement in the court, and the judge was the first to speak.
"Very extraordinary, sir!  What is your name?"

"Charles Archfield," said the clear resolute voice.

Then came a general movement and sensation, and Anne, still holding fast to the support, saw
the newcomer start forward with a cry, "My father!" and with two or three bounds reach the
side of Sir Philip, who had sunk back in his seat for a moment, but recovered himself as he
felt his son's arm round him.

There was a general buzz, and a cry of order, and in the silence thus produced the judge addressed
the witness:--

"Is what this gentleman says the truth?"

And on Anne's reply, "Yes, my Lord," spoken with the clear ring of anguish, the judge added--

"Was the prisoner present?"

"No, my Lord; he had nothing to do with it."

"Then, brother Cowper, do you wish to proceed with the case?"

Mr. Cowper replied in the negative, and the judge then made a brief summing-up, and the jury,
without retiring, returned a verdict of 'Not guilty.'

In the meantime Anne had been led like one blinded from the witness- box, and almost dropped
into her uncle's arms.  "Cheer up, cheer up, my child," he said.  "You have done your part
bravely, and after so upright a confession no one can deal hardly with the young man.  God
will surely protect him."

The acquittal had been followed by a few words from Baron Hatsel, congratulating the late prisoner
on his deliverance through this gentleman's generous confession.  Then there was a moment's
hesitation, ended by the sheriff asking Charles, who stood up by his old father, one arm supporting
the trembling form, and the other hand clasped in the two aged ones, "Then, sir, do you surrender
to take your trial?"

"Certainly, sir," said Charles.  "I ought to have done so long ago, but in the first shock--"

Mr. Harcourt here cautioned him not to say anything that could be used against him, adding
in a low tone, much to Sir Philip's relief, "It may be brought in manslaughter, sir."

"He should be committed," another authority said.  "Is there a Hampshire magistrate here to
sign a warrant?"

Of these there were plenty; and as the clerk asked for his description, all eyes turned on
the tall and robust form in the prime of manhood, with the noble resolute expression on his
fine features and steadfast eyes, except when, as he looked at his father, they were full of
infinite pity.  The brown hair hung over the rich gold-laced white coat, faced with black,
and with a broad gold-coloured sash fringed with black over his shoulder, and there was a look
of distinction about him that made his answer only natural.  "Charles Archfield, of Archfield
House, Fareham, Lieutenant-Colonel of his Imperial Majesty's Light Dragoons, Knight of the
Holy Roman Empire.  Must I give up my sword like a prisoner of war?" he asked, with a smile.

Sir Philip rose to his feet with an earnest trembling entreaty that bail might be taken for
him, and many voices of gentlemen and men of substance made offers of it.  There was a little
consultation, and it was ruled that bail might be accepted under the circumstances, and Charles
bowed his thanks to the distant and gave his hand to the nearer, while Mr. Eyre of Botley Grange,
and Mr. Brocas of Roche Court, were accepted as sureties.  The gentle old face of Mr. Cromwell
of Hursley, was raised to poor old Sir Philip's with the words, spoken with a remnant of the
authority of the Protector: "Your son has spoken like a brave man, sir; God bless you, and
bring you well through it."

Charles was then asked whether he wished for time to collect witnesses.  "No, my lord," he
said.  "I thank you heartily, but I have no one to call, and the sooner this is over the better
for all."

After a little consultation it was found that the Grand Jury had not been dismissed, and could
find a true bill against him; and it was decided that the trial should take place after the
rest of the criminal cases were disposed of.

This settled, the sorrowful party with the strangely welcomed son were free to return to their
quarters at the George.  Mr. Cromwell pressed forward to beg that they would make use of his
coach.  It was a kind thought, for Sir Philip hung feebly on his son's arm, and to pass through
the curious throng would have been distressing. After helping him in, Charles turned and demanded--

"Where is she, the young gentlewoman, Miss Woodford?"

She was just within, her uncle waiting to take her out till the crowd's attention should be
called off.  Charles lifted her in, and Sir Edmund and Dr. Woodford followed him, for there
was plenty of room in the capacious vehicle.

Nobody spoke in the very short interval the four horses took in getting themselves out of the
space in front of the County Hall and down the hill to the George.  Only Charles had leant
forward, taken Anne's hand, drawn it to his lips, and then kept fast hold of it.

They were all in the room at the inn at last, they hardly knew how; indeed, as Charles was
about to shut the door there was a smack on his back, and there stood Sedley holding out his hand.

"So, Charley, old fellow, you were the sad dog after all.  You got me out of it, and I owe
you my thanks, but you need not have put your neck into the noose.  I should have come off
with flying colours, and made them all make fools of themselves, if you had only waited."

"Do you think I could sit still and see her put to the torture?" said Charles.

"Torture?  You are thinking of your barbarous countries.  No fear of the boot here, nor even
in Scotland nowadays."

"That's all the torture you understand," muttered Sir Edmund Nutley.

"Not but what I am much beholden to you all the same," went on Sedley.  "And look here, sir,"
turning to his uncle, "if you wish to get him let off cheap you had better send up another
special retainer to Harcourt, without loss of time, as he may be off."

Sir Edmund Nutley concurred in the advice, and they hurried off together in search of the family
attorney, through whom the great man had to be approached.

The four left together could breathe more freely.  Indeed Dr. Woodford would have taken his
niece away, but that Charles already had her in his arms in a most fervent embrace, as he said,
"My brave, my true maid!"

She could not speak, but she lifted up her eyes, with infinite relief in all her sorrow, as
for a moment she rested against him; but they had to move apart, for a servant came up with
some wine, and Charles, putting her into a chair, began to wait on her and on his father.

"I have not quite forgotten my manners," he said lightly, as if to relieve the tension of feeling,
"though in Germany the ladies serve the gentlemen."

It was very hard not to burst into tears at these words, but Anne knew that would be the way
to distress her companions and to have to leave the room and lose these precious moments. 
Sir Philip, after swallowing the wine, succeeded in saying, "Have you been at home?"

Charles explained that he had landed at Gravesend, and had ridden thence, sleeping at Basingstoke,
and taking the road through Winchester in case his parents should be wintering there, and on
arriving a couple of hours previously and inquiring for them, he had heard the tidings that
Sir Philip Archfield was indeed there, for his nephew was being tried for his life for the
wilful murder of Major Oakshott's son seven years ago.

"And you had none of my warnings?  I wrote to all the ports," said his father, "to warn you
to wait till all this was over."

No; he had crossed from Sluys, and had met no letter.  "I suppose," he said, "that I must not
ride home to-morrow.  It might make my sureties uneasy; but I would fain see them all."

"It would kill your mother to be here," said Sir Philip.  "She knows nothing of what Anne told
me on Sedley's arrest.  She is grown very feeble;" and he groaned.  "But we might send for
your sister, if she can leave her, and the boy."

"I should like my boy to be fetched," said Charles.  "I should wish him to remember his father--not
as a felon convicted!"  Then putting a knee to the ground before Sir Philip, he said, "Sir,
I ask your blessing and forgiveness.  I never before thoroughly understood my errors towards
you, especially in hiding this miserable matter, and leaving all this to come on you, while
my poor Anne there was left to bear all the load.  It was a cowardly and selfish act, and I
ask your pardon."

The old man sobbed with his hand on his son's head.  "My dear boy! my poor boy! you were distraught."

"I was then.  I did it, as I thought, for my poor Alice's sake at first, and as it proved,
it was all in vain; but at the year's end, when I was older, it was folly and wrong.  I ought
to have laid all before you, and allowed you to judge, and I sincerely repent the not having
so done.  And Anne, my sweetest Anne, has borne the burthen all this time," he added, going
back to her.  "Let no one say a woman cannot keep secrets, though I ought never to have laid
this on her."

"Ah! it might have gone better for you then," sighed Sir Philip. "No one would have visited
a young lad's mischance hardly on a loyal house in those days.  What is to be done, my son?"

"That we will discuss when the lawyer fellow comes.  Is it old Lee? Meantime let us enjoy our
meeting.  So that is Lucy's husband. Sober and staid, eh?  And my mother is feeble, you say.
Has she been ill?"

Charles was comporting himself with the cheerfulness that had become habitual to him as a soldier,
always in possible danger, but it was very hard to the others to chime in with his tone, and
when a message was brought to ask whether his Honour would be served in private, the cheery
greeting and shake of the hand broke down the composure of the old servant who brought it,
and he cried, "Oh, sir, to see you thus, and such a fine young gentleman!"

Charles, the only person who could speak, gave the orders, but they did not eat alone, for
Sir Edmund Nutley and Sedley arrived with the legal advisers, and it was needful, perhaps even
better, to have their company.  The chief of the conversation was upon Hungarian and Transylvanian
politics and the Turkish war.  Mr. Harcourt seeming greatly to appreciate the information that
Colonel Archfield was able to give him, and the anecdotes of the war, and descriptions of scenes
therein actually brightened Sir Philip into interest, and into forgetting for a moment his
son's situation in pride in his conduct, and at the distinction he had gained.  "We must save
him," said Mr. Harcourt to Sir Edmund.  "He is far too fine a fellow to be lost for a youthful
mischance."

The meal was a short one, and a consultation was to follow, while Sedley departed.  Anne was
about to withdraw, when Mr. Lee the attorney said, "We shall need Mistress Woodford's evidence,
sir, for the defence."

"I do not see what defence there can be," returned Charles.  "I can only plead guilty, and
throw myself on the King's mercy, if he chooses to extend it to one of a Tory family."

"Not so fast, sir," said Mr. Harcourt; "as far as I have gathered the facts, there is every
reason to hope you may obtain a verdict of manslaughter, and a nominal penalty, although that
rests with the judge."

On this the discussion began in earnest.  Charles, who had never heard the circumstances which
led to the trial, was greatly astonished to hear what remains had been discovered.  He said
that he could only declare himself to have thrown in the body, full dressed, just as it was,
and how it could have been stripped and buried he could not imagine.  "What made folks think
of looking into the vault?" he asked.

"It was Mrs. Oakshott," said Lee, "the young man's wife, she who was to have married the deceased.
She took up some strange notion about stories of phantoms current among the vulgar, and insisted
on having the vault searched, though it had been walled up for many years past."

Charles and Anne looked at each other, and the former said, "Again?"

"Oh yes!" said Anne; "indeed there have been enough to make me remember what you bade me do,
in case they recurred, only it was impossible."

"Phantoms!" said Mr. Harcourt; "what does this mean?"

"Mere vulgar superstitions, sir," said the attorney.

"But very visible," said Charles; "I have seen one myself, of which I am quite sure, besides
many that may be laid to the account of the fever of my wound."

"I must beg to hear," said the barrister.  "Do I understand that these were apparitions of
the deceased?"

"Yes," said Charles.  "Miss Woodford saw the first, I think."

"May I beg you to describe it?" said Mr. Harcourt, taking a fresh piece of paper to make notes on.

Anne narrated the two appearances in London, and Charles added the story of the figure seen
in the street at Douai, seen by both together, asking what more she knew of.

"Once at night last summer, at the very anniversary, I saw his face in the trees in the garden,"
said Anne; "it was gone in a moment. That has been all I have seen; but little Philip came
to me full of stories of people having seen Penny Grim, as he calls it, and very strangely,
once it rose before him at the great pond, and his fright saved him from sliding to the dangerous
part.  What led Mrs. Oakshott to the examination was that it was seen once on the beach, once
by the sentry at the vault itself, once by the sexton at Havant Churchyard, and once by my
mother's grave."

"Seven?" said the counsel, reviewing the notes he jotted down. "Colonel Archfield, I should
recommend you pleading not guilty, and basing your defence, like your cousin, on the strong
probability that this same youth is a living man."

"Indeed!" said Charles, starting, "I could have hoped it from these recent apparitions, but
what I myself saw forbids the idea.  If any sight were ever that of a spirit, it was what we
saw at Douai; besides, how should he come thither, a born and bred Whig and Puritan?"

"There is no need to mention that; you can call witnesses to his having been seen within these
few months.  It would rest with the prosecution to disprove his existence in the body, especially
as the bones in the vault cannot be identified."

"Sir," said Charles, "the defence that would have served my innocent cousin cannot serve me,
who know what I did to Oakshott.  I am now aware that it is quite possible that the sword might
not have killed him, but when I threw him into that vault I sealed his fate."

"How deep is the vault?"

Mr. Lee and Dr. Woodford both averred that it was not above twenty or twenty-four feet deep,
greatly to Charles's surprise, for as a lad he had thought it almost unfathomable; but then
he owned his ideas of Winchester High Street had been likewise far more magnificent than he
found it.  The fall need not necessarily have been fatal, especially to one insensible and
opposing no resistance, but even supposing that death had not resulted, in those Draconian
days, the intent to murder was equally subject with its full accomplishment to capital punishment.
Still, as Colonel Archfield could plead with all his heart that he had left home with no evil
intentions towards young Oakshott, the lawyers agreed that to prove that the death of the victim
was uncertain would reduce the matter to a mere youthful brawl, which could not be heavily
visited.  Mr. Harcourt further asked whether it were possible to prove that the prisoner had
been otherwise employed than in meddling with the body; but unfortunately it had been six hours
before he came home.

"I was distracted," said Charles; "I rode I knew not whither, till I came to my senses on finding
that my horse was ready to drop, when I led him into a shed at a wayside public-house, bade
them feed him, took a drink, then I wandered out into the copse near, and lay on the ground
there till I thought him rested, for how long I know not. I think it must have been near Bishops
Waltham, but I cannot recollect."

Mr. Lee decided on setting forth at peep of dawn the next morning to endeavour to collect witnesses
of Peregrine's appearances.  Sir Edmund Nutley intended to accompany him as far as Fareham
to fetch little Philip and Lady Nutley, if the latter could leave her mother after the tidings
had been broken to them, and also to try to trace whether Charles's arrival at any public-house
were remembered.

To her dismay, Anne received another summons from the other party to act as witness.

"I hoped to have spared you this, my sweet," said Charles, "but never mind; you cannot say
anything worse of me than I shall own of myself."

The two were left to each other for a little while in the bay window.  "Oh, sir! can you endure
me thus after all?" murmured Anne, as she felt his arm round her.

"Can you endure me after all I left you to bear?" he returned.

"It was not like what I brought on you," she said.

But they could not talk much of the future; and Charles told how he had rested through all
his campaigns in the knowledge that his Anne was watching and praying for him, and how his
long illness had brought before him deeper thoughts than he had ever had before, and made him
especially dwell on the wrong done to his parents by his long absence, and the lightness with
which he had treated home duties and responsibilities, till he had resolved that if his life
were then spared, he would neglect them no longer.

"And now," he said, and paused, "all I shall have done is to break their hearts.  What is that
saying, 'Be sure your sin will find you out.'"

"Oh, sir! they are sure not to deal hardly with you."

"Perhaps the Emperor's Ambassador may claim me.  If so, would you go into banishment with the
felon, Anne, love?  It would not be quite so mad as when I asked you before."

"I would go to the ends of the world with you; and we would take little Phil.  Do you know,
he is growing a salad, and learning Latin, all for papa?"

And so she told him of little Phil till his father was seen looking wistfully at him.

With Sir Philip, Charles was all cheerfulness and hope, taking such interest in all there was
to hear about the family, estate, and neighbourhood that the old gentleman was beguiled into
feeling as if there were only a short ceremony to be gone through before he had his son at
home, saving him ease and trouble.

But after Sir Philip had been persuaded to retire, worn out with the day's agitations, and
Anne likewise had gone to her chamber to weep and pray, Charles made his arrangements with
Mr. Lee for the future for all connected with him in case of the worst; and after the lawyer's
departure poured out his heart to Dr. Woodford in deep contrition, as he said he had longed
to do when lying in expectation of death at the Iron Gates.  "However it may end," he said,
"and I expect, as I deserve, the utmost, I am thankful for this opportunity, though unhappily
it gives more pain to those about me than if I had died out there.  Tell them, when they need
comfort, how much better it is for me."

"My dear boy, I cannot believe you will have to suffer."

"There is much against me, sir.  My foolish flight, the state of parties, and the recent conspiracy,
which has made loyal families suspected and odious.  I saw something of that as I came down.
The crowd fancied my uniform French, and hooted and hissed me. Unluckily I have no other clothes
to wear.  Nor can I from my heart utterly disclaim all malice or ill will when I remember the
thrill of pleasure in driving my sword home.  I have had to put an end to a Janissary or two
more than once in the way of duty, but their black eyes never haunted me like those parti-coloured
ones.  Still I trust, as you tell me I may, that God forgives me, for our Blessed Lord's sake;
but I should like, if I could, to take the Holy Sacrament with my love while I am still thus
far a free man.  I have not done so since the Easter before these troubles."

"You shall, my dear boy, you shall."

There were churches at which the custom freshly begun at the Restoration was not dropped. 
The next was St. Matthias's Day, and Anne and her uncle had already purposed to go to the quiet
little church of St. Lawrence, at no great distance, in the very early morning.  They were
joined on their way down the stair into the courtyard of the inn by a gentleman in a slouched
hat and large dark cloak, who drew Anne's arm within his own.

Truly there was peace on that morning, and strength to the brave man beyond the physical courage
that had often before made him bright in the face of danger, and Anne, though weeping, had
a sense of respite and repose, if not of hope.

Late in the afternoon, little Philip was lifted down from riding before old Ralph into the
arms of the splendid officer, whose appearance transcended all his visions.  He fumbled in
his small pocket, and held out a handful of something green and limp.

"Here's my salad, papa.  I brought it all the way for you to eat."

And Colonel Archfield ate every scrap of it for supper, though it was much fitter for a rabbit,
and all the evening he held on his knee the tired child, and responded to his prattle about
Nana and dogs and rabbits; nay, ministered to his delight and admiration of the sheriff's coach,
javelin men, and even the judge, with a strange mixture of wonder, delight, and with melancholy
only in eyes and undertones.

CHAPTER XXX: SENTENCE

"I have hope to live, and am prepared to die."

Measure for Measure.

Ralph was bidden to be ready to take his young master home early the next morning.  At eight
o'clock the boy, who had slept with his father, came down the stair, clinging to his father's
hand, and Miss Woodford coming closely with him.

"Yes," said Charles, as he held the little fair fellow in his arms, ere seating him on the
horse, "he knows all, Ralph.  He knows that his father did an evil thing, and that what we
do in our youth finds us out later, and must be paid for.  He has promised me to be a comfort
to the old people, and to look on this lady as a mother. Nay, no more, Ralph; 'tis not good-bye
to any of you yet.  There, Phil, don't lug my head off, nor catch my hair in your buttons.
Give my dutiful love to your grandmamma and to Aunt Nutley, and be a good boy to them."

"And when I come to see you again I'll bring another salad," quoth Philip, as he rode out of
the court; and his father, by way of excusing a contortion of features, smoothed the entangled
lock of hair, and muttered something about, "This comes of not wearing a periwig."  Then he said--

"And to think that I have wasted the company of such a boy as that, all his life except for
this mere glimpse!"

"Oh! you will come back to him," was all that could be said.

For it was time for Charles Archfield to surrender himself to take his trial.

He had been instructed over and over again as to the line of his defence, and cautioned against
candour for himself and delicacy towards others, till he had more than once to declare that
he had no intention of throwing his life away; but the lawyers agreed in heartily deploring
the rules that thus deprived the accused of the assistance of an advocate in examining witnesses
and defending himself.  All depended, as they knew and told Sir Edmund Nutley, on the judge
and jury.  Now Mr. Baron Hatsel had shown himself a well- meaning but weak and vacillating
judge, whose summing up was apt rather to confuse than to elucidate the evidence; and as to
the jury, Mr. Lee scanned their stolid countenances somewhat ruefully when they were marshalled
before the prisoner, to be challenged if desirable.  A few words passed, into which the judge
inquired.

"I am reminded, my Lord," said Colonel Archfield, bowing, "that I once incurred Mr. Holt's
displeasure as a mischievous boy by throwing a stone which injured one of his poultry; but
I cannot believe such a trifle would bias an honest man in a question of life and death."

Nevertheless the judge put aside Mr. Holt.

"I like his spirit," whispered Mr. Harcourt.

"But," returned Lee, "I doubt if he has done himself any good with those fellows by calling
it a trifle to kill an old hen.  I should like him to have challenged two or three more moody
old Whiggish rascals; but he has been too long away from home to know how the land lies."

"Too generous and high-spirited for this work," sighed Sir Edmund, who sat with them.

The indictment was read, the first count being "That of malice aforethought, by the temptation
of the Devil, Charles Archfield did wilfully kill and slay Peregrine Oakshott," etc.  The second
indictment was that "By misadventure he had killed and slain the said Peregrine Oakshott."
To the first he pleaded 'Not guilty;' to the second 'Guilty.'

Tall, well-made, manly, and soldierly he stood, with a quiet set face, while Mr. Cowper proceeded
to open the prosecution, with a certain compliment to the prisoner and regret at having to
push the case against one who had so generously come forward on behalf of a kinsman; but he
must unwillingly state the circumstances that made it doubtful, nay, more than doubtful, whether
the prisoner's plea of mere misadventure could stand.  The dislike to the unfortunate deceased
existing among the young Tory country gentlemen of the county was, he should prove, intensified
in the prisoner on account of not inexcusable jealousies, as well as of the youthful squabbles
which sometimes lead to fatal results.  On the evening of the 30th of June 1688 there had been
angry words between the prisoner and the deceased on Portsdown Hill, respecting the prisoner's
late lady.  At four or five o'clock on the ensuing morning, the 1st of July, the one fell by
the sword of the other in the then unfrequented court of Portchester Castle.  It was alleged
that the stroke was fatal only through the violence of youthful impetuosity; but was it consistent
with that supposition that the young gentleman's time was unaccounted for afterwards, and that
the body should have been disposed of in a manner that clearly proved the assistance of an
accomplice, and with so much skill that no suspicion had arisen for seven years and a half,
whilst the actual slayer was serving, not his own country, but a foreign prince, and had only
returned at a most suspicious crisis?

