Parables of the Christ-life, by I. Lilias Trotter

Marshall Brothers, Ltd. London & Edinburgh.

To F.N.F. B.G.L.N. G.S.T. & A.M.E. 'fellow workers unto the kingdom of God.'

LIFE--the first glance would hardly find it on this African hillside in the summertime. The
hot wind of the desert has passed over it, and the spring beauty of iris and orchid, asphodel
and marigold, has vanished. Nothing is to be seen but the mellow golden-brown of the grass,
broken by blue-green aloe leaves, and here and there a deep madder head of dried-up fennel.

Yet life is reigning, not death, all the while; it is there, in infinitely greater abundance
than when the field was green--life enough to clothe a score of fields next year.

Stoop down and look into that withered grass, and a whole new world of God's handiwork will
come into view in the burnt-up tangle. For of all the growing things out here, the seed-vessels
are among the most wonderful. Even little insignificant plants that would hardly catch your
eye when in flower, develop forms of quaint beauty as the capsules ripen. And now that all
is finished, they lie stored with vitality in the midst of the seeming loss around.

Do you see the parable? We will trace it out step by step.

Back we must go, to the days of early spring. The annuals that clothed the field had each but
one life then; a perishing life, though it looked so strong in its young vigour. Left to itself,
it stood "condemned already."

But the critical moment came, changing its whole destiny, when a new birth took place: the
vitalizing pollen was received by the pistil, and set up the reign of a fresh undying creation.
All that had gone before in the plant's history was a preparation for this moment: all that
followed was a working out to its fruition.

"Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God."
Every soul carries like the flower a possible life, other than that of its first birth; more
than that, to every soul within reach of the Gospel there comes probably a moment when the
Life of God draws near and could be received if it were willing. There is a crisis like that
which the flower reaches, when all things are ready. If that crisis is not seized, nothing
lies before the plant but useless, irrevocable decay; the power to receive withers and vanishes;
and nothing can renew it. Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born again." Are you
letting pass the moment on which all eternity hangs?

* * * * * *

The hour at which this new birth can take place in the flower is the hour at which the stigma
is able to grasp the pollen that comes to it, blown by the wind or carried by the bees and
butterflies. Up till then the grains fall off unheeded; but now it develops a surface, glutinous
in some cases, velvety in others, that can clasp and keep them fast. The pollen grains lay
hold at the same moment by their sculptured points and ridges. They "apprehend" each other,
and the pollen, with its mysterious quickening power, does the rest. As soon as it is received
it sinks down into the innermost depths of the flower's heart, and starts there the beginning
of the new creation.

The most wonderful secrets of the plant world hang round the process of fertilisation, and
the ways in which these springs of the second birth are guarded and set going, but the flower's
simple work is to open and receive.

"The gift of God is eternal life"--oh, marvellous words!--"through Jesus Christ our Lord."
"As many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that
believe on His name."

It is utterly, unbelievably simple. Receive Jesus with a heart-grasp, and you will find, like
the flower, a spring of eternal life, entirely distinct from your own, that is perishing, set
working deep down in your inmost being.

And all that is needed, for the fulfilment of God's uttermost purpose for you, is that this
"new man" should be formed and that the old should pass away.

From the very outset of its new birth we see this double process going on in the plant. Within
a few hours the throb of new life has spread through the flower, with this first result, that
the petals begin to wither. Fertilisation marks the striking of the death-blow to all that
went before. Look at a clover head; do you know why some of the spikes are upright and others
turned downwards and fading? It is because these last have received the new tide, and the old
is ebbing out already. The birth-peal and the death-knell rang together. Fertilisation marks
the death of the flower and the death of the flower the death of the annual, though the carrying
out of its doom comes gradually.

And in like manner the sentence of death passes, in the Cross, on the old nature in its entirety,
as the new comes into being. This is the one only basis and groundwork for all carrying out
in our practical experience of what that death means. Once for all let this be clear. Apart
from the work done on Calvary, all working out of a death process in our own souls is only
a false and dangerous mysticism... . "I have been crucified with Christ." (R. V.)--Yes, long
before ever I asked to be--glory be to God! and yet as freshly as if it were yesterday, for
time is nowhere with Him.

And simultaneously, in figure, in the little flower-heart, while "that which is natural" begins
to fade, "that which is spiritual" dawns. The seed-vessel with its hidden treasure--the ultimate
object of this miracle of quickening--begins immediately to form. It was within three days
of "the heavenly vision" when the once rejected Jesus was received by St. Paul, that the commission
came--"he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear My Name." A chosen vessel unto Him. The seed-vessel
belongs to the seed, only and for ever: it is formed for itself and has no purpose apart. Separation
has nothing austere and narrow in it when it is unto Him.

Chosen vessels to bear His Name--His personality; with all that is wrapped up in that Name
of fragrance and healing, authority and power; chosen to go about this weary sinful world with
the living Christ folded in our hearts, ready and able as of old to meet the need around. Is
not this a calling for which it is worth counting, as St. Paul did, all things but loss?

Chosen vessels--there is the vessel and there is the treasure in it, for ever distinct, though
in wonderful union, like the seed-vessel and the seed: the one enshrines the other.

God builds up a shrine within us of His workmanship, from the day in which Jesus was received.
The seed-vessel is its picture. With the old nature He can have nothing to do except to deliver
it to death: no improving can fit it for His purpose, any more than the leaf or tendril, however
beautiful, can be the receptacle of the seed. There must be "a new creation" (R.V., margin),
"the new man," to be the temple of the Divine Life.

And as the petals drop off, and the growing seed-vessel comes into view, we see a fresh individuality
developed. Compare in these four pages some of the seed-vessels of a single family--vetch and
clover: we found over thirty species of it in that one field of the frontispiece. These will
show something of their extraordinary variety--we have bunches of horns great and small, and
bunches of imitation centipedes, and bunches of mock holly leaves, prickly coils and velvety
balls; mimic concertinas, and bits of quaint embroidery; imitation snail-shells, croziers,
pods with frills at the seams, spiked caskets with curious indentations, clusters of stars,
bladders like soft paper, and plaited spirals wound into a tiny cocoanut, that, untwisted,
becomes a minature crown of thorns--are they not all a visible expression of the thoughts that
are more than can be numbered? And the greater part spring from little unnoticeable flowers,
so alike in their yellow or pink that you have to look closely in order to find out any difference!
It is the seed-bearing that gives them their individual character.

And the same God has manifold plans for our development too, as vessels for His Christ-life.
It is by the Divine indwelling that our true, eternal personality dawns, and for the expression
of the special manifestation of Himself which is entrusted to each one of us. The protoplasm
that quickens each different seed is one and the same essence, but in no two does it find the
same expression. He needs the whole Church to manifest His whole character and accomplish His
appointed ministry, and so the individual development must differ widely in everything but
the common vital principle. Life--eternal life--is the essence of all--life receiving and life-giving.
There is no need to imitate the seed-vessel of a brother vetch!--only to draw into our own
the fulness of grace that we may develop into its full individuality the mission entrusted to us.

There is nothing arbitrary in these differing shapes of the seed-vessels. If we look closely,
we shall find that they are formed in union with the seed that each contains--it is this that
determines the form of each, and builds it up. See these few instances: the peas need their
long pod with its daintily-cushioned divisions, to allow each little globe to round itself
to perfection; the crescent-shaped seeds of this other vetch, each set into its own place again,
form the distinctive character of their different sheath--so do the tiny rod-shaped ones of
the third vetch, which clothe themselves in a segmented rod in turn. While on the other hand
the fine sand-like grain of this snap-dragon needs storing in a capsule--such a quaint one
it is (whether most like a bird or a mouse sitting on a twig is hard to say)--but it is a perfectly
adapted treasure-bag for the delicate things, and when they are ripe the two eyes open, and
the wind shakes the seed out by them! Each one lays itself out for the special trust committed
to it. Is it not the same wonderful Fashioner Who fits us and our ministry together, and forms
us through it with unerring precision, preparing us for the white stone and the new name which
no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it, eternity's seal on the heavenly individuality of
each. That eternal future will show how the Lord had need of each of us in our varying character,
and how all that made up this earthly life fitted us for "bearing about" the special manifestation
of Jesus entrusted to us, in which no other could take our place. He needs us, every one of
us, as if there were no other besides.

* * * * * *

But we will go back from this glimpse of God's ultimate purpose for us, to watch the process
by which it is reached, so far as we can trace it in the ripening of the little annuals.

The figure will not give us all the steps by which God gets His way in the intricacies of a
human soul: we shall see no hint in it of the cleansing and filling that is needed in sinful
man before he can follow the path of the plant. It shows us some of the Divine principles of
the new life rather than a set sequence of experience; above all, the parable gives a lesson
that most of us only begin to learn after Pentecost has become a reality to us--the lesson
of walking, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

The flesh--the life of nature--is all, good and bad alike, that we had and were before Christ
came to us. We see its shadow in the life of root and stem, leaf and tendril and petal, that
made up the plant before its new birth took place; "for all flesh is grass, and all the goodliness
thereof is as the flower of the field." It is not only that which is sinful as opposed to that
which is holy: it is that which is human as opposed to that which is Divine.

In the earlier stage of the seed-vessel's growth we see the two lives, the old and the new,
practically going on alongside. And can we not remember, many of us, in our own history, how
the self life went almost untouched and unrecognised, for years, while all the time Christ
was growing within us, and our ministry was being given?

Let us look at the seed-vessels, well set and forming fast, with their natural life all unbroken
as yet, and learn to be very tender and patient with the early stages of God's work in those
around.

But though the two may exist for a time side by side, they cannot flourish together. The crisis
must come to us as to the annual, when the old creation begins to go down into the grave, and
the new begins to triumph at its cost.

In the plant life the two are absolutely and for ever separate--there is no possibility of
confounding the perishable existence of leaf and stalk with the newborn seed-vessel and its
hidden riches. In the heavenly light the distinction stands out as ineffaceably. But our eyes
are too dim at first to distinguish them in detail: with most of us it is only when the cleansing
Blood has dealt with the question of known sin, and the Spirit's incoming has cleared our vision,
that the two lives, natural and spiritual, begin to stand out before us, no longer shading
into each other, but in vivid contrast. The word of God in the hand of the Holy Ghost pierces
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and we see bit by bit as we can bear it, how we
have made provision for the flesh, given occasion to the flesh, had confidence in the flesh,
warred after the flesh, judged after the flesh, purposed after the flesh, known each other
after the flesh. The carnal nature with its workings stands out as the hindrance in the way
of the Divine, and the time comes when we see that no more growth is possible to the Christ
in us unless a deliverance comes here.

We are helpless in the matter. There is no system of self-repression or self-mortification
that will do anything but drive the evil below the surface, there to do a still more subtle
work, winding down out of reach. The roots will only strike deeper and the sap flow stronger
for the few leaves trimmed off here and there. If self sets to work to slay self it will only
end in rising hydra-headed from the contest. How is the deliverance to come?

The annuals give us the secret. Look back at the vetch seed-vessels. Why is it that the leaves
which used to stand firm and fresh like those of the flowering clover, have begun to shrivel
and turn yellow? It is because they have acquiesced wholly now in the death sentence of their
new birth, and they are letting the new life live at the expense of the old. Death is being
wrought out by life.

And the same triumphant power of the new life is set free as we come to accept to its utmost
limits the sentence of Calvary, that "our old man was crucified with Him," in its sum-total,
seen and unseen, root and branch. Christ is our Life now--our only Life--and we begin to find
that He is dealing with the old creation, we hardly know how. We only know that as we bring
the judgment, the motive, the aim that were ours, not His, into contact with Him, they shrivel
and wither like the dying leaves. The impulses and the shrinkings of the flesh perish in His
Presence alike. The new life wrecks the old. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds
of the body ye shall live"--that is what the withering leaves say. We are "saved by His life."

The great North African aloe plant shows this very strikingly. It is like our annuals on a
large scale, for it flowers and seeds but once in its career, though that numbers more years
than these can count weeks.

