It may be feared that Ralph had no such deep sense of his fault as that suggested. He did remember
well enough,--had reflected more than once or twice,--on those words which he had spoken to
Clary. Having spoken them he had felt his crime to be their not unnatural accompaniment. At
that moment, when he was on the lawn at Fulham, he had thought that it would be very sweet
to devote himself to dear Clary,--that Clary was the best and prettiest girl he knew, that,
in short, it might be well for him to love her and cherish her and make her his wife. Had not
Patience come upon the scene, and disturbed them, he would probably then and there have offered
to her his hand and heart. But Patience had come upon the scene, and the offer had not been,
as he thought, made. Since all that, which had passed ages ago,--weeks and weeks ago,--there
had fallen upon him the prosaic romance of Polly Neefit. He had actually gone down to Hendon
to offer himself as a husband to the breeches-maker's daughter. It is true he had hitherto
escaped in that quarter also,--or, at any rate, had not as yet committed himself. But the train
of incidents and thoughts which had induced him to think seriously of marrying Polly, had made
him aware that he could not propose marriage to Sir Thomas Underwood's daughter. From such
delight as that he found, on calm reflection, that he had debarred himself by the folly of
his past life. It was well that Patience had come upon the scene.

Such being the state of affairs with him, that little episode with Clary being at an end,--or
rather, as he thought, never having quite come to a beginning,--and his little arrangement
as to Polly Neefit being in abeyance, he was free to amuse himself with this newcomer. Miss
Bonner was certainly the most lovely girl he had ever seen. He could imagine no beauty to exceed
hers. He knew well enough that her loveliness could be nothing to him;--but a woman's beauty
is in one sense as free as the air in all Christian countries. It is a light shed for the delight,
not of one, but of many. There could be no reason why he should not be among the admirers of
Miss Bonner. "I expect, you know, to be admitted quite on the terms of an old friend," he said.
"I shall call you Mary, and all that kind of thing."

"I don't see your claim," said Miss Bonner.

"Oh yes, you do,--and must allow it. I was almost a sort of son of Sir Thomas's,--till he turned
me off when I came of age. And Patience and Clarissa are just the same as sisters to me."

"You are not even a cousin, Mr. Newton."

"No;--I'm not a cousin. It's more like a foster-brother, you know. Of course I shan't call
you Mary if you tell me not. How is it to be?"

"Just for the present I'll be Miss Bonner."

"For a week or so?"

"Say for a couple of years, and then we'll see how it is."

"You'll be some lucky's fellow's wife long before that. Do you like living at Fulham?"

"Very much. How should I not like it? They are so kind to me. And you know, when I first resolved
to come home, I thought I should have to go out as a governess,--or, perhaps, as a nursery-maid,
if they didn't think me clever enough to teach. I did not expect my uncle to be so good to
me. I had never seen him, you know. Is it not odd that my uncle is so little at home?"

"It is odd. He is writing a book, you see, and he finds that the air of Fulham doesn't suit
his brains."

"Oh, Mr. Newton!"

"And he likes to be quite alone. There isn't a better fellow going than your uncle. I am sure
I ought to say so. But he isn't just what I should call,--sociable."

"I think him almost perfection;--but I do wish he was more at home for their sakes. We'll go
in now, Mr. Newton. Patience has gone in, and I haven't seen Clarissa for ever so long."

Soon after this the guests began to go away. Mr. Truepeny gave Mrs. Brownlow's hand the last
squeeze, and Mr. Poojean remarked that all terrestrial joys must have an end. "Not but that
such hours as these," said he, "have about them a dash of the celestial which almost gives
them a claim to eternity." "Horrible fool!" said Clarissa to her sister, who was standing close
to her.

"Mrs. Brownlow would, perhaps, prefer going to bed," said Ralph. Then every one was gone except
the Underwoods and Ralph Newton. The girls had on their hats and shawls, and all was prepared
for their departure;--but there was some difficulty about the fly. The Fulham fly which had
brought them, and which always took them everywhere, had hitherto omitted to return for them.
It was ordered for half-past ten, and now it was eleven. "Are you sure he was told?" said Clary.
Patience had told him herself,--twice. "Then he must be tipsy again," said Clary. Mrs. Brownlow
bade them to sit still and wait; but when the fly did not arrive by half-past eleven, it was
necessary that something should be done. There were omnibuses on the road, but they might probably
be full. "It is only two miles,--let us walk," said Clary; and so it was decided.

Ralph insisted on walking with them till he should meet an omnibus or a cab to take him back
to London. Patience did her best to save him from such labour, protesting that they would want
no such escort. But he would not be gainsayed, and would go with them at least a part of the
way. Of course he did not leave them till they had reached the gate of Popham Villa. But when
they were starting there arose a difficulty as to the order in which they would marshal themselves;--a
difficulty as to which not a word could be spoken, but which was not the less a difficulty.
Clarissa hung back. Ralph had spoken hardly a word to her all the evening. It had better continue
so. She was sure that he could not care for her. But she thought that she would be better contented
that he should walk with Patience than with Mary Bonner. But Mary took the matter into her
own hands, and started off boldly with Patience. Patience hardly approved, but there would
be nothing so bad as seeming to disapprove. Clary's heart was in her mouth as she found her
arm within his. He had contrived that it should be so, and she could not refuse. Her mind was
changed again now, and once more she wished that she could let him know that the crime was
forgiven.

"I am so glad to have a word with you at last," he said. "How do you get on with the new cousin?"

"Very well;--and how have you got on with her?"

"You must ask her that. She is very beautiful,--what I call wonderfully beautiful."

"Indeed she is," said Clary, withdrawing almost altogether the weight of her hand from his arm.

"And clever, too,--very clever; but--"

"But what?" asked Clary, and the softest, gentlest half-ounce of pressure was restored.

"Well;--nothing. I like her uncommonly;--but is she not quite,--quite,--quite--"

"She is quite everything that she ought to be, Ralph."

"I'm sure of that;--an angel, you know, and all the rest of it. But angels are cold, you know.
I don't know that I ever admired a girl so much in my life." The pressure was again lessened,--all
but annihilated. "But, somehow, I should never dream of falling in love with your cousin."

"Perhaps you may do so without dreaming," said Clary, as unconsciously she gave back the weight
to her hand.

"No;--I know very well the sort of girl that makes me spoony." This was not very encouraging
to poor Clary, but still she presumed that he meant to imply that she herself was a girl of
the sort that so acted upon him. And the conversation went on in this way throughout the walk.
There was not much encouragement to her, and certainly she did not say a word to him that could
make him feel that she wanted encouragement. But still he had been with her, and she had been
happy; and when they parted at the gate, and he again pressed her hand, she thought that things
had gone well. "He must know that I have forgiven him now!" she said to herself.

CHAPTER XIII.

MR. NEEFIT IS DISTURBED.

On the morning following Mrs. Brownlow's little tea-party Ralph Newton was bound by appointment
to call upon Sir Thomas. But before he started on that duty a certain friend of his called
upon him. This friend was Mr. Neefit. But before the necessary account of Mr. Neefit's mission
is given, the reader must be made acquainted with a few circumstances as they had occurred
at Hendon.

It will be remembered perhaps that on the Sunday evening the two rivals left the cottage at
the same moment, one taking the road to the right, and the other that to the left,--so that
bloodshed, for that occasion at least, was prevented. "Neefit," said his wife to him when they
were alone together, "you'll be getting yourself into trouble." "You be blowed," said Neefit.
He was very angry with his wife, and was considering what steps he would take to maintain his
proper marital and parental authority. He was not going to give way to the weaker vessel in
a matter of such paramount importance, as to be made a fool of in his own family. He was quite
sure of this, while the strength of the port wine still stood to him; and though he was somewhat
more troubled in spirit when his wife began to bully him on the next morning, he still had
valour enough to say that Ontario Moggs also might be--blowed.

On the Monday, when he returned home and asked for Polly, he found that Polly was out walking.
Mrs. Neefit did not at once tell him that Moggs was walking with her, but such was the fact.
Just at five o'clock Moggs had presented himself at the cottage,--knowing very well, sly dog
that he was, the breeches-maker's hour of return, which took place always precisely at four
minutes past six,--and boldly demanded an interview with Polly. "I should like to hear what
she's got to say to me," said he, looking boldly, almost savagely, into Mrs. Neefit's face.
According to that matron's ideas this was the proper way in which maidens should be wooed and
won; and, though Polly had at first declared that she had nothing at all to say to Mr. Moggs,
she allowed herself at last to be led forth. Till they had passed the railway station on the
road leading away from London, Ontario said not a word of his purpose. Polly, feeling that
silence was awkward, and finding that she was being hurried along at a tremendous pace, spoke
of the weather and of the heat, and expostulated. "It is hot, very hot," said Ontario, taking
off his hat and wiping his brow,--"but there are moments in a man's life when he can't go slow."

"Then there are moments in his life when he must go on by himself," said Polly. But her pluck
was too good for her to desert him at such a moment, and, although he hardly moderated his
pace till he had passed the railway station, she kept by his side. As things had gone so far
it might be quite as well now that she should hear what he had to say. A dim, hazy idea had
crossed the mind of Moggs that it would be as well that he should get out into the country
before he began his task, and that the line of the railway which passed beneath the road about
a quarter of a mile beyond Mr. Neefit's cottage, might be considered as the boundary which
divided the town from pastoral joys. He waited, therefore, till the bridge was behind them,
till they had passed the station, which was close to the bridge;--and then he began. "Polly,"
said he, "you know what brings me here."

Polly did know very well, but she was not bound to confess such knowledge. "You've brought
me here, Mr. Moggs, and that's all I know," she said.

"Yes;--I've brought you here. Polly, what took place last night made me very unhappy,--very
unhappy indeed."

"I can't help that, Mr. Moggs."

"Not that I mean to blame you."

"Blame me! I should think not. Blame me, indeed! Why are you to blame anybody because father
chooses to ask whom he pleases to dinner? A pretty thing indeed, if father isn't to have whom
he likes in his own house."

"Polly, you know what I mean."

"I know you made a great goose of yourself last night, and I didn't feel a bit obliged to you."

"No, I didn't. I wasn't a goose at all. I don't say but what I'm as big a fool as most men.
I don't mean to stick up for myself. I know well enough that I am foolish often. But I wasn't
foolish last night. What was he there for?"

"What business have you to ask, Mr. Moggs?"

"All the business in life. Love;--real love. That's why I have business. That young man, who
is, I suppose, what you call a swell."

"Don't put words into my mouth, Mr. Moggs. I don't call him anything of the kind."

"He's a gentleman."

"Yes;--he is a gentleman,--I suppose."

"And I'm a tradesman,--a bootmaker."

"So is father a tradesman, and if you mean to tell me that I turn up my nose at people the
same as father is, you may just go back to London and think what you like about me. I won't
put up with it from you or anybody. A tradesman to me is as good as anybody,--if he is as good.
There."

"Oh, Polly, you do look so beautiful!"

"Bother!"

"When you say that, and speak in that way, I think you as good as you are beautiful."

"Remember,--I don't say a word against what you call--gentlemen. I take 'em just as they come.
Mr. Newton is a very nice young man."

"Are you going to take him, Polly?"

"How can I take him when he has never asked me? You are not my father, Mr. Moggs, not yet my
uncle. What right have you to question me? If I was going to take him, I shouldn't want your
leave."

"Polly, you ought to be honest."

"I am honest."

"Will you hear me, Polly?"

"No, I won't."

"You won't! Is that answer to go for always?"

"Yes, it is. You come and tease and say uncivil things, and I don't choose to be bullied. What
right have you to talk to me about Mr. Newton? Did I ever give you any right? Honest indeed!
What right have you to talk to me about being honest?"

"It's all true, dear."

"Very well, then. Hold your tongue, and don't say such things. Honest indeed! If I were to
take the young man to-morrow, that would not make me dishonest."

"It's all true, dear, and I beg your pardon. If I have offended you, I will beg your pardon."

"Never mind about that;--only don't say foolish things."

"Is it foolish, Polly, to say that I love you? And if I love you, can I like to see a young
fellow like Mr. Newton hanging about after you? He doesn't love you. He can't love you,--as
I do. Your father brings him here because he is a gentleman."

"I don't think anything of his being a gentleman."

"But think of me. Of course I was unhappy, wretched,--miserable. I knew why he was there. You
can understand, Polly, that when a man really loves he must be the miserablest or the happiest
of human beings."

"I don't understand anything about it."

"I wish you would let me teach you."

"I don't want to learn, and I doubt whether you'd make a good master. I really must go back
now, Mr. Moggs. I came out because mother said I'd better. I don't know that it could do any
good if we were to walk on to Edgeware." And so saying, Polly turned back.

He walked beside her half the way home in silence, thinking that if he could only choose the
proper words and the proper tone he might yet prevail; but feeling that the proper words and
the proper tone were altogether out of his reach. On those favourite subjects, the ballot,
or the power of strikes, he could always find the proper words and the proper tone when he
rose upon his legs at the Cheshire Cheese;--and yet, much as he loved the ballot, he loved
Polly Neefit infinitely more dearly. When at the Cheshire Cheese he was a man; but now, walking
with the girl of his heart, he felt himself to be a bootmaker, and the smell of the leather
depressed him. It was evident that she would walk the whole way home in silence, if he would
permit it. The railway station was already again in sight, when he stopped her on the pathway,
and made one more attempt. "You believe me, when I say that I love you?"

"I don't know, Mr. Moggs."

"Oh, Polly, you don't know!"

"But it doesn't signify,--not the least. I ain't bound to take a man because he loves me."

"You won't take Mr. Newton;--will you?"

"I don't know. I won't say anything about it. Mr. Newton is nothing to you." Then there was
a pause. "If you think, Mr. Moggs, that you can recommend yourself to a young woman by such
tantrums as there were going on last night, you are very much mistaken. That's not the way
to win me."

"I wish I knew which was the way."

"Mr. Newton never said a word."

"Your father told him to take you out a-walking before my very eyes! Was I to bear that? Think
of it, Polly. You mayn't care for me, and I don't suppose you do; but you may understand what
my feelings were. What would you have thought of me if I'd stayed there, smoking, and borne
it quiet,--and you going about with that young man? I'll tell you what it is, Polly, I couldn't
bear it, and I won't. There;--and now you know what I mean." At this point in his speech he
took off his hat and waved it in the air. "I won't bear it. There are things a man can't bear,--can't
bear,--can't bear. Oh, Polly! if you could only be brought to understand what it is that I feel!"

After all, he didn't do it so very badly. There was just a tear in the corner of Polly's eye,
though Polly was very careful that he shouldn't see it. And Polly did know well enough that
he was in earnest,--that he was, in fact, true. But then he was gawky and ungainly. It was
not that he was a shoemaker. Could he have had his own wits, and danced like the gasfitter,
he might have won her still, against Ralph Newton, with all his blood and white hands. But
poor Ontario was, as regarded externals, so ill a subject for a great passion!

"And where have you been, Polly?" said her father, as soon as she entered the house.

"I have been walking with Ontario Moggs," said Polly boldly.

"What have you been saying to him? I won't have you walk with Ontario Moggs. I and your mother
'll have to fall out if this kind of thing goes on."

"Don't be silly, father."

"What do you mean by that, miss?"

"It is silly. Why shouldn't I walk with him? Haven't I known him all my life, and walked with
him scores of times? Isn't it silly, father? Don't I know that if I told you I loved Ontario
Moggs, you'd let me marry him to-morrow?"

"He'd have to take you in what you stand up in."

"He wouldn't desire anything better. I'll say that for him. He's true and honest. I'd love
him if I could,--only, somehow I don't."

"You've told him you didn't,--once and for all?"

"I don't know about that, father. He'll come again, you may be sure. He's one of that sort
that isn't easily said nay to. If you mean,--have I said yes?--I haven't. I'll never say yes
to any man unless I love him. When I do say it I shall mean it,--whether it's Onty Moggs or
anybody else. I'm not going to be given away, you know, like a birthday present, out of a shop.
There's nobody can give me away, father,--only myself." To all which utterances of a rebellious
spirit the breeches-maker made no answer. He knew that Polly would, at least, be true to him;
and, as she was as yet free, the field was still open to his candidate. He believed thoroughly
that had not his wife interfered, and asked the bootmaker to join that unfortunate dinner party,
his daughter and Ralph Newton would now have been engaged together. And probably it might have
been so. When first it had been whispered to Polly that that handsome and very agreeable young
gentleman, Mr. Ralph Newton, might become a suitor for her hand, she had chucked up her head
and declared to her mother that she didn't intend to take a husband of her father's choosing;
but as she came to know Ralph a little, she did find that he was good-looking and agreeable,--and
her heart did flutter at the idea of becoming the wife of a real, undoubted gentleman. She
meant to have her grand passion, and she must be quite sure that Mr. Newton loved her. But
she didn't see any reason why Mr. Newton shouldn't love her, and, upon the whole, she was inclined
to obey her father rather than to disobey him. And it might still be that he should win her;--for
he had done nothing to disgrace himself in her sight. But there did lurk within her bosom some
dim idea that he should have bestirred himself more thoroughly on that Sunday evening, and
not have allowed himself to be driven out of the field by Ontario Moggs. She wronged him there,
as indeed he had had no alternative, unless he had followed her up to her bedroom.

Mr. Neefit, when he found that no harm had as yet been done, resolved that he would return
to the charge. It has been before observed that he lacked something in delicacy, but what he
did so lack he made up in persistency. He had been unable to impute any blame to Ralph as to
that evening. He felt that he rather owed an apology to his favourite candidate. He would make
the apology, and inform the favourite candidate, at the same time, that the course was still
open to him. With these views he left Conduit Street early on the Wednesday morning, and called
on Ralph at his rooms. "Mr. Newton," he said, hastening at once upon the grand subject, "I
hope you didn't think as I was to blame in having Moggs at our little dinner on Sunday." Ralph
declared that he had never thought of imputing blame to any one. "But it was,--as awk'ard as
awk'ard could be. It was my wife's doing. Of course you can see how it all is. That chap has
been hankering after Polly ever since she was in her teens. But, Lord love you, Captain, he
ain't a chance with her. He was there again o' Monday, but the girl wouldn't have a word to
say to him." Ralph sat silent, and very grave. He was taken now somewhat by surprise, having
felt, up to this moment, that he would at least have the advantage of a further interview with
Sir Thomas, before he need say another word to Mr. Neefit. "What I want you to do, Captain,
is just to pop it, straight off, to my girl. I know she'd take you, because of her way of looking.
Not, mind, that she ever said so. Oh, no. But the way to find out is just to ask the question."

"You see, Mr. Neefit, it wasn't very easy to ask it last Sunday," said Ralph, attempting to laugh.

"Moggs has been at her again," said Neefit. This argument was good. Had Ralph been as anxious
as Moggs, he would have made his opportunity.

"And, to tell you the truth, Mr. Neefit--"

"Well, sir?"

"There is nothing so disagreeable as interfering in families. I admire your daughter amazingly."

"She's a trump, Mr. Newton."

"She is indeed;--and I thoroughly appreciate the great generosity of your offer."

"I'll be as good as my word, Mr. Newton. The money shall be all there,--down on the nail."

"But, you see, your wife is against me."

"Blow my wife. You don't think Polly 'd do what her mother tells her? Who's got the money-bag?
That's the question. You go down and pop it straight. You ain't afraid of an old woman, I suppose;--nor
yet of a young un. Don't mind waiting for more dinners, or anything of that kind. They likes
a man to be hot about it;--that's what they likes. You're sure to find her any time before
dinner;--that's at one, you know. May be she mayn't be figged out fine, but you won't mind
that. I'll go bail you'll find the flesh and blood all right. Just you make your way in, and
say what you've got to say. I'll make it straight with the old woman afterwards."

Ralph Newton had hitherto rather prided himself on his happy management of young ladies. He
was not ordinarily much afflicted by shyness, and conceived himself able to declare a passion,
perhaps whether felt or feigned, as well as another. And now he was being taught how to go
a-wooing by his breeches-maker! He did not altogether like it, and, as at this moment his mind
was rather set against the Hendon matrimonial speculation, he was disposed to resent it. "I
think you're making a little mistake, Mr. Neefit," he said.

"What mistake? I don't know as I'm making any mistake. You'll be making a mistake, and so you'll
find when the plum's gone."

"It's just this, you know. When you suggested this thing to me--"

"Well;--yes; I did suggest it, and I ain't ashamed of it."

"I was awfully grateful. I had met your daughter once or twice, and I told you I admired her
ever so much."

"That's true;--but you didn't admire her a bit more than what she's entitled to."

"I'm sure of that. But then I thought I ought,--just to,--know her a little better, you see.
And then how could I presume to think she'd take me till she knew me a little better?"

"Presume to think! Is that all you know about young women? Pop the question right out, and
give her a buss. That's the way."

Newton paused a moment before he spoke, and looked very grave. "I think you're driving me a
little too fast, Mr. Neefit," he said at last.

"The deuce I am! Driving you too fast. What does that mean?"

"There must be a little management and deliberation in these things. If I were to do as you
propose, I should not recommend myself to your daughter; and I should myself feel that, at
the most important crisis of my life, I was allowing myself to be hurried beyond my judgment."
These words were spoken with a slow solemnity of demeanour, and a tone of voice so serious
that for a moment they perfectly awed the breeches-maker. Ralph was almost successful in reducing
his proposed father-in-law to a state of absolute subjection. Mr. Neefit was all but induced
to forget that he stood there with twenty thousand pounds in his pocket. There came a drop
or two of perspiration on his brow, and his large saucer eyes almost quailed before those of
his debtor. But at last he rallied himself,--though not entirely. He could not quite assume
that self-assertion which he knew that his position would have warranted; but he did keep his
flag up after a fashion. "I dare say you know your own business best, Mr. Newton;--only them's
not my ideas; that's all. I come to you fair and honest, and I repeats the same. Good morning,
Mr. Newton." So he went, and nothing had been settled.

