The sargent looked at my pants kind of hurt like I hadnt ast for a new pair thirty seven times.
After the General had put the whole battery under arrest an rode away to get some raw meat
he sighed like a fello that everybodies agenst. Then he turns to the corperal an says "What
the this an that do you mean by gettin me in Dutch, you big space filler?"

So the corperal stuck me on detail manacurin the streets for a couple of days. About all there
is left for me is to go around an kick a few horses in the stummick after dark.

The funny part about it is that everybody knew there hadnt been no pants ishued since we got
here. Half the fellos in the battery is comin thru in places the General couldnt see because
he was mounted. That dont make no difference. A fellos knees aint got no rights in this mans
army. I wish I was a Lady from Hell an I wouldnt have to bother about pants. Thats tecknickle,
Mable. I dont guess youll get it.

They call this passin the buck. In the army they got it fixed up so that nothin aint ever nobodies
fault. Its always on the next fello down. That works out pretty good unless you happen to be
on the bottom step like me. I dont know why they call it passin the buck. I never saw it pass
him yet.

Your Crismus box came yesterday. It sure was good of you to send it after all I said. At least
a good part of it came considerin one end of the box was gone. There was enuff left to give
me an idear of what had been in it. The only reason that any of it got here was because theyd
set so many things on top of it that some of the stuff got kind of baled an stuck to the insides.

The thing that struck us most was the size of the box. Whoever got that up must have thought
that the folks at home was goin to send us jewelrey for Crismus. I didnt care cause I knew
it wasnt your falt. Joe took it kind of hard tho cause he forgot to send any slips home an
he was kind of countin on me.

I got six letters from you all at once a couple of days ago. You must carry them around in
your pocket a week or two like I do when anybody gives me a bunch to mail. I didnt care about
anything tho when I read that Archie Wainwright had gone an married that little snub nosed
thing across the street. I guess he must have been tipped off that nobodied given him the freedom
of the city. Some reason or other tho I feel madder at him than I did before. I guess theres
got to be a casulty when I get home anyway.

I aint goin to rite any more cause the sargent ast me to help him out this afternoon cleanin
the guns. I dont like to leave him to do it all alone when were so near the finish. Tell the
good news to your father an mother.

     Yours on the home stretch
          Bill

Dere Mable:

Here I am ritin you at the govermints expense for the last time. Were in the same place where
we first rested almost a year ago. It hasnt changed much except theyve gotten in more mud an
tents since then an there aint so many boats to unpack.

Weve turned in our Soizant Canses to some monument factory. Weve said good by to our horses
for ever. The last thing one of them did was to try an kick me as I went past. Thats there
idea of gratitude. Now we got less to do than the doboys cause we havnt even got rifles to
clean. This is the last letter youll ever get from me in France. If I have my say about it
its the last letter youll ever get from me anywhere. I never want to get out of telefone range
agen. Our boat is all ready. This will probably travel over on the same boat with me. I wanted
to rite you from the A.E.F. for the last time. An by the way, Mable, that dont mean Am Expectin
Flowers but Am Extremely Fortunate.

There aint much to say just like there aint much to do. I feel awful funny. I cant exactly
explain it. Of course I want to go home. Thats all Ive wanted to do since November. At the
same time I feel kind of sad like you do when your comin back to work from your summer vacashun.
We been in the old army so long, an weve done the same things an cussed at them so many times,
that you get sort of fond of the whole business just like you do any job that takes an awful
long time an a lot of hard work to finish, but that youve finished. I guess you could get sentimental
about piece work in a factory--after youd quit.

I never thought when I sat here in the mud last May an rote you how Id escaped from the pearls
of the sea, as the poets say, that Id ever sit here agen an rite you that I was comin home.
I never menshuned this of course for fear it would worry you. Now that its all over tho its
all right to talk about it. It wasnt that I was scared cause I guess you know that I was never
scared of nothin. Nerveless. Thats me all over, Mable. But I used to think of how hard youd
take it when you saw it in the papers, an how people would come an look at your house an shake
there heads an walk away. Some of them would pull out a lace hankercheff out of there neck
or sleeve or wherever you carry those things. Theyd touch up there eyes a bit an say "I knew
him well," wether they did or not.

You know, Mable, that once or twice when I get lyin awake at night thinkin about all that stuff
I came pretty near cryin myself it struck me as so sad. The one I liked to think of best tho
was the minister sayin a few butiful words about me Sunday. All the people was turnin around
to look at you. You were cryin quiet like an your mother was tryin to keep the tears from spottin
the red Moroko himnal.

An here I am safe an sound without even a wound stripe. I feel the same way that I did when
I came across on the boat without getting sunk. It aint fair to you somehow or other. I kind
of cheated somehow, tho for the life of me I cant figer how. It makes me into a sort of a third
class crook but Im glad to be one.

Theres been an awful lot of talk in the papers an magazines about how were comin home changed
men. I dont believe your goin to have any trouble recognizin me, Mable. Perhaps Ive gotten
a little stouter. Thats about all. Even the Captin, whose been with me ever since we started,
was sayin to me the other day "Smith, I cant see any difference in you since the first day
you came into the army."

I got thinkin the other night what a lot of good yarns I had to spin when I got home. I was
plannin on how people would probably ask me around to dinner sos I could amuse em with stories
about the war. I happened to menshun it to Angus an he says yes an there was about two milyun
others plannin the same thing. He says the stuff about the folks that stay at home sufferin
the most was never truer than it is just now.

So Ive just sworn off talkin war when I get home. I aint never goin to get like that fello
down in Henrys barber shop that just sits around all day tryin to get somebody to lissen to
the Battle of Gethisburg.

I may have speshul occashuns when I let loose. Like once in a while when were sittin alone
evenins in the little house with the green blinds that aint built yet. Then Ill get out the
helmet that belonged to the red headed Fritz an the looger pistel an the irun crosses. Ill
tell you how the big ones sounded when they went over the dug-out. Ill show you how Fritz says
Kamarad. Ill tell you about bilets an mud an Top sargents an whiz bangs. Perhaps once a year,
say Crismus or something, Ill tell about goin over the top. I got to get that out of my sistem
once in a while.

The rest of the time Im goin to be just plain Mr. Bill Smith, docter or brick layer or lawyer
or street car conductor--anything in fact that hasnt got any horses connected with it.

So good by for a while. The next time you here from me itll be the scrapin of my hobnails on
the front stoop. Then look out. Impulsive. Thats me all over, Mable.

          Bill

THE END