Back of the schoolhouse rose a round hill, upon which, tradition said, had stood in colonial
times a block-house, built by the settlers for defense against the Indians. For the Indians
had the idea that the whites were not settled enough, and used to come nights to settle--them
with a tomahawk. It was called Fort Hill. It was very steep on each side, and the river ran
close by. It was a charming place in summer, where one could find laurel, and checkerberries,
and sassafras roots, and sit in the cool breeze, looking at the mountains across the river,
and listening to the murmur of the Deerfield. The Methodists built a meeting-house there afterwards,
but the hill was so slippery in winter that the aged could not climb it and the wind raged
so fiercely that it blew nearly all the young Methodists away (many of whom were afterwards
heard of in the West), and finally the meeting-house itself came down into the valley, and
grew a steeple, and enjoyed itself ever afterwards. It used to be a notion in New England that
a meeting-house ought to stand as near heaven as possible.

The boys at our school divided themselves into two parties: one was the Early Settlers and
the other the Pequots, the latter the most numerous. The Early Settlers built a snow fort on
the hill, and a strong fortress it was, constructed of snowballs, rolled up to a vast size
(larger than the cyclopean blocks of stone which form the ancient Etruscan walls in Italy),
piled one upon another, and the whole cemented by pouring on water which froze and made the
walls solid. The Pequots helped the whites build it. It had a covered way under the snow, through
which only could it be entered, and it had bastions and towers and openings to fire from, and
a great many other things for which there are no names in military books. And it had a glacis
and a ditch outside.

When it was completed, the Early Settlers, leaving the women in the schoolhouse, a prey to
the Indians, used to retire into it, and await the attack of the Pequots. There was only a
handful of the garrison, while the Indians were many, and also barbarous. It was agreed that
they should be barbarous. And it was in this light that the great question was settled whether
a boy might snowball with balls that he had soaked over night in water and let freeze. They
were as hard as cobble-stones, and if a boy should be hit in the head by one of them, he could
not tell whether he was a Pequot or an Early Settler. It was considered as unfair to use these
ice-balls in open fight, as it is to use poisoned ammunition in real war. But as the whites
were protected by the fort, and the Indians were treacherous by nature, it was decided that
the latter might use the hard missiles.

The Pequots used to come swarming up the hill, with hideous war-whoops, attacking the fort
on all sides with great noise and a shower of balls. The garrison replied with yells of defiance
and well-directed shots, hurling back the invaders when they attempted to scale the walls.
The Settlers had the advantage of position, but they were sometimes overpowered by numbers,
and would often have had to surrender but for the ringing of the school-bell. The Pequots were
in great fear of the school-bell.

I do not remember that the whites ever hauled down their flag and surrendered voluntarily;
but once or twice the fort was carried by storm and the garrison were massacred to a boy, and
thrown out of the fortress, having been first scalped. To take a boy's cap was to scalp him,
and after that he was dead, if he played fair. There were a great many hard hits given and
taken, but always cheerfully, for it was in the cause of our early history. The history of
Greece and Rome was stuff compared to this. And we had many boys in our school who could imitate
the Indian war whoop enough better than they could scan arma, virumque cano.

XII. THE LONELY FARMHOUSE

The winter evenings of the farmer-boy in New England used not to be so gay as to tire him of
the pleasures of life before he became of age. A remote farmhouse, standing a little off the
road, banked up with sawdust and earth to keep the frost out of the cellar, blockaded with
snow, and flying a blue flag of smoke from its chimney, looks like a besieged fort. On cold
and stormy winter nights, to the traveler wearily dragging along in his creaking sleigh, the
light from its windows suggests a house of refuge and the cheer of a blazing fire. But it is
no less a fort, into which the family retire when the New England winter on the hills really
sets in.

The boy is an important part of the garrison. He is not only one of the best means of communicating
with the outer world, but he furnishes half the entertainment and takes two thirds of the scolding
of the family circle. A farm would come to grief without a boy-on it, but it is impossible
to think of a farmhouse without a boy in it.

"That boy" brings life into the house; his tracks are to be seen everywhere; he leaves all
the doors open; he has n't half filled the wood-box; he makes noise enough to wake the dead;
or he is in a brown-study by the fire and cannot be stirred, or he has fastened a grip into
some Crusoe book which cannot easily be shaken off. I suppose that the farmer-boy's evenings
are not now what they used to be; that he has more books, and less to do, and is not half so
good a boy as formerly, when he used to think the almanac was pretty lively reading, and the
comic almanac, if he could get hold of that, was a supreme delight.

Of course he had the evenings to himself, after he had done the "chores" at the barn, brought
in the wood and piled it high in the box, ready to be heaped upon the great open fire. It was
nearly dark when he came from school (with its continuation of snowballing and sliding), and
he always had an agreeable time stumbling and fumbling around in barn and wood-house, in the
waning light.

John used to say that he supposed nobody would do his "chores" if he did not get home till
midnight; and he was never contradicted. Whatever happened to him, and whatever length of days
or sort of weather was produced by the almanac, the cardinal rule was that he should be at
home before dark.

John used to imagine what people did in the dark ages, and wonder sometimes whether he was
n't still in them.

Of course, John had nothing to do all the evening, after his "chores,"--except little things.
While he drew his chair up to the table in order to get the full radiance of the tallow candle
on his slate or his book, the women of the house also sat by the table knitting and sewing.
The head of the house sat in his chair, tipped back against the chimney; the hired man was
in danger of burning his boots in the fire. John might be deep in the excitement of a bear
story, or be hard at writing a "composition" on his greasy slate; but whatever he was doing,
he was the only one who could always be interrupted. It was he who must snuff the candles,
and put on a stick of wood, and toast the cheese, and turn the apples, and crack the nuts.
He knew where the fox-and-geese board was, and he could find the twelve-men-Morris. Considering
that he was expected to go to bed at eight o'clock, one would say that the opportunity for
study was not great, and that his reading was rather interrupted. There seemed to be always
something for him to do, even when all the rest of the family came as near being idle as is
ever possible in a New England household.

No wonder that John was not sleepy at eight o'clock; he had been flying about while the others
had been yawning before the fire. He would like to sit up just to see how much more solemn
and stupid it would become as the night went on; he wanted to tinker his skates, to mend his
sled, to finish that chapter. Why should he go away from that bright blaze, and the company
that sat in its radiance, to the cold and solitude of his chamber? Why did n't the people who
were sleepy go to bed?

How lonesome the old house was; how cold it was, away from that great central fire in the heart
of it; how its timbers creaked as if in the contracting pinch of the frost; what a rattling
there was of windows, what a concerted attack upon the clapboards; how the floors squeaked,
and what gusts from round corners came to snatch the feeble flame of the candle from the boy's
hand. How he shivered, as he paused at the staircase window to look out upon the great fields
of snow, upon the stripped forest, through which he could hear the wind raving in a kind of
fury, and up at the black flying clouds, amid which the young moon was dashing and driven on
like a frail shallop at sea. And his teeth chattered more than ever when he got into the icy
sheets, and drew himself up into a ball in his flannel nightgown, like a fox in his hole.

For a little time he could hear the noises downstairs, and an occasional laugh; he could guess
that now they were having cider, and now apples were going round; and he could feel the wind
tugging at the house, even sometimes shaking the bed. But this did not last long. He soon went
away into a country he always delighted to be in: a calm place where the wind never blew, and
no one dictated the time of going to bed to any one else. I like to think of him sleeping there,
in such rude surroundings, ingenious, innocent, mischievous, with no thought of the buffeting
he is to get from a world that has a good many worse places for a boy than the hearth of an
old farmhouse, and the sweet, though undemonstrative, affection of its family life.

But there were other evenings in the boy's life, that were different from these at home, and
one of them he will never forget. It opened a new world to John, and set him into a great flutter.
It produced a revolution in his mind in regard to neckties; it made him wonder if greased boots
were quite the thing compared with blacked boots; and he wished he had a long looking-glass,
so that he could see, as he walked away from it, what was the effect of round patches on the
portion of his trousers he could not see, except in a mirror; and if patches were quite stylish,
even on everyday trousers. And he began to be very much troubled about the parting of his hair,
and how to find out on which side was the natural part.

The evening to which I refer was that of John's first party. He knew the girls at school, and
he was interested in some of them with a different interest from that he took in the boys.
He never wanted to "take it out" with one of them, for an insult, in a stand-up fight, and
he instinctively softened a boy's natural rudeness when he was with them. He would help a timid
little girl to stand erect and slide; he would draw her on his sled, till his hands were stiff
with cold, without a murmur; he would generously give her red apples into which he longed to
set his own sharp teeth; and he would cut in two his lead-pencil for a girl, when he would
not for a boy. Had he not some of the beautiful auburn tresses of Cynthia Rudd in his skate,
spruce-gum, and wintergreen box at home? And yet the grand sentiment of life was little awakened
in John. He liked best to be with boys, and their rough play suited him better than the amusements
of the shrinking, fluttering, timid, and sensitive little girls. John had not learned then
that a spider-web is stronger than a cable; or that a pretty little girl could turn him round
her finger a great deal easier than a big bully of a boy could make him cry "enough."

