"No sir. I had a black eye. I was beaten over both eyes as far as that is concerned. My arms
were held out by one big man on either side and I was beaten on both sides. As Sheriff McRae
went past me he said 'Give it to him good,' and when I saw what was coming I dropped in order
to save my face, and the man on the left hand side kicked me from the middle of my back clear
down to my heels, and he kept kicking me until the fellow on the right told him to kick me
no more as I was all in. My back and my hip have bothered me ever since."

Black tried to interrupt the witness and also endeavored to have his answer stricken from the
testimony but the judge answered his objection by saying:

"I told you to withdraw the question and you didn't do it."

Vanderveer asked Billings the question:

"Why did you carry a gun on the fifth of November?"

"I took it for my own personal benefit," replied Billings. "I didn't intend to let anybody
beat me up like I was beaten on October 30th in the condition I was in. I was in bad condition
at the time."

Harvey E. Wood, an employe of the Jamison Mill Company, took the stand and told of a visit
made by Jefferson Beard to the bunkhouse of the mill company on the night of November 4th and
stated that at the time there were six automatic shot guns and three pump guns in the place.
These were for the use of James B. Reed, Neal Jamison, Joe Hosh, Roy Hosh, Walter S. Downs,
and a man named McCortell. This witness had acted as a strikebreaker up until the time he was
subpoenaed.

Two of the defendants, Benjamin F. Legg and Jack Leonard, fully verified the story told by
Billings.

Leland Butcher, an I. W. W. member who was on the Verona, told of how he had been shot in the
leg. When asked why he had joined the I. W. W. he answered:

"I joined the I. W. W. to better my own condition and to make the conditions my father was
laboring under for the last 25 years, with barely enough to keep himself and family, a thing
of the past."

Another of the defendants, Ed Roth, who had been seriously wounded on the Verona, gave an unshaken
story of the outrage. Roth testified that he had been shot in the abdomen at the very beginning
of the trouble and because of his wounded condition and the fact that there were wounded men
piled on top of him he had been unable to move until some time after the Verona had left the
dock. This testimony showed the absurdity of McRae's pretended identification of the witness.
Roth was a member of the International Longshoremen's Association and had joined the I. W.
W. on the day before the tragedy.

John Stroka, a lad of 18, victim of the deputies at Beverly Park and a passenger on the Verona,
gave testimony regarding the men wounded on the boat.

The next witness was Ernest P. Marsh, president of the State Federation of Labor, who was called
for the purpose of impeaching the testimony of Mayor Merrill and also to prove that Mrs. Frennette
was a visitor at the Everett Labor Temple on the morning of November 5th, this last being added
confirmation of the fact that Clyde Gibbons had committed perjury on the stand.

To the ordinary mind--and certainly the minds of the prosecution lawyers were not above the
ordinary--the social idealist is an inexplicable mystery. Small wonder then that they could
not understand the causes that impelled the next witness, Abraham Bonnet Wimborne, one of the
defendants, to answer the call for fighters to defend free speech.

Wimborne, the son of a Jewish Rabbi, told from the witness stand how he had first joined the
Socialist Party, afterward coming in contact with the I. W. W., and upon hearing of the cruel
beating given to James Rowan, had decided to leave Portland for Everett to fight for free speech.
Arriving in Seattle on November 4th, he took passage on the steamer Verona the next day.

Prosecutor Black asked the witness what were the preparations made by the men on the boat.

"Don't misunderstand my words, Mr. Black," responded Wimborne, "when I say prepared, I mean
they were armed with the spirit of determination. Determined to uphold the right of free speech
with their feeble strength; that is, I never really believed it would be possible for the outrages
and brutalities to come under the stars and stripes, and I didn't think it was necessary for
anything else."

"Then when these men left they were determined?" inquired Black.

"Yes, determined that they would uphold the spirit of the Constitution; if not, go to jail.
There were men in Everett who would refuse the right of workingmen to come and tell the workers
that they had a way whereby the little children could get sufficient clothing, sufficient food,
and the right of education, and other things which they can only gain--how? By organizing into
industrial unions, sir, that is what I meant. We do not believe in bloodshed. Thuggery is not
our method. What can a handful of workers do against the mighty forces of Maxim guns and the
artillery of the capitalist class?"

"Did you consider yourself a fighting member?" questioned Black.

"If you mean am I a moral fighter? yes; but physically--why, look at me! Do I look like a fighter?"
said the slightly built witness.

"Did you or did you not expect to go to jail when you left Portland?" asked the prosecutor.

"My dear Mr. Black, I didn't know and I didn't care!" responded Wimborne with a shrug of his
shoulders.

Wimborne joined the I. W. W. while in the Everett County Jail.

Michael J. Reilley, another of the defendants, testified as to the firing of the first shot
from the dock and also gave the story of the death of Abraham Rabinowitz. Vanderveer asked
him the question:

"Do you know why you are a defendant?"

"Yes, sir," replied Reilley, "because I didn't talk to them in the city jail in Seattle. I
was never picked out."

Attorney H. D. Cooley was recalled to the stand and was made to admit that he was a member
of the Commercial Club and a citizen deputy on the dock November 5th. He was asked by Vanderveer:

"Did you see any guns on the dock?"

"Yes sir."

"Did you see any guns fired on the dock?"

"Yes sir."

"Did you see any guns fired on the boat?"

"No sir."

"Did you see a gun on the boat?"

"I did not."

"You were in full view of the boat?"

"I was."

Yet the ethics of the legal profession are such that this attorney could justify his actions
in laboring for months in an endeavor to secure, by any and all means, the conviction of the
men on the boat!

Defendant Charles Black testified that McRae dropped his hand to his gun and pulled it just
as one of the deputies fired from a point just behind the sheriff. Black ran down the deck
and into the cabin, passing in front of the windows from which the deputies had sworn that
heavy firing was going on.

Leonard Broman, working partner with Abraham Rabinowitz, then took the stand and told his story.
When asked what were the benefits he received from having joined the I. W. W., the witness replied:

"They raised the wages and shortened the hours. Before I joined the I. W. W. the wages I received
in Ellis, Kansas, was $3.00 for twelve hours and last fall the I. W. W. got $3.50 for nine
hours on the same work."

Ex-deputy Charles Lawry told of various brutalities at the jail and also impeached McRae's
testimony in many other particulars.

Dr. Grant Calhoun, who had attended the more seriously injured men who were taken from the
Verona on its return to Seattle, told of the number and nature of the wounds that had been
inflicted. On eight of the men examined he had found twenty-one serious wounds, counting the
entrance and exit of the same bullet as only one wound. Veitch conducted no cross-examination
of the witness.

Joe Manning, J. H. Beyers, and Harvey Hubler, all three of them defendants, gave their testimony.
Manning told of having been seated in the cabin with Tracy when the firing commenced, after
which he sought cover behind the smokestack and was joined by Tracy a moment later. Beyers
identified Deputy Bridge as having stood just behind McRae with his revolver drawn as tho firing
when the first shot was heard. This witness also corroborated the story of Billings in regard
to demanding that the engineer take the boat away from the dock. Hubler verified the statements
about conditions on the Verona and also told of being taken from his jail cell by force on
an order signed by detective McLaren in an attempt to have him discharge the defense attorneys
and accept an alleged lawyer from Los Angeles.

Harry Parker and C. C. England told of injuries sustained on the Verona, and John Riely stated
there was absolutely no shooting from the cabin windows, that being impossible because the
men on the boat had crowded the entire rail at that side.

Jerry L. Finch, former deputy prosecuting attorney of King County, gave impeaching testimony
against Wm. Kenneth and Charles Tucker. Cooley asked this witness about his interviews with
the different state's witnesses:

"If you talked with all of them, you would probably have something on all of them?"

The judge would not let Finch answer the question, but there is no doubt that Cooley had the
correct idea about the character of the witnesses on his side of the case.

In detailing certain arrests Sheriff McRae had claimed that men taken from the shingleweavers'
picket line were members of the I. W. W. B. Said was one of the men so mentioned. Said took
the witness stand and testified that he was a member of the longshoremen's union and was not
and had not been a member of the I. W. W.

J. G. Brown, president of the International Shingleweavers' Union, testified that the various
men arrested on the picket line in Everett were either members of the shingle weavers' union
or else were longshoremen from Seattle, none of the men named by McRae being members of the
I. W. W. The testimony of Brown was also of such a nature as to be impeaching of the statements
of Mayor Merrill on the witness stand.

Charles Gray, Robert Adams, and Joe Ghilezano, I. W. W. men on the Verona, then testified,
Adams telling of having been shot thru the elbow, and Ghilezano giving the details of the way
in which his kneecap had been shot off and other injuries received.

The murderous intentions of the deputies were further shown by the testimony of Nels Bruseth,
who ran down to the shore to launch a boat and rescue the men in the water. He was stopped
in this errand of mercy by the deputies.

Civil Engineer F. Whitwith, Jr., of the firm of Rutherford and Whitwith, surveyed the dock
and the steamer Verona and made a report in court of his findings. His evidence clearly showed
that there was rifle, shotgun and revolver fire of a wild character from the interior of the
warehouses and from many points on the dock. He stated that there were one hundred and seventy-three
rifle or revolver bullet marks, exclusive of the B-B and buckshot markings which were too numerous
to count, on the Verona, these having come from the dock, the shore, and the Improvement Dock
to the south. There were sixteen marks on the boat that appeared as tho they might have been
from revolver fire proceeding from the boat itself. There were also small triangular shaped
gouges in the planking of the dock, the apex of the triangles indicating that bullets had struck
there and proceeded onward from the Klatawa slip to the open space on the dock where deputies
had been stationed. The physical facts thus introduced were incontrovertible.

Defendant J. D. Houlihan gave positive testimony to the effect that he had not spoken privately
with "Red" Doran in the I. W. W. hall on the morning of November 5th, that he had received
no gun from Doran or anyone else, that he did not have the conversation which Auspos imputed
to him, that he had no talk with Auspos on the return trip. All efforts to confuse this witness
failed of their purpose.

In verification of the testimony about deputies firing on the Verona from the Improvement Company
Dock the defense brought Percy Walker upon the stand. Walker had been cruising around the bay
in a little gasoline launch and saw men armed with long guns, probably rifles or shotguns,
leaning over a breastwork of steel pipes and firing in the direction of the Verona.

Lawrence Manning, Harston Peters, and Ed. J. Shapeero, defendants, told their simple straightforward
stories of the "battle." Peters stated that as he lay under cover and heard the shots coming
from the dock he "wished to Christ that he did have a gun." Shapeero told of the wounds he
had received and of the way the uninjured men cared for the wounded persons on the boat.

Mrs. Joyce Peters testified that she had gone to Everett on the morning of November 5th in
company with Mrs. Lorna Mahler. The reason she did not go on the Verona was because the trip
by water had made Mrs. Mahler ill on previous occasions. She saw Mrs. Frennette in Everett
only when they were on the same interurban car leaving for Seattle after the tragedy.

Albert Doninger, W. B. Montgomery and Japheth Banfield, I. W. W. men who were on the Verona,
all placed the first shot as having come from the dock immediately after the sheriff had cried
out "You can't land here."

N. Inscho, Chief of Police of Wenatchee, testified that during the time the I. W. W. carried
on their successful fight for free speech in his city there were no incendiary fires, no property
destroyed, no assaults or acts of violence committed, and no resistance to arrest.

H. W. Mullinger, lodging house proprietor, John M. Hogan, road construction contractor, Edward
Case, railroad grading contractor, William Kincaid, alfalfa farmer, and John Egan, teamster,
all of North Yakima and vicinity, were called as character witnesses for Tracy, the defendant
having worked with or for them for a number of years.

The defense followed these witnesses with Oscar Carlson, the passenger on the Verona who had
been fairly riddled with bullets. Carlson testified that he was not and never had been a member
of the I. W. W., that he had gone to Everett with his working partner, Nordstrom, as a sort
of an excursion trip, that he had purchased a one way ticket which was taken up by the captain
after the boat had left Seattle, that he intended returning by way of the Interurban, and that
the men on the boat were orderly and well behaved. He told of having gone to the very front
of the boat as it pulled into Everett from which point he heard the first shot, which was fired
from the dock. He fell immediately and while prostrate was struck with bullet after bullet.
He then told of having entered suit against the Vashon Navigation Company for $50,000.00 on
account of injuries received. Robert C. Saunders, of the law firm of Saunders and Nelson, then
testified that he was handling the case for Carlson and had made out the affidavit of complaint
himself and was responsible for the portion that alleged that a lawless mob were on the boat,
Carlson having made no such statement to him at any time.

Charles Ashleigh was recalled to the stand to testify to having telephoned to the Seattle newspapers
on November 4th, requesting them to send reporters to Everett the next day. He was followed
on the stand by John T. Doran, familiarly known as "Red" on account of the color of his hair.
Doran stated that he was the author of the handbill distributed in Everett prior to the attempted
meeting of November 5th. He positively denied having given a gun to Houlihan or anyone else
on November 5th. Upon cross-examination he said that he was in charge of the work of checking
the number of men who went on the Verona to Everett, and had paid the transportation of the
men in a lump sum.

As the next to the last witness on its side of the long-drawn out case the defense placed on
the stand the defendant, Thomas H. Tracy. The witness told of having been one of a working
class family, too large to be properly cared for and having to leave home and make his own
way in the world before he was eleven years old. From that time on he had followed farming,
teaming and construction work in all parts of the west, his bronzed appearance above the prison
pallor giving evidence of his outdoor life.

Tracy told of having been secretary of the I. W. W. in Everett for a short time, that being
the only official position he had ever held in the organization. He explained his position
on the boat at the time it docked, stating that the first shot apparently came from the dock
and struck close to where he was sitting. Immediately the boat listed and threw him away from
the window, after which he sought a place of safety behind the smokestack. He denied having
been in any way a party to a conspiracy to commit an act of violence, or to kill anyone.

"You are charged here, Mr. Tracy," said Vanderveer, "with having aided and abetted an unknown
man in killing Jefferson Beard. Are you guilty or not guilty?"

"I am not guilty," replied Tracy without a trace of emotion.

The cross-questioning of the defendant in this momentous case was conducted by citizen-deputy
Cooley. His questions to the man whom he and his fellow conspirators on the dock had not succeeded
in murdering were of the most trivial nature, clearly proving that arch-sleuth McLaren had
been unable to discover or to manufacture anything that would make Tracy's record other than
that of a plain, unassuming, migratory worker.

"Where did you vote last?" asked Cooley.

"I never voted," responded Tracy.

"Never voted in your life?" queried Cooley.

"No!" replied the defendant who for the time represented the entire migratory class. "I was
never in one place long enough!"

Then, acting on the class theory that it is an honor to be a "globe-trotter" but a disgrace
to be a "blanket-stiff," the prosecutor brought out Tracy's travels in minute detail. This
examination of the railroad construction worker brought home to the listeners the truth of
the little verse:

     "He built the road;
     With others of his class he built the road;
     Now o'er its weary length he packs his load,
     Chasing a Job, spurred on by Hunger's goad,
     He walks and walks and walks and walks,
     And wonders why in Hell he built the road!"

Then there hobbled into the court room on crutches a stripling with an empty trouser leg, his
face drawn with suffering, and who was able to get into the witness chair only by obviously
painful efforts with the assistance of Vanderveer and Judge Ronald. This was Harry Golden,
whose entire left leg had been amputated after having been shattered by a high-power rifle
bullet fired by a "law and order" deputy.

Golden stated that he had been born in Poland twenty-two years before, and had come to the
United States at the age of sixteen. He was asked:

"Why did you come to this country?"

"I came to the United States," said the witness, "because it is supposed to be a free country."

"We object to that as immaterial!" cried prosecutor Veitch.

The witness described the firing of the first shot and told of his attempts to find a place
of safety. He said he was wounded in the hand as he attempted to climb into a life boat. He
remained on the starboard side of the starboard life boat until the Verona had backed out into
the bay. Then just as he was starting to raise up a rifle bullet struck his leg, taking a course
thru the limb and emerging at the knee.

"That is on your left--?"

"On my left, yes, which I ain't got; I lost it!" said the witness.

"Did I understand you to say you stood up to see something before you were shot?" asked Veitch.

"Why, sure!" replied Golden contemptuously. "I had my two legs then."

Veitch wished to learn the exact location of the witness at the time he was shot and to that
end referred to the model with the remark:

"Look here. Here is the boat as it was at the dock."

"I don't like to look at it!" said Golden heatedly. "I lost my leg on that boat!"

The witness was in evident pain during the examination, having just had a hospital treatment
applied to his raw stump, and was rather irritable as a consequence. He answered several questions
rather sharply and proceeded to explain his answers. At one of these interruptions Judge Ronald
exclaimed to the witness angrily:

"When he asks you a question answer yes or no! If you want to live in this country try and
live like an American!"

"I take an exception to Your Honor's remarks!" said Moore emphatically.

The judge grudgingly allowed an exception to his uncalled for statement.

In concluding his examination Veitch asked the witness:

"What is your name in Polish?"

"I am not Polish; I am a Jew," replied Golden. "Well, what is your family name in Poland?"
asked the prosecutor.

"Goldenhaul, or something like that. Now I call myself Golden. When we come to this country--."

"Never mind," interposed Veitch hurriedly.

"When we come to this country for good luck we always change the name, you know," finished
Golden, and added bitterly, "I sure did have good luck!"

This ended the case in chief for the defense, the marshalling of such a mass of testimony from
a host of disinterested witnesses, men, women and children, putting it on an entirely different
footing from the prejudiced testimony brought forward by the prosecution.

In rebuttal of testimony produced by the defense the prosecution introduced a series of witnesses.
As in their case in chief every one of the parties who testified were in some way concerned
in the case as deputies, jailers, police officers, dance hall habitues, detectives, and the
like. The witnesses were W. P. Bell, Dr. F. R. Hedges, E. E. Murphy, Charles Hall, Rudolph
Weidaur, W. J. Britt, Percy Ames, Harry Blackburn, Reuben Westover, Harry Groger, W. M. Maloney,
Albert Burke, W. R. Conner, A. E. Andrews, David D. Young, Howard Hathaway, George Leonard
Mickel, Paul Hill, E. C. Mony, B. H. Bryan, all of whom were deputies, D. C. Pearson, W. H.
Bridge, and "Honest" John Hogan, all three jailers and deputies, Robert C. Hickey, city jailer,
David Daniels and Adolph Miller, police officers, Charles Manning and J. T. Rogers, personal
friends of McRae, Oscar Moline, dance hall musician, Albert McKay, of the Ocean Food Products
Company located on the Everett Improvement Dock, T. J. McKinnon, employe of McKay, R. B. Williams,
contractor, John Flynn, agent Everett Improvement Dock, W. W. Blain and F. S. Ruble, secretary
and bookkeeper respectively of the Commercial Club and also deputies, A. E. Ballew, Great Northern
depot agent, H. G. Keith, Great Northern detective, Charles Auspos, who was shown to be in
receipt of favors as state's witness, and George Reese, Pinkerton informer and "stool pigeon."

One deputy, H. S. Groger, stated on cross-examination that he continuously fired at a man on
the boat who appeared to be trying to untie the spring line. Outside of this evidence of a
desire for wholesale slaughter nothing developed of sufficient importance to warrant the production
of sur-rebuttal witnesses, except in the testimony of Auspos and Reese.

Auspos testified that defendant Billings in the presence of John Rawlings had stated in the
Everett County jail that he had a gun that made a noise like a cannon. This was intended to
controvert the testimony of Billings.

Reese related a conversation that Tracy was alleged to have carried on in his presence on the
Verona as it was bound for Everett. He stated that a launch was seen approaching and someone
remarked that it was probably coming to head them off, to which Tracy replied "Let them come;
they will find we are ready for them, and we will give them something they are not looking
for." This was intended as impeachment of Tracy.

Cross-examination of this informer brought out the fact that he was a Pinkerton agent at the
time he was holding the office of delegate to the Central Labor Council of the American Federation
of Labor. Reese stated that he was employed on the waterfront during the longshoremen's strike
with instructions to "look for everybody who was pulling the rough stuff, such as threatening
to burn or attempting to burn warehouses, and shooting up non-union workers, and beating them
up and so forth." He had been in the employ of the Pinkerton Agency for six weeks this last
time before he was ordered to go down and join the I. W. W. He stated in answer to a question
by Vanderveer:

"I was instructed to go down there and find out who these fellows were that was handling this
phosphorus and pulling off this sabotage and the only way I could find out was to get a card
and get in and get acquainted with them."

Attorney Moore in the absence of the jury offered to prove that Reese had practically manufactured
this job for himself by promoting the very things he was supposed to discover. Moore stated
some of the things he would prove if permitted by the court:

"That on or about August 1st Reese went to one J. M. Wilson, an official of the longshoremen's
union, and endeavored to get $10.00 with which to buy dynamite to blow up a certain city dock;
that on September 20th the witness gave Percy May, a member of the longshoremen's union, a
bottle of phosphorus with instructions to start a fire at Pier 5; that in the month of July
the witness opposed a settlement of the longshoremen's strike and when members of the union
argued that they could remain out no longer as they had no money, Reese clapped his pockets
and said, 'you fellows wouldn't be starving if you had the nerve that I have got. Why don't
you go out and get it, take it off the scabs the way I do;' that in September Feinberg had
to make Reese leave the speaker's stand in Everett because he was talking on matters harmful
to industrial union propaganda; that on November 4th the witness went to the place where Feinberg
was employed and left a suit of clothes to be pressed, saying to Feinberg, after he had ascertained
that Feinberg was thinking of going to Everett on the following day, "mark the bill 'paid'
so I will have a receipt if you don't come back;" that on August 16th, the day before the big
dock fire in Seattle, Reese went to the down-town office of the same dye works in which Walker
C. Smith was manager and in charge of the purchase of chemicals and tried to get Smith to purchase
for him some carbon disulphide to be used in connection with phosphorus; that in the month
of November in the Labor Temple, in the presence of Sam Sadler, Reese had said to Albert Brilliant
that if the longshoremen had any guts they would go out with guns and clean up the scabs on
the waterfront; and that Reese tried to get other men to co-operate with him in a scheme to
capture a Government boat lying in the Sound during the progress of the longshoremen's strike."

The court refused to allow the defense to go into these matters so the only showing of the
true character of Reese was confined to examination as to the perjury he had committed in his
initial sworn statement to the defense.

The sur-rebuttal of the defense occupied but a few minutes. It was admitted that Mr. Garver,
the court reporter, would swear that Reese had made an initial statement to the defense counsel
and that the same had been taken down stenographically and sworn to. Charles Tennant, captain
of the detective force of the Seattle police department, testified to having telephoned to
the sheriff's office in Everett on November 5th to give the information that a boatload of
I. W. W. men had left for Everett. He did not describe the body of men in any way and had not
said that they were armed. This was for the purpose of showing that somewhere between the time
that Jefferson Beard received the message and the time it was transmitted to the deputies some
one had inserted the statement that the men on the boat were heavily armed. John Rawlings,
defendant, testified that no such conversation as that related by Auspos had occurred in the
presence of defendant Billings. Thomas H. Tracy denied making the threats ascribed to him by
Reese, and this closed the hearing of evidence in the case.

Outside the courtroom on the day the last of the evidence was introduced there was in progress
one of the largest demonstrations of Labor ever held in the Pacific Northwest. The date was
May first, and International Labor Day was celebrated by the united radicals of the entire
city and surrounding district. Meeting at the I. W. W. hall at 10:30 in the morning, thousands
of men and women fell into a marching line of fours, a committee pinning a red rose or carnation
on each marcher. Fifteen solid blocks of these marchers, headed by Wagner's Band, then wended
their way thru the streets to Mount Pleasant Cemetery and grouped themselves around the graves
of Baran, Gerlot and Looney--Labor's martyred dead.

There, upon the hillside, in accordance with his final wishes, the ashes of Joe Hill were scattered
to the breeze, and with them were cast upon the air and on the graves beneath, the ashes of
Jessie Lloyd and Patrick Brennan, two loyal fighters in the class struggle who had died during
the year just passed.

A fitting song service, with a few simple words by speakers in English, Russian, Swedish, Hungarian
and Italian, in commemoration of those who had passed away, completed the tribute to the dead.

Nor were the living forgotten! The great crowd drifted from the graveside, but hundreds of
them reassembled almost automatically and marched to the King County jail. Standing there,
just outside of the very heart of the great city, the crowd, led by the I. W. W. choir, sang
song after song from the revolutionary hymnal--the little red song book, each song being answered
by one from the free speech prisoners confined in the jail. The service lasted until late in
the day and, to complete the one labor day that is as broad as the world itself, a meeting
was held in one of the largest halls of the city. At this meeting the final collection for
the Everett Prisoners' Defense was taken and at the request of the imprisoned men one half
of the proceeds was sent to aid in the liberation of Tom Mooney and his fellow victims of the
Merchants' and Manufacturers' Association in San Francisco.

There remained but the reading of the instructions of the court and the addresses by the counsel
for either side to complete this epoch making case and place it in the hands of the jury for
their final verdict.

CHAPTER VIII.

PLEADINGS AND THE VERDICT

The instructions of the court, carefully prepared by Judge J. T. Ronald, required sixty-five
minutes in the reading. These instructions were divided into twenty-three sections, each section
representing a different phase of the case. Herewith is presented the first section in its
entirety and a summary of the remaining portion:

"Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury:

"My responsibility is to decide all questions of law in this case; yours to decide one question
of fact. With these instructions my responsibility practically ends, your commences. You have
taken a solemn oath that 'you will well and truly try and true delivery make between the State
of Washington and the prisoner at the bar, whom you have in charge, according to the evidence.'

"There is no escape from the responsibility which has come to you, save in the faithful effort
to render a true verdict. Any verdict other than one based upon pure conscience will be an
injustice. An honest juror yields to no friendship, nor bears any enmity. He is moved by no
sympathy, nor influenced by any prejudice. He seeks the approval of no one, nor fears the condemnation
of anyone--save that one unerring, silent monitor, his own conscience. Disregard this whispering
voice in yourself and you may fool the public, you may fool the defendant, you may, hereafter,
with some effort, even close your own soul to her whispering reproaches and enjoy the ill-earned
plaudits of the selfish or biased friend or interest whom you sought to please, but be assured
you will not change the truth, you will not deceive justice which, at some time, and in some
way, will collect from you the penalty which is always sooner or later exacted from those who
betray the truth.

"So let me urge that in deciding the issue of facts which is now your responsibility you be
guided by these instructions which you have sworn to follow, and by their conscientious application
to the evidence in this case.

"Do not permit yourselves to be swayed by sympathy, influenced by prejudice, or moved in the
least by a consideration of what might or might not meet the approval or the condemnation of
any person or class of persons, or of interest whatever. To do so will be an act alike dishonest,
violative of your oath, substituting for a fair and impartial trial an unfair and a partial
one. This is an epoch in your lives to which you will ever look back. Be sure that when you
do you may face the smiling approval of your conscience rather than its stinging reproach.

"The guilt or innocence of this defendant is a single question of fact to be determined by
the evidence alone. If this evidence shows defendant to be guilty, then no sympathy, no desire
for approval, no fear of condemnation, can make him innocent; if the evidence fails to show
him guilty, then no prejudice, no desire for approval, no fear of condemnation, can make him
guilty. The issue is a momentous one, not only to the defendant, who, if innocent, deserves
the deepest sympathy, for the accusation made against him is a serious one; but likewise to
the public and to society at large, and the tranquility and security of our different communities.

"A false verdict against the defendant conflicts with the purpose and the laws of the State
as effectively as a false verdict in his favor. The State has no higher duty or interest than
to preserve all its citizens from suffering under unfounded accusations. If, on the other hand,
the guilt of the defendant has been shown, a false verdict of acquittal would not only be a
breach of your oaths, but it would inflict a grievous wrong upon the State. If a true verdict
calls for conviction, the misfortune to the defendant is not in the verdict, nor in the penalty,
but in the fact it was his conduct which makes the verdict true. You alone of all the world,
and who now possess all the facts, are therefore responsible for the verdict in this case.
The law is not concerned about conviction merely--but it is concerned, deeply concerned, that
juries shall conscientiously and fearlessly declare the truth. Whether it be conviction, or
whether it be acquittal, a true verdict is justice--a false is injustice."

Judge Ronald followed this lecture on civic righteousness and personal duty with more specific
instructions to the jury, of which the following are excerpts.

"In this case you must answer the question--Is this defendant guilty or innocent? * * * Keep
constantly in mind this issue and do not go astray to discuss any other of the many issues
that may be suggested by or may lay hidden among the great mass of evidence in this case. Whether
the Industrial Workers of the World shall or shall not speak at a certain place in the City
of Everett is not an issue here. * * * Whether the open or the closed shop shall prevail is
not a subject for your consideration.

"Every defendant in a criminal case is presumed to be innocent. * * * You must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt of the facts necessary to show guilt before you can convict. * *
* You should give the phrase 'proof beyond a reasonable doubt' its full meaning and weight
as explained and defined to you in these instructions. On the other hand, you should not magnify
nor exaggerate its force and fail to return a verdict of guilty simply because the evidence
does not satisfy you of guilt to an absolute certainty. No crime can be proved to an absolute
certainty.

"It does not follow because every one of the facts which are disputed between the parties may
not be established beyond a reasonable doubt, that there cannot be a conviction. At the same
time you will bear carefully in mind that all facts which are necessary to establish the conclusion
of guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

"There are two facts necessary to convict this defendant:

(1) That some person on the boat unlawfully killed Jefferson Beard.

(2) That this defendant aided, incited or encouraged such shooting.

"If you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of these two facts, then you must convict,
no matter what may be your belief concerning any other question in dispute in this case; if
you have a reasonable doubt as to either of these two facts, then you must acquit."

The instructions then went into detail as to the rights of the workers to organize, to bargain
in regard to compensation, hours of labor and conditions of work generally, to go on strike,
to persuade or entice their fellow workers by peaceful means from taking the positions which
they have left, to assemble at public places where such meetings are not prohibited by law
and ordinance, and "no person, either private citizen or public official, has any right to
deny, abridge or in any manner interfere with the full and free enjoyment of those privileges
and any person who attempts to do so is himself guilty of an unlawful act."

After reciting such acts attributed to the workers in this case as were in violation of law,
the instructions went on to state that "a sheriff has no authority to arrest any person without
a warrant except upon probable cause for believing such person has violated a law of the state;
nor has he authority after making such arrest to hold his prisoner in custody for a longer
time than is reasonably necessary to cause proper complaint to be filed, and an opportunity
given for bail. * * * A sheriff has no right or authority to interfere with or prevent any
person from violating a city ordinance, nor has he the right or authority to arrest for violations
of city ordinances" unless "the act threatened, or the act done, in violation of such ordinance
be at the same time violation of a state law."

The instructions then outlined the scope of criminal conspiracy, stating that it was unnecessary
for one conspirator to know all of the other conspirators but that common design is the essence
of the charge of conspiracy. The acts of one conspirator become the acts of any and all conspirators.
In the eyes of the law the sheriff and the deputies also constituted in this case but one personality,
the sheriff being bound by the acts of his deputies and the deputies being authorized by the
powers of the sheriff. Also the ordinance dated September 21st, 1916, was held to be a valid one.

"Now whether any of the Industrial Workers of the World have been, prior to November 5, 1916,
guilty of encouraging disrespect for law, or of unlawful assemblage, or of riot, is not the
question on trial here. They could all be guilty of all the acts or offenses heretofore mentioned,
and still this defendant be innocent of this particular crime charged on November 5th, or they
could all be innocent of all the acts mentioned, and defendant still be guilty of the main
charge here.

"Again, whether the sheriff or any of his assistants have been guilty of any of the acts charged
against them is not on trial here. They could all be guilty of all the acts charged and still
be the victims of unjustifiable shooting from that boat, or they could all be innocent of any
offense, and still be the aggressors and cause of that shooting on the dock wherein Jefferson
Beard lost his life.

"One of the questions in this case is the question--Which side was the aggressor on that occasion?

"In determining who was the aggressor it is your duty to consider all the facts and circumstances
surrounding the situation, the relations of the parties to each other, their intentions toward
each other, and all the things they did. You will also consider the past conduct of all the
parties, any acts of violence or other assaults that may have been committed, and any threats
that may have been made, and the character as known and understood by each other.

"Therefore, simplify your deliberations and determine first the question: Did somebody on the
boat unlawfully kill Jefferson Beard? If somebody on the boat did not kill Beard, then of course
Tracy could not be guilty of aiding John Doe to do something which John Doe did not do. But
if the State has satisfied you beyond a reasonable doubt that Beard was killed by a shot fired
by somebody on the boat, then such killing is either unlawful, in which case John Doe would
be guilty of one of three degrees of unlawful or felonious homicide, viz., murder in the first
degree, murder in the second degree, or manslaughter; or it is justifiable in which case John
Doe would not be guilty. Hence you will render one of four verdicts in this case--

1. Guilty of murder in the first degree, or

2. Guilty of murder in the second degree, or

3. Guilty of manslaughter, or

4. Not guilty.

"It is very desirable that you reach a verdict in this case. The law requires that your conclusion
shall be unanimous. It is not required that any one of you should surrender his individual
freedom of judgement, but it is well that each of you should have in mind that your true verdict
cannot ordinarily be reached except by mutual consideration and discussion of all the different
views that may suggest themselves to any of your number. The jury room is no place for pride
of opinion. A verdict which is the result of real harmony, or that growing out of open-minded
discussion between jurors, and a willingness to be convinced, with a proper regard for the
opinions of others, and with a reasonable distrust of individual views not shared by their
fellows, is a fair yielding of one reason to a stronger one; such, having in mind the great
desirability of unanimity, is not open to criticism. The law contemplates that jurors shall,
by their discussions, harmonize their views if possible, but not that they shall compromise
and yield for the mere purpose of agreement. One should not surrender his conscientious convictions.

"And now, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I commit the case to your hands. Listen to the
arguments. Regardless of what may be counsel's recollection of testimony, you must take and
follow your own recollection. You are not required to adopt any view which counsel may suggest
in argument, but you should give close attention to all they say. Take up your task fearlessly,
with but one single aim--to discharge the obligations of your oaths. You have no class to satisfy--simply
the dictates of your own conscience."

