He stood silent before her, looking away from her, thinking over it all. He certainly had believed
himself to be violently in love with Lady Laura, and yet when he had just now entered her drawing-room,
he had almost forgotten that there had been such a passage in his life. And he had believed
that she had forgotten it,--even though she had counselled him not to come to Loughlinter within
the last nine months! He had been a boy then, and had not known himself;--but now he was a
man, and was proud of the intensity of his love. There came upon him some passing throb of
pain from his shoulder, reminding him of the duel, and he was proud also of that. He had been
willing to risk everything,--life, prospects, and position,--sooner than abandon the slight
hope which was his of possessing Violet Effingham. And now he was told that this wound in his
heart would soon be cured, and was told so by a woman to whom he had once sung a song of another
passion. It is very hard to answer a woman in such circumstances, because her womanhood gives
her so strong a ground of vantage! Lady Laura might venture to throw in his teeth the fickleness
of his heart, but he could not in reply tell her that to change a love was better than to marry
without love,--that to be capable of such a change showed no such inferiority of nature as
did the capacity for such a marriage. She could hit him with her argument; but he could only
remember his, and think how violent might be the blow he could inflict,--if it were not that
she were a woman, and therefore guarded. "You will not help me then?" he said, when they had
both been silent for a while.

"Help you? How should I help you?"

"I wanted no other help than this,--that I might have had an opportunity of meeting Violet
here, and of getting from her some answer."

"Has the question then never been asked already?" said Lady Laura. To this Phineas made no
immediate reply. There was no reason why he should show his whole hand to an adversary. "Why
do you not go to Lady Baldock's house?" continued Lady Laura. "You are admitted there. You
know Lady Baldock. Go and ask her to stand your friend with her niece. See what she will say
to you. As far as I understand these matters, that is the fair, honourable, open way in which
gentlemen are wont to make their overtures."

"I would make mine to none but to herself," said Phineas.

"Then why have you made it to me, sir?" demanded Lady Laura.

"I have come to you as I would to my sister."

"Your sister? Psha! I am not your sister, Mr. Finn. Nor, were I so, should I fail to remember
that I have a dearer brother to whom my faith is pledged. Look here. Within the last three
weeks Oswald has sacrificed everything to his father, because he was determined that Mr. Kennedy
should have the money which he thought was due to my husband. He has enabled my father to do
what he will with Saulsby. Papa will never hurt him;--I know that. Hard as papa is with him,
he will never hurt Oswald's future position. Papa is too proud to do that. Violet has heard
what Oswald has done; and now that he has nothing of his own to offer her for the future but
his bare title, now that he has given papa power to do what he will with the property, I believe
that she would accept him instantly. That is her disposition."

Phineas again paused a moment before he replied. "Let him try," he said.

"He is away,--in Brussels."

"Send to him, and bid him return. I will be patient, Lady Laura. Let him come and try, and
I will bide my time. I confess that I have no right to interfere with him if there be a chance
for him. If there is no chance, my right is as good as that of any other."

There was something in this which made Lady Laura feel that she could not maintain her hostility
against this man on behalf of her brother;--and yet she could not force herself to be other
than hostile to him. Her heart was sore, and it was he that had made it sore. She had lectured
herself, schooling herself with mental sackcloth and ashes, rebuking herself with heaviest
censures from day to day, because she had found herself to be in danger of regarding this man
with a perilous love; and she had been constant in this work of penance till she had been able
to assure herself that the sackcloth and ashes had done their work, and that the danger was
past. "I like him still and love him well," she had said to herself with something almost of
triumph, "but I have ceased to think of him as one who might have been my lover." And yet she
was now sick and sore, almost beside herself with the agony of the wound, because this man
whom she had been able to throw aside from her heart had also been able so to throw her aside.
And she felt herself constrained to rebuke him with what bitterest words she might use. She
had felt it easy to do this at first, on her brother's score. She had accused him of treachery
to his friendship,--both as to Oswald and as to herself. On that she could say cutting words
without subjecting herself to suspicion even from herself. But now this power was taken away
from her, and still she wished to wound him. She desired to taunt him with his old fickleness,
and yet to subject herself to no imputation. "Your right!" she said. "What gives you any right
in the matter?"

"Simply the right of a fair field, and no favour."

"And yet you come to me for favour,--to me, because I am her friend. You cannot win her yourself,
and think I may help you! I do not believe in your love for her. There! If there were no other
reason, and I could help you, I would not, because I think your heart is a sham heart. She
is pretty, and has money--"

"Lady Laura!"

"She is pretty, and has money, and is the fashion. I do not wonder that you should wish to
have her. But, Mr. Finn, I believe that Oswald really loves her;--and that you do not. His
nature is deeper than yours."

He understood it all now as he listened to the tone of her voice, and looked into the lines
of her face. There was written there plainly enough that spretæ injuria formæ of which she
herself was conscious, but only conscious. Even his eyes, blind as he had been, were opened,--and
he knew that he had been a fool.

"I am sorry that I came to you," he said.

"It would have been better that you should not have done so," she replied.

"And yet perhaps it is well that there should be no misunderstanding between us."

"Of course I must tell my brother."

He paused but for a moment, and then he answered her with a sharp voice, "He has been told."

"And who told him?"

"I did. I wrote to him the moment that I knew my own mind. I owed it to him to do so. But my
letter missed him, and he only learned it the other day."

"Have you seen him since?"

"Yes;--I have seen him."

"And what did he say? How did he take it? Did he bear it from you quietly?"

"No, indeed;" and Phineas smiled as he spoke.

"Tell me, Mr. Finn; what happened? What is to be done?"

"Nothing is to be done. Everything has been done. I may as well tell you all. I am sure that
for the sake of me, as well as of your brother, you will keep our secret. He required that
I should either give up my suit, or that I should,--fight him. As I could not comply with the
one request, I found myself bound to comply with the other."

"And there has been a duel?"

"Yes;--there has been a duel. We went over to Belgium, and it was soon settled. He wounded
me here in the arm."

"Suppose you had killed him, Mr. Finn?"

"That, Lady Laura, would have been a misfortune so terrible that I was bound to prevent it."
Then he paused again, regretting what he had said. "You have surprised me, Lady Laura, into
an answer that I should not have made. I may be sure,--may I not,--that my words will not go
beyond yourself?"

"Yes;--you may be sure of that." This she said plaintively, with a tone of voice and demeanour
of body altogether different from that which she lately bore. Neither of them knew what was
taking place between them; but she was, in truth, gradually submitting herself again to this
man's influence. Though she rebuked him at every turn for what he said, for what he had done,
for what he proposed to do, still she could not teach herself to despise him, or even to cease
to love him for any part of it. She knew it all now,--except that word or two which had passed
between Violet and Phineas in the rides of Saulsby Park. But she suspected something even of
that, feeling sure that the only matter on which Phineas would say nothing would be that of
his own success,--if success there had been. "And so you and Oswald have quarrelled, and there
has been a duel. That is why you were away?"

"That is why I was away."

"How wrong of you,--how very wrong! Had he been,--killed, how could you have looked us in the
face again?"

"I could not have looked you in the face again."

"But that is over now. And were you friends afterwards?"

"No;--we did not part as friends. Having gone there to fight with him,--most unwillingly,--I
could not afterwards promise him that I would give up Miss Effingham. You say she will accept
him now. Let him come and try." She had nothing further to say,--no other argument to use.
There was the soreness at her heart still present to her, making her wretched, instigating
her to hurt him if she knew how to do so, in spite of her regard for him. But she felt that
she was weak and powerless. She had shot her arrows at him,--all but one,--and if she used
that, its poisoned point would wound herself far more surely than it would touch him. "The
duel was very silly," he said. "You will not speak of it."

"No; certainly not."

"I am glad at least that I have told you everything."

"I do not know why you should be glad. I cannot help you."

"And you will say nothing to Violet?"

"Everything that I can say in Oswald's favour. I will say nothing of the duel; but beyond that
you have no right to demand my secrecy with her. Yes; you had better go, Mr. Finn, for I am
hardly well. And remember this,--If you can forget this little episode about Miss Effingham,
so will I forget it also; and so will Oswald. I can promise for him." Then she smiled and gave
him her hand, and he went.

She rose from her chair as he left the room, and waited till she heard the sound of the great
door closing behind him before she again sat down. Then, when he was gone,--when she was sure
that he was no longer there with her in the same house,--she laid her head down upon the arm
of the sofa, and burst into a flood of tears. She was no longer angry with Phineas. There was
no further longing in her heart for revenge. She did not now desire to injure him, though she
had done so as long as he was with her. Nay,--she resolved instantly, almost instinctively,
that Lord Brentford must know nothing of all this, lest the political prospects of the young
member for Loughton should be injured. To have rebuked him, to rebuke him again and again,
would be only fair,--would at least be womanly; but she would protect him from all material
injury as far as her power of protection might avail. And why was she weeping now so bitterly?
Of course she asked herself, as she rubbed away the tears with her hands,--Why should she weep?
She was not weak enough to tell herself that she was weeping for any injury that had been done
to Oswald. She got up suddenly from the sofa, and pushed away her hair from her face, and pushed
away the tears from her cheeks, and then clenched her fists as she held them out at full length
from her body, and stood, looking up with her eyes fixed upon the wall. "Ass!" she exclaimed.
"Fool! Idiot! That I should not be able to crush it into nothing and have done with it! Why
should he not have her? After all, he is better than Oswald. Oh,--is that you?" The door of
the room had been opened while she was standing thus, and her husband had entered.

"Yes,--it is I. Is anything wrong?"

"Very much is wrong."

"What is it, Laura?"

"You cannot help me."

"If you are in trouble you should tell me what it is, and leave it to me to try to help you."

"Nonsense!" she said, shaking her head.

"Laura, that is uncourteous,--not to say undutiful also."

"I suppose it was,--both. I beg your pardon, but I could not help it."

"Laura, you should help such words to me."

"There are moments, Robert, when even a married woman must be herself rather than her husband's
wife. It is so, though you cannot understand it."

"I certainly do not understand it."

"You cannot make a woman subject to you as a dog is so. You may have all the outside and as
much of the inside as you can master. With a dog you may be sure of both."

"I suppose this means that you have secrets in which I am not to share."

"I have troubles about my father and my brother which you cannot share. My brother is a ruined
man."

"Who ruined him?"

"I will not talk about it any more. I will not speak to you of him or of papa. I only want
you to understand that there is a subject which must be secret to myself, and on which I may
be allowed to shed tears,--if I am so weak. I will not trouble you on a matter in which I have
not your sympathy." Then she left him, standing in the middle of the room, depressed by what
had occurred,--but not thinking of it as of a trouble which would do more than make him uncomfortable
for that day.

CHAPTER XL

Madame Max Goesler

Day after day, and clause after clause, the bill was fought in committee, and few men fought
with more constancy on the side of the Ministers than did the member for Loughton. Troubled
though he was by his quarrel with Lord Chiltern, by his love for Violet Effingham, by the silence
of his friend Lady Laura,--for since he had told her of the duel she had become silent to him,
never writing to him, and hardly speaking to him when she met him in society,--nevertheless
Phineas was not so troubled but what he could work at his vocation. Now, when he would find
himself upon his legs in the House, he would wonder at the hesitation which had lately troubled
him so sorely. He would sit sometimes and speculate upon that dimness of eye, upon that tendency
of things to go round, upon that obtrusive palpitation of heart, which had afflicted him so
seriously for so long a time. The House now was no more to him than any other chamber, and
the members no more than other men. He guarded himself from orations, speaking always very
shortly,--because he believed that policy and good judgment required that he should be short.
But words were very easy to him, and he would feel as though he could talk for ever. And there
quickly came to him a reputation for practical usefulness. He was a man with strong opinions,
who could yet be submissive. And no man seemed to know how his reputation had come. He had
made one good speech after two or three failures. All who knew him, his whole party, had been
aware of his failure; and his one good speech had been regarded by many as no very wonderful
effort. But he was a man who was pleasant to other men,--not combative, not self-asserting
beyond the point at which self-assertion ceases to be a necessity of manliness. Nature had
been very good to him, making him comely inside and out,--and with this comeliness he had crept
into popularity.

The secret of the duel was, I think, at this time, known to a great many men and women. So
Phineas perceived; but it was not, he thought, known either to Lord Brentford or to Violet
Effingham. And in this he was right. No rumour of it had yet reached the ears of either of
these persons;--and rumour, though she flies so fast and so far, is often slow in reaching
those ears which would be most interested in her tidings. Some dim report of the duel reached
even Mr. Kennedy, and he asked his wife. "Who told you?" said she, sharply.

"Bonteen told me that it was certainly so."

"Mr. Bonteen always knows more than anybody else about everything except his own business."

"Then it is not true?"

Lady Laura paused,--and then she lied. "Of course it is not true. I should be very sorry to
ask either of them, but to me it seems to be the most improbable thing in life." Then Mr. Kennedy
believed that there had been no duel. In his wife's word he put absolute faith, and he thought
that she would certainly know anything that her brother had done. As he was a man given to
but little discourse, he asked no further questions about the duel either in the House or at
the Clubs.

At first, Phineas had been greatly dismayed when men had asked him questions tending to elicit
from him some explanation of the mystery;--but by degrees he became used to it, and as the
tidings which had got abroad did not seem to injure him, and as the questionings were not pushed
very closely, he became indifferent. There came out another article in the People's Banner
in which Lord C----n and Mr. P----s F----n were spoken of as glaring examples of that aristocratic
snobility,--that was the expressive word coined, evidently with great delight, for the occasion,--which
the rotten state of London society in high quarters now produced. Here was a young lord, infamously
notorious, quarrelling with one of his boon-companions, whom he had appointed to a private
seat in the House of Commons, fighting duels, breaking the laws, scandalising the public,--and
all this was done without punishment to the guilty! There were old stories afloat,--so said
the article--of what in a former century had been done by Lord Mohuns and Mr. Bests; but now,
in 186--, &c. &c. &c. And so the article went on. Any reader may fill in without difficulty
the concluding indignation and virtuous appeal for reform in social morals as well as Parliament.
But Phineas had so far progressed that he had almost come to like this kind of thing.

Certainly I think that the duel did him no harm in society. Otherwise he would hardly have
been asked to a semi-political dinner at Lady Glencora Palliser's, even though he might have
been invited to make one of the five hundred guests who were crowded into her saloons and staircases
after the dinner was over. To have been one of the five hundred was nothing; but to be one
of the sixteen was a great deal,--was indeed so much that Phineas, not understanding as yet
the advantage of his own comeliness, was at a loss to conceive why so pleasant an honour was
conferred upon him. There was no man among the eight men at the dinner-party not in Parliament,--and
the only other except Phineas not attached to the Government was Mr. Palliser's great friend,
John Grey, the member for Silverbridge. There were four Cabinet Ministers in the room,--the
Duke, Lord Cantrip, Mr. Gresham, and the owner of the mansion. There was also Barrington Erle
and young Lord Fawn, an Under-Secretary of State. But the wit and grace of the ladies present
lent more of character to the party than even the position of the men. Lady Glencora Palliser
herself was a host. There was no woman then in London better able to talk to a dozen people
on a dozen subjects; and then, moreover, she was still in the flush of her beauty and the bloom
of her youth. Lady Laura was there;--by what means divided from her husband Phineas could not
imagine; but Lady Glencora was good at such divisions. Lady Cantrip had been allowed to come
with her lord;--but, as was well understood, Lord Cantrip was not so manifestly a husband as
was Mr. Kennedy. There are men who cannot guard themselves from the assertion of marital rights
at most inappropriate moments. Now Lord Cantrip lived with his wife most happily; yet you should
pass hours with him and her together, and hardly know that they knew each other. One of the
Duke's daughters was there,--but not the Duchess, who was known to be heavy;--and there was
the beauteous Marchioness of Hartletop. Violet Effingham was in the room also,--giving Phineas
a blow at the heart as he saw her smile. Might it be that he could speak a word to her on this
occasion? Mr. Grey had also brought his wife;--and then there was Madame Max Goesler. Phineas
found that it was his fortune to take down to dinner,--not Violet Effingham, but Madame Max
Goesler. And, when he was placed at dinner, on the other side of him there sat Lady Hartletop,
who addressed the few words which she spoke exclusively to Mr. Palliser. There had been in
former days matters difficult of arrangement between those two; but I think that those old
passages had now been forgotten by them both. Phineas was, therefore, driven to depend exclusively
on Madame Max Goesler for conversation, and he found that he was not called upon to cast his
seed into barren ground.

Up to that moment he had never heard of Madame Max Goesler. Lady Glencora, in introducing them,
had pronounced the lady's name so clearly that he had caught it with accuracy, but he could
not surmise whence she had come, or why she was there. She was a woman probably something over
thirty years of age. She had thick black hair, which she wore in curls,--unlike anybody else
in the world,--in curls which hung down low beneath her face, covering, and perhaps intended
to cover, a certain thinness in her cheeks which would otherwise have taken something from
the charm of her countenance. Her eyes were large, of a dark blue colour, and very bright,--and
she used them in a manner which is as yet hardly common with Englishwomen. She seemed to intend
that you should know that she employed them to conquer you, looking as a knight may have looked
in olden days who entered a chamber with his sword drawn from the scabbard and in his hand.
Her forehead was broad and somewhat low. Her nose was not classically beautiful, being broader
at the nostrils than beauty required, and, moreover, not perfectly straight in its line. Her
lips were thin. Her teeth, which she endeavoured to show as little as possible, were perfect
in form and colour. They who criticised her severely said, however, that they were too large.
Her chin was well formed, and divided by a dimple which gave to her face a softness of grace
which would otherwise have been much missed. But perhaps her great beauty was in the brilliant
clearness of her dark complexion. You might almost fancy that you could see into it so as to
read the different lines beneath the skin. She was somewhat tall, though by no means tall to
a fault, and was so thin as to be almost meagre in her proportions. She always wore her dress
close up to her neck, and never showed the bareness of her arms. Though she was the only woman
so clad now present in the room, this singularity did not specially strike one, because in
other respects her apparel was so rich and quaint as to make inattention to it impossible.
The observer who did not observe very closely would perceive that Madame Max Goesler's dress
was unlike the dress of other women, but seeing that it was unlike in make, unlike in colour,
and unlike in material, the ordinary observer would not see also that it was unlike in form
for any other purpose than that of maintaining its general peculiarity of character. In colour
she was abundant, and yet the fabric of her garment was always black. My pen may not dare to
describe the traceries of yellow and ruby silk which went in and out through the black lace,
across her bosom, and round her neck, and over her shoulders, and along her arms, and down
to the very ground at her feet, robbing the black stuff of all its sombre solemnity, and producing
a brightness in which there was nothing gaudy. She wore no vestige of crinoline, and hardly
anything that could be called a train. And the lace sleeves of her dress, with their bright
traceries of silk, were fitted close to her arms; and round her neck she wore the smallest
possible collar of lace, above which there was a short chain of Roman gold with a ruby pendant.
And she had rubies in her ears, and a ruby brooch, and rubies in the bracelets on her arms.
Such, as regarded the outward woman, was Madame Max Goesler; and Phineas, as he took his place
by her side, thought that fortune for the nonce had done well with him,--only that he should
have liked it so much better could he have been seated next to Violet Effingham!

I have said that in the matter of conversation his morsel of seed was not thrown into barren
ground. I do not know that he can truly be said to have produced even a morsel. The subjects
were all mooted by the lady, and so great was her fertility in discoursing that all conversational
grasses seemed to grow with her spontaneously. "Mr. Finn," she said, "what would I not give
to be a member of the British Parliament at such a moment as this!"

"Why at such a moment as this particularly?"

"Because there is something to be done, which, let me tell you, senator though you are, is
not always the case with you."

"My experience is short, but it sometimes seems to me that there is too much to be done."

"Too much of nothingness, Mr. Finn. Is not that the case? But now there is a real fight in
the lists. The one great drawback to the life of women is that they cannot act in politics."

"And which side would you take?"

"What, here in England?" said Madame Max Goesler,--from which expression, and from one or two
others of a similar nature, Phineas was led into a doubt whether the lady were a countrywoman
of his or not. "Indeed, it is hard to say. Politically I should want to out-Turnbull Mr. Turnbull,
to vote for everything that could be voted for,--ballot, manhood suffrage, womanhood suffrage,
unlimited right of striking, tenant right, education of everybody, annual parliaments, and
the abolition of at least the bench of bishops."

"That is a strong programme," said Phineas.

"It is strong, Mr. Finn, but that's what I should like. I think, however, that I should be
tempted to feel a dastard security in the conviction that I might advocate my views without
any danger of seeing them carried out. For, to tell you the truth, I don't at all want to put
down ladies and gentlemen."

"You think that they would go with the bench of bishops?"

"I don't want anything to go,--that is, as far as real life is concerned. There's that dear
good Bishop of Abingdon is the best friend I have in the world,--and as for the Bishop of Dorchester,
I'd walk from here to there to hear him preach. And I'd sooner hem aprons for them all myself
than that they should want those pretty decorations. But then, Mr. Finn, there is such a difference
between life and theory;--is there not?"

"And it is so comfortable to have theories that one is not bound to carry out," said Phineas.

"Isn't it? Mr. Palliser, do you live up to your political theories?" At this moment Mr. Palliser
was sitting perfectly silent between Lady Hartletop and the Duke's daughter, and he gave a
little spring in his chair as this sudden address was made to him. "Your House of Commons theories,
I mean, Mr. Palliser. Mr. Finn is saying that it is very well to have far advanced ideas,--it
does not matter how far advanced,--because one is never called upon to act upon them practically."

"That is a dangerous doctrine, I think," said Mr. Palliser.

"But pleasant,--so at least Mr. Finn says."

"It is at least very common," said Phineas, not caring to protect himself by a contradiction.

"For myself," said Mr. Palliser gravely, "I think I may say that I always am really anxious
to carry into practice all those doctrines of policy which I advocate in theory."

During this conversation Lady Hartletop sat as though no word of it reached her ears. She did
not understand Madame Max Goesler, and by no means loved her. Mr. Palliser, when he had made
his little speech, turned to the Duke's daughter and asked some question about the conservatories
at Longroyston.

"I have called forth a word of wisdom," said Madame Max Goesler, almost in a whisper.

"Yes," said Phineas, "and taught a Cabinet Minister to believe that I am a most unsound politician.
You may have ruined my prospects for life, Madame Max Goesler."

"Let me hope not. As far as I can understand the way of things in your Government, the aspirants
to office succeed chiefly by making themselves uncommonly unpleasant to those who are in power.
If a man can hit hard enough he is sure to be taken into the elysium of the Treasury bench,--not
that he may hit others, but that he may cease to hit those who are there. I don't think men
are chosen because they are useful."

"You are very severe upon us all."

"Indeed, as far as I can see, one man is as useful as another. But to put aside joking,--they
tell me that you are sure to become a minister."

Phineas felt that he blushed. Could it be that people said of him behind his back that he was
a man likely to rise high in political position? "Your informants are very kind," he replied
awkwardly, "but I do not know who they are. I shall never get up in the way you describe,--that
is, by abusing the men I support."

After that Madame Max Goesler turned round to Mr. Grey, who was sitting on the other side of
her, and Phineas was left for a moment in silence. He tried to say a word to Lady Hartletop,
but Lady Hartletop only bowed her head gracefully in recognition of the truth of the statement
he made. So he applied himself for a while to his dinner.

"What do you think of Miss Effingham?" said Madame Max Goesler, again addressing him suddenly.

"What do I think about her?"

"You know her, I suppose."

"Oh yes, I know her. She is closely connected with the Kennedys, who are friends of mine."

"So I have heard. They tell me that scores of men are raving about her. Are you one of them?"

"Oh yes;--I don't mind being one of sundry scores. There is nothing particular in owning to that."

"But you admire her?"

"Of course I do," said Phineas.

"Ah, I see you are joking. I do amazingly. They say women never do admire women, but I most
sincerely do admire Miss Effingham."

"Is she a friend of yours?"

"Oh no;--I must not dare to say so much as that. I was with her last winter for a week at Matching,
and of course I meet her about at people's houses. She seems to me to be the most independent
girl I ever knew in my life. I do believe that nothing would make her marry a man unless she
loved him and honoured him, and I think it is so very seldom that you can say that of a girl."

"I believe so also," said Phineas. Then he paused a moment before he continued to speak. "I
cannot say that I know Miss Effingham very intimately, but from what I have seen of her, I
should think it very probable that she may not marry at all."

"Very probably," said Madame Max Goesler, who then again turned away to Mr. Grey.

Ten minutes after this, when the moment was just at hand in which the ladies were to retreat,
Madame Max Goesler again addressed Phineas, looking very full into his face as she did so.
"I wonder whether the time will ever come, Mr. Finn, in which you will give me an account of
that day's journey to Blankenberg?"

"To Blankenberg!"

"Yes;--to Blankenberg. I am not asking for it now. But I shall look for it some day." Then
Lady Glencora rose from her seat, and Madame Max Goesler went out with the others.

CHAPTER XLI

Lord Fawn

What had Madame Max Goesler to do with his journey to Blankenberg? thought Phineas, as he sat
for a while in silence between Mr. Palliser and Mr. Grey; and why should she, who was a perfect
stranger to him, have dared to ask him such a question? But as the conversation round the table,
after the ladies had gone, soon drifted into politics and became general, Phineas, for a while,
forgot Madame Max Goesler and the Blankenberg journey, and listened to the eager words of Cabinet
Ministers, now and again uttering a word of his own, and showing that he, too, was as eager
as others. But the session in Mr. Palliser's dining-room was not long, and Phineas soon found
himself making his way amidst a throng of coming guests into the rooms above. His object was
to meet Violet Effingham, but, failing that, he would not be unwilling to say a few more words
to Madame Max Goesler.

He first encountered Lady Laura, to whom he had not spoken as yet, and, finding himself standing
close to her for a while, he asked her after his late neighbour. "Do tell me one thing, Lady
Laura;--who is Madame Max Goesler, and why have I never met her before?"

"That will be two things, Mr. Finn; but I will answer both questions as well as I can. You
have not met her before, because she was in Germany last spring and summer, and in the year
before that you were not about so much as you have been since. Still you must have seen her,
I think. She is the widow of an Austrian banker, and has lived the greater part of her life
at Vienna. She is very rich, and has a small house in Park Lane, where she receives people
so exclusively that it has come to be thought an honour to be invited by Madame Max Goesler.
Her enemies say that her father was a German Jew, living in England, in the employment of the
Viennese bankers, and they say also that she has been married a second time to an Austrian
Count, to whom she allows ever so much a year to stay away from her. But of all this, nobody,
I fancy, knows anything. What they do know is that Madame Max Goesler spends seven or eight
thousand a year, and that she will give no man an opportunity of even asking her to marry him.
People used to be shy of her, but she goes almost everywhere now."

"She has not been at Portman Square?"

"Oh no; but then Lady Glencora is so much more advanced than we are! After all, we are but
humdrum people, as the world goes now."

Then Phineas began to roam about the rooms, striving to find an opportunity of engrossing five
minutes of Miss Effingham's attention. During the time that Lady Laura was giving him the history
of Madame Max Goesler his eyes had wandered round, and he had perceived that Violet was standing
in the further corner of a large lobby on to which the stairs opened,--so situated, indeed,
that she could hardly escape, because of the increasing crowd, but on that very account almost
impossible to be reached. He could see, also, that she was talking to Lord Fawn, an unmarried
peer of something over thirty years of age, with an unrivalled pair of whiskers, a small estate,
and a rising political reputation. Lord Fawn had been talking to Violet through the whole dinner,
and Phineas was beginning to think that he should like to make another journey to Blankenberg,
with the object of meeting his lordship on the sands. When Lady Laura had done speaking, his
eyes were turned through a large open doorway towards the spot on which his idol was standing.
"It is of no use, my friend," she said, touching his arm. "I wish I could make you know that
it is of no use, because then I think you would be happier." To this Phineas made no answer,
but went and roamed about the rooms. Why should it be of no use? Would Violet Effingham marry
any man merely because he was a lord?

Some half-hour after this he had succeeded in making his way up to the place in which Violet
was still standing, with Lord Fawn beside her. "I have been making such a struggle to get to
you," he said.

"And now you are here, you will have to stay, for it is impossible to get out," she answered.
"Lord Fawn has made the attempt half-a-dozen times, but has failed grievously."

"I have been quite contented," said Lord Fawn;--"more than contented."

Phineas felt that he ought to give some special reason to Miss Effingham to account for his
efforts to reach her, but yet he had nothing special to say. Had Lord Fawn not been there,
he would immediately have told her that he was waiting for an answer to the question he had
asked her in Saulsby Park, but he could hardly do this in presence of the noble Under-Secretary
of State. She received him with her pleasant genial smile, looking exactly as she had looked
when he had parted from her on the morning after their ride. She did not show any sign of anger,
or even of indifference at his approach. But still it was almost necessary that he should account
for his search of her. "I have so longed to hear from you how you got on at Loughlinter," he said.

"Yes,--yes; and I will tell you something of it some day, perhaps. Why do you not come to Lady
Baldock's?"

"I did not even know that Lady Baldock was in town."

"You ought to have known. Of course she is in town. Where did you suppose I was living? Lord
Fawn was there yesterday, and can tell you that my aunt is quite blooming."

"Lady Baldock is blooming," said Lord Fawn; "certainly blooming;--that is, if evergreens may
be said to bloom."

"Evergreens do bloom, as well as spring plants, Lord Fawn. You come and see her, Mr. Finn;--only
you must bring a little money with you for the Female Protestant Unmarried Women's Emigration
Society. That is my aunt's present hobby, as Lord Fawn knows to his cost."

"I wish I may never spend half-a-sovereign worse."

"But it is a perilous affair for me, as my aunt wants me to go out as a sort of leading Protestant
unmarried female emigrant pioneer myself."

"You don't mean that," said Lord Fawn, with much anxiety.

"Of course you'll go," said Phineas. "I should, if I were you."

"I am in doubt," said Violet.

"It is such a grand prospect," said he. "Such an opening in life. So much excitement, you know;
and such a useful career."

"As if there were not plenty of opening here for Miss Effingham," said Lord Fawn, "and plenty
of excitement."

"Do you think there is?" said Violet. "You are much more civil than Mr. Finn, I must say."
Then Phineas began to hope that he need not be afraid of Lord Fawn. "What a happy man you were
at dinner!" continued Violet, addressing herself to Phineas.

"I thought Lord Fawn was the happy man."

"You had Madame Max Goesler all to yourself for nearly two hours, and I suppose there was not
a creature in the room who did not envy you. I don't doubt that ever so much interest was made
with Lady Glencora as to taking Madame Max down to dinner. Lord Fawn, I know, intrigued."

"Miss Effingham, really I must--contradict you."

"And Barrington Erle begged for it as a particular favour. The Duke, with a sigh, owned that
it was impossible, because of his cumbrous rank; and Mr. Gresham, when it was offered to him,
declared that he was fatigued with the business of the House, and not up to the occasion. How
much did she say to you; and what did she talk about?"

"The ballot chiefly,--that, and manhood suffrage."

"Ah! she said something more than that, I am sure. Madame Max Goesler never lets any man go
without entrancing him. If you have anything near your heart, Mr. Finn, Madame Max Goesler
touched it, I am sure." Now Phineas had two things near his heart,--political promotion and
Violet Effingham,--and Madame Max Goesler had managed to touch them both. She had asked him
respecting his journey to Blankenberg, and had touched him very nearly in reference to Miss
Effingham. "You know Madame Max Goesler, of course?" said Violet to Lord Fawn.

"Oh yes, I know the lady;--that is, as well as other people do. No one, I take it, knows much
of her; and it seems to me that the world is becoming tired of her. A mystery is good for nothing
if it remains always a mystery."

"And it is good for nothing at all when it is found out," said Violet.

"And therefore it is that Madame Max Goesler is a bore," said Lord Fawn.

"You did not find her a bore?" said Violet. Then Phineas, choosing to oppose Lord Fawn as well
as he could on that matter, as on every other, declared that he had found Madame Max Goesler
most delightful. "And beautiful,--is she not?" said Violet.

"Beautiful!" exclaimed Lord Fawn.

"I think her very beautiful," said Phineas.

"So do I," said Violet. "And she is a dear ally of mine. We were a week together last winter,
and swore an undying friendship. She told me ever so much about Mr. Goesler."

"But she told you nothing of her second husband?" said Lord Fawn.

"Now that you have run into scandal, I shall have done," said Violet.

Half an hour after this, when Phineas was preparing to fight his way out of the house, he was
again close to Madame Max Goesler. He had not found a single moment in which to ask Violet
for an answer to his old question, and was retiring from the field discomfited, but not dispirited.
Lord Fawn, he thought, was not a serious obstacle in his way. Lady Laura had told him that
there was no hope for him; but then Lady Laura's mind on that subject was, he thought, prejudiced.
Violet Effingham certainly knew what were his wishes, and knowing them, smiled on him and was
gracious to him. Would she do so if his pretensions were thoroughly objectionable to her?

"I saw that you were successful this evening," said Madame Max Goesler to him.

"I was not aware of any success."

"I call it great success to be able to make your way where you will through such a crowd as
there is here. You seem to me to be so stout a cavalier that I shall ask you to find my servant,
and bid him get my carriage. Will you mind?" Phineas, of course, declared that he would be
delighted. "He is a German, and not in livery. But if somebody will call out, he will hear.
He is very sharp, and much more attentive than your English footmen. An Englishman hardly ever
makes a good servant."

"Is that a compliment to us Britons?"

"No, certainly not. If a man is a servant, he should be clever enough to be a good one." Phineas
had now given the order for the carriage, and, having returned, was standing with Madame Max
Goesler in the cloak-room. "After all, we are surely the most awkward people in the world,"
she said. "You know Lord Fawn, who was talking to Miss Effingham just now. You should have
heard him trying to pay me a compliment before dinner. It was like a donkey walking a minuet,
and yet they say he is a clever man and can make speeches." Could it be possible that Madame
Max Goesler's ears were so sharp that she had heard the things which Lord Fawn had said of her?

"He is a well-informed man," said Phineas.

"For a lord, you mean," said Madame Max Goesler. "But he is an oaf, is he not? And yet they
say he is to marry that girl."

"I do not think he will," said Phineas, stoutly.

"I hope not, with all my heart; and I hope that somebody else may,--unless somebody else should
change his mind. Thank you; I am so much obliged to you. Mind you come and call on me,--193,
Park Lane. I dare say you know the little cottage." Then he put Madame Max Goesler into her
carriage, and walked away to his club.

CHAPTER XLII

Lady Baldock Does Not Send a Card to Phineas Finn

Lady Baldock's house in Berkeley Square was very stately,--a large house with five front windows
in a row, and a big door, and a huge square hall, and a fat porter in a round-topped chair;--but
it was dingy and dull, and could not have been painted for the last ten years, or furnished
for the last twenty. Nevertheless, Lady Baldock had "evenings," and people went to them,--though
not such a crowd of people as would go to the evenings of Lady Glencora. Now Mr. Phineas Finn
had not been asked to the evenings of Lady Baldock for the present season, and the reason was
after this wise.

"Yes, Mr. Finn," Lady Baldock had said to her daughter, who, early in the spring, was preparing
the cards. "You may send one to Mr. Finn, certainly."

"I don't know that he is very nice," said Augusta Boreham, whose eyes at Saulsby had been sharper
perhaps than her mother's, and who had her suspicions.

But Lady Baldock did not like interference from her daughter. "Mr. Finn, certainly," she continued.
"They tell me that he is a very rising young man, and he sits for Lord Brentford's borough.
Of course he is a Radical, but we cannot help that. All the rising young men are Radicals now.
I thought him very civil at Saulsby."

"But, mamma--"

"Well!"

"Don't you think that he is a little free with Violet?"

"What on earth do you mean, Augusta?"

"Have you not fancied that he is--fond of her?"

"Good gracious, no!"

"I think he is. And I have sometimes fancied that she is fond of him, too."

"I don't believe a word of it, Augusta,--not a word. I should have seen it if it was so. I
am very sharp in seeing such things. They never escape me. Even Violet would not be such a
fool as that. Send him a card, and if he comes I shall soon see." Miss Boreham quite understood
her mother, though she could never master her,--and the card was prepared. Miss Boreham could
never master her mother by her own efforts; but it was, I think, by a little intrigue on her
part that Lady Baldock was mastered, and, indeed, altogether cowed, in reference to our hero,
and that this victory was gained on that very afternoon in time to prevent the sending of the card.

When the mother and daughter were at tea, before dinner, Lord Baldock came into the room, and,
after having been patted and petted and praised by his mother, he took up all the cards out
of a china bowl and ran his eyes over them. "Lord Fawn!" he said, "the greatest ass in all
London! Lady Hartletop! you know she won't come." "I don't see why she shouldn't come," said
Lady Baldock;--"a mere country clergyman's daughter!" "Julius Cæsar Conway;--a great friend
of mine, and therefore he always blackballs my other friends at the club. Lord Chiltern; I
thought you were at daggers drawn with Chiltern." "They say he is going to be reconciled to
his father, Gustavus, and I do it for Lord Brentford's sake. And he won't come, so it does
not signify. And I do believe that Violet has really refused him." "You are quite right about
his not coming," said Lord Baldock, continuing to read the cards; "Chiltern certainly won't
come. Count Sparrowsky;--I wonder what you know about Sparrowsky that you should ask him here."
"He is asked about, Gustavus; he is indeed," pleaded Lady Baldock. "I believe that Sparrowsky
is a penniless adventurer. Mr. Monk; well, he is a Cabinet Minister. Sir Gregory Greeswing;
you mix your people nicely at any rate. Sir Gregory Greeswing is the most old-fashioned Tory
in England." "Of course we are not political, Gustavus." "Phineas Finn. They come alternately,--one
and one.

"Mr. Finn is asked everywhere, Gustavus."

"I don't doubt it. They say he is a very good sort of fellow. They say also that Violet has
found that out as well as other people."

"What do you mean, Gustavus?"

"I mean that everybody is saying that this Phineas Finn is going to set himself up in the world
by marrying your niece. He is quite right to try it on, if he has a chance."

"I don't think he would be right at all," said Lady Baldock, with much energy. "I think he
would be wrong,--shamefully wrong. They say he is the son of an Irish doctor, and that he hasn't
a shilling in the world."

"That is just why he would be right. What is such a man to do, but to marry money? He's a deuced
good-looking fellow, too, and will be sure to do it."

"He should work for his money in the city, then, or somewhere there. But I don't believe it,
Gustavus; I don't, indeed."

"Very well. I only tell you what I hear. The fact is that he and Chiltern have already quarrelled
about her. If I were to tell you that they have been over to Holland together and fought a
duel about her, you wouldn't believe that."

"Fought a duel about Violet! People don't fight duels now, and I should not believe it."

"Very well. Then send your card to Mr. Finn." And, so saying, Lord Baldock left the room.

Lady Baldock sat in silence for some time toasting her toes at the fire, and Augusta Boreham
sat by, waiting for orders. She felt pretty nearly sure that new orders would be given if she
did not herself interfere. "You had better put by that card for the present, my dear," said
Lady Baldock at last. "I will make inquiries. I don't believe a word of what Gustavus has said.
I don't think that even Violet is such a fool as that. But if rash and ill-natured people have
spoken of it, it may be as well to be careful."

"It is always well to be careful;--is it not, mamma?"

"Not but what I think it very improper that these things should be said about a young woman;
and as for the story of the duel, I don't believe a word of it. It is absurd. I dare say that
Gustavus invented it at the moment, just to amuse himself."

The card of course was not sent, and Lady Baldock at any rate put so much faith in her son's
story as to make her feel it to be her duty to interrogate her niece on the subject. Lady Baldock
at this period of her life was certainly not free from fear of Violet Effingham. In the numerous
encounters which took place between them, the aunt seldom gained that amount of victory which
would have completely satisfied her spirit. She longed to be dominant over her niece as she
was dominant over her daughter; and when she found that she missed such supremacy, she longed
to tell Violet to depart from out her borders, and be no longer niece of hers. But had she
ever done so, Violet would have gone at the instant, and then terrible things would have followed.
There is a satisfaction in turning out of doors a nephew or niece who is pecuniarily dependent,
but when the youthful relative is richly endowed, the satisfaction is much diminished. It is
the duty of a guardian, no doubt, to look after the ward; but if this cannot be done, the ward's
money should at least be held with as close a fist as possible. But Lady Baldock, though she
knew that she would be sorely wounded, poked about on her old body with the sharp lances of
disobedience, and struck with the cruel swords of satire, if she took upon herself to scold
or even to question Violet, nevertheless would not abandon the pleasure of lecturing and teaching.
"It is my duty," she would say to herself, "and though it be taken in a bad spirit, I will
always perform my duty." So she performed her duty, and asked Violet Effingham some few questions
respecting Phineas Finn. "My dear," she said, "do you remember meeting a Mr. Finn at Saulsby?"

"A Mr. Finn, aunt! Why, he is a particular friend of mine. Of course I do, and he was at Saulsby.
I have met him there more than once. Don't you remember that we were riding about together?"

"I remember that he was there, certainly; but I did not know that he was a special--friend."

"Most especial, aunt. A 1, I may say;--among young men, I mean."

Lady Baldock was certainly the most indiscreet of old women in such a matter as this, and Violet
the most provoking of young ladies. Lady Baldock, believing that there was something to fear,--as,
indeed, there was, much to fear,--should have been content to destroy the card, and to keep
the young lady away from the young gentleman, if such keeping away was possible to her. But
Miss Effingham was certainly very wrong to speak of any young man as being A 1. Fond as I am
of Miss Effingham, I cannot justify her, and must acknowledge that she used the most offensive
phrase she could find, on purpose to annoy her aunt.

"Violet," said Lady Baldock, bridling up, "I never heard such a word before from the lips of
a young lady."

"Not as A 1? I thought it simply meant very good."

"A 1 is a nobleman," said Lady Baldock.

"No, aunt;--A 1 is a ship,--a ship that is very good," said Violet.

"And do you mean to say that Mr. Finn is,--is,--is,--very good?"

"Yes, indeed. You ask Lord Brentford, and Mr. Kennedy. You know he saved poor Mr. Kennedy from
being throttled in the streets."

"That has nothing to do with it. A policeman might have done that."

"Then he would have been A 1 of policemen,--though A 1 does not mean a policeman."

"He would have done his duty, and so perhaps did Mr. Finn."

"Of course he did, aunt. It couldn't have been his duty to stand by and see Mr. Kennedy throttled.
And he nearly killed one of the men, and took the other prisoner with his own hands. And he
made a beautiful speech the other day. I read every word of it. I am so glad he's a Liberal.
I do like young men to be Liberals." Now Lord Baldock was a Tory, as had been all the Lord
Baldocks,--since the first who had been bought over from the Whigs in the time of George III
at the cost of a barony.

"You have nothing to do with politics, Violet."

"Why shouldn't I have something to do with politics, aunt?"

"And I must tell you that your name is being very unpleasantly mentioned in connection with
that of this young man because of your indiscretion."

"What indiscretion?" Violet, as she made her demand for a more direct accusation, stood quite
upright before her aunt, looking the old woman full in the face,--almost with her arms akimbo.

"Calling him A 1, Violet."

"People have been talking about me and Mr. Finn, because I just now, at this very moment, called
him A 1 to you! If you want to scold me about anything, aunt, do find out something less ridiculous
than that."

"It was most improper language,--and if you used it to me, I am sure you would to others."

"To what others?"

"To Mr. Finn,--and those sort of people."

"Call Mr. Finn A 1 to his face! Well,--upon my honour I don't know why I should not. Lord Chiltern
says he rides beautifully, and if we were talking about riding I might do so."

"You have no business to talk to Lord Chiltern about Mr. Finn at all."

"Have I not? I thought that perhaps the one sin might palliate the other. You know, aunt, no
young lady, let her be ever so ill-disposed, can marry two objectionable young men,--at the
same time."

"I said nothing about your marrying Mr. Finn."

"Then, aunt, what did you mean?"

"I meant that you should not allow yourself to be talked of with an adventurer, a young man
without a shilling, a person who has come from nobody knows where in the bogs of Ireland."

"But you used to ask him here."

"Yes,--as long as he knew his place. But I shall not do so again. And I must beg you to be
circumspect."

"My dear aunt, we may as well understand each other. I will not be circumspect, as you call
it. And if Mr. Finn asked me to marry him to-morrow, and if I liked him well enough, I would
take him,--even though he had been dug right out of a bog. Not only because I liked him,--mind!
If I were unfortunate enough to like a man who was nothing, I would refuse him in spite of
my liking,--because he was nothing. But this young man is not nothing. Mr. Finn is a fine fellow,
and if there were no other reason to prevent my marrying him than his being the son of a doctor,
and coming out of the bogs, that would not do so. Now I have made a clean breast to you as
regards Mr. Finn; and if you do not like what I've said, aunt, you must acknowledge that you
have brought it on yourself."

Lady Baldock was left for a time speechless. But no card was sent to Phineas Finn.

CHAPTER XLIII

Promotion

Phineas got no card from Lady Baldock, but one morning he received a note from Lord Brentford
which was of more importance to him than any card could have been. At this time, bit by bit,
the Reform Bill of the day had nearly made its way through the committee, but had been so mutilated
as to be almost impossible of recognition by its progenitors. And there was still a clause
or two as to the rearrangement of seats, respecting which it was known that there would be
a combat,--probably combats,--carried on after the internecine fashion. There was a certain
clipping of counties to be done, as to which it was said that Mr. Daubeny had declared that
he would not yield till he was made to do so by the brute force of majorities;--and there was
another clause for the drafting of certain superfluous members from little boroughs, and bestowing
them on populous towns at which they were much wanted, respecting which Mr. Turnbull had proclaimed
that the clause as it now stood was a fainéant clause, capable of doing, and intended to do,
no good in the proper direction; a clause put into the bill to gull ignorant folk who had not
eyes enough to recognise the fact that it was fainéant; a make-believe clause,--so said Mr.
Turnbull,--to be detested on that account by every true reformer worse than the old Philistine
bonds and Tory figments of representation, as to which there was at least no hypocritical pretence
of popular fitness. Mr. Turnbull had been very loud and very angry,--had talked much of demonstrations
among the people, and had almost threatened the House. The House in its present mood did not
fear any demonstrations,--but it did fear that Mr. Turnbull might help Mr. Daubeny, and that
Mr. Daubeny might help Mr. Turnbull. It was now May,--the middle of May,--and ministers, who
had been at work on their Reform Bill ever since the beginning of the session, were becoming
weary of it. And then, should these odious clauses escape the threatened Turnbull-Daubeny alliance,--then
there was the House of Lords! "What a pity we can't pass our bills at the Treasury, and have
done with them!" said Laurence Fitzgibbon. "Yes, indeed," replied Mr. Ratler. "For myself,
I was never so tired of a session in my life. I wouldn't go through it again to be made,--no,
not to be made Chancellor of the Exchequer."

Lord Brentford's note to Phineas Finn was as follows:--

   House of Lords, 16th May, 186--.

   MY DEAR MR. FINN,

   You are no doubt aware that Lord Bosanquet's death has
   taken Mr. Mottram into the Upper House, and that as
   he was Under-Secretary for the Colonies, and as the
   Under-Secretary must be in the Lower House, the vacancy
   must be filled up.

The heart of Phineas Finn at this moment was almost in his mouth. Not only to be selected for
political employment, but to be selected at once for an office so singularly desirable! Under-Secretaries,
he fancied, were paid two thousand a year. What would Mr. Low say now? But his great triumph
soon received a check. "Mr. Mildmay has spoken to me on the subject," continued the letter,
"and informs me that he has offered the place at the colonies to his old supporter, Mr. Laurence
Fitzgibbon." Laurence Fitzgibbon!

   I am inclined to think that he could not have done better,
   as Mr. Fitzgibbon has shown great zeal for his party. This
   will vacate the Irish seat at the Treasury Board, and I am
   commissioned by Mr. Mildmay to offer it to you. Perhaps
   you will do me the pleasure of calling on me to-morrow
   between the hours of eleven and twelve.

   Yours very sincerely,

   BRENTFORD.

Phineas was himself surprised to find that his first feeling on reading this letter was one
of dissatisfaction. Here were his golden hopes about to be realised,--hopes as to the realisation
of which he had been quite despondent twelve months ago,--and yet he was uncomfortable because
he was to be postponed to Laurence Fitzgibbon. Had the new Under-Secretary been a man whom
he had not known, whom he had not learned to look down upon as inferior to himself, he would
not have minded it,--would have been full of joy at the promotion proposed for himself. But
Laurence Fitzgibbon was such a poor creature, that the idea of filling a place from which Laurence
had risen was distasteful to him. "It seems to be all a matter of favour and convenience,"
he said to himself, "without any reference to the service." His triumph would have been so
complete had Mr. Mildmay allowed him to go into the higher place at one leap. Other men who
had made themselves useful had done so. In the first hour after receiving Lord Brentford's
letter, the idea of becoming a Lord of the Treasury was almost displeasing to him. He had an
idea that junior lordships of the Treasury were generally bestowed on young members whom it
was convenient to secure, but who were not good at doing anything. There was a moment in which
he thought that he would refuse to be made a junior lord.

But during the night cooler reflections told him that he had been very wrong. He had taken
up politics with the express desire of getting his foot upon a rung of the ladder of promotion,
and now, in his third session, he was about to be successful. Even as a junior lord he would
have a thousand a year; and how long might he have sat in chambers, and have wandered about
Lincoln's Inn, and have loitered in the courts striving to look as though he had business,
before he would have earned a thousand a year! Even as a junior lord he could make himself
useful, and when once he should be known to be a good working man, promotion would come to
him. No ladder can be mounted without labour; but this ladder was now open above his head,
and he already had his foot upon it.

At half-past eleven he was with Lord Brentford, who received him with the blandest smile and
a pressure of the hand which was quite cordial. "My dear Finn," he said, "this gives me the
most sincere pleasure,--the greatest pleasure in the world. Our connection together at Loughton
of course makes it doubly agreeable to me."

"I cannot be too grateful to you, Lord Brentford."

"No, no; no, no. It is all your own doing. When Mr. Mildmay asked me whether I did not think
you the most promising of the young members on our side in your House, I certainly did say
that I quite concurred. But I should be taking too much on myself, I should be acting dishonestly,
if I were to allow you to imagine that it was my proposition. Had he asked me to recommend,
I should have named you; that I say frankly. But he did not. He did not. Mr. Mildmay named
you himself. 'Do you think,' he said, 'that your friend Finn would join us at the Treasury?'
I told him that I did think so. 'And do you not think,' said he, 'that it would be a useful
appointment?' Then I ventured to say that I had no doubt whatever on that point;--that I knew
you well enough to feel confident that you would lend a strength to the Liberal Government.
Then there were a few words said about your seat, and I was commissioned to write to you. That
was all."

Phineas was grateful, but not too grateful, and bore himself very well in the interview. He
explained to Lord Brentford that of course it was his object to serve the country,--and to
be paid for his services,--and that he considered himself to be very fortunate to be selected
so early in his career for parliamentary place. He would endeavour to do his duty, and could
safely say of himself that he did not wish to eat the bread of idleness. As he made this assertion,
he thought of Laurence Fitzgibbon. Laurence Fitzgibbon had eaten the bread of idleness, and
yet he was promoted. But Phineas said nothing to Lord Brentford about his idle friend. When
he had made his little speech he asked a question about the borough.

"I have already ventured to write a letter to my agent at Loughton, telling him that you have
accepted office, and that you will be shortly there again. He will see Shortribs and arrange
it. But if I were you I should write to Shortribs and to Grating,--after I had seen Mr. Mildmay.
Of course you will not mention my name," And the Earl looked very grave as he uttered this caution.

"Of course I will not," said Phineas.

"I do not think you'll find any difficulty about the seat," said the peer. "There never has
been any difficulty at Loughton yet. I must say that for them. And if we can scrape through
with Clause 72 we shall be all right;--shall we not?" This was the clause as to which so violent
an opposition was expected from Mr. Turnbull,--a clause as to which Phineas himself had felt
that he would hardly know how to support the Government, in the event of the committee being
pressed to a division upon it. Could he, an ardent reformer, a reformer at heart,--could he
say that such a borough as Loughton should be spared;--that the arrangement by which Shortribs
and Grating had sent him to Parliament, in obedience to Lord Brentford's orders, was in due
accord with the theory of a representative legislature? In what respect had Gatton and Old
Sarum been worse than Loughton? Was he not himself false to his principle in sitting for such
a borough as Loughton? He had spoken to Mr. Monk, and Mr. Monk had told him that Rome was not
built in a day,--and had told him also that good things were most valued and were more valuable
when they came by instalments. But then Mr. Monk himself enjoyed the satisfaction of sitting
for a popular Constituency. He was not personally pricked in the conscience by his own parliamentary
position. Now, however, --now that Phineas had consented to join the Government, any such considerations
as these must be laid aside. He could no longer be a free agent, or even a free thinker. He
had been quite aware of this, and had taught himself to understand that members of Parliament
in the direct service of the Government were absolved from the necessity of free-thinking.
Individual free-thinking was incompatible with the position of a member of the Government,
and unless such abnegation were practised, no government would be possible. It was of course
a man's duty to bind himself together with no other men but those with whom, on matters of
general policy, he could agree heartily;--but having found that he could so agree, he knew
that it would be his duty as a subaltern to vote as he was directed. It would trouble his conscience
less to sit for Loughton and vote for an objectionable clause as a member of the Government,
than it would have done to give such a vote as an independent member. In so resolving, he thought
that he was simply acting in accordance with the acknowledged rules of parliamentary government.
And therefore, when Lord Brentford spoke of Clause 72, he could answer pleasantly, "I think
we shall carry it; and, you see, in getting it through committee, if we can carry it by one,
that is as good as a hundred. That's the comfort of close-fighting in committee. In the open
House we are almost as much beaten by a narrow majority as by a vote against us."

"Just so; just so," said Lord Brentford, delighted to see that his young pupil,--as he regarded
him,--understood so well the system of parliamentary management. "By-the-bye, Finn, have you
seen Chiltern lately?"

"Not quite lately," said Phineas, blushing up to his eyes.

"Or heard from him?"

"No;--nor heard from him. When last I heard of him he was in Brussels."

"Ah,--yes; he is somewhere on the Rhine now. I thought that as you were so intimate, perhaps
you corresponded with him. Have you heard that we have arranged about Lady Laura's money?"

"I have heard. Lady Laura has told me."

"I wish he would return," said Lord Brentford sadly,--almost solemnly. "As that great difficulty
is over, I would receive him willingly, and make my house pleasant to him, if I can do so.
I am most anxious that he should settle, and marry. Could you not write to him?" Phineas, not
daring to tell Lord Brentford that he had quarrelled with Lord Chiltern,--feeling that if he
did so everything would go wrong,--said that he would write to Lord Chiltern.

As he went away he felt that he was bound to get an answer from Violet Effingham. If it should
be necessary, he was willing to break with Lord Brentford on that matter,--even though such
breaking should lose him his borough and his place;--but not on any other matter.

CHAPTER XLIV

Phineas and His Friends

Our hero's friends were, I think, almost more elated by our hero's promotion than was our hero
himself. He never told himself that it was a great thing to be a junior lord of the Treasury,
though he acknowledged to himself that to have made a successful beginning was a very great
thing. But his friends were loud in their congratulations,--or condolements as the case might be.

He had his interview with Mr. Mildmay, and, after that, one of his first steps was to inform
Mrs. Bunce that he must change his lodgings. "The truth is, Mrs. Bunce, not that I want anything
better; but that a better position will be advantageous to me, and that I can afford to pay
for it." Mrs. Bunce acknowledged the truth of the argument, with her apron up to her eyes.
"I've got to be so fond of looking after you, Mr. Finn! I have indeed," said Mrs. Bunce. "It
is not just what you pays like, because another party will pay as much. But we've got so used
to you, Mr. Finn,--haven't we?" Mrs. Bunce was probably not aware herself that the comeliness
of her lodger had pleased her feminine eye, and touched her feminine heart. Had anybody said
that Mrs. Bunce was in love with Phineas, the scandal would have been monstrous. And yet it
was so,--after a fashion. And Bunce knew it,--after his fashion. "Don't be such an old fool,"
he said, "crying after him because he's six foot high." "I ain't crying after him because he's
six foot high," whined the poor woman;--"but one does like old faces better than new, and a
gentleman about one's place is pleasant." "Gentleman be d----d," said Bunce. But his anger
was excited, not by his wife's love for Phineas, but by the use of an objectionable word.

Bunce himself had been on very friendly terms with Phineas, and they two had had many discussions
on matters of politics, Bunce taking up the cudgels always for Mr. Turnbull, and generally
slipping away gradually into some account of his own martyrdom. For he had been a martyr, having
failed in obtaining any redress against the policeman who had imprisoned him so wrongfully.
The People's Banner had fought for him manfully, and therefore there was a little disagreement
between him and Phineas on the subject of that great organ of public opinion. And as Mr. Bunce
thought that his lodger was very wrong to sit for Lord Brentford's borough, subjects were sometimes
touched which were a little galling to Phineas.

Touching this promotion, Bunce had nothing but condolement to offer to the new junior lord.
"Oh yes," said he, in answer to an argument from Phineas, "I suppose there must be lords, as
you call 'em; though for the matter of that I can't see as they is of any mortal use."

"Wouldn't you have the Government carried on?"

"Government! Well; I suppose there must be government. But the less of it the better. I'm not
against government;--nor yet against laws, Mr. Finn; though the less of them, too, the better.
But what does these lords do in the Government? Lords indeed! I'll tell you what they do, Mr.
Finn. They wotes; that's what they do! They wotes hard; black or white, white or black. Ain't
that true? When you're a 'lord,' will you be able to wote against Mr. Mildmay to save your
very soul?"

"If it comes to be a question of soul-saving, Mr. Bunce, I shan't save my place at the expense
of my conscience."

"Not if you knows it, you mean. But the worst of it is that a man gets so thick into the mud
that he don't know whether he's dirty or clean. You'll have to wote as you're told, and of
course you'll think it's right enough. Ain't you been among Parliament gents long enough to
know that that's the way it goes?"

"You think no honest man can be a member of the Government?"

"I don't say that, but I think honesty's a deal easier away from 'em. The fact is, Mr. Finn,
it's all wrong with us yet, and will be till we get it nigher to the great American model.
If a poor man gets into Parliament,--you'll excuse me, Mr. Finn, but I calls you a poor man."

"Certainly,--as a member of Parliament I am a very poor man."

"Just so,--and therefore what do you do? You goes and lays yourself out for government! I'm
not saying as how you're anyways wrong. A man has to live. You has winning ways, and a good
physiognomy of your own, and are as big as a life-guardsman." Phineas as he heard this doubtful
praise laughed and blushed. "Very well; you makes your way with the big wigs, lords and earls
and them like, and you gets returned for a rotten borough;--you'll excuse me, but that's about
it, ain't it?--and then you goes in for government! A man may have a mission to govern, such
as Washington and Cromwell and the like o' them. But when I hears of Mr. Fitzgibbon a-governing,
why then I says,--d----n it all."

"There must be good and bad you know."

"We've got to change a deal yet, Mr. Finn, and we'll do it. When a young man as has liberal
feelings gets into Parliament, he shouldn't be snapped up and brought into the governing business
just because he's poor and wants a salary. They don't do it that way in the States; and they
won't do it that way here long. It's the system as I hates, and not you, Mr. Finn. Well, good-bye,
sir. I hope you'll like the governing business, and find it suits your health."

These condolements from Mr. Bunce were not pleasant, but they set him thinking. He felt assured
that Bunce and Quintus Slide and Mr. Turnbull were wrong. Bunce was ignorant. Quintus Slide
was dishonest. Turnbull was greedy of popularity. For himself, he thought that as a young man
he was fairly well informed. He knew that he meant to be true in his vocation. And he was quite
sure that the object nearest to his heart in politics was not self-aggrandisement, but the
welfare of the people in general. And yet he could not but agree with Bunce that there was
something wrong. When such men as Laurence Fitzgibbon were called upon to act as governors,
was it not to be expected that the ignorant but still intelligent Bunces of the population
should--"d----n it all"?

On the evening of that day he went up to Mrs. Low's, very sure that he should receive some
encouragement from her and from her husband. She had been angry with him because he had put
himself into a position in which money must be spent and none could be made. The Lows, especially
Mrs. Low, had refused to believe that any success was within his reach. Now that he had succeeded,
now that he was in receipt of a salary on which he could live and save money, he would be sure
of sympathy from his old friends the Lows!

But Mrs. Low was as severe upon him as Mr. Bunce had been, and even from Mr. Low he could extract
no real comfort. "Of course I congratulate you," said Mr. Low coldly.

"And you, Mrs. Low?"

"Well, you know, Mr. Finn, I think you have begun at the wrong end. I thought so before, and
I think so still. I suppose I ought not to say so to a Lord of the Treasury, but if you ask
me, what can I do?"

"Speak the truth out, of course."

"Exactly. That's what I must do. Well, the truth is, Mr. Finn, that I do not think it is a
very good opening for a young man to be made what they call a Lord of the Treasury,--unless
he has got a private fortune, you know, to support that kind of life."

"You see, Phineas, a ministry is such an uncertain thing," said Mr. Low.

"Of course it's uncertain;--but as I did go into the House, it's something to have succeeded."

"If you call that success," said Mrs. Low.

"You did intend to go on with your profession," said Mr. Low. He could not tell them that he
had changed his mind, and that he meant to marry Violet Effingham, who would much prefer a
parliamentary life for her husband to that of a working barrister. "I suppose that is all given
up now," continued Mr. Low.

"Just for the present," said Phineas.

"Yes;--and for ever I fear," said Mrs. Low, "You'll never go back to real work after frittering
away your time as a Lord of the Treasury. What sort of work must it be when just anybody can
do it that it suits them to lay hold of? But of course a thousand a year is something, though
a man may have it for only six months."

It came out in the course of the evening that Mr. Low was going to stand for the borough vacated
by Mr. Mottram, at which it was considered that the Conservatives might possibly prevail. "You
see, after all, Phineas," said Mr. Low, "that I am following your steps."

"Ah; you are going into the House in the course of your profession."

"Just so," said Mrs. Low.

"And are taking the first step towards being a Tory Attorney-General."

"That's as may be," said Mr. Low. "But it's the kind of thing a man does after twenty years
of hard work. For myself, I really don't care much whether I succeed or fail. I should like
to live to be a Vice-Chancellor. I don't mind saying as much as that to you. But I'm not at
all sure that Parliament is the best way to the Equity Bench."

"But it is a grand thing to get into Parliament when you do it by means of your profession,"
said Mrs. Low.

Soon after that Phineas took his departure from the house, feeling sore and unhappy. But on
the next morning he was received in Grosvenor Place with an amount of triumph which went far
to compensate him. Lady Laura had written to him to call there, and on his arrival he found
both Violet Effingham and Madame Max Goesler with his friend. When Phineas entered the room
his first feeling was one of intense joy at seeing that Violet Effingham was present there.
Then there was one of surprise that Madame Max Goesler should make one of the little party.
Lady Laura had told him at Mr. Palliser's dinner-party that they, in Portman Square, had not
as yet advanced far enough to receive Madame Max Goesler,--and yet here was the lady in Mr.
Kennedy's drawing-room. Now Phineas would have thought it more likely that he should find her
in Portman Square than in Grosvenor Place. The truth was that Madame Goesler had been brought
by Miss Effingham,--with the consent, indeed, of Lady Laura, but with a consent given with
much of hesitation. "What are you afraid of?" Violet had asked. "I am afraid of nothing," Lady
Laura had answered; "but one has to choose one's acquaintance in accordance with rules which
one doesn't lay down very strictly." "She is a clever woman," said Violet, "and everybody likes
her; but if you think Mr. Kennedy would object, of course you are right." Then Lady Laura had
consented, telling herself that it was not necessary that she should ask her husband's approval
as to every new acquaintance she might form. At the same time Violet had been told that Phineas
would be there, and so the party had been made up.

"'See the conquering hero comes,' said Violet in her cheeriest voice.

"I am so glad that Mr. Finn has been made a lord of something," said Madame Max Goesler. "I
had the pleasure of a long political discussion with him the other night, and I quite approve
of him."

"We are so much gratified, Mr. Finn," said Lady Laura. "Mr. Kennedy says that it is the best
appointment they could have made, and papa is quite proud about it."

"You are Lord Brentford's member; are you not?" asked Madame Max Goesler. This was a question
which Phineas did not quite like, and which he was obliged to excuse by remembering that the
questioner had lived so long out of England as to be probably ignorant of the myths, and theories,
and system, and working of the British Constitution. Violet Effingham, little as she knew of
politics, would never have asked a question so imprudent.

But the question was turned off, and Phineas, with an easy grace, submitted himself to be petted,
and congratulated, and purred over, and almost caressed by the three ladies, Their good-natured
enthusiasm was at any rate better than the satire of Bunce, or the wisdom of Mrs. Low. Lady
Laura had no misgivings as to Phineas being fit for governing, and Violet Effingham said nothing
as to the short-lived tenure of ministers. Madame Max Goesler, though she had asked an indiscreet
question, thoroughly appreciated the advantage of Government pay, and the prestige of Government
power. "You are a lord now," she said, speaking, as was customary with her, with the slightest
possible foreign accent, "and you will be a president soon, and then perhaps a secretary. The
order of promotion seems odd, but I am told it is very pleasant."

"It is pleasant to succeed, of course," said Phineas, "let the success be ever so little."

"We knew you would succeed," said Lady Laura. "We were quite sure of it. Were we not, Violet?"

"You always said so, my dear. For myself I do not venture to have an opinion on such matters.
Will you always have to go to that big building in the corner, Mr. Finn, and stay there from
ten till four? Won't that be a bore?"

"We have a half-holiday on Saturday, you know," said Phineas.

"And do the Lords of the Treasury have to take care of the money?" asked Madame Max Goesler.

"Only their own; and they generally fail in doing that," said Phineas.

He sat there for a considerable time, wondering whether Mr. Kennedy would come in, and wondering
also as to what Mr. Kennedy would say to Madame Max Goesler when he did come in. He knew that
it was useless for him to expect any opportunity, then or there, of being alone for a moment
with Violet Effingham. His only chance in that direction would be in some crowded room, at
some ball at which he might ask her to dance with him; but it seemed that fate was very unkind
to him, and that no such chance came in his way. Mr. Kennedy did not appear, and Madame Max
Goesler with Violet went away, leaving Phineas still sitting with Lady Laura. Each of them
said a kind word to him as they went. "I don't know whether I may dare to expect that a Lord
of the Treasury will come and see me?" said Madame Max Goesler. Then Phineas made a second
promise that he would call in Park Lane. Violet blushed as she remembered that she could not
ask him to call at Lady Baldock's. "Good-bye, Mr. Finn," she said, giving him her hand. "I'm
so very glad that they have chosen you; and I do hope that, as Madame Max says, they'll make
you a secretary and a president, and everything else very quickly,--till it will come to your
turn to be making other people." "He is very nice," said Madame Goesler to Violet as she took
her place in the carriage. "He bears being petted and spoilt without being either awkward or
conceited." "On the whole, he is rather nice," said Violet; "only he has not got a shilling
in the world, and has to make himself before he will be anybody." "He must marry money, of
course," said Madame Max Goesler.

"I hope you are contented?" said Lady Laura, rising from her chair and coming opposite to him
as soon as they were alone.

"Of course I am contented."

"I was not,--when I first heard of it. Why did they promote that empty-headed countryman of
yours to a place for which he was quite unfit? I was not contented. But then I am more ambitious
for you than you are for yourself." He sat without answering her for awhile, and she stood
waiting for his reply. "Have you nothing to say to me?" she asked.

"I do not know what to say. When I think of it all, I am lost in amazement. You tell me that
you are not contented;--that you are ambitious for me. Why is it that you should feel any interest
in the matter?"

"Is it not reasonable that we should be interested for our friends?"

"But when you and I last parted here in this room you were hardly my friend."

"Was I not? You wrong me there;--very deeply."

"I told you what was my ambition, and you resented it," said Phineas.

"I think I said that I could not help you, and I think I said also that I thought you would
fail. I do not know that I showed much resentment. You see, I told her that you were here,
that she might come and meet you. You know that I wished my brother should succeed. I wished
it before I ever knew you. You cannot expect that I should change my wishes."

"But if he cannot succeed," pleaded Phineas.

"Who is to say that? Has a woman never been won by devotion and perseverance? Besides, how
can I wish to see you go on with a suit which must sever you from my father, and injure your
political prospects;--perhaps fatally injure them? It seems to me now that my father is almost
the only man in London who has not heard of this duel."

"Of course he will hear of it. I have half made up my mind to tell him myself."

"Do not do that, Mr. Finn. There can be no reason for it. But I did not ask you to come here
to-day to talk to you about Oswald or Violet. I have given you my advice about that, and I
can do no more."

"Lady Laura, I cannot take it. It is out of my power to take it."

"Very well. The matter shall be what you members of Parliament call an open question between
us. When papa asked you to accept this place at the Treasury, did it ever occur to you to refuse
it?"

"It did;--for half an hour or so."

"I hoped you would,--and yet I knew that I was wrong. I thought that you should count yourself
to be worth more than that, and that you should, as it were, assert yourself. But then it is
so difficult to draw the line between proper self-assertion and proper self-denial;--to know
how high to go up the table, and how low to go down. I do not doubt that you have been right,--only
make them understand that you are not as other junior lords;--that you have been willing to
be a junior lord, or anything else for a purpose; but that the purpose is something higher
than that of fetching and carrying in Parliament for Mr. Mildmay and Mr. Palliser."

"I hope in time to get beyond fetching and carrying," said Phineas.

"Of course you will; and knowing that, I am glad that you are in office. I suppose there will
be no difficulty about Loughton."

Then Phineas laughed. "I hear," said he, "that Mr. Quintus Slide, of the People's Banner, has
already gone down to canvass the electors."

"Mr. Quintus Slide! To canvass the electors of Loughton!" and Lady Laura drew herself up and
spoke of this unseemly intrusion on her father's borough, as though the vulgar man who had
been named had forced his way into the very drawing-room in Portman Square. At that moment
Mr. Kennedy came in. "Do you hear what Mr. Finn tells me?" she said. "He has heard that Mr.
Quintus Slide has gone down to Loughton to stand against him."

"And why not?" said Mr. Kennedy.

"My dear!" ejaculated Lady Laura.

"Mr. Quintus Slide will no doubt lose his time and his money;--but he will gain the prestige
of having stood for a borough, which will be something for him on the staff of the People's
Banner," said Mr. Kennedy.

"He will get that horrid man Vellum to propose him," said Lady Laura.

"Very likely," said Mr. Kennedy. "And the less any of us say about it the better. Finn, my
dear fellow, I congratulate you heartily. Nothing for a long time has given me greater pleasure
than hearing of your appointment. It is equally honourable to yourself and to Mr. Mildmay.
It is a great step to have gained so early."

Phineas, as he thanked his friend, could not help asking himself what his friend had done to
be made a Cabinet Minister. Little as he, Phineas, himself had done in the House in his two
sessions and a half, Mr. Kennedy had hardly done more in his fifteen or twenty. But then Mr.
Kennedy was possessed of almost miraculous wealth, and owned half a county, whereas he, Phineas,
owned almost nothing at all. Of course no Prime Minister would offer a junior lordship at the
Treasury to a man with £30,000 a year. Soon after this Phineas took his leave. "I think he
will do well," said Mr. Kennedy to his wife.

"I am sure he will do well," replied Lady Laura, almost scornfully.

"He is not quite such a black swan with me as he is with you; but still I think he will succeed,
if he takes care of himself. It is astonishing how that absurd story of his duel with Chiltern
has got about."

"It is impossible to prevent people talking," said Lady Laura.

"I suppose there was some quarrel, though neither of them will tell you. They say it was about
Miss Effingham. I should hardly think that Finn could have any hopes in that direction."

"Why should he not have hopes?"

"Because he has neither position, nor money, nor birth," said Mr. Kennedy.

"He is a gentleman." said Lady Laura; "and I think he has position. I do not see why he should
not ask any girl to marry him."

"There is no understanding you, Laura," said Mr. Kennedy, angrily. "I thought you had quite
other hopes about Miss Effingham."

"So I have; but that has nothing to do with it. You spoke of Mr. Finn as though he would be
guilty of some crime were he to ask Violet Effingham to be his wife. In that I disagree with
you. Mr. Finn is--"

"You will make me sick of the name of Mr. Finn."

"I am sorry that I offend you by my gratitude to a man who saved your life." Mr. Kennedy shook
his head. He knew that the argument used against him was false, but he did not know how to
show that he knew that it was false. "Perhaps I had better not mention his name any more,"
continued Lady Laura.

"Nonsense!"

"I quite agree with you that it is nonsense, Robert."

"All I mean to say is, that if you go on as you do, you will turn his head and spoil him. Do
you think I do not know what is going on among you?"

"And what is going on among us,--as you call it?"

"You are taking this young man up and putting him on a pedestal and worshipping him, just because
he is well-looking, and rather clever and decently behaved. It's always the way with women
who have nothing to do, and who cannot be made to understand that they should have duties.
They cannot live without some kind of idolatry."

"Have I neglected my duty to you, Robert?"

"Yes,--you know you have;--in going to those receptions at your father's house on Sundays."

"What has that to do with Mr. Finn?"

"Psha!"

"I begin to think I had better tell Mr. Finn not to come here any more, since his presence
is disagreeable to you. All the world knows how great is the service he did you, and it will
seem to be very ridiculous. People will say all manner of things; but anything will be better
than that you should go on as you have done,--accusing your wife of idolatry towards--a young
man, because--he is--well-looking."

"I never said anything of the kind."

"You did, Robert."

"I did not. I did not speak more of you than of a lot of others."

"You accused me personally, saying that because of my idolatry I had neglected my duty; but
really you made such a jumble of it all, with papa's visitors, and Sunday afternoons, that
I cannot follow what was in your mind."

Then Mr. Kennedy stood for awhile, collecting his thoughts, so that he might unravel the jumble,
if that were possible to him; but finding that it was not possible, he left the room, and closed
the door behind him.

Then Lady Laura was left alone to consider the nature of the accusation which her husband had
brought against her; or the nature rather of the accusation which she had chosen to assert
that her husband had implied. For in her heart she knew that he had made no such accusation,
and had intended to make none such. The idolatry of which he had spoken was the idolatry which
a woman might show to her cat, her dog, her picture, her china, her furniture, her carriage
and horses, or her pet maid-servant. Such was the idolatry of which Mr. Kennedy had spoken;--but
was there no other worship in her heart, worse, more pernicious than that, in reference to
this young man?

She had schooled herself about him very severely, and had come to various resolutions. She
had found out and confessed to herself that she did not, and could not, love her husband. She
had found out and confessed to herself that she did love, and could not help loving, Phineas
Finn. Then she had resolved to banish him from her presence, and had gone the length of telling
him so. After that she had perceived that she had been wrong, and had determined to meet him
as she met other men,--and to conquer her love. Then, when this could not be done, when something
almost like idolatry grew upon her, she determined that it should be the idolatry of friendship,
that she would not sin even in thought, that there should be nothing in her heart of which
she need be ashamed;--but that the one great object and purport of her life should be the promotion
of this friend's welfare. She had just begun to love after this fashion, had taught herself
to believe that she might combine something of the pleasure of idolatry towards her friend
with a full complement of duty towards her husband, when Phineas came to her with his tale
of love for Violet Effingham. The lesson which she got then was a very rough one,--so hard
that at first she could not bear it. Her anger at his love for her brother's wished-for bride
was lost in her dismay that Phineas should love any one after having once loved her. But by
sheer force of mind she had conquered that dismay, that feeling of desolation at her heart,
and had almost taught herself to hope that Phineas might succeed with Violet. He wished it,--and
why should he not have what he wished,--he, whom she so fondly idolised? It was not his fault
that he and she were not man and wife. She had chosen to arrange it otherwise, and was she
not bound to assist him now in the present object of his reasonable wishes? She had got over
in her heart that difficulty about her brother, but she could not quite conquer the other difficulty.
She could not bring herself to plead his cause with Violet. She had not brought herself as
yet to do it.

And now she was accused of idolatry for Phineas by her husband,--she with "a lot of others,"
in which lot Violet was of course included. Would it not be better that they two should be
brought together? Would not her friend's husband still be her friend? Would she not then forget
to love him? Would she not then be safer than she was now?

As she sat alone struggling with her difficulties, she had not as yet forgotten to love him,--nor
was she as yet safe.

CHAPTER XLV

Miss Effingham's Four Lovers

One morning early in June Lady Laura called at Lady Baldock's house and asked for Miss Effingham.
The servant was showing her into the large drawing-room, when she again asked specially for
Miss Effingham. "I think Miss Effingham is there," said the man, opening the door. Miss Effingham
was not there. Lady Baldock was sitting all alone, and Lady Laura perceived that she had been
caught in the net which she specially wished to avoid. Now Lady Baldock had not actually or
openly quarrelled with Lady Laura Kennedy or with Lord Brentford, but she had conceived a strong
idea that her niece Violet was countenanced in all improprieties by the Standish family generally,
and that therefore the Standish family was to be regarded as a family of enemies. There was
doubtless in her mind considerable confusion on the subject, for she did not know whether Lord
Chiltern or Mr. Finn was the suitor whom she most feared,--and she was aware, after a sort
of muddled fashion, that the claims of these two wicked young men were antagonistic to each
other. But they were both regarded by her as emanations from the same source of iniquity, and,
therefore, without going deeply into the machinations of Lady Laura,--without resolving whether
Lady Laura was injuring her by pressing her brother as a suitor upon Miss Effingham, or by
pressing a rival of her brother,--still she became aware that it was her duty to turn a cold
shoulder on those two houses in Portman Square and Grosvenor Place. But her difficulties in
doing this were very great, and it may be said that Lady Baldock was placed in an unjust and
cruel position. Before the end of May she had proposed to leave London, and to take her daughter
and Violet down to Baddingham,--or to Brighton, if they preferred it, or to Switzerland. "Brighton
in June!" Violet had exclaimed. "Would not a month among the glaciers be delightful!" Miss
Boreham had said. "Don't let me keep you in town, aunt," Violet replied; "but I do not think
I shall go till other people go. I can have a room at Laura Kennedy's house." Then Lady Baldock,
whose position was hard and cruel, resolved that she would stay in town. Here she had in her
hands a ward over whom she had no positive power, and yet in respect to whom her duty was imperative!
Her duty was imperative, and Lady Baldock was not the woman to neglect her duty;--and yet she
knew that the doing of her duty would all be in vain. Violet would marry a shoe-black out of
the streets if she were so minded. It was of no use that the poor lady had provided herself
with two strings, two most excellent strings, to her bow,--two strings either one of which
should have contented Miss Effingham. There was Lord Fawn, a young peer, not very rich indeed,--but
still with means sufficient for a wife, a rising man, and in every way respectable, although
a Whig. And there was Mr. Appledom, one of the richest commoners in England, a fine Conservative
too, with a seat in the House, and everything appropriate. He was fifty, but looked hardly
more than thirty-five, and was,--so at least Lady Baldock frequently asserted,--violently in
love with Violet Effingham. Why had not the law, or the executors, or the Lord Chancellor,
or some power levied for the protection of the proprieties, made Violet absolutely subject
to her guardian till she should be made subject to a husband?

"Yes, I think she is at home," said Lady Baldock, in answer to Lady Laura's inquiry for Violet.
"At least, I hardly know. She seldom tells me what she means to do,--and sometimes she will
walk out quite alone!" A most imprudent old woman was Lady Baldock, always opening her hand
to her adversaries, unable to control herself in the scolding of people, either before their
faces or behind their backs, even at moments in which such scolding was most injurious to her
own cause. "However, we will see," she continued. Then the bell was rung, and in a few minutes
Violet was in the room. In a few minutes more they were up-stairs together in Violet's own
room, in spite of the openly-displayed wrath of Lady Baldock. "I almost wish she had never
been born," said Lady Baldock to her daughter. "Oh, mamma, don't say that." "I certainly do
wish that I had never seen her." "Indeed she has been a grievous trouble to you, mamma," said
Miss Boreham, sympathetically.

"Brighton! What nonsense!" said Lady Laura.

"Of course it's nonsense. Fancy going to Brighton! And then they have proposed Switzerland.
If you could only hear Augusta talking in rapture of a month among the glaciers! And I feel
so ungrateful. I believe they would spend three months with me at any horrible place that I
could suggest,--at Hong Kong if I were to ask it,--so intent are they on taking me away from
metropolitan danger."

"But you will not go?"

"No!--I won't go. I know I am very naughty; but I can't help feeling that I cannot be good
without being a fool at the same time. I must either fight my aunt, or give way to her. If
I were to yield, what a life I should have;--and I should despise myself after all."

"And what is the special danger to be feared now?"

"I don't know;--you, I fancy. I told her that if she went, I should go to you. I knew that
would make her stay."

"I wish you would come to me," said Lady Laura.

"I shouldn't think of it really,--not for any length of time."

"Why not?"

"Because I should be in Mr. Kennedy's way."

"You wouldn't be in his way in the least. If you would only be down punctually for morning
prayers, and go to church with him on Sunday afternoon, he would be delighted to have you."

"What did he say about Madame Max coming?"

"Not a word. I don't think he quite knew who she was then. I fancy he has inquired since, by
something he said yesterday."

"What did he say?"

"Nothing that matters;--only a word. I haven't come here to talk about Madame Max Goesler,--nor
yet about Mr. Kennedy."

"Whom have you come to talk about?" asked Violet, laughing a little, with something of increased
colour in her cheeks, though she could not be said to blush.

"A lover of course," said Lady Laura.

"I wish you would leave me alone with my lovers. You are as bad or worse than my aunt. She,
at any rate, varies her prescription. She has become sick of poor Lord Fawn because he's a Whig."

"And who is her favourite now?"

"Old Mr. Appledom,--who is really a most unexceptionable old party, and whom I like of all
things. I really think I could consent to be Mrs. Appledom, to get rid of my troubles,--if
he did not dye his whiskers and have his coats padded."

"He'd give up those little things if you asked him."

"I shouldn't have the heart to do it. Besides, this isn't his time of the year for making proposals.
His love fever, which is of a very low kind, and intermits annually, never comes on till the
autumn. It is a rural malady, against which he is proof while among his clubs!"

"Well, Violet,--I am like your aunt."

"Like Lady Baldock?"

"In one respect. I, too, will vary my prescription."

"What do you mean, Laura?"

"Just this,--that if you like to marry Phineas Finn, I will say that you are right."

"Heaven and earth! And why am I to marry Phineas Finn?"

"Only for two reasons; because he loves you, and because--"

"No,--I deny it. I do not."

"I had come to fancy that you did."

"Keep your fancy more under control then. But upon my word I can't understand this. He was
your great friend."

"What has that to do with it?" demanded Lady Laura.

"And you have thrown over your brother, Laura?"

"You have thrown him over. Is he to go on for ever asking and being refused?"

"I do not know why he should not," said Violet, "seeing how very little trouble it gives him.
Half an hour once in six months does it all for him, allowing him time for coming and going
in a cab."

"Violet, I do not understand you. Have you refused Oswald so often because he does not pass
hours on his knees before you?"

"No, indeed! His nature would be altered very much for the worse before he could do that."

"Why do you throw it in his teeth then that he does not give you more of his time?"

"Why have you come to tell me to marry Mr. Phineas Finn? That is what I want to know. Mr. Phineas
Finn, as far as I am aware, has not a shilling in the world,--except a month's salary now due
to him from the Government. Mr. Phineas Finn I believe to be the son of a country doctor in
Ireland,--with about seven sisters. Mr. Phineas Finn is a Roman Catholic. Mr. Phineas Finn
is,--or was a short time ago,--in love with another lady; and Mr. Phineas Finn is not so much
in love at this moment but what he is able to intrust his cause to an ambassador. None short
of a royal suitor should ever do that with success."

"Has he never pleaded his cause to you himself?"

"My dear, I never tell gentlemen's secrets. It seems that if he has, his success was so trifling
that he has thought he had better trust some one else for the future."

"He has not trusted me. He has not given me any commission."

"Then why have you come?"

"Because,--I hardly know how to tell his story. There have been things about Oswald which made
it almost necessary that Mr. Finn should explain himself to me."

"I know it all;--about their fighting. Foolish young men! I am not a bit obliged to either
of them,--not a bit. Only fancy, if my aunt knew it, what a life she would lead me! Gustavus
knows all about it, and I feel that I am living at his mercy. Why were they so wrong-headed?"

"I cannot answer that,--though I know them well enough to be sure that Chiltern was the one
in fault."

"It is so odd that you should have thrown your brother over."

"I have not thrown my brother over. Will you accept Oswald if he asks you again?"

"No," almost shouted Violet.

"Then I hope that Mr. Finn may succeed. I want him to succeed in everything. There;--you may
know it all. He is my Phoebus Apollo."

"That is flattering to me,--looking at the position in which you desire to place your Phoebus
at the present moment."

"Come, Violet, I am true to you, and let me have a little truth from you. This man loves you,
and I think is worthy of you. He does not love me, but he is my friend. As his friend, and
believing in his worth, I wish for his success beyond almost anything else in the world. Listen
to me, Violet. I don't believe in those reasons which you gave me just now for not becoming
this man's wife."

"Nor do I."

"I know you do not. Look at me. I, who have less of real heart than you, I who thought that
I could trust myself to satisfy my mind and my ambition without caring for my heart, I have
married for what you call position. My husband is very rich, and a Cabinet Minister, and will
probably be a peer. And he was willing to marry me at a time when I had not a shilling of my own."

"He was very generous."

"He has asked for it since," said Lady Laura. "But never mind. I have not come to talk about
myself;--otherwise than to bid you not do what I have done. All that you have said about this
man's want of money and of family is nothing."

"Nothing at all," said Violet. "Mere words,--fit only for such people as my aunt."

"Well then?"

"Well?"

"If you love him--!"

"Ah! but if I do not? You are very close in inquiring into my secrets. Tell me, Laura;--was
not this young Crichton once a lover of your own?"

"Psha! And do you think I cannot keep a gentleman's secret as well as you?"

"What is the good of any secret, Laura, when we have been already so open? He tried his 'prentice
hand on you; and then he came to me. Let us watch him, and see who'll be the third. I too like
him well enough to hope that he'll land himself safely at last."

CHAPTER XLVI

The Mousetrap

Phineas had certainly no desire to make love by an ambassador,--at second-hand. He had given
no commission to Lady Laura, and was, as the reader is aware, quite ignorant of what was being
done and said on his behalf. He had asked no more from Lady Laura than an opportunity of speaking
for himself, and that he had asked almost with a conviction that by so asking he would turn
his friend into an enemy. He had read but little of the workings of Lady Laura's heart towards
himself, and had no idea of the assistance she was anxious to give him. She had never told
him that she was willing to sacrifice her brother on his behalf, and, of course, had not told
him that she was willing also to sacrifice herself. Nor, when she wrote to him one June morning
and told him that Violet would be found in Portman Square, alone, that afternoon,--naming an
hour, and explaining that Miss Effingham would be there to meet herself and her father, but
that at such an hour she would be certainly alone,--did he even then know how much she was
prepared to do for him. The short note was signed "L.," and then there came a long postscript.
"Ask for me," she said in a postscript. "I shall be there later, and I have told them to bid
you wait. I can give you no hope of success, but if you choose to try,--you can do so. If you
do not come, I shall know that you have changed your mind. I shall not think the worse of you,
and your secret will be safe with me. I do that which you have asked me to do,--simply because
you have asked it. Burn this at once,--because I ask it." Phineas destroyed the note, tearing
it into atoms, the moment that he had read it and re-read it. Of course he would go to Portman
Square at the hour named. Of course he would take his chance. He was not buoyed up by much
of hope;--but even though there were no hope, he would take his chance.

When Lord Brentford had first told Phineas of his promotion, he had also asked the new Lord
of the Treasury to make a certain communication on his behalf to his son. This Phineas had
found himself obliged to promise to do;--and he had done it. The letter had been difficult
enough to write,--but he had written it. After having made the promise, he had found himself
bound to keep it.

"Dear Lord Chiltern," he had commenced, "I will not think that there was anything in our late
encounter to prevent my so addressing you. I now write at the instance of your father, who
has heard nothing of our little affair." Then he explained at length Lord Brentford's wishes
as he understood them. "Pray come home," he said, finishing his letter. "Touching V. E., I
feel that I am bound to tell you that I still mean to try my fortune, but that I have no ground
for hoping that my fortune will be good. Since the day on the sands, I have never met her but
in society. I know you will be glad to hear that my wound was nothing; and I think you will
be glad to hear that I have got my foot on to the ladder of promotion.--Yours always,

"PHINEAS FINN."

Now he had to try his fortune,--that fortune of which he had told Lord Chiltern that he had
no reason for hoping that it would be good. He went direct from his office at the Treasury
to Portman Square, resolving that he would take no trouble as to his dress, simply washing
his hands and brushing his hair as though he were going down to the House, and he knocked at
the Earl's door exactly at the hour named by Lady Laura.

"Miss Effingham," he said, "I am so glad to find you alone."

"Yes," she said, laughing. "I am alone,--a poor unprotected female. But I fear nothing. I have
strong reason for believing that Lord Brentford is somewhere about. And Pomfret the butler,
who has known me since I was a baby, is a host in himself."

"With such allies you can have nothing to fear," he replied, attempting to carry on her little
jest.

"Nor even without them, Mr. Finn. We unprotected females in these days are so self-reliant
that our natural protectors fall off from us, finding themselves to be no longer wanted. Now
with you,--what can I fear?"

"Nothing,--as I hope."

"There used to be a time, and that not so long ago either, when young gentlemen and ladies
were thought to be very dangerous to each other if they were left alone. But propriety is less
rampant now, and upon the whole virtue and morals, with discretion and all that kind of thing,
have been the gainers. Don't you think so?"

"I am sure of it."

"All the same, but I don't like to be caught in a trap, Mr. Finn."

"In a trap?"

"Yes;--in a trap. Is there no trap here? If you will say so, I will acknowledge myself to be
a dolt, and will beg your pardon."

"I hardly know what you call a trap."

"You were told that I was here?"

He paused a moment before he replied. "Yes, I was told."

"I call that a trap."

"Am I to blame?"

"I don't say that you set it,--but you use it."

"Miss Effingham, of course I have used it. You must know,--I think you must know that I have
that to say to you which has made me long for such an opportunity as this."

"And therefore you have called in the assistance of your friend."

"It is true."

"In such matters you should never talk to any one, Mr. Finn. If you cannot fight your own battle,
no one can fight it for you."

"Miss Effingham, do you remember our ride at Saulsby?"

"Very well;--as if it were yesterday."

"And do you remember that I asked you a question which you have never answered?"

"I did answer it,--as well as I knew how, so that I might tell you a truth without hurting you."

"It was necessary,--is necessary that I should be hurt sorely, or made perfectly happy. Violet
Effingham, I have come to you to ask you to be my wife;--to tell you that I love you, and to
ask for your love in return. Whatever may be my fate, the question must be asked, and an answer
must be given. I have not hoped that you should tell me that you loved me--"

"For what then have you hoped?"

"For not much, indeed;--but if for anything, then for some chance that you might tell me so
hereafter."

"If I loved you, I would tell you so now,--instantly. I give you my word of that."

"Can you never love me?"

"What is a woman to answer to such a question? No;--I believe never. I do not think I shall
ever wish you to be my husband. You ask me to be plain, and I must be plain."

"Is it because--?" He paused, hardly knowing what the question was which he proposed to himself
to ask.

"It is for no because,--for no cause except that simple one which should make any girl refuse
any man whom she did not love. Mr. Finn, I could say pleasant things to you on any other subject
than this,--because I like you."

"I know that I have nothing to justify my suit."

"You have everything to justify it;--at least I am bound to presume that you have. If you love
me,--you are justified."

"You know that I love you."

"I am sorry that it should ever have been so,--very sorry. I can only hope that I have not
been in fault."

"Will you try to love me?"

"No;--why should I try? If any trying were necessary, I would try rather not to love you. Why
should I try to do that which would displease everybody belonging to me? For yourself, I admit
your right to address me,--and tell you frankly that it would not be in vain, if I loved you.
But I tell you as frankly that such a marriage would not please those whom I am bound to try
to please."

He paused a moment before he spoke further. "I shall wait," he said, "and come again."

"What am I to say to that? Do not tease me, so that I be driven to treat you with lack of courtesy.
Lady Laura is so much attached to you, and Mr. Kennedy, and Lord Brentford,--and indeed I may
say, I myself also, that I trust there may be nothing to mar our good fellowship. Come, Mr.
Finn,--say that you will take an answer, and I will give you my hand."

"Give it me," said he. She gave him her hand, and he put it up to his lips and pressed it.
"I will wait and come again," he said. "I will assuredly come again." Then he turned from her
and went out of the house. At the corner of the square he saw Lady Laura's carriage, but did
not stop to speak to her. And she also saw him.

"So you have had a visitor here," said Lady Laura to Violet.

"Yes;--I have been caught in the trap."

"Poor mouse! And has the cat made a meal of you?"

"I fancy he has, after his fashion. There be cats that eat their mice without playing,--and
cats that play with their mice, and then eat them; and cats again which only play with their
mice, and don't care to eat them. Mr. Finn is a cat of the latter kind, and has had his afternoon's
diversion."

"You wrong him there."

"I think not, Laura. I do not mean to say that he would not have liked me to accept him. But,
if I can see inside his bosom, such a little job as that he has now done will be looked back
upon as one of the past pleasures of his life;--not as a pain."

CHAPTER XLVII

Mr. Mildmay's Bill

It will be necessary that we should go back in our story for a very short period in order that
the reader may be told that Phineas Finn was duly re-elected at Loughton after his appointment
at the Treasury Board. There was some little trouble at Loughton, and something more of expense
than he had before encountered. Mr. Quintus Slide absolutely came down, and was proposed by
Mr. Vellum for the borough. Mr. Vellum being a gentleman learned in the law, and hostile to
the interests of the noble owner of Saulsby, was able to raise a little trouble against our
hero. Mr. Slide was proposed by Mr. Vellum, and seconded by Mr. Vellum's clerk,--though, as
it afterwards appeared, Mr. Vellum's clerk was not in truth an elector,--and went to the poll
like a man. He received three votes, and at twelve o'clock withdrew. This in itself could hardly
have afforded compensation for the expense which Mr. Slide or his backers must have encountered;--but
he had an opportunity of making a speech, every word of which was reported in the People's
Banner; and if the speech was made in the language given in the report, Mr. Slide was really
possessed of some oratorical power. Most of those who read the speech in the columns of the
People's Banner were probably not aware how favourable an opportunity of retouching his sentences
in type had been given to Mr. Slide by the fact of his connection with the newspaper. The speech
had been very severe upon our hero; and though the speaker had been so hooted and pelted at
Loughton as to have been altogether inaudible,--so maltreated that in point of fact he had
not been able to speak above a tenth part of his speech at all,--nevertheless the speech did
give Phineas a certain amount of pain. Why Phineas should have read it who can tell? But who
is there that abstains from reading that which is printed in abuse of himself?

In the speech as it was printed Mr. Slide declared that he had no thought of being returned
for the borough. He knew too well how the borough was managed, what slaves the electors were;--how
they groaned under a tyranny from which hitherto they had been unable to release themselves.
Of course the Earl's nominee, his lacquey, as the honourable gentleman might be called, would
be returned. The Earl could order them to return whichever of his lacqueys he pleased.--There
is something peculiarly pleasing to the democratic ear in the word lacquey! Any one serving
a big man, whatever the service may be, is the big man's lacquey in the People's Banner.--The
speech throughout was very bitter. Mr. Phineas Finn, who had previously served in Parliament
as the lacquey of an Irish earl, and had been turned off by him, had now fallen into the service
of the English earl, and was the lacquey chosen for the present occasion. But he, Quintus Slide,
who boasted himself to be a man of the people,--he could tell them that the days of their thraldom
were coming to an end, and that their enfranchisement was near at hand. That friend of the
people, Mr. Turnbull, had a clause in his breeches-pocket which he would either force down
the unwilling throat of Mr. Mildmay, or else drive the imbecile Premier from office by carrying
it in his teeth. Loughton, as Loughton, must be destroyed, but it should be born again in a
better birth as a part of a real electoral district, sending a real member, chosen by a real
constituency, to a real Parliament. In those days,--and they would come soon,--Mr. Quintus
Slide rather thought that Mr. Phineas Finn would be found "nowhere," and he rather thought
also that when he showed himself again, as he certainly should do, in the midst of that democratic
electoral district as the popular candidate for the honour of representing it in Parliament,
that democratic electoral district would accord to him a reception very different from that
which he was now receiving from the Earl's lacqueys in the parliamentary village of Loughton.
A prettier bit of fiction than these sentences as composing a part of any speech delivered,
or proposed to be delivered, at Loughton, Phineas thought he had never seen. And when he read
at the close of the speech that though the Earl's hired bullies did their worst, the remarks
of Mr. Slide were received by the people with reiterated cheering, he threw himself back in
his chair at the Treasury and roared. The poor fellow had been three minutes on his legs, had
received three rotten eggs, and one dead dog, and had retired. But not the half of the speech
as printed in the People's Banner has been quoted. The sins of Phineas, who in spite of his
inability to open his mouth in public had been made a Treasury hack by the aristocratic influence,--"by
aristocratic influence not confined to the male sex,"--were described at great length, and
in such language that Phineas for a while was fool enough to think that it would be his duty
to belabour Mr. Slide with a horsewhip. This notion, however, did not endure long with him,
and when Mr. Monk told him that things of that kind came as a matter of course, he was comforted.

But he found it much more difficult to obtain comfort when he weighed the arguments brought
forward against the abominations of such a borough as that for which he sat, and reflected
that if Mr. Turnbull brought forward his clause, he, Phineas Finn, would be bound to vote against
the clause, knowing the clause to be right, because he was a servant of the Government. The
arguments, even though they appeared in the People's Banner, were true arguments; and he had
on one occasion admitted their truth to his friend Lady Laura,--in the presence of that great
Cabinet Minister, her husband. "What business has such a man as that down there? Is there a
single creature who wants him?" Lady Laura had said. "I don't suppose anybody does want Mr.
Quintus Slide," Phineas had replied; "but I am disposed to think the electors should choose
the man they do want, and that at present they have no choice left to them." "They are quite
satisfied," said Lady Laura, angrily. "Then, Lady Laura," continued Phineas, "that alone should
be sufficient to prove that their privilege of returning a member to Parliament is too much
for them. We can't defend it." "It is defended by tradition," said Mr. Kennedy. "And by its
great utility," said Lady Laura, bowing to the young member who was present, and forgetting
that very useless old gentleman, her cousin, who had sat for the borough for many years. "In
this country it doesn't do to go too fast," said Mr. Kennedy. "And then the mixture of vulgarity,
falsehood, and pretence!" said Lady Laura, shuddering as her mind recurred to the fact that
Mr. Quintus Slide had contaminated Loughton by his presence. "I am told that they hardly let
him leave the place alive."

Whatever Mr. Kennedy and Lady Laura might think about Loughton and the general question of
small boroughs, it was found by the Government, to their great cost, that Mr. Turnbull's clause
was a reality. After two months of hard work, all questions of franchise had been settled,
rating and renting, new and newfangled, fancy franchises and those which no one fancied, franchises
for boroughs and franchises for counties, franchises single, dual, three-cornered, and four-sided,--by
various clauses to which the Committee of the whole House had agreed after some score of divisions,--the
matter of the franchise had been settled. No doubt there was the House of Lords, and there
might yet be shipwreck. But it was generally believed that the Lords would hardly look at the
bill,--that they would not even venture on an amendment. The Lords would only be too happy
to let the matter be settled by the Commons themselves. But then, after the franchise, came
redistribution. How sick of the subject were all members of the Government, no one could tell
who did not see their weary faces. The whole House was sick, having been whipped into various
lobbies, night after night, during the heat of the summer, for weeks past. Redistribution!
Why should there be any redistribution? They had got, or would get, a beautiful franchise.
Could they not see what that would do for them? Why redistribute anything? But, alas, it was
too late to go back to so blessed an idea as that! Redistribution they must have. But there
should be as little redistribution as possible. Men were sick of it all, and would not be exigeant.
Something should be done for overgrown counties;--something for new towns which had prospered
in brick and mortar. It would be easy to crush up a peccant borough or two,--a borough that
had been discovered in its sin. And a few boroughs now blessed with two members might consent
to be blessed only with one. Fifteen small clauses might settle the redistribution, in spite
of Mr. Turnbull,--if only Mr. Daubeny would be good-natured.

Neither the weather, which was very hot, nor the tedium of the session, which had been very
great, nor the anxiety of Ministers, which was very pressing, had any effect in impairing the
energy of Mr. Turnbull. He was as instant, as oratorical, as hostile, as indignant about redistribution
as he had been about the franchise. He had been sure then, and he was sure now, that Ministers
desired to burke the question, to deceive the people, to produce a bill that should be no bill.
He brought out his clause,--and made Loughton his instance. "Would the honourable gentleman
who sat lowest on the Treasury bench,--who at this moment was in sweet confidential intercourse
with the right honourable gentleman now President of the Board of Trade, who had once been
a friend of the people,--would the young Lord of the Treasury get up in his place and tell
them that no peer of Parliament had at present a voice in sending a member to their House of
Commons,--that no peer would have a voice if this bill, as proposed by the Government, were
passed in its present useless, ineffectual, conservative, and most dishonest form?"

Phineas, who replied to this, and who told Mr. Turnbull that he himself could not answer for
any peers,--but that he thought it probable that most peers would, by their opinions, somewhat
influence the opinions of some electors,--was thought to have got out of his difficulty very
well. But there was the clause of Mr. Turnbull to be dealt with,--a clause directly disfranchising
seven single-winged boroughs, of which Loughton was of course one,--a clause to which the Government
must either submit or object. Submission would be certain defeat in one way, and objection
would be as certain defeat in another,--if the gentlemen on the other side were not disposed
to assist the ministers. It was said that the Cabinet was divided. Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk
were for letting the seven boroughs go. Mr. Mildmay could not bring himself to obey Mr. Turnbull,
and Mr. Palliser supported him. When Mr. Mildmay was told that Mr. Daubeny would certainly
go into the same lobby with Mr. Turnbull respecting the seven boroughs, he was reported to
have said that in that case Mr. Daubeny must be prepared with a Government. Mr. Daubeny made
a beautiful speech about the seven boroughs;--the seven sins, and seven stars, and seven churches,
and seven lamps. He would make no party question of this. Gentlemen who usually acted with
him would vote as their own sense of right or wrong directed them;--from which expression of
a special sanction it was considered that these gentlemen were not accustomed to exercise the
privilege now accorded to them. But in regarding the question as one of right and wrong, and
in looking at what he believed to be both the wish of the country and its interests, he, Mr.
Daubeny,--he, himself, being simply a humble member of that House,--must support the clause
of the honourable gentleman. Almost all those to whom had been surrendered the privilege of
using their own judgment for that occasion only, used it discreetly,--as their chief had used
it himself,--and Mr. Turnbull carried his clause by a majority of fifteen. It was then 3 a.m.,
and Mr. Gresham, rising after the division, said that his right honourable friend the First
Lord of the Treasury was too tired to return to the House, and had requested him to state that
the Government would declare their purpose at 6 p.m. on the following evening.

Phineas, though he had made his little speech in answer to Mr. Turnbull with good-humoured
flippancy, had recorded his vote in favour of the seven boroughs with a sore heart. Much as
he disliked Mr. Turnbull, he knew that Mr. Turnbull was right in this. He had spoken to Mr.
Monk on the subject, as it were asking Mr. Monk's permission to throw up his office, and vote
against Mr. Mildmay. But Mr. Monk was angry with him, telling him that his conscience was of
that restless, uneasy sort which is neither useful nor manly. "We all know," said Mr. Monk,
"and none better than Mr. Mildmay, that we cannot justify such a borough as Loughton by the
theory of our parliamentary representation,--any more than we can justify the fact that Huntingdonshire
should return as many members as the East Riding. There must be compromises, and you should
trust to others who have studied the matter more thoroughly than you, to say how far the compromise
should go at the present moment."

"It is the influence of the peer, not the paucity of the electors," said Phineas.

"And has no peer any influence in a county? Would you disfranchise Westmoreland? Believe me,
Finn, if you want to be useful, you must submit yourself in such matters to those with whom
you act."

Phineas had no answer to make, but he was not happy in his mind. And he was the less happy,
perhaps, because he was very sure that Mr. Mildmay would be beaten. Mr. Low in these days harassed
him sorely. Mr. Low was very keen against such boroughs as Loughton, declaring that Mr. Daubeny
was quite right to join his standard to that of Mr. Turnbull on such an issue. Mr. Low was
the reformer now, and Phineas found himself obliged to fight a losing battle on behalf of an
acknowledged abuse. He never went near Bunce; but, unfortunately for him, Bunce caught him
once in the street and showed him no mercy. "Slide was a little 'eavy on you in the Banner
the other day,--eh, Mr. Finn?--too 'eavy, as I told him."

"Mr. Slide can be just as heavy as he pleases, Bunce."

"That's in course. The press is free, thank God,--as yet. But it wasn't any good rattling away
at the Earl's little borough when it's sure to go. Of course it'll go, Mr. Finn."

"I think it will."

"The whole seven on 'em. The 'ouse couldn't but do it. They tell me it's all Mr. Mildmay's
own work, sticking out for keeping on 'em. He's very old, and so we'll forgive him. But he
must go, Mr. Finn."

"We shall know all about that soon, Bunce."

"If you don't get another seat, Mr. Finn, I suppose we shall see you back at the Inn. I hope
we may. It's better than being member for Loughton, Mr. Finn;--you may be sure of that." And
then Mr. Bunce passed on.

Mr. Turnbull carried his clause, and Loughton was doomed. Loughton and the other six deadly
sins were anathematized, exorcised, and finally got rid of out of the world by the voices of
the gentlemen who had been proclaiming the beauty of such pleasant vices all their lives, and
who in their hearts hated all changes that tended towards popular representation. But not the
less was Mr. Mildmay beaten; and, in accordance with the promise made by his first lieutenant
immediately after the vote was taken, the Prime Minister came forward on the next evening and
made his statement. He had already put his resignation into the hands of Her Majesty, and Her
Majesty had graciously accepted it. He was very old, and felt that the time had come in which
it behoved him to retire into that leisure which he thought he had, perhaps, earned. He had
hoped to carry this bill as the last act of his political life; but he was too old, too stiff,
as he said, in his prejudices, to bend further than he had bent already, and he must leave
the completion of the matter in other hands. Her Majesty had sent for Mr. Gresham, and Mr.
Gresham had already seen Her Majesty. Mr. Gresham and his other colleagues, though they dissented
from the clause which had been carried by the united efforts of gentlemen opposite to him,
and of gentlemen below him on his own side of the House, were younger men than he, and would,
for the country's sake,--and for the sake of Her Majesty,--endeavour to carry the bill through.
There would then, of course, be a dissolution, and the future Government would, no doubt, depend
on the choice of the country. From all which it was understood that Mr. Gresham was to go on
with the bill to a conclusion, whatever might be the divisions carried against him, and that
a new Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs must be chosen. Phineas understood, also, that
he had lost his seat at Loughton. For the borough of Loughton there would never again be an
election. "If I had been Mr. Mildmay, I would have thrown the bill up altogether," Lord Brentford
said afterwards; "but of course it was not for me to interfere."

The session was protracted for two months after that,--beyond the time at which grouse should
have been shot,--and by the 23rd of August became the law of the land. "I shall never get over
it," said Mr. Ratler to Mr. Finn, seated one terribly hot evening on a bench behind the Cabinet
Ministers,--"never. I don't suppose such a session for work was ever known before. Think what
it is to have to keep men together in August, with the thermometer at 81°, and the river stinking
like,--like the very mischief." Mr. Ratler, however, did not die.

On the last day of the session Laurence Fitzgibbon resigned. Rumours reached the ears of Phineas
as to the cause of this, but no certain cause was told him. It was said that Lord Cantrip had
insisted upon it, Laurence having by mischance been called upon for some official statement
during an unfortunate period of absence. There was, however, a mystery about it;--but the mystery
was not half so wonderful as the triumph to Phineas, when Mr. Gresham offered him the place.

"But I shall have no seat," said Phineas.

"We shall none of us have seats to-morrow," said Mr. Gresham.

"But I shall be at a loss to find a place to stand for."

"The election will not come on till November, and you must look about you. Both Mr. Monk and
Lord Brentford seem to think you will be in the House."

And so the bill was carried, and the session was ended.

CHAPTER XLVIII

"The Duke"

By the middle of September there was assembled a large party at Matching Priory, a country
mansion belonging to Mr. Plantagenet Palliser. The men had certainly been chosen in reference
to their political feelings and position,--for there was not a guest in the house who had voted
for Mr. Turnbull's clause, or the wife or daughter, or sister of any one who had so voted.
Indeed, in these days politics ran so high that among politicians all social gatherings were
brought together with some reference to the state of parties. Phineas was invited, and when
he arrived at Matching he found that half the Cabinet was there. Mr. Kennedy was not there,
nor was Lady Laura. Mr. Monk was there, and the Duke,--with the Duchess, and Mr. Gresham, and
Lord Thrift; Mrs. Max Goesler was there also, and Mrs. Bonteen,--Mr. Bonteen being detained
somewhere out of the way; and Violet Effingham was expected in two days, and Lord Chiltern
at the end of the week. Lady Glencora took an opportunity of imparting this latter information
to Phineas very soon after his arrival; and Phineas, as he watched her eye and her mouth while
she spoke, was quite sure that Lady Glencora knew the story of the duel. "I shall be delighted
to see him again," said Phineas. "That is all right," said Lady Glencora. There were also there
Mr. and Mrs. Grey, who were great friends of the Pallisers,--and on the very day on which Phineas
reached Matching, at half an hour before the time for dressing, the Duke of Omnium arrived.
Now, Mr. Palliser was the Duke's nephew and heir,--and the Duke of Omnium was a very great
person indeed. I hardly know why it should have been so, but the Duke of Omnium was certainly
a greater man in public estimation than the other duke then present,--the Duke of St. Bungay.
The Duke of St. Bungay was a useful man, and had been so all his life, sitting in Cabinets
and serving his country, constant as any peer in the House of Lords, always ready to take on
his own shoulders any troublesome work required of him, than whom Mr. Mildmay, and Mr. Mildmay's
predecessor at the head of the liberal party, had had no more devoted adherent. But the Duke
of Omnium had never yet done a day's work on behalf of his country. They both wore the Garter,
the Duke of St. Bungay having earned it by service, the Duke of Omnium having been decorated
with the blue ribbon,--because he was Duke of Omnium. The one was a moral, good man, a good
husband, a good father, and a good friend. The other,--did not bear quite so high a reputation.
But men and women thought but little of the Duke of St. Bungay, while the other duke was regarded
with an almost reverential awe. I think the secret lay in the simple fact that the Duke of
Omnium had not been common in the eyes of the people. He had contrived to envelope himself
in something of the ancient mystery of wealth and rank. Within three minutes of the Duke's
arrival Mrs. Bonteen, with an air of great importance, whispered a word to Phineas. "He has
come. He arrived exactly at seven!"

"Who has come?" Phineas asked.

"The Duke of Omnium!" she said, almost reprimanding him by her tone of voice for his indifference.
"There has been a great doubt whether or no he would show himself at last. Lady Glencora told
me that he never will pledge himself. I am so glad he has come."

"I don't think I ever saw him," said Phineas.

"Oh, I have seen him,--a magnificent-looking man! I think it is so very nice of Lady Glencora
getting him to meet us. It is very rarely that he will join in a great party, but they say
Lady Glencora can do anything with him since the heir was born. I suppose you have heard all
about that."

"No," said Phineas; "I have heard nothing of the heir, but I know that there are three or four
babies."

"There was no heir, you know, for a year and a half, and they were all au désespoir; and the
Duke was very nearly quarrelling with his nephew; and Mr. Palliser--; you know it had very
nearly come to a separation."

"I don't know anything at all about it," said Phineas, who was not very fond of the lady who
was giving him the information.

"It is so, I can assure you; but since the boy was born Lady Glencora can do anything with
the Duke. She made him go to Ascot last spring, and he presented her with the favourite for
one of the races on the very morning the horse ran. They say he gave three thousand pounds
for him."

"And did Lady Glencora win?"

"No;--the horse lost; and Mr. Palliser has never known what to do with him since. But it was
very pretty of the Duke;--was it not?"

Phineas, though he had intended to show to Mrs. Bonteen how little he thought about the Duke
of Omnium,--how small was his respect for a great peer who took no part in politics,--could
not protect himself from a certain feeling of anxiety as to the aspect and gait and words of
the man of whom people thought so much, of whom he had heard so often, and of whom he had seen
so little. He told himself that the Duke of Omnium should be no more to him than any other
man, but yet the Duke of Omnium was more to him than other men. When he came down into the
drawing-room he was angry with himself, and stood apart;--and was then angry with himself again
because he stood apart. Why should he make a difference in his own bearing because there was
such a man in the company? And yet he could not avoid it. When he entered the room the Duke
was standing in a large bow-window, and two or three ladies and two or three men were standing
round him. Phineas would not go near the group, telling himself that he would not approach
a man so grand as was the Duke of Omnium. He saw Madame Max Goesler among the party, and after
a while he saw her retreat. As she retreated, Phineas knew that some words from Madame Max
Goesler had not been received with the graciousness which she had expected. There was the prettiest
smile in the world on the lady's face, and she took a corner on a sofa with an air of perfect
satisfaction. But yet Phineas knew that she had received a wound.

"I called twice on you in London," said Phineas, coming up close to her, "but was not fortunate
enough to find you!"

"Yes;--but you came so late in the season as to make it impossible that there should be any
arrangements for our meeting. What can any woman do when a gentleman calls on her in August?"

"I came in July."

"Yes, you did; on the 31st. I keep the most accurate record of all such things, Mr. Finn. But
let us hope that we may have better luck next year. In the meantime, we can only enjoy the
good things that are going."

"Socially, or politically, Madame Goesler?"

"Oh, socially. How can I mean anything else when the Duke of Omnium is here? I feel so much
taller at being in the same house with him. Do not you? But you are a spoilt child of fortune,
and perhaps you have met him before."

"I think I once saw the back of a hat in the park, and somebody told me that the Duke's head
was inside it."

"And you have never seen him but that once?"

"Never but that once,--till now."

"And do not you feel elated?"

"Of course I do. For what do you take me, Madame Goesler?"

"I do,--immensely. I believe him to be a fool, and I never heard of his doing a kind act to
anybody in my life."

"Not when he gave the racehorse to Lady Glencora?"

"I wonder whether that was true. Did you ever hear of such an absurdity? As I was saying, I
don't think he ever did anything for anybody;--but then, you know, to be Duke of Omnium! It
isn't necessary,--is it,--that a Duke of Omnium should do anything except be Duke of Omnium?"

At this moment Lady Glencora came up to Phineas, and took him across to the Duke. The Duke
had expressed a desire to be introduced to him. Phineas, half-pleased and half-disgusted, had
no alternative, and followed Lady Glencora. The Duke shook hands with him, and made a little
bow, and said something about the garrotters, which Phineas, in his confusion, did not quite
understand. He tried to reply as he would have replied to anybody else, but the weight of the
Duke's majesty was too much for him, and he bungled. The Duke made another little bow, and
in a moment was speaking a word of condescension to some other favoured individual. Phineas
retreated altogether disgusted,--hating the Duke, but hating himself worse; but he would not
retreat in the direction of Madame Max Goesler. It might suit that lady to take an instant
little revenge for her discomfiture, but it did not suit him to do so. The question with him
would be, whether in some future part of his career it might not be his duty to assist in putting
down Dukes of Omnium.

At dinner Phineas sat between Mrs. Bonteen and the Duchess of St. Bungay, and did not find
himself very happy. At the other end of the table the Duke,--the great Duke, was seated at
Lady Glencora's right hand, and on his other side Fortune had placed Madame Max Goesler. The
greatest interest which Phineas had during the dinner was in watching the operations,--the
triumphantly successful operations of that lady. Before dinner she had been wounded by the
Duke. The Duke had not condescended to accord the honour of his little bow of graciousness
to some little flattering morsel of wit which the lady had uttered on his behoof. She had said
a sharp word or two in her momentary anger to Phineas; but when Fortune was so good to her
in that matter of her place at dinner, she was not fool enough to throw away her chance. Throughout
the soup and fish she was very quiet. She said a word or two after her first glass of champagne.
The Duke refused two dishes, one after another, and then she glided into conversation. By the
time that he had his roast mutton before him she was in full play, and as she eat her peach,
the Duke was bending over her with his most gracious smile.

"Didn't you think the session was very long, Mr. Finn?" said the Duchess to Phineas.

"Very long indeed, Duchess," said Phineas, with his attention still fixed on Madame Max Goesler.

"The Duke found it very troublesome."

"I daresay he did," said Phineas. That duke and that duchess were no more than any other man
and any other man's wife. The session had not been longer to the Duke of St. Bungay than to
all the public servants. Phineas had the greatest possible respect for the Duke of St. Bungay,
but he could not take much interest in the wailings of the Duchess on her husband's behalf.

"And things do seem to be so very uncomfortable now," said the Duchess,--thinking partly of
the resignation of Mr. Mildmay, and partly of the fact that her own old peculiar maid who had
lived with her for thirty years had retired into private life.

"Not so very bad, Duchess, I hope," said Phineas, observing that at this moment Madame Max
Goesler's eyes were brilliant with triumph. Then there came upon him a sudden ambition,--that
he would like to "cut out" the Duke of Omnium in the estimation of Madame Max Goesler. The
brightness of Madame Max Goesler's eyes had not been thrown away upon our hero.

Violet Effingham came at the appointed time, and, to the surprise of Phineas, was brought to
Matching by Lord Brentford. Phineas at first thought that it was intended that the Earl and
his son should meet and make up their quarrel at Mr. Palliser's house. But Lord Brentford stayed
only one night, and Phineas on the next morning heard the whole history of his coming and going
from Violet. "I have almost been on my knees to him to stay," she said. "Indeed, I did go on
my knees,--actually on my knees."

"And what did he say?"

"He put his arm round me and kissed me, and,--and,--I cannot tell you all that he said. But
it ended in this,--that if Chiltern can be made to go to Saulsby, fatted calves without stint
will be killed. I shall do all I can to make him go; and so must you, Mr. Finn. Of course that
silly affair in foreign parts is not to make any difference between you two."

Phineas smiled, and said he would do his best, and looked up into her face, and was just able
to talk to her as though things were going comfortably with him. But his heart was very cold.
As Violet had spoken to him about Lord Chiltern there had come upon him, for the first time,--for
the first time since he had known that Lord Chiltern had been refused,--an idea, a doubt, whether
even yet Violet might not become Lord Chiltern's wife. His heart was very sad, but he struggled
on,--declaring that it was incumbent on them both to bring together the father and son.

"I am so glad to hear you say so, Mr. Finn," said Violet. "I really do believe that you can
do more towards it than any one else. Lord Chiltern would think nothing of my advice,--would
hardly speak to me on such a subject. But he respects you as well as likes you, and not the
less because of what has occurred."

How was it that Violet should know aught of the respect or liking felt by this rejected suitor
for that other suitor,--who had also been rejected? And how was it that she was thus able to
talk of one of them to the other, as though neither of them had ever come forward with such
a suit? Phineas felt his position to be so strange as to be almost burdensome. He had told
Violet, when she had refused him, very plainly, that he should come again to her, and ask once
more for the great gift which he coveted. But he could not ask again now. In the first place,
there was that in her manner which made him sure that were he to do so, he would ask in vain;
and then he felt that she was placing a special confidence in him, against which he would commit
a sin were he to use her present intimacy with him for the purposes of making love. They two
were to put their shoulders together to help Lord Chiltern, and while doing so he could not
continue a suit which would be felt by both of them to be hostile to Lord Chiltern. There might
be opportunity for a chance word, and if so the chance word should be spoken; but he could
not make a deliberate attack, such as he had made in Portman Square. Violet also probably understood
that she had not now been caught in a mousetrap.

The Duke was to spend four days at Matching, and on the third day,--the day before Lord Chiltern
was expected,--he was to be seen riding with Madame Max Goesler by his side. Madame Max Goesler
was known as a perfect horsewoman,--one indeed who was rather fond of going a little fast on
horseback, and who rode well to hounds. But the Duke seldom moved out of a walk, and on this
occasion Madame Max was as steady in her seat and almost as slow as the mounted ghost in Don
Juan. But it was said by some there, especially by Mrs. Bonteen, that the conversation between
them was not slow. And on the next morning the Duke and Madame Max Goesler were together again
before luncheon, standing on a terrace at the back of the house, looking down on a party who
were playing croquet on the lawn.

"Do you never play?" said the Duke.

"Oh yes;--one does everything a little."

"I am sure you would play well. Why do you not play now?"

"No;--I shall not play now."

"I should like to see you with your mallet."

"I am sorry your Grace cannot be gratified. I have played croquet till I am tired of it, and
have come to think it is only fit for boys and girls. The great thing is to give them opportunities
for flirting, and it does that."

"And do you never flirt, Madame Goesler?"

"Never at croquet, Duke."

"And what with you is the choicest time?"

"That depends on so many things,--and so much on the chosen person. What do you recommend?"

"Ah,--I am so ignorant. I can recommend nothing."

"What do you say to a mountain-top at dawn on a summer day?" asked Madame Max Goesler.

"You make me shiver," said the Duke.

"Or a boat on a lake on a summer evening, or a good lead after hounds with nobody else within
three fields, or the bottom of a salt-mine, or the deck of an ocean steamer, or a military
hospital in time of war, or a railway journey from Paris to Marseilles?"

"Madame Max Goesler, you have the most uncomfortable ideas."

"I have no doubt your Grace has tried each of them,--successfully. But perhaps, after all,
a comfortable chair over a good fire, in a pretty room, beats everything."

"I think it does,--certainly," said the Duke. Then he whispered something at which Madame Max
Goesler blushed and smiled, and immediately after that she followed those who had already gone
in to lunch.

Mrs. Bonteen had been hovering round the spot on the terrace on which the Duke and Madame Max
Goesler had been standing, looking on with envious eyes, meditating some attack, some interruption,
some excuse for an interpolation, but her courage had failed her and she had not dared to approach.
The Duke had known nothing of the hovering propinquity of Mrs. Bonteen, but Madame Goesler
had seen and had understood it all.

"Dear Mrs. Bonteen," she said afterwards, "why did you not come and join us? The Duke was so
pleasant."

"Two is company, and three is none," said Mrs. Bonteen, who in her anger was hardly able to
choose her words quite as well as she might have done had she been more cool.

"Our friend Madame Max has made quite a new conquest," said Mrs. Bonteen to Lady Glencora.

"I am so pleased," said Lady Glencora, with apparently unaffected delight. "It is such a great
thing to get anybody to amuse my uncle. You see everybody cannot talk to him, and he will not
talk to everybody."

"He talked enough to her in all conscience," said Mrs. Bonteen, who was now more angry than ever.

CHAPTER XLIX

The Duellists Meet

Lord Chiltern arrived, and Phineas was a little nervous as to their meeting. He came back from
shooting on the day in question, and was told by the servant that Lord Chiltern was in the
house. Phineas went into the billiard-room in his knickerbockers, thinking probably that he
might be there, and then into the drawing-room, and at last into the library,--but Lord Chiltern
was not to be found. At last he came across Violet.

"Have you seen him?" he asked.

"Yes;--he was with me half an hour since, walking round the gardens."

"And how is he? Come;--tell me something about him."

"I never knew him to be more pleasant. He would give no promise about Saulsby, but he did not
say that he would not go."

"Does he know that I am here?"

"Yes;--I told him so. I told him how much pleasure I should have in seeing you two together,--as
friends."

"And what did he say?"

"He laughed, and said you were the best fellow in the world. You see I am obliged to be explicit."

"But why did he laugh?" Phineas asked.

"He did not tell me, but I suppose it was because he was thinking of a little trip he once
took to Belgium, and he perceived that I knew all about it."

"I wonder who told you. But never mind. I do not mean to ask any questions. As I do not like
that our first meeting should be before all the people in the drawing-room, I will go to him
in his own room."

"Do, do;--that will be so nice of you."

Phineas sent his card up by a servant, and in a few minutes was standing with his hand on the
lock of Lord Chiltern's door. The last time he had seen this man, they had met with pistols
in their hands to shoot at each other, and Lord Chiltern had in truth done his very best to
shoot his opponent. The cause of quarrel was the same between them as ever. Phineas had not
given up Violet, and had no intention of giving her up. And he had received no intimation whatever
from his rival that there was to be a truce between them. Phineas had indeed written in friendship
to Lord Chiltern, but he had received no answer;--and nothing of certainty was to be gathered
from the report which Violet had just made. It might well be that Lord Chiltern would turn
upon him now in his wrath, and that there would be some scene which in a strange house would
be obviously objectionable. Nevertheless he had resolved that even that would be better than
a chance encounter among strangers in a drawing-room. So the door was opened and the two men met.

"Well, old fellow," said Lord Chiltern, laughing. Then all doubt was over, and in a moment
Phineas was shaking his former,--and present friend, warmly by the hand. "So we've come to
be an Under-Secretary have we?--and all that kind of thing."

"I had to get into harness,--when the harness offered itself," said Phineas.

"I suppose so. It's a deuce of a bore, isn't it?"

"I always liked work, you know."

"I thought you liked hunting better. You used to ride as if you did. There's Bonebreaker back
again in the stable for you. That poor fool who bought him could do nothing with him, and I
let him have his money back."

"I don't see why you should have done that."

"Because I was the biggest fool of the two. Do you remember when that brute got me down under
the bank in the river? That was about the nearest touch I ever had. Lord bless me;--how he
did squeeze me! So here you are;--staying with the Pallisers,--one of a Government party I
suppose. But what are you going to do for a seat, my friend?"

"Don't talk about that yet, Chiltern."

"A sore subject,--isn't it? I think they have been quite right, you know, to put Loughton into
the melting-pot,--though I'm sorry enough for your sake."

"Quite right," said Phineas.

"And yet you voted against it, old chap? But, come; I'm not going to be down upon you. So my
father has been here?"

"Yes;--he was here for a day or two."

"Violet has just been telling me. You and he are as good friends as ever?"

"I trust we are."

"He never heard of that little affair?" And Lord Chiltern nodded his head, intending to indicate
the direction of Blankenberg.

"I do not think he has yet."

"So Violet tells me. Of course you know that she has heard all about it."

"I have reason to suppose as much."

"And so does Laura."

"I told her myself," said Phineas.

"The deuce you did! But I daresay it was for the best. It's a pity you had not proclaimed it
at Charing Cross, and then nobody would have believed a word about it. Of course my father
will hear it some day."

"You are going to Saulsby, I hope, Chiltern?"

"That question is easier asked than answered. It is quite true that the great difficulty has
been got over. Laura has had her money. And if my father will only acknowledge that he has
wronged me throughout, from beginning to end, I will go to Saulsby to-morrow;--and would cut
you out at Loughton the next day, only that Loughton is not Loughton any longer."

"You cannot expect your father to do that."

"No;--and therefore there is a difficulty. So you've had that awfully ponderous Duke here.
How did you get on with him?"

"Admirably. He condescended to do something which he called shaking hands with me."

"He is the greatest old dust out," said Lord Chiltern, disrespectfully. "Did he take any notice
of Violet?"

"Not that I observed."

"He ought not to be allowed into the same room with her." After that there was a short pause,
and Phineas felt some hesitation in speaking of Miss Effingham to Lord Chiltern. "And how do
you get on with her?" asked Lord Chiltern. Here was a question for a man to answer. The question
was so hard to be answered, that Phineas did not at first make any attempt to answer it. "You
know exactly the ground that I stand on," continued Lord Chiltern. "She has refused me three
times. Have you been more fortunate?"

Lord Chiltern, as he asked his question, looked full into Finn's face in a manner that was
irresistible. His look was not one of anger nor even of pride. It was not, indeed, without
a strong dash of fun. But such as it was it showed Phineas that Lord Chiltern intended to have
an answer. "No," said he at last, "I have not been more fortunate."

"Perhaps you have changed your mind," said his host.

"No;--I have not changed my mind," said Phineas, quickly.

"How stands it then? Come;--let us be honest to each other. I told you down at Willingford
that I would quarrel with any man who attempted to cut me out with Violet Effingham. You made
up your mind that you would do so, and therefore I quarrelled with you. But we can't always
be fighting duels."

"I hope we may not have to fight another."

"No;--it would be absurd," said Lord Chiltern. "I rather think that what we did was absurd.
But upon my life I did not see any other way out of it. However, that is over. How is it to
be now?"

"What am I to say in answer to that?" asked Phineas.

"Just the truth. You have asked her, I suppose?"

"Yes;--I have asked her."

"And she has refused you?"

"Yes;--she has refused me."

"And you mean to ask her again?"

"I shall;--if I ever think that there is a chance. Indeed, Chiltern, I believe I shall whether
I think that I have any chance or not."

"Then we start fairly, Finn. I certainly shall do so. I believe I once told you that I never
would;--but that was long before I suspected that you would enter for the same plate. What
a man says on such a matter when he is down in the mouth goes for nothing. Now we understand
each other, and you had better go and dress. The bell rang nearly half an hour ago, and my
fellow is hanging about outside the door."

The interview had in one respect been very pleasant to Phineas, and in another it had been
very bitter. It was pleasant to him to know that he and Lord Chiltern were again friends. It
was a delight to him to feel that this half-savage but high-spirited young nobleman, who had
been so anxious to fight with him and to shoot him, was nevertheless ready to own that he had
behaved well. Lord Chiltern had in fact acknowledged that though he had been anxious to blow
out our hero's brains, he was aware all the time that our hero was a good sort of fellow. Phineas
understood this, and felt that it was pleasant. But with this understanding, and accompanying
this pleasure, there was a conviction in his heart that the distance between Lord Chiltern
and Violet would daily grow to be less and still less,--and that Lord Chiltern could afford
to be generous. If Miss Effingham could teach herself to be fond of Lord Chiltern, what had
he, Phineas Finn, to offer in opposition to the claims of such a suitor?

That evening Lord Chiltern took Miss Effingham out to dinner. Phineas told himself that this
was of course so arranged by Lady Glencora, with the express view of serving the Saulsby interest.
It was almost nothing to him at the moment that Madame Max Goesler was intrusted to him. He
had his ambition respecting Madame Max Goesler; but that for the time was in abeyance. He could
hardly keep his eyes off Miss Effingham. And yet, as he well knew, his observation of her must
be quite useless. He knew beforehand, with absolute accuracy, the manner in which she would
treat her lover. She would be kind, genial, friendly, confidential, nay, affectionate; and
yet her manner would mean nothing, would give no clue to her future decision either for or
against Lord Chiltern. It was, as Phineas thought, a peculiarity with Violet Effingham that
she could treat her rejected lovers as dear familiar friends immediately after her rejection
of them.

"Mr. Finn," said Madame Max Goesler, "your eyes and ears are tell-tales of your passion."

"I hope not," said Phineas, "as I certainly do not wish that any one should guess how strong
is my regard for you."

"That is prettily turned,--very prettily turned; and shows more readiness of wit than I gave
you credit for under your present suffering. But of course we all know where your heart is.
Men do not undertake perilous journeys to Belgium for nothing."

"That unfortunate journey to Belgium! But, dear Madame Max, really nobody knows why I went."

"You met Lord Chiltern there?"

"Oh yes;--I met Lord Chiltern there."

"And there was a duel?"

"Madame Max,--you must not ask me to criminate myself!"

"Of course there was, and of course it was about Miss Effingham, and of course the lady thinks
herself bound to refuse both the gentlemen who were so very wicked, and of course--"

"Well,--what follows?"

"Ah! if you have not wit enough to see, I do not think it can be my duty to tell you. But I
wished to caution you as a friend that your eyes and ears should be more under your command."

"You will go to Saulsby?" Violet said to Lord Chiltern.

"I cannot possibly tell as yet," said he, frowning.

"Then I can tell you that you ought to go. I do not care a bit for your frowns. What does the
fifth commandment say?"

"If you have no better arguments than the commandments, Violet--"

"There can be none better. Do you mean to say that the commandments are nothing to you?"

"I mean to say that I shan't go to Saulsby because I am told in the twentieth chapter of Exodus
to honour my father and mother,--and that I shouldn't believe anybody who told me that he did
anything because of the commandments."

"Oh, Lord Chiltern!"

"People are so prejudiced and so used to humbug that for the most part they do not in the least
know their own motives for what they do. I will go to Saulsby to-morrow,--for a reward."

"For what reward?" said Violet, blushing.

"For the only one in the world that could tempt me to do anything."

"You should go for the sake of duty. I should not even care to see you go, much as I long for
it, if that feeling did not take you there."

It was arranged that Phineas and Lord Chiltern were to leave Matching together. Phineas was
to remain at his office all October, and in November the general election was to take place.
What he had hitherto heard about a future seat was most vague, but he was to meet Ratler and
Barrington Erle in London, and it had been understood that Barrington Erle, who was now at
Saulsby, was to make some inquiry as to that group of boroughs of which Loughton at this moment
formed one. But as Loughton was the smallest of four boroughs, and as one of the four had for
many years had a representative of its own, Phineas feared that no success would be found there.
In his present agony he began to think that there might be a strong plea made for a few private
seats in the House of Commons, and that the propriety of throwing Loughton into the melting-pot
was, after all, open to question. He and Lord Chiltern were to return to London together, and
Lord Chiltern, according to his present scheme, was to proceed at once to Willingford to look
after the cub-hunting. Nothing that either Violet or Phineas could say to him would induce
him to promise to go to Saulsby. When Phineas pressed it, he was told by Lord Chiltern that
he was a fool for his pains,--by which Phineas understood perfectly well that when Lord Chiltern
did go to Saulsby, he, Phineas, was to take that as strong evidence that everything was over
for him as regarded Violet Effingham. When Violet expressed her eagerness that the visit should
be made, she was stopped with an assurance that she could have it done at once if she pleased.
Let him only be enabled to carry with him the tidings of his betrothal, and he would start
for his father's house without an hour's delay. But this authority Violet would not give him.
When he answered her after this fashion she could only tell him that he was ungenerous. "At
any rate I am not false," he replied on one occasion. "What I say is the truth."

There was a very tender parting between Phineas and Madame Max Goesler. She had learned from
him pretty nearly all his history, and certainly knew more of the reality of his affairs than
any of those in London who had been his most staunch friends. "Of course you'll get a seat,"
she said as he took his leave of her. "If I understand it at all, they never throw over an
ally so useful as you are."

"But the intention is that in this matter nobody shall any longer have the power of throwing
over, or of not throwing over, anybody."

"That is all very well, my friend; but cakes will still be hot in the mouth, even though Mr.
Daubeny turn purist, with Mr. Turnbull to help him. If you want any assistance in finding a
seat you will not go to the People's Banner,--even yet."

"Certainly not to the People's Banner."

"I don't quite understand what the franchise is," continued Madame Max Goesler.

"Household in boroughs," said Phineas with some energy.

"Very well;--household in boroughs. I daresay that is very fine and very liberal, though I
don't comprehend it in the least. And you want a borough. Very well. You won't go to the households.
I don't think you will;--not at first, that is."

"Where shall I go then?"

"Oh,--to some great patron of a borough;--or to a club;--or perhaps to some great firm. The
households will know nothing about it till they are told. Is not that it?"

"The truth is, Madame Max, I do not know where I shall go. I am like a child lost in a wood.
And you may understand this;--if you do not see me in Park Lane before the end of January,
I shall have perished in the wood."

"Then I will come and find you,--with a troop of householders. You will come. You will be there.
I do not believe in death coming without signs. You are full of life." As she spoke, she had
hold of his hand, and there was nobody near them. They were in a little book-room inside the
library at Matching, and the door, though not latched, was nearly closed. Phineas had flattered
himself that Madame Goesler had retreated there in order that this farewell might be spoken
without interruption. "And, Mr. Finn;--I wonder whether I may say one thing," she continued.

"You may say anything to me," he replied.

"No,--not in this country, in this England. There are things one may not say here,--that are
tabooed by a sort of consent,--and that without any reason." She paused again, and Phineas
was at a loss to think what was the subject on which she was about to speak. Could she mean--?
No; she could not mean to give him any outward plain-spoken sign that she was attached to him.
It was the peculiar merit of this man that he was not vain, though much was done to him to
fill him with vanity; and as the idea crossed his brain, he hated himself because it had been
there.

"To me you may say anything, Madame Goesler," he said,--"here in England, as plainly as though
we were in Vienna."

"But I cannot say it in English," she said. Then in French, blushing and laughing as she spoke,--almost
stammering in spite of her usual self-confidence,--she told him that accident had made her
rich, full of money. Money was a drug with her. Money she knew was wanted, even for householders.
Would he not understand her, and come to her, and learn from her how faithful a woman could be?

He still was holding her by the hand, and he now raised it to his lips and kissed it. "The
offer from you," he said, "is as high-minded, as generous, and as honourable as its acceptance
by me would be mean-spirited, vile, and ignoble. But whether I fail or whether I succeed, you
shall see me before the winter is over."

CHAPTER L

Again Successful

Phineas also said a word of farewell to Violet before he left Matching, but there was nothing
peculiar in her little speech to him, or in his to her. "Of course we shall see each other
in London. Don't talk of not being in the House. Of course you will be in the House." Then
Phineas had shaken his head and smiled. Where was he to find a requisite number of householders
prepared to return him? But as he went up to London he told himself that the air of the House
of Commons was now the very breath of his nostrils. Life to him without it would be no life.
To have come within the reach of the good things of political life, to have made his mark so
as to have almost insured future success, to have been the petted young official aspirant of
the day,--and then to sink down into the miserable platitudes of private life, to undergo daily
attendance in law-courts without a brief, to listen to men who had come to be much below him
in estimation and social intercourse, to sit in a wretched chamber up three pairs of stairs
at Lincoln's Inn, whereas he was now at this moment provided with a gorgeous apartment looking
out into the Park from the Colonial Office in Downing Street, to be attended by a mongrel between
a clerk and an errand boy at 17s. 6d. a week instead of by a private secretary who was the
son of an earl's sister, and was petted by countesses' daughters innumerable,--all this would
surely break his heart. He could have done it, so he told himself, and could have taken glory
in doing it, had not these other things come in his way. But the other things had come. He
had run the risk, and had thrown the dice. And now when the game was so nearly won, must it
be that everything should be lost at last?

He knew that nothing was to be gained by melancholy looks at his club, or by show of wretchedness
at his office. London was very empty; but the approaching elections still kept some there who
otherwise would have been looking after the first flush of pheasants. Barrington Erle was there,
and was not long in asking Phineas what were his views.

"Ah;--that is so hard to say. Ratler told me that he would be looking about."

"Ratler is very well in the House," said Barrington, "but he is of no use for anything beyond
it. I suppose you were not brought up at the London University?"

"Oh no," said Phineas, remembering the glories of Trinity.

"Because there would have been an opening. What do you say to Stratford,--the new Essex borough?"

"Broadbury the brewer is there already!"

"Yes;--and ready to spend any money you like to name. Let me see. Loughton is grouped with
Smotherem, and Walker is a deal too strong at Smotherem to hear of any other claim. I don't
think we could dare to propose it. There are the Chelsea hamlets, but it will take a wack of
money."

"I have not got a wack of money," said Phineas, laughing.

"That's the devil of it. I think, if I were you, I should hark back upon some place in Ireland.
Couldn't you get Laurence to give you up his seat?"

"What! Fitzgibbon?"

"Yes. He has not a ghost of a chance of getting into office again. Nothing on earth would induce
him to look at a paper during all those weeks he was at the Colonial Office; and when Cantrip
spoke to him, all he said was, 'Ah, bother!' Cantrip did not like it, I can tell you."

"But that wouldn't make him give up his seat."

"Of course you'd have to arrange it." By which Phineas understood Barrington Erle to mean that
he, Phineas, was in some way to give to Laurence Fitzgibbon some adequate compensation for
the surrender of his position as a county member.

"I'm afraid that's out of the question," said Phineas. "If he were to go, I should not get it."

"Would you have a chance at Loughshane?"

"I was thinking of trying it," said Phineas.

"Of course you know that Morris is very ill." This Mr. Morris was the brother of Lord Tulla,
and was the sitting member of Loughshane. "Upon my word I think I should try that. I don't
see where we're to put our hands on a seat in England. I don't indeed." Phineas, as he listened
to this, could not help thinking that Barrington Erle, though he had certainly expressed a
great deal of solicitude, was not as true a friend as he used to be. Perhaps he, Phineas, had
risen too fast, and Barrington Erle was beginning to think that he might as well be out of the way.

He wrote to his father, asking after the borough, and asking after the health of Mr. Morris.
And in his letter he told his own story very plainly,--almost pathetically. He perhaps had
been wrong to make the attempt which he had made. He began to believe that he had been wrong.
But at any rate he had made it so far successfully, and failure now would be doubly bitter.
He thought that the party to which he belonged must now remain in office. It would hardly be
possible that a new election would produce a House of Commons favourable to a conservative
ministry. And with a liberal ministry he, Phineas, would be sure of his place, and sure of
an official income,--if only he could find a seat. It was all very true, and was almost pathetic.
The old doctor, who was inclined to be proud of his son, was not unwilling to make a sacrifice.
Mrs. Finn declared before her daughters that if there was a seat in all Ireland, Phineas ought
to have it. And Mary Flood Jones stood by listening, and wondering what Phineas would do if
he lost his seat. Would he come back and live in County Clare, and be like any other girl's
lover? Poor Mary had come to lose her ambition, and to think that girls whose lovers stayed
at home were the happiest. Nevertheless, she would have walked all the way to Lord Tulla's
house and back again, might that have availed to get the seat for Phineas. Then there came
an express over from Castlemorris. The doctor was wanted at once to see Mr. Morris. Mr. Morris
was very bad with gout in his stomach. According to the messenger it was supposed that Mr.
Morris was dying. Before Dr. Finn had had an opportunity of answering his son's letter, Mr.
Morris, the late member for Loughshane, had been gathered to his fathers.

Dr. Finn understood enough of elections for Parliament, and of the nature of boroughs, to be
aware that a candidate's chance of success is very much improved by being early in the field;
and he was aware, also, that the death of Mr. Morris would probably create various aspirants
for the honour of representing Loughshane. But he could hardly address the Earl on the subject
while the dead body of the late member was lying in the house at Castlemorris. The bill which
had passed in the late session for reforming the constitution of the House of Commons had not
touched Ireland, a future measure having been promised to the Irish for their comfort; and
Loughshane therefore was, as to Lord Tulla's influence, the same as it had ever been. He had
not there the plenary power which the other lord had held in his hands in regard to Loughton;--but
still the Castlemorris interest would go a long way. It might be possible to stand against
it, but it would be much more desirable that the candidate should have it at his back. Dr.
Finn was fully alive to this as he sat opposite to the old lord, saying now a word about the
old lord's gout in his legs and arms, and then about the gout in the stomach, which had carried
away to another world the lamented late member for the borough.

"Poor Jack!" said Lord Tulla, piteously. "If I'd known it, I needn't have paid over two thousand
pounds for him last year;--need I, doctor?"

"No, indeed," said Dr. Finn, feeling that his patient might perhaps approach the subject of
the borough himself.

"He never would live by any rule, you know," said the desolate brother.

"Very hard to guide;--was he not, my lord?"

"The very devil. Now, you see, I do do what I'm told pretty well,--don't I, doctor?"

"Sometimes."

"By George, I do nearly always. I don't know what you mean by sometimes. I've been drinking
brandy-and-water till I'm sick of it, to oblige you, and you tell me about--sometimes. You
doctors expect a man to be a slave. Haven't I kept it out of my stomach?"

"Thank God, yes."

"It's all very well thanking God, but I should have gone as poor Jack has gone, if I hadn't
been the most careful man in the world. He was drinking champagne ten days ago;--would do it,
you know." Lord Tulla could talk about himself and his own ailments by the hour together, and
Dr. Finn, who had thought that his noble patient was approaching the subject of the borough,
was beginning again to feel that the double interest of the gout that was present, and the
gout that had passed away, would be too absorbing. He, however, could say but little to direct
the conversation.

"Mr. Morris, you see, lived more in London than you do, and was subject to temptation."

"I don't know what you call temptation. Haven't I the temptation of a bottle of wine under
my nose every day of my life?"

"No doubt you have."

"And I don't drink it. I hardly ever take above a glass or two of brown sherry. By George!
when I think of it, I wonder at my own courage. I do, indeed."

"But a man in London, my lord--"

"Why the deuce would he go to London? By-the-bye, what am I to do about the borough now?"

"Let my son stand for it, if you will, my lord."

"They've clean swept away Brentford's seat at Loughton, haven't they? Ha, ha, ha! What a nice
game for him,--to have been forced to help to do it himself! There's nobody on earth I pity
so much as a radical peer who is obliged to work like a nigger with a spade to shovel away
the ground from under his own feet. As for me, I don't care who sits for Loughshane. I did
care for poor Jack while he was alive. I don't think I shall interfere any longer. I am glad
it lasted Jack's time." Lord Tulla had probably already forgotten that he himself had thrown
Jack over for the last session but one.

"Phineas, my lord," began the father, "is now Under-Secretary of State."

"Oh, I've no doubt he's a very fine fellow;--but you see, he's an out-and-out Radical."

"No, my lord."

"Then how can he serve with such men as Mr. Gresham and Mr. Monk? They've turned out poor old
Mildmay among them, because he's not fast enough for them. Don't tell me."

"My anxiety, of course, is for my boy's prospects. He seems to have done so well in Parliament."

"Why don't he stand for Marylebone or Finsbury?"

"The money, you know, my lord!"

"I shan't interfere here, doctor. If he comes, and the people then choose to return him, I
shall say nothing. They may do just as they please. They tell me Lambert St. George, of Mockrath,
is going to stand. If he does, it's the d---- piece of impudence I ever heard of. He's a tenant
of my own, though he has a lease for ever; and his father never owned an acre of land in the
county till his uncle died." Then the doctor knew that, with a little management, the lord's
interest might be secured for his son.

Phineas came over and stood for the borough against Mr. Lambert St. George, and the contest
was sharp enough. The gentry of the neighbourhood could not understand why such a man as Lord
Tulla should admit a liberal candidate to succeed his brother. No one canvassed for the young
Under-Secretary with more persistent zeal than did his father, who, when Phineas first spoke
of going into Parliament, had produced so many good arguments against that perilous step. Lord
Tulla's agent stood aloof,--desolate with grief at the death of the late member. At such a
moment of family affliction, Lord Tulla, he declared, could not think of such a matter as the
borough. But it was known that Lord Tulla was dreadfully jealous of Mr. Lambert St. George,
whose property in that part of the county was now nearly equal to his own, and who saw much
more company at Mockrath than was ever entertained at Castlemorris. A word from Lord Tulla,--so
said the Conservatives of the county,--would have put Mr. St. George into the seat; but that
word was not spoken, and the Conservatives of the neighbourhood swore that Lord Tulla was a
renegade. The contest was very sharp, but our hero was returned by a majority of seventeen votes.

Again successful! As he thought of it he remembered stories of great generals who were said
to have chained Fortune to the wheels of their chariots, but it seemed to him that the goddess
had never served any general with such staunch obedience as she had displayed in his cause.
Had not everything gone well with him;--so well, as almost to justify him in expecting that
even yet Violet Effingham would become his wife? Dear, dearest Violet! If he could only achieve
that, no general, who ever led an army across the Alps, would be his equal either in success
or in the reward of success. Then he questioned himself as to what he would say to Miss Flood
Jones on that very night. He was to meet dear little Mary Flood Jones that evening at a neighbour's
house. His sister Barbara had so told him in a tone of voice which he quite understood to imply
a caution. "I shall be so glad to see her," Phineas had replied.

"If there ever was an angel on earth, it is Mary," said Barbara Finn.

"I know that she is as good as gold," said Phineas.

"Gold!" replied Barbara,--"gold indeed! She is more precious than refined gold. But, Phineas,
perhaps you had better not single her out for any special attention. She has thought it wisest
to meet you."

"Of course," said Phineas. "Why not?"

"That is all, Phineas. I have nothing more to say. Men of course are different from girls."

"That's true, Barbara, at any rate."

"Don't laugh at me, Phineas, when I am thinking of nothing but of you and your interests, and
when I am making all manner of excuses for you because I know what must be the distractions
of the world in which you live." Barbara made more than one attempt to renew the conversation
before the evening came, but Phineas thought that he had had enough of it. He did not like
being told that excuses were made for him. After all, what had he done? He had once kissed
Mary Flood Jones behind the door.

"I am so glad to see you, Mary," he said, coming and taking a chair by her side. He had been
specially warned not to single Mary out for his attention, and yet there was the chair left
vacant as though it were expected that he would fall into it.

"Thank you. We did not happen to meet last year, did we,--Mr. Finn?"

"Do not call me Mr. Finn, Mary."

"You are such a great man now!"

"Not at all a great man. If you only knew what little men we understrappers are in London you
would hardly speak to me."

"But you are something--of State now;--are you not?"

"Well;--yes. That's the name they give me. It simply means that if any member wants to badger
some one in the House about the Colonies, I am the man to be badgered. But if there is any
credit to be had, I am not the man who is to have it."

"But it is a great thing to be in Parliament and in the Government too."

"It is a great thing for me, Mary, to have a salary, though it may only be for a year or two.
However, I will not deny that it is pleasant to have been successful."

"It has been very pleasant to us, Phineas. Mamma has been so much rejoiced."

"I am so sorry not to see her. She is at Floodborough, I suppose."

"Oh, yes;--she is at home. She does not like coming out at night in winter. I have been staying
here you know for two days, but I go home to-morrow."

"I will ride over and call on your mother." Then there was a pause in the conversation for
a moment. "Does it not seem odd, Mary, that we should see so little of each other?"

"You are so much away, of course."

"Yes;--that is the reason. But still it seems almost unnatural. I often wonder when the time
will come that I shall be quietly at home again. I have to be back in my office in London this
day week, and yet I have not had a single hour to myself since I have been at Killaloe. But
I will certainly ride over and see your mother. You will be at home on Wednesday I suppose."

"Yes,--I shall be at home."

Upon that he got up and went away, but again in the evening he found himself near her. Perhaps
there is no position more perilous to a man's honesty than that in which Phineas now found
himself;--that, namely, of knowing himself to be quite loved by a girl whom he almost loves
himself. Of course he loved Violet Effingham; and they who talk best of love protest that no
man or woman can be in love with two persons at once. Phineas was not in love with Mary Flood
Jones; but he would have liked to take her in his arms and kiss her;--he would have liked to
gratify her by swearing that she was dearer to him than all the world; he would have liked
to have an episode,--and did, at the moment, think that it might be possible to have one life
in London and another life altogether different at Killaloe. "Dear Mary," he said as he pressed
her hand that night, "things will get themselves settled at last, I suppose." He was behaving
very ill to her, but he did not mean to behave ill.

He rode over to Floodborough, and saw Mrs. Flood Jones. Mrs. Flood Jones, however, received
him very coldly; and Mary did not appear. Mary had communicated to her mother her resolutions
as to her future life. "The fact is, mamma, I love him. I cannot help it. If he ever chooses
to come for me, here I am. If he does not, I will bear it as well as I can. It may be very
mean of me, but it's true."

CHAPTER LI

Troubles at Loughlinter

There was a dull house at Loughlinter during the greater part of this autumn. A few men went
down for the grouse shooting late in the season; but they stayed but a short time, and when
they went Lady Laura was left alone with her husband. Mr. Kennedy had explained to his wife,
more than once, that though he understood the duties of hospitality and enjoyed the performance
of them, he had not married with the intention of living in a whirlwind. He was disposed to
think that the whirlwind had hitherto been too predominant, and had said so very plainly with
a good deal of marital authority. This autumn and winter were to be devoted to the cultivation
of proper relations between him and his wife. "Does that mean Darby and Joan?" his wife had
asked him, when the proposition was made to her. "It means mutual regard and esteem," replied
Mr. Kennedy in his most solemn tone, "and I trust that such mutual regard and esteem between
us may yet be possible." When Lady Laura showed him a letter from her brother, received some
weeks after this conversation, in which Lord Chiltern expressed his intention of coming to
Loughlinter for Christmas, he returned the note to his wife without a word. He suspected that
she had made the arrangement without asking him, and was angry; but he would not tell her that
her brother would not be welcome at his house. "It is not my doing," she said, when she saw
the frown on his brow.

"I said nothing about anybody's doing," he replied.

"I will write to Oswald and bid him not come, if you wish it. Of course you can understand
why he is coming."

"Not to see me, I am sure," said Mr. Kennedy.

"Nor me," replied Lady Laura. "He is coming because my friend Violet Effingham will be here."

"Miss Effingham! Why was I not told of this? I knew nothing of Miss Effingham's coming."

"Robert, it was settled in your own presence last July."

"I deny it."

Then Lady Laura rose up, very haughty in her gait and with something of fire in her eye, and
silently left the room. Mr. Kennedy, when he found himself alone, was very unhappy. Looking
back in his mind to the summer weeks in London, he remembered that his wife had told Violet
that she was to spend her Christmas at Loughlinter, that he himself had given a muttered assent
and that Violet,--as far as he could remember,--had made no reply. It had been one of those
things which are so often mentioned, but not settled. He felt that he had been strictly right
in denying that it had been "settled" in his presence;--but yet he felt that he had been wrong
in contradicting his wife so peremptorily. He was a just man, and he would apologise for his
fault; but he was an austere man, and would take back the value of his apology in additional
austerity. He did not see his wife for some hours after the conversation which has been narrated,
but when he did meet her his mind was still full of the subject. "Laura", he said, "I am sorry
that I contradicted you."

"I am quite used to it, Robert."

"No;--you are not used to it." She smiled and bowed her head. "You wrong me by saying that
you are used to it." Then he paused a moment, but she said not a word,--only smiled and bowed
her head again. "I remember," he continued, "that something was said in my presence to Miss
Effingham about her coming here at Christmas. It was so slight, however, that it had passed
out of my memory till recalled by an effort. I beg your pardon."

"That is unnecessary, Robert."

"It is, dear."

"And do you wish that I should put her off,--or put Oswald off,--or both? My brother never
yet has seen me in your house."

"And whose fault has that been?"

"I have said nothing about anybody's fault, Robert. I merely mentioned a fact. Will you let
me know whether I shall bid him stay away?"

"He is welcome to come,--only I do not like assignations for love-making."

"Assignations!"

"Clandestine meetings. Lady Baldock would not wish it."

"Lady Baldock! Do you think that Violet would exercise any secrecy in the matter,--or that
she will not tell Lady Baldock that Oswald will be here,--as soon as she knows it herself?"

"That has nothing to do with it."

"Surely, Robert, it must have much to do with it. And why should not these two young people
meet? The acknowledged wish of all the family is that they should marry each other. And in
this matter, at any rate, my brother has behaved extremely well." Mr. Kennedy said nothing
further at the time, and it became an understanding that Violet Effingham was to be a month
at Loughlinter, staying from the 20th of December to the 20th of January, and that Lord Chiltern
was to come there for Christmas,--which with him would probably mean three days.

Before Christmas came, however, there were various other sources of uneasiness at Loughlinter.
There had been, as a matter of course, great anxiety as to the elections. With Lady Laura this
anxiety had been very strong, and even Mr. Kennedy had been warmed with some amount of fire
as the announcements reached him of the successes and of the failures. The English returns
came first,--and then the Scotch, which were quite as interesting to Mr. Kennedy as the English.
His own seat was quite safe,--was not contested; but some neighbouring seats were sources of
great solicitude. Then, when this was over, there were the tidings from Ireland to be received;
and respecting one special borough in Ireland, Lady Laura evinced more solicitude than her
husband approved. There was much danger for the domestic bliss of the house of Loughlinter,
when things came to such a pass, and such words were spoken, as the election at Loughshane
produced.

"He is in," said Lady Laura, opening a telegram.

"Who is in?" said Mr. Kennedy, with that frown on his brow to which his wife was now well accustomed.
Though he asked the question, he knew very well who was the hero to whom the telegram referred.

"Our friend Phineas Finn," said Lady Laura, speaking still with an excited voice,--with a voice
that was intended to display excitement. If there was to be a battle on this matter, there
should be a battle. She would display all her anxiety for her young friend, and fling it in
her husband's face if he chose to take it as an injury. What,--should she endure reproach from
her husband because she regarded the interests of the man who had saved his life, of the man
respecting whom she had suffered so many heart-struggles, and as to whom she had at last come
to the conclusion that he should ever be regarded as a second brother, loved equally with the
elder brother? She had done her duty by her husband,--so at least she had assured herself;--and
should he dare to reproach her on this subject, she would be ready for the battle. And now
the battle came. "I am glad of this," she said, with all the eagerness she could throw into
her voice. "I am, indeed,--and so ought you to be." The husband's brow grew blacker and blacker,
but still he said nothing. He had long been too proud to be jealous, and was now too proud
to express his jealousy,--if only he could keep the expression back. But his wife would not
leave the subject. "I am so thankful for this," she said, pressing the telegram between her
hands. "I was so afraid he would fail!"

"You over-do your anxiety on such a subject," at last he said, speaking very slowly.

"What do you mean, Robert? How can I be over-anxious? If it concerned any other dear friend
that I have in the world, it would not be an affair of life and death. To him it is almost
so. I would have walked from here to London to get him his election." And as she spoke she
held up the clenched fist of her left hand, and shook it, while she still held the telegram
in her right hand.

"Laura, I must tell you that it is improper that you should speak of any man in those terms;--of
any man that is a stranger to your blood."

"A stranger to my blood! What has that to do with it? This man is my friend, is your friend;--saved
your life, has been my brother's best friend, is loved by my father,--and is loved by me, very
dearly. Tell me what you mean by improper!"

"I will not have you love any man,--very dearly."

"Robert!"

"I tell you that I will have no such expressions from you. They are unseemly, and are used
only to provoke me."

"Am I to understand that I am insulted by an accusation? If so, let me beg at once that I may
be allowed to go to Saulsby. I would rather accept your apology and retractation there than here."

"You will not go to Saulsby, and there has been no accusation, and there will be no apology.
If you please there will be no more mention of Mr. Finn's name between us, for the present.
If you will take my advice you will cease to think of him extravagantly;--and I must desire
you to hold no further direct communication with him."

"I have held no communication with him," said Lady Laura, advancing a step towards him. But
Mr. Kennedy simply pointed to the telegram in her hand, and left the room. Now in respect to
this telegram there had been an unfortunate mistake. I am not prepared to say that there was
any reason why Phineas himself should not have sent the news of his success to Lady Laura;
but he had not done so. The piece of paper which she still held crushed in her hand was in
itself very innocent. "Hurrah for the Loughshanes. Finny has done the trick." Such were the
words written on the slip, and they had been sent to Lady Laura by her young cousin, the clerk
in the office who acted as private secretary to the Under-Secretary of State. Lady Laura resolved
that her husband should never see those innocent but rather undignified words. The occasion
had become one of importance, and such words were unworthy of it. Besides, she would not condescend
to defend herself by bringing forward a telegram as evidence in her favour. So she burned the
morsel of paper.

Lady Laura and Mr. Kennedy did not meet again till late that evening. She was ill, she said,
and would not come down to dinner. After dinner she wrote him a note. "Dear Robert, I think
you must regret what you said to me. If so, pray let me have a line from you to that effect.
Yours affectionately, L." When the servant handed it to him, and he had read it, he smiled
and thanked the girl who had brought it, and said he would see her mistress just now. Anything
would be better than that the servants should know that there was a quarrel. But every servant
in the house had known all about it for the last three hours. When the door was closed and
he was alone, he sat fingering the note, thinking deeply how he should answer it, or whether
he would answer it at all. No; he would not answer it;--not in writing. He would give his wife
no written record of his humiliation. He had not acted wrongly. He had said nothing more than
now, upon mature consideration, he thought that the circumstances demanded. But yet he felt
that he must in some sort withdraw the accusation which he had made. If he did not withdraw
it, there was no knowing what his wife might do. About ten in the evening he went up to her
and made his little speech. "My dear, I have come to answer your note."

"I thought you would have written to me a line."

"I have come instead, Laura. Now, if you will listen to me for one moment, I think everything
will be made smooth."

"Of course I will listen," said Lady Laura, knowing very well that her husband's moment would
be rather tedious, and resolving that she also would have her moment afterwards.

"I think you will acknowledge that if there be a difference of opinion between you and me as
to any question of social intercourse, it will be better that you should consent to adopt my
opinion."

"You have the law on your side."

"I am not speaking of the law."

"Well;--go on, Robert. I will not interrupt you if I can help it."

"I am not speaking of the law. I am speaking simply of convenience, and of that which you must
feel to be right. If I wish that your intercourse with any person should be of such or such
a nature it must be best that you should comply with my wishes." He paused for her assent,
but she neither assented nor dissented. "As far as I can understand the position of a man and
wife in this country, there is no other way in which life can be made harmonious."

"Life will not run in harmonies."

"I expect that ours shall be made to do so, Laura. I need hardly say to you that I intend to
accuse you of no impropriety of feeling in reference to this young man."

"No, Robert; you need hardly say that. Indeed, to speak my own mind, I think that you need
hardly have alluded to it. I might go further, and say that such an allusion is in itself an
insult,--an insult now repeated after hours of deliberation,--an insult which I will not endure
to have repeated again. If you say another word in any way suggesting the possibility of improper
relations between me and Mr. Finn, either as to deeds or thoughts, as God is above me, I will
write to both my father and my brother, and desire them to take me from your house. If you
wish me to remain here, you had better be careful!" As she was making this speech, her temper
seemed to rise, and to become hot, and then hotter, till it glowed with a red heat. She had
been cool till the word insult, used by herself, had conveyed back to her a strong impression
of her own wrong,--or perhaps I should rather say a strong feeling of the necessity of becoming
indignant. She was standing as she spoke, and the fire flashed from her eyes, and he quailed
before her. The threat which she had held out to him was very dreadful to him. He was a man
terribly in fear of the world's good opinion, who lacked the courage to go through a great
and harassing trial in order that something better might come afterwards. His married life
had been unhappy. His wife had not submitted either to his will or to his ways. He had that
great desire to enjoy his full rights, so strong in the minds of weak, ambitious men, and he
had told himself that a wife's obedience was one of those rights which he could not abandon
without injury to his self-esteem. He had thought about the matter, slowly, as was his wont,
and had resolved that he would assert himself. He had asserted himself, and his wife told him
to his face that she would go away and leave him. He could detain her legally, but he could
not do even that without the fact of such forcible detention being known to all the world.
How was he to answer her now at this moment, so that she might not write to her father, and
so that his self-assertion might still be maintained?

"Passion, Laura, can never be right."

"Would you have a woman submit to insult without passion? I at any rate am not such a woman."
Then there was a pause for a moment. "If you have nothing else to say to me, you had better
leave me. I am far from well, and my head is throbbing."

He came up and took her hand, but she snatched it away from him. "Laura," he said, "do not
let us quarrel."

"I certainly shall quarrel if such insinuations are repeated."

"I made no insinuation."

"Do not repeat them. That is all."

He was cowed and left her, having first attempted to get out of the difficulty of his position
by making much of her alleged illness, and by offering to send for Dr. Macnuthrie. She positively
refused to see Dr. Macnuthrie, and at last succeeded in inducing him to quit the room.

This had occurred about the end of November, and on the 20th of December Violet Effingham reached
Loughlinter. Life in Mr. Kennedy's house had gone quietly during the intervening three weeks,
but not very pleasantly. The name of Phineas Finn had not been mentioned. Lady Laura had triumphed;
but she had no desire to acerbate her husband by any unpalatable allusion to her victory. And
he was quite willing to let the subject die away, if only it would die. On some other matters
he continued to assert himself, taking his wife to church twice every Sunday, using longer
family prayers than she approved, reading an additional sermon himself every Sunday evening,
calling upon her for weekly attention to elaborate household accounts, asking for her personal
assistance in much local visiting, initiating her into his favourite methods of family life
in the country, till sometimes she almost longed to talk again about Phineas Finn, so that
there might be a rupture, and she might escape. But her husband asserted himself within bounds,
and she submitted, longing for the coming of Violet Effingham. She could not write to her father
and beg to be taken away, because her husband would read a sermon to her on Sunday evening.

To Violet, very shortly after her arrival, she told her whole story. "This is terrible," said
Violet. "This makes me feel that I never will be married."

"And yet what can a woman become if she remain single? The curse is to be a woman at all."

"I have always felt so proud of the privileges of my sex," said Violet.

"I never have found them," said the other; "never. I have tried to make the best of its weaknesses,
and this is what I have come to! I suppose I ought to have loved some man."

"And did you never love any man?"

"No;--I think I never did,--not as people mean when they speak of love. I have felt that I
would consent to be cut in little pieces for my brother,--because of my regard for him."

"Ah, that is nothing."

"And I have felt something of the same thing for another,--a longing for his welfare, a delight
to hear him praised, a charm in his presence,--so strong a feeling for his interest, that were
he to go to wrack and ruin, I too, should, after a fashion, be wracked and ruined. But it has
not been love either."

"Do I know whom you mean? May I name him? It is Phineas Finn."

"Of course it is Phineas Finn."

"Did he ever ask you,--to love him?"

"I feared he would do so, and therefore accepted Mr. Kennedy's offer almost at the first word."

"I do not quite understand your reasoning, Laura."

"I understand it. I could have refused him nothing in my power to give him, but I did not wish
to be his wife."

"And he never asked you?"

Lady Laura paused a moment, thinking what reply she should make;--and then she told a fib.
"No; he never asked me." But Violet did not believe the fib. Violet was quite sure that Phineas
had asked Lady Laura Standish to be his wife. "As far as I can see," said Violet, "Madame Max
Goesler is his present passion."

"I do not believe it in the least," said Lady Laura, firing up.

"It does not much matter," said Violet.

"It would matter very much. You know, you,--you; you know whom he loves. And I do believe that
sooner or later you will be his wife."

"Never."

"Yes, you will. Had you not loved him you would never have condescended to accuse him about
that woman."

"I have not accused him. Why should he not marry Madame Max Goesler? It would be just the thing
for him. She is very rich."

"Never. You will be his wife."

"Laura, you are the most capricious of women. You have two dear friends, and you insist that
I shall marry them both. Which shall I take first?"

"Oswald will be here in a day or two, and you can take him if you like it. No doubt he will
ask you. But I do not think you will."

"No; I do not think I shall. I shall knock under to Mr. Mill, and go in for women's rights,
and look forward to stand for some female borough. Matrimony never seemed to me to be very
charming, and upon my word it does not become more alluring by what I find at Loughlinter."

It was thus that Violet and Lady Laura discussed these matters together, but Violet had never
showed to her friend the cards in her hand, as Lady Laura had shown those which she held. Lady
Laura had in fact told almost everything that there was to tell,--had spoken either plainly
with true words, or equally plainly with words that were not true. Violet Effingham had almost
come to love Phineas Finn;--but she never told her friend that it was so. At one time she had
almost made up her mind to give herself and all her wealth to this adventurer. He was a better
man, she thought, than Lord Chiltern; and she had come to persuade herself that it was almost
imperative on her to take the one or the other. Though she could talk about remaining unmarried,
she knew that that was practically impossible. All those around her,--those of the Baldock
as well as those of the Brentford faction,--would make such a life impossible to her. Besides,
in such a case what could she do? It was all very well to talk of disregarding the world and
of setting up a house for herself;--but she was quite aware that that project could not be
used further than for the purpose of scaring her amiable aunt. And if not that,--then could
she content herself to look forward to a joint life with Lady Baldock and Augusta Boreham?
She might, of course, oblige her aunt by taking Lord Fawn, or oblige her aunt equally by taking
Mr. Appledom; but she was strongly of opinion that either Lord Chiltern or Phineas would be
preferable to these. Thinking over it always she had come to feel that it must be either Lord
Chiltern or Phineas; but she had never whispered her thought to man or woman. On her journey
to Loughlinter, where she then knew that she was to meet Lord Chiltern, she endeavoured to
persuade herself that it should be Phineas. But Lady Laura had marred it all by that ill-told
fib. There had been a moment before in which Violet had felt that Phineas had sacrificed something
of that truth of love for which she gave him credit to the glances of Madame Goesler's eyes;
but she had rebuked herself for the idea, accusing herself not only of a little jealousy, but
of foolish vanity. Was he, whom she had rejected, not to speak to another woman? Then came
the blow from Lady Laura, and Violet knew that it was a blow. This gallant lover, this young
Crichton, this unassuming but ardent lover, had simply taken up with her as soon as he had
failed with her friend. Lady Laura had been most enthusiastic in her expressions of friendship.
Such platonic regards might be all very well. It was for Mr. Kennedy to look to that. But,
for herself, she felt that such expressions were hardly compatible with her ideas of having
her lover all to herself. And then she again remembered Madame Goesler's bright blue eyes.

Lord Chiltern came on Christmas eve, and was received with open arms by his sister, and with
that painful, irritating affection which such a girl as Violet can show to such a man as Lord
Chiltern, when she will not give him that other affection for which his heart is panting. The
two men were civil to each other,--but very cold. They called each other Kennedy and Chiltern,
but even that was not done without an effort. On the Christmas morning Mr. Kennedy asked his
brother-in-law to go to church. "It's a kind of thing I never do," said Lord Chiltern. Mr.
Kennedy gave a little start, and looked a look of horror. Lady Laura showed that she was unhappy.
Violet Effingham turned away her face, and smiled.

As they walked across the park Violet took Lord Chiltern's part. "He only means that he does
not go to church on Christmas day."

"I don't know what he means," said Mr. Kennedy.

"We need not speak of it," said Lady Laura.

"Certainly not," said Mr. Kennedy.

"I have been to church with him on Sundays myself," said Violet, perhaps not reflecting that
the practices of early years had little to do with the young man's life at present.

Christmas day and the next day passed without any sign from Lord Chiltern, and on the day after
that he was to go away. But he was not to leave till one or two in the afternoon. Not a word
had been said between the two women, since he had been in the house, on the subject of which
both of them were thinking. Very much had been said of the expediency of his going to Saulsby,
but on this matter he had declined to make any promise. Sitting in Lady Laura's room, in the
presence of both of them, he had refused to do so. "I am bad to drive," he said, turning to
Violet, "and you had better not try to drive me."

"Why should not you be driven as well as another?" she answered, laughing.

CHAPTER LII

The First Blow

Lord Chiltern, though he had passed two entire days in the house with Violet without renewing
his suit, had come to Loughlinter for the express purpose of doing so, and had his plans perfectly
fixed in his own mind. After breakfast on that last morning he was up-stairs with his sister
in her own room, and immediately made his request to her. "Laura," he said, "go down like a
good girl, and make Violet come up here." She stood a moment looking at him and smiled. "And,
mind," he continued, "you are not to come back yourself. I must have Violet alone."

"But suppose Violet will not come? Young ladies do not generally wait upon young men on such
occasions."

"No;--but I rank her so high among young women, that I think she will have common sense enough
to teach her that, after what has passed between us, I have a right to ask for an interview,
and that it may be more conveniently had here than in the wilderness of the house below."

Whatever may have been the arguments used by her friend, Violet did come. She reached the door
all alone, and opened it bravely. She had promised herself, as she came along the passages,
that she would not pause with her hand on the lock for a moment. She had first gone to her
own room, and as she left it she had looked into the glass with a hurried glance, and had then
rested for a moment,--thinking that something should be done, that her hair might be smoothed,
or a ribbon set straight, or the chain arranged under her brooch. A girl would wish to look
well before her lover, even when she means to refuse him. But her pause was but for an instant,
and then she went on, having touched nothing. She shook her head and pressed her hands together,
and went on quick and opened the door,--almost with a little start. "Violet, this is very good
of you," said Lord Chiltern, standing with his back to the fire, and not moving from the spot.

"Laura has told me that you thought I would do as much as this for you, and therefore I have
done it."

"Thanks, dearest. It is the old story, Violet, and I am so bad at words!"

"I must have been bad at words too, as I have not been able to make you understand."

"I think I have understood. You are always clear-spoken, and I, though I cannot talk, am not
muddle-pated. I have understood. But while you are single there must be yet hope;--unless,
indeed, you will tell me that you have already given yourself to another man."

"I have not done that."

"Then how can I not hope? Violet, I would if I could tell you all my feelings plainly. Once,
twice, thrice, I have said to myself that I would think of you no more. I have tried to persuade
myself that I am better single than married."

"But I am not the only woman."

"To me you are,--absolutely, as though there were none other on the face of God's earth. I
live much alone; but you are always with me. Should you marry any other man, it will be the
same with me still. If you refuse me now I shall go away,--and live wildly."

"Oswald, what do you mean?"

"I mean that I will go to some distant part of the world, where I may be killed or live a life
of adventure. But I shall do so simply in despair. It will not be that I do not know how much
better and greater should be the life at home of a man in my position."

"Then do not talk of going."

"I cannot stay. You will acknowledge, Violet, that I have never lied to you. I am thinking
of you day and night. The more indifferent you show yourself to me, the more I love you. Violet,
try to love me." He came up to her, and took her by both her hands, and tears were in his eyes.
"Say you will try to love me."

"It is not that," said Violet, looking away, but still leaving her hands with him.

"It is not what, dear?"

"What you call,--trying."

"It is that you do not wish to try?"

"Oswald, you are so violent, so headstrong. I am afraid of you,--as is everybody. Why have
you not written to your father, as we have asked you?"

"I will write to him instantly, now, before I leave the room, and you shall dictate the letter
to him. By heavens, you shall!" He had dropped her hands when she called him violent; but now
he took them again, and still she permitted it. "I have postponed it only till I had spoken
to you once again."

"No, Lord Chiltern, I will not dictate to you."

"But will you love me?" She paused and looked down, having even now not withdrawn her hands
from him. But I do not think he knew how much he had gained. "You used to love me,--a little,"
he said.

"Indeed,--indeed, I did."

"And now? Is it all changed now?"

"No," she said, retreating from him.

"How is it, then? Violet, speak to me honestly. Will you be my wife?" She did not answer him,
and he stood for a moment looking at her. Then he rushed at her, and, seizing her in his arms,
kissed her all over,--her forehead, her lips, her cheeks, then both her hands, and then her
lips again. "By G----, she is my own!" he said. Then he went back to the rug before the fire,
and stood there with his back turned to her. Violet, when she found herself thus deserted,
retreated to a sofa, and sat herself down. She had no negative to produce now in answer to
the violent assertion which he had pronounced as to his own success. It was true. She had doubted,
and doubted,--and still doubted. But now she must doubt no longer. Of one thing she was quite
sure. She could love him. As things had now gone, she would make him quite happy with assurances
on that subject. As to that other question,--that fearful question, whether or not she could
trust him,--on that matter she had better at present say nothing, and think as little, perhaps,
as might be. She had taken the jump, and therefore why should she not be gracious to him? But
how was she to be gracious to a lover who stood there with his back turned to her?

After the interval of a minute or two he remembered himself, and turned round. Seeing her seated,
he approached her, and went down on both knees close at her feet. Then he took her hands again,
for the third time, and looked up into her eyes.

"Oswald, you on your knees!" she said.

"I would not bend to a princess," he said, "to ask for half her throne; but I will kneel here
all day, if you will let me, in thanks for the gift of your love. I never kneeled to beg for it."

"This is the man who cannot make speeches."

"I think I could talk now by the hour, with you for a listener."

"Oh, but I must talk too."

"What will you say to me?"

"Nothing while you are kneeling. It is not natural that you should kneel. You are like Samson
with his locks shorn, or Hercules with a distaff."

"Is that better?" he said, as he got up and put his arm round her waist.

"You are in earnest?" she asked.

"In earnest. I hardly thought that that would be doubted. Do you not believe me?"

"I do believe you. And you will be good?"

"Ah,--I do not know that."

"Try, and I will love you so dearly. Nay, I do love you dearly. I do. I do."

"Say it again."

"I will say it fifty times,--till your ears are weary with it";--and she did say it to him,
after her own fashion, fifty times.

"This is a great change," he said, getting up after a while and walking about the room.

"But a change for the better;--is it not, Oswald?"

"So much for the better that I hardly know myself in my new joy. But, Violet, we'll have no
delay,--will we? No shilly-shallying. What is the use of waiting now that it's settled?"

"None in the least, Lord Chiltern. Let us say,--this day twelvemonth."

"You are laughing at me, Violet."

"Remember, sir, that the first thing you have to do is to write to your father."

He instantly went to the writing-table and took up paper and pen. "Come along," he said. "You
are to dictate it." But this she refused to do, telling him that he must write his letter to
his father out of his own head, and out of his own heart. "I cannot write it," he said, throwing
down the pen. "My blood is in such a tumult that I cannot steady my hand."

"You must not be so tumultuous, Oswald, or I shall have to live in a whirlwind."

"Oh, I shall shake down. I shall become as steady as an old stager. I'll go as quiet in harness
by-and-by as though I had been broken to it a four-year-old. I wonder whether Laura could not
write this letter."

"I think you should write it yourself, Oswald."

"If you bid me I will."

"Bid you indeed! As if it was for me to bid you. Do you not know that in these new troubles
you are undertaking you will have to bid me in everything, and that I shall be bound to do
your bidding? Does it not seem to be dreadful? My wonder is that any girl can ever accept any man."

"But you have accepted me now."

"Yes, indeed."

"And you repent?"

"No, indeed, and I will try to do your biddings;--but you must not be rough to me, and outrageous,
and fierce,--will you, Oswald?"

"I will not at any rate be like Kennedy is with poor Laura."

"No;--that is not your nature."

"I will do my best, dearest. And you may at any rate be sure of this, that I will love you
always. So much good of myself, if it be good, I can say."

"It is very good," she answered; "the best of all good words. And now I must go. And as you
are leaving Loughlinter I will say good-bye. When am I to have the honour and felicity of beholding
your lordship again?"

"Say a nice word to me before I am off, Violet."

"I,--love,--you,--better,--than all the world beside; and I mean,--to be your wife,--some day.
Are not those twenty nice words?"

He would not prolong his stay at Loughlinter, though he was asked to do so both by Violet and
his sister, and though, as he confessed himself, he had no special business elsewhere. "It
is no use mincing the matter. I don't like Kennedy, and I don't like being in his house," he
said to Violet. And then he promised that there should be a party got up at Saulsby before
the winter was over. His plan was to stop that night at Carlisle, and write to his father from
thence. "Your blood, perhaps, won't be so tumultuous at Carlisle," said Violet. He shook his
head and went on with his plans. He would then go on to London and down to Willingford, and
there wait for his father's answer. "There is no reason why I should lose more of the hunting
than necessary." "Pray don't lose a day for me," said Violet. As soon as he heard from his
father, he would do his father's bidding. "You will go to Saulsby," said Violet; "you can hunt
at Saulsby, you know."

"I will go to Jericho if he asks me, only you will have to go with me." "I thought we were
to go to,--Belgium," said Violet.

"And so that is settled at last," said Violet to Laura that night.

"I hope you do not regret it."

"On the contrary, I am as happy as the moments are long."

"My fine girl!"

"I am happy because I love him. I have always loved him. You have known that."

"Indeed, no."

"But I have, after my fashion. I am not tumultuous, as he calls himself. Since he began to
make eyes at me when he was nineteen--"

"Fancy Oswald making eyes!"

"Oh, he did, and mouths too. But from the beginning, when I was a child, I have known that
he was dangerous, and I have thought that he would pass on and forget me after a while. And
I could have lived without him. Nay, there have been moments when I thought I could learn to
love some one else."

"Poor Phineas, for instance."

"We will mention no names. Mr. Appledom, perhaps, more likely. He has been my most constant
lover, and then he would be so safe! Your brother, Laura, is dangerous. He is like the bad
ice in the parks where they stick up the poles. He has had a pole stuck upon him ever since
he was a boy."

"Yes;--give a dog a bad name and hang him."

"Remember that I do not love him a bit the less on that account;--perhaps the better. A sense
of danger does not make me unhappy, though the threatened evil may be fatal. I have entered
myself for my forlorn hope, and I mean to stick to it. Now I must go and write to his worship.
Only think,--I never wrote a love-letter yet!"

Nothing more shall be said about Miss Effingham's first love-letter, which was, no doubt, creditable
to her head and heart; but there were two other letters sent by the same post from Loughlinter
which shall be submitted to the reader, as they will assist the telling of the story. One was
from Lady Laura Kennedy to her friend Phineas Finn, and the other from Violet to her aunt,
Lady Baldock. No letter was written to Lord Brentford, as it was thought desirable that he
should receive the first intimation of what had been done from his son.

Respecting the letter to Phineas, which shall be first given, Lady Laura thought it right to
say a word to her husband. He had been of course told of the engagement, and had replied that
he could have wished that the arrangement could have been made elsewhere than at his house,
knowing as he did that Lady Baldock would not approve of it. To this Lady Laura had made no
reply, and Mr. Kennedy had condescended to congratulate the bride-elect. When Lady Laura's
letter to Phineas was completed she took care to put it into the letter-box in the presence
of her husband. "I have written to Mr. Finn," she said, "to tell him of this marriage."

"Why was it necessary that he should be told?"

"I think it was due to him,--from certain circumstances."

"I wonder whether there was any truth in what everybody was saying about their fighting a duel?"
asked Mr. Kennedy. His wife made no answer, and then he continued--"You told me of your own
knowledge that it was untrue."

"Not of my own knowledge, Robert."

"Yes;--of your own knowledge." Then Mr. Kennedy walked away, and was certain that his wife
had deceived him about the duel. There had been a duel, and she had known it; and yet she had
told him that the report was a ridiculous fabrication. He never forgot anything. He remembered
at this moment the words of the falsehood, and the look of her face as she told it. He had
believed her implicitly, but he would never believe her again. He was one of those men who,
in spite of their experience of the world, of their experience of their own lives, imagine
that lips that have once lied can never tell the truth.

Lady Laura's letter to Phineas was as follows:

   Loughlinter, December 28th, 186--.

   MY DEAR FRIEND,

   Violet Effingham is here, and Oswald has just left us.
   It is possible that you may see him as he passes through
   London. But, at any rate, I think it best to let you know
   immediately that she has accepted him,--at last. If there
   be any pang in this to you, be sure that I will grieve
   for you. You will not wish me to say that I regret that
   which was the dearest wish of my heart before I knew you.
   Lately, indeed, I have been torn in two ways. You will
   understand what I mean, and I believe I need say nothing
   more;--except this, that it shall be among my prayers that
   you may obtain all things that may tend to make you happy,
   honourable, and of high esteem.

   Your most sincere friend

   LAURA KENNEDY.

Even though her husband should read the letter, there was nothing in that of which she need
be ashamed. But he did not read the letter. He simply speculated as to its contents, and inquired
within himself whether it would not be for the welfare of the world in general, and for the
welfare of himself in particular, that husbands should demand to read their wives' letters.

And this was Violet's letter to her aunt:--

   MY DEAR AUNT,

   The thing has come at last, and all your troubles will be
   soon over;--for I do believe that all your troubles have
   come from your unfortunate niece. At last I am going to
   be married, and thus take myself off your hands. Lord
   Chiltern has just been here, and I have accepted him. I am
   afraid you hardly think so well of Lord Chiltern as I do;
   but then, perhaps, you have not known him so long. You do
   know, however, that there has been some difference between
   him and his father. I think I may take upon myself to say
   that now, upon his engagement, this will be settled. I
   have the inexpressible pleasure of feeling sure that Lord
   Brentford will welcome me as his daughter-in-law. Tell the
   news to Augusta with my best love. I will write to her in
   a day or two. I hope my cousin Gustavus will condescend
   to give me away. Of course there is nothing fixed about
   time;--but I should say, perhaps, in nine years.

   Your affectionate niece,

   VIOLET EFFINGHAM.

   Loughlinter, Friday.

"What does she mean about nine years?" said Lady Baldock in her wrath.

"She is joking," said the mild Augusta.

"I believe she would--joke, if I were going to be buried," said Lady Baldock.

CHAPTER LIII

Showing How Phineas Bore the Blow

When Phineas received Lady Laura Kennedy's letter, he was sitting in his gorgeous apartment
in the Colonial Office. It was gorgeous in comparison with the very dingy room at Mr. Low's
to which he had been accustomed in his early days,--and somewhat gorgeous also as compared
with the lodgings he had so long inhabited in Mr. Bunce's house. The room was large and square,
and looked out from three windows on to St. James's Park. There were in it two very comfortable
arm-chairs and a comfortable sofa. And the office table at which he sat was of old mahogany,
shining brightly, and seemed to be fitted up with every possible appliance for official comfort.
This stood near one of the windows, so that he could sit and look down upon the park. And there
was a large round table covered with books and newspapers. And the walls of the room were bright
with maps of all the colonies. And there was one very interesting map,--but not very bright,--showing
the American colonies, as they used to be. And there was a little inner closet in which he
could brush his hair and wash his hands; and in the room adjoining there sat,--or ought to
have sat, for he was often absent, vexing the mind of Phineas,--the Earl's nephew, his private
secretary. And it was all very gorgeous. Often as he looked round upon it, thinking of his
old bedroom at Killaloe, of his little garrets at Trinity, of the dingy chambers in Lincoln's
Inn, he would tell himself that it was very gorgeous. He would wonder that anything so grand
had fallen to his lot.

The letter from Scotland was brought to him in the afternoon, having reached London by some
day-mail from Glasgow. He was sitting at his desk with a heap of papers before him referring
to a contemplated railway from Halifax, in Nova Scotia, to the foot of the Rocky Mountains.
It had become his business to get up the subject, and then discuss with his principal, Lord
Cantrip, the expediency of advising the Government to lend a company five million of money,
in order that this railway might be made. It was a big subject, and the contemplation of it
gratified him. It required that he should look forward to great events, and exercise the wisdom
of a statesman. What was the chance of these colonies being swallowed up by those other regions,--once
colonies,--of which the map that hung in the corner told so eloquent a tale? And if so, would
the five million ever be repaid? And if not swallowed up, were the colonies worth so great
an adventure of national money? Could they repay it? Would they do so? Should they be made
to do so? Mr. Low, who was now a Q.C. and in Parliament, would not have greater subjects than
this before him, even if he should come to be Solicitor General. Lord Cantrip had specially
asked him to get up this matter,--and he was getting it up sedulously. Once in nine years the
harbour of Halifax was blocked up by ice. He had just jotted down the fact, which was material,
when Lady Laura's letter was brought to him. He read it, and putting it down by his side very
gently, went back to his maps as though the thing would not so trouble his mind as to disturb
his work. He absolutely wrote, automatically, certain words of a note about the harbour, after
he had received the information. A horse will gallop for some scores of yards, after his back
has been broken, before he knows of his great ruin;--and so it was with Phineas Finn. His back
was broken, but, nevertheless, he galloped, for a yard or two. "Closed in 1860-61 for thirteen
days." Then he began to be aware that his back was broken, and that the writing of any more
notes about the ice in Halifax harbour was for the present out of the question. "I think it
best to let you know immediately that she has accepted him." These were the words which he
read the oftenest. Then it was all over! The game was played out, and all his victories were
as nothing to him. He sat for an hour in his gorgeous room thinking of it, and various were
the answers which he gave during the time to various messages;--but he would see nobody. As
for the colonies, he did not care if they revolted to-morrow. He would have parted with every
colony belonging to Great Britain to have gotten the hand of Violet Effingham for himself.
Now,--now at this moment, he told himself with oaths that he had never loved any one but Violet
Effingham.

There had been so much to make such a marriage desirable! I should wrong my hero deeply were
I to say that the weight of his sorrow was occasioned by the fact that he had lost an heiress.
He would never have thought of looking for Violet Effingham had he not first learned to love
her. But as the idea opened itself out to him, everything had seemed to be so suitable. Had
Miss Effingham become his wife, the mouths of the Lows and of the Bunces would have been stopped
altogether. Mr. Monk would have come to his house as his familiar guest, and he would have
been connected with half a score of peers. A seat in Parliament would be simply his proper
place, and even Under-Secretaryships of State might soon come to be below him. He was playing
a great game, but hitherto he had played it with so much success,--with such wonderful luck!
that it had seemed to him that all things were within his reach. Nothing more had been wanting
to him than Violet's hand for his own comfort, and Violet's fortune to support his position;
and these, too, had almost seemed to be within his grasp. His goddess had indeed refused him,--but
not with disdain. Even Lady Laura had talked of his marriage as not improbable. All the world,
almost, had heard of the duel; and all the world had smiled, and seemed to think that in the
real fight Phineas Finn would be the victor,--that the lucky pistol was in his hands. It had
never occurred to any one to suppose,--as far as he could see,--that he was presuming at all,
or pushing himself out of his own sphere, in asking Violet Effingham to be his wife. No;--he
would trust his luck, would persevere, and would succeed. Such had been his resolution on that
very morning,--and now there had come this letter to dash him to the ground.

There were moments in which he declared to himself that he would not believe the letter,--not
that there was any moment in which there was in his mind the slightest spark of real hope.
But he would tell himself that he would still persevere. Violet might have been driven to accept
that violent man by violent influence,--or it might be that she had not in truth accepted him,
that Chiltern had simply so asserted. Or, even if it were so, did women never change their
minds? The manly thing would be to persevere to the end. Had he not before been successful,
when success seemed to be as far from him? But he could buoy himself up with no real hope.
Even when these ideas were present to his mind, he knew,--he knew well,--at those very moments,
that his back was broken.

Some one had come in and lighted the candles and drawn down the blinds while he was sitting
there, and now, as he looked at his watch, he found that it was past five o'clock. He was engaged
to dine with Madame Max Goesler at eight, and in his agony he half-resolved that he would send
an excuse. Madame Max would be full of wrath, as she was very particular about her little dinner-parties;--but,
what did he care now about the wrath of Madame Max Goesler? And yet only this morning he had
been congratulating himself, among his other successes, upon her favour, and had laughed inwardly
at his own falseness,--his falseness to Violet Effingham,--as he did so. He had said something
to himself jocosely about lovers' perjuries, the remembrance of which was now very bitter to
him. He took up a sheet of note-paper and scrawled an excuse to Madame Goesler. News from the
country, he said, made it impossible that he should go out to-night. But he did not send the
note. At about half-past five he opened the door of his private secretary's room and found
the young man fast asleep, with a cigar in his mouth. "Halloa, Charles," he said.

"All right!" Charles Standish was a first cousin of Lady Laura's, and, having been in the office
before Phineas had joined it, and being a great favourite with his cousin, had of course become
the Under-Secretary's private secretary. "I'm all here," said Charles Standish, getting up
and shaking himself.

"I am going. Just tie up those papers,--exactly as they are. I shall be here early to-morrow,
but I shan't want you before twelve. Good night, Charles."

"Ta, ta," said his private secretary, who was very fond of his master, but not very respectful,--unless
upon express occasions.

Then Phineas went out and walked across the park; but as he went he became quite aware that
his back was broken. It was not the less broken because he sang to himself little songs to
prove to himself that it was whole and sound. It was broken, and it seemed to him now that
he never could become an Atlas again, to bear the weight of the world upon his shoulders. What
did anything signify? All that he had done had been part of a game which he had been playing
throughout, and now he had been beaten in his game. He absolutely ignored his old passion for
Lady Laura as though it had never been, and regarded himself as a model of constancy,--as a
man who had loved, not wisely perhaps, but much too well,--and who must now therefore suffer
a living death. He hated Parliament. He hated the Colonial Office. He hated his friend Mr.
Monk; and he especially hated Madame Max Goesler. As to Lord Chiltern,--he believed that Lord
Chiltern had obtained his object by violence. He would see to that! Yes;--let the consequences
be what they might, he would see to that!

He went up by the Duke of York's column, and as he passed the Athenæum he saw his chief, Lord
Cantrip, standing under the portico talking to a bishop. He would have gone on unnoticed, had
it been possible; but Lord Cantrip came down to him at once. "I have put your name down here,"
said his lordship.

"What's the use?" said Phineas, who was profoundly indifferent at this moment to all the clubs
in London.

"It can't do any harm, you know. You'll come up in time. And if you should get into the ministry,
they'll let you in at once."

"Ministry!" ejaculated Phineas. But Lord Cantrip took the tone of voice as simply suggestive
of humility, and suspected nothing of that profound indifference to all ministers and ministerial
honours which Phineas had intended to express. "By-the-bye," said Lord Cantrip, putting his
arm through that of the Under-Secretary, "I wanted to speak to you about the guarantees. We
shall be in the devil's own mess, you know--" And so the Secretary of State went on about the
Rocky Mountain Railroad, and Phineas strove hard to bear his burden with his broken back. He
was obliged to say something about the guarantees, and the railway, and the frozen harbour,--and
something especially about the difficulties which would be found, not in the measures themselves,
but in the natural pugnacity of the Opposition. In the fabrication of garments for the national
wear, the great thing is to produce garments that shall, as far as possible, defy hole-picking.
It may be, and sometimes is, the case, that garments so fabricated will be good also for wear.
Lord Cantrip, at the present moment, was very anxious and very ingenious in the stopping of
holes; and he thought that perhaps his Under-Secretary was too much prone to the indulgence
of large philanthropical views without sufficient thought of the hole-pickers. But on this
occasion, by the time that he reached Brooks's, he had been enabled to convince his Under-Secretary,
and though he had always thought well of his Under-Secretary, he thought better of him now
than ever he had done. Phineas during the whole time had been meditating what he could do to
Lord Chiltern when they two should meet. Could he take him by the throat and smite him? "I
happen to know that Broderick is working as hard at the matter as we are," said Lord Cantrip,
stopping opposite to the club. "He moved for papers, you know, at the end of last session."
Now Mr. Broderick was a gentleman in the House looking for promotion in a Conservative Government,
and of course would oppose any measure that could be brought forward by the Cantrip-Finn Colonial
Administration. Then Lord Cantrip slipped into the club, and Phineas went on alone.

A spark of his old ambition with reference to Brooks's was the first thing to make him forget
his misery for a moment. He had asked Lord Brentford to put his name down, and was not sure
whether it had been done. The threat of Mr. Broderick's opposition had been of no use towards
the strengthening of his broken back, but the sight of Lord Cantrip hurrying in at the coveted
door did do something. "A man can't cut his throat or blow his brains out," he said to himself;
"after all, he must go on and do his work. For hearts will break, yet brokenly live on." Thereupon
he went home, and after sitting for an hour over his own fire, and looking wistfully at a little
treasure which he had,--a treasure obtained by some slight fraud at Saulsby, and which he now
chucked into the fire, and then instantly again pulled out of it, soiled but unscorched,--he
dressed himself for dinner, and went out to Madame Max Goesler's. Upon the whole, he was glad
that he had not sent the note of excuse. A man must live, even though his heart be broken,
and living he must dine.

Madame Max Goesler was fond of giving little dinners at this period of the year, before London
was crowded, and when her guests might probably not be called away by subsequent social arrangements.
Her number seldom exceeded six or eight, and she always spoke of these entertainments as being
of the humblest kind. She sent out no big cards. She preferred to catch her people as though
by chance, when that was possible. "Dear Mr. Jones. Mr. Smith is coming to tell me about some
sherry on Tuesday. Will you come and tell me too? I daresay you know as much about it." And
then there was a studious absence of parade. The dishes were not very numerous. The bill of
fare was simply written out once, for the mistress, and so circulated round the table. Not
a word about the things to be eaten or the things to be drunk was ever spoken at the table,--or
at least no such word was ever spoken by Madame Goesler. But, nevertheless, they who knew anything
about dinners were aware that Madame Goesler gave very good dinners indeed. Phineas Finn was
beginning to flatter himself that he knew something about dinners, and had been heard to assert
that the soups at the cottage in Park Lane were not to be beaten in London. But he cared for
no soup to-day, as he slowly made his way up Madame Goesler's staircase.

There had been one difficulty in the way of Madame Goesler's dinner-parties which had required
some patience and great ingenuity in its management. She must either have ladies, or she must
not have them. There was a great allurement in the latter alternative; but she knew well that
if she gave way to it, all prospect of general society would for her be closed,--and for ever.
This had been in the early days of her widowhood in Park Lane. She cared but little for women's
society; but she knew well that the society of gentlemen without women would not be that which
she desired. She knew also that she might as effectually crush herself and all her aspirations
by bringing to her house indifferent women,--women lacking something either in character, or
in position, or in talent,--as by having none at all. Thus there had been a great difficulty,
and sometimes she had thought that the thing could not be done at all. "These English are so
stiff, so hard, so heavy!" And yet she would not have cared to succeed elsewhere than among
the English. By degrees, however, the thing was done. Her prudence equalled her wit, and even
suspicious people had come to acknowledge that they could not put their fingers on anything
wrong. When Lady Glencora Palliser had once dined at the cottage in Park Lane, Madame Max Goesler
had told herself that henceforth she did not care what the suspicious people said. Since that
the Duke of Omnium had almost promised that he would come. If she could only entertain the
Duke of Omnium she would have done everything.

But there was no Duke of Omnium there to-night. At this time the Duke of Omnium was, of course,
not in London. But Lord Fawn was there; and our old friend Laurence Fitzgibbon, who had--resigned
his place at the Colonial Office; and there were Mr. and Mrs. Bonteen. They, with our hero,
made up the party. No one doubted for a moment to what source Mr. Bonteen owed his dinner.
Mrs. Bonteen was good-looking, could talk, was sufficiently proper, and all that kind of thing,--and
did as well as any other woman at this time of year to keep Madame Max Goesler in countenance.
There was never any sitting after dinner at the cottage; or, I should rather say, there was
never any sitting after Madame Goesler went; so that the two ladies could not weary each other
by being alone together. Mrs. Bonteen understood quite well that she was not required there
to talk to her hostess, and was as willing as any woman to make herself agreeable to the gentlemen
she might meet at Madame Goesler's table. And thus Mr. and Mrs. Bonteen not unfrequently dined
in Park Lane.

"Now we have only to wait for that horrible man, Mr. Fitzgibbon," said Madame Max Goesler,
as she welcomed Phineas. "He is always late."

"What a blow for me!" said Phineas.

"No,--you are always in good time. But there is a limit beyond which good time ends, and being
shamefully late at once begins. But here he is." And then, as Laurence Fitzgibbon entered the
room, Madame Goesler rang the bell for dinner.

Phineas found himself placed between his hostess and Mr. Bonteen, and Lord Fawn was on the
other side of Madame Goesler. They were hardly seated at the table before some one stated it
as a fact that Lord Brentford and his son were reconciled. Now Phineas knew, or thought that
he knew, that this could not as yet be the case; and indeed such was not the case, though the
father had already received the son's letter. But Phineas did not choose to say anything at
present about Lord Chiltern.

"How odd it is," said Madame Goesler; "how often you English fathers quarrel with your sons!"

"How often we English sons quarrel with our fathers rather," said Lord Fawn, who was known
for the respect he had always paid to the fifth commandment.

"It all comes from entail and primogeniture, and old-fashioned English prejudices of that kind,"
said Madame Goesler. "Lord Chiltern is a friend of yours, Mr. Finn, I think."

"They are both friends of mine," said Phineas.

"Ah, yes; but you,--you,--you and Lord Chiltern once did something odd together. There was
a little mystery, was there not?"

"It is very little of a mystery now," said Fitzgibbon.

"It was about a lady;--was it not?" said Mrs. Bonteen, affecting to whisper to her neighbour.

"I am not at liberty to say anything on the subject," said Fitzgibbon; "but I have no doubt
Phineas will tell you."

"I don't believe this about Lord Brentford," said Mr. Bonteen. "I happen to know that Chiltern
was down at Loughlinter three days ago, and that he passed through London yesterday on his
way to the place where he hunts. The Earl is at Saulsby. He would have gone to Saulsby if it
were true."

"It all depends upon whether Miss Effingham will accept him," said Mrs. Bonteen, looking over
at Phineas as she spoke.

As there were two of Violet Effingham's suitors at table, the subject was becoming disagreeably
personal; and the more so, as every one of the party knew or surmised something of the facts
of the case. The cause of the duel at Blankenberg had become almost as public as the duel,
and Lord Fawn's courtship had not been altogether hidden from the public eye. He on the present
occasion might probably be able to carry himself better than Phineas, even presuming him to
be equally eager in his love,--for he knew nothing of the fatal truth. But he was unable to
hear Mrs. Bonteen's statement with indifference, and showed his concern in the matter by his
reply. "Any lady will be much to be pitied," he said, "who does that. Chiltern is the last
man in the world to whom I would wish to trust the happiness of a woman for whom I cared."

"Chiltern is a very good fellow," said Laurence Fitzgibbon.

"Just a little wild," said Mrs. Bonteen.

"And never had a shilling in his pocket in his life," said her husband.

"I regard him as simply a madman," said Lord Fawn.

"I do so wish I knew him," said Madame Max Goesler. "I am fond of madmen, and men who haven't
shillings, and who are a little wild, Could you not bring him here, Mr. Finn?"

Phineas did not know what to say, or how to open his mouth without showing his deep concern.
"I shall be happy to ask him if you wish it," he replied, as though the question had been put
to him in earnest; "but I do not see so much of Lord Chiltern as I used to do."

"You do not believe that Violet Effingham will accept him?" asked Mrs. Bonteen.

He paused a moment before he spoke, and then made his answer in a deep solemn voice,--with
a seriousness which he was unable to repress. "She has accepted him," he said.

"Do you mean that you know it?" said Madame Goesler.

"Yes;--I mean that I know it."

Had anybody told him beforehand that he would openly make this declaration at Madame Goesler's
table, he would have said that of all things it was the most impossible. He would have declared
that nothing would have induced him to speak of Violet Effingham in his existing frame of mind,
and that he would have had his tongue cut out before he spoke of her as the promised bride
of his rival. And now he had declared the whole truth of his own wretchedness and discomfiture.
He was well aware that all of them there knew why he had fought the duel at Blankenberg;--all,
that is, except perhaps Lord Fawn. And he felt as he made the statement as to Lord Chiltern
that he blushed up to his forehead, and that his voice was strange, and that he was telling
the tale of his own disgrace. But when the direct question had been asked him he had been unable
to refrain from answering it directly. He had thought of turning it off with some jest or affectation
of drollery, but had failed. At the moment he had been unable not to speak the truth.

"I don't believe a word of it," said Lord Fawn,--who also forgot himself.

"I do believe it, if Mr. Finn says so," said Mrs. Bonteen, who rather liked the confusion she
had caused.

"But who could have told you, Finn?" asked Mr. Bonteen.

"His sister, Lady Laura, told me so," said Phineas.

"Then it must be true," said Madame Goesler.

"It is quite impossible," said Lord Fawn. "I think I may say that I know that it is impossible.
If it were so, it would be a most shameful arrangement. Every shilling she has in the world
would be swallowed up." Now, Lord Fawn in making his proposals had been magnanimous in his
offers as to settlements and pecuniary provisions generally.

For some minutes after that Phineas did not speak another word, and the conversation generally
was not so brisk and bright as it was expected to be at Madame Goesler's. Madame Max Goesler
herself thoroughly understood our hero's position, and felt for him. She would have encouraged
no questionings about Violet Effingham had she thought that they would have led to such a result,
and now she exerted herself to turn the minds of her guests to other subjects. At last she
succeeded; and after a while, too, Phineas himself was able to talk. He drank two or three
glasses of wine, and dashed away into politics, taking the earliest opportunity in his power
of contradicting Lord Fawn very plainly on one or two matters. Laurence Fitzgibbon was of course
of opinion that the ministry could not stay in long. Since he had left the Government the ministers
had made wonderful mistakes, and he spoke of them quite as an enemy might speak. "And yet,
Fitz," said Mr. Bonteen, "you used to be so staunch a supporter."

"I have seen the error of my way, I can assure you," said Laurence.

"I always observe," said Madame Max Goesler, "that when any of you gentlemen resign,--which
you usually do on some very trivial matter,--the resigning gentleman becomes of all foes the
bitterest. Somebody goes on very well with his friends, agreeing most cordially about everything,
till he finds that his public virtue cannot swallow some little detail, and then he resigns.
Or some one, perhaps, on the other side has attacked him, and in the mêlée he is hurt, and
so he resigns. But when he has resigned, and made his parting speech full of love and gratitude,
I know well after that where to look for the bitterest hostility to his late friends. Yes,
I am beginning to understand the way in which politics are done in England."

All this was rather severe upon Laurence Fitzgibbon; but he was a man of the world, and bore
it better than Phineas had borne his defeat.

The dinner, taken altogether, was not a success, and so Madame Goesler understood. Lord Fawn,
after he had been contradicted by Phineas, hardly opened his mouth. Phineas himself talked
rather too much and rather too loudly; and Mrs. Bonteen, who was well enough inclined to flatter
Lord Fawn, contradicted him. "I made a mistake," said Madame Goesler afterwards, "in having
four members of Parliament who all of them were or had been in office. I never will have two
men in office together again." This she said to Mrs. Bonteen. "My dear Madame Max," said Mrs.
Bonteen, "your resolution ought to be that you will never again have two claimants for the
same young lady."

In the drawing-room up-stairs Madame Goesler managed to be alone for three minutes with Phineas
Finn. "And it is as you say, my friend?" she asked. Her voice was plaintive and soft, and there
was a look of real sympathy in her eyes. Phineas almost felt that if they two had been quite
alone he could have told her everything, and have wept at her feet.

"Yes," he said, "it is so."

"I never doubted it when you had declared it. May I venture to say that I wish it had been
otherwise?"

"It is too late now, Madame Goesler. A man of course is a fool to show that he has any feelings
in such a matter. The fact is, I heard it just before I came here, and had made up my mind
to send you an excuse. I wish I had now."

"Do not say that, Mr. Finn."

"I have made such an ass of myself."

"In my estimation you have done yourself honour. But if I may venture to give you counsel,
do not speak of this affair again as though you had been personally concerned in it. In the
world now-a-days the only thing disgraceful is to admit a failure."

"And I have failed."

"But you need not admit it, Mr. Finn. I know I ought not to say as much to you."

"I, rather, am deeply indebted to you. I will go now, Madame Goesler, as I do not wish to leave
the house with Lord Fawn."

"But you will come and see me soon." Then Phineas promised that he would come soon; and felt
as he made the promise that he would have an opportunity of talking over his love with his
new friend at any rate without fresh shame as to his failure.

Laurence Fitzgibbon went away with Phineas, and Mr. Bonteen, having sent his wife away by herself,
walked off towards the clubs with Lord Fawn. He was very anxious to have a few words with Lord
Fawn. Lord Fawn had evidently been annoyed by Phineas, and Mr. Bonteen did not at all love
the young Under-Secretary. "That fellow has become the most consummate puppy I ever met," said
he, as he linked himself on to the lord, "Monk, and one or two others among them, have contrived
to spoil him altogether."

"I don't believe a word of what he said about Lord Chiltern," said Lord Fawn.

"About his marriage with Miss Effingham?"

"It would be such an abominable shame to sacrifice the girl," said Lord Fawn. "Only think of
it. Everything is gone. The man is a drunkard, and I don't believe he is any more reconciled
to his father than you are. Lady Laura Kennedy must have had some object in saying so."

"Perhaps an invention of Finn's altogether," said Mr. Bonteen. "Those Irish fellows are just
the men for that kind of thing."

"A man, you know, so violent that nobody can hold him," said Lord Fawn, thinking of Chiltern.

"And so absurdly conceited," said Mr. Bonteen, thinking of Phineas.

"A man who has never done anything, with all his advantages in the world,--and never will."

"He won't hold his place long," said Mr. Bonteen.

"Whom do you mean?"

"Phineas Finn."

"Oh, Mr. Finn. I was talking of Lord Chiltern. I believe Finn to be a very good sort of a fellow,
and he is undoubtedly clever. They say Cantrip likes him amazingly. He'll do very well. But
I don't believe a word of this about Lord Chiltern." Then Mr. Bonteen felt himself to be snubbed,
and soon afterwards left Lord Fawn alone.

CHAPTER LIV

Consolation

On the day following Madame Goesler's dinner party, Phineas, though he was early at his office,
was not able to do much work, still feeling that as regarded the realities of the world, his
back was broken. He might no doubt go on learning, and, after a time, might be able to exert
himself in a perhaps useful, but altogether uninteresting kind of way, doing his work simply
because it was there to be done,--as the carter or the tailor does his;--and from the same
cause, knowing that a man must have bread to live. But as for ambition, and the idea of doing
good, and the love of work for work's sake,--as for the elastic springs of delicious and beneficent
labour,--all that was over for him. He would have worked from day till night, and from night
till day, and from month till month throughout the year to have secured for Violet Effingham
the assurance that her husband's position was worthy of her own. But now he had no motive for
such work as this. As long as he took the public pay, he would earn it; and that was all.

On the next day things were a little better with him. He received a note in the morning from
Lord Cantrip saying that they two were to see the Prime Minister that evening, in order that
the whole question of the railway to the Rocky Mountains might be understood, and Phineas was
driven to his work. Before the time of the meeting came he had once more lost his own identity
in great ideas of colonial welfare, and had planned and peopled a mighty region on the Red
River, which should have no sympathy with American democracy. When he waited upon Mr. Gresham
in the afternoon he said nothing about the mighty region; indeed, he left it to Lord Cantrip
to explain most of the proposed arrangements,--speaking only a word or two here and there as
occasion required. But he was aware that he had so far recovered as to be able to save himself
from losing ground during the interview.

"He's about the first Irishman we've had that has been worth his salt," said Mr. Gresham to
his colleague afterwards.

"That other Irishman was a terrible fellow," said Lord Cantrip, shaking his head.

On the fourth day after his sorrow had befallen him, Phineas went again to the cottage in Park
Lane. And in order that he might not be balked in his search for sympathy he wrote a line to
Madame Goesler to ask if she would be at home. "I will be at home from five to six,--and alone.--M.
M. G." That was the answer from Marie Max Goesler, and Phineas was of course at the cottage
a few minutes after five. It is not, I think, surprising that a man when he wants sympathy
in such a calamity as that which had now befallen Phineas Finn, should seek it from a woman.
Women sympathise most effectually with men, as men do with women. But it is, perhaps, a little
odd that a man when he wants consolation because his heart has been broken, always likes to
receive it from a pretty woman. One would be disposed to think that at such a moment he would
be profoundly indifferent to such a matter, that no delight could come to him from female beauty,
and that all he would want would be the softness of a simply sympathetic soul. But he generally
wants a soft hand as well, and an eye that can be bright behind the mutual tear, and lips that
shall be young and fresh as they express their concern for his sorrow. All these things were
added to Phineas when he went to Madame Goesler in his grief.

"I am so glad to see you," said Madame Max.

"You are very good-natured to let me come."

"No;--but it is so good of you to trust me. But I was sure you would come after what took place
the other night. I saw that you were pained, and I was so sorry for it."

"I made such a fool of myself."

"Not at all. And I thought that you were right to tell them when the question had been asked.
If the thing was not to be kept a secret, it was better to speak it out. You will get over
it quicker in that way than in any other. I have never seen the young lord, myself."

"Oh, there is nothing amiss about him. As to what Lord Fawn said, the half of it is simply
exaggeration, and the other half is misunderstood."

"In this country it is so much to be a lord," said Madame Goesler.

Phineas thought a moment of that matter before he replied. All the Standish family had been
very good to him, and Violet Effingham had been very good. It was not the fault of any of them
that he was now wretched and back-broken. He had meditated much on this, and had resolved that
he would not even think evil of them. "I do not in my heart believe that that has had anything
to do with it," he said.

"But it has, my friend,--always. I do not know your Violet Effingham."

"She is not mine."

"Well;--I do not know this Violet that is not yours. I have met her, and did not specially
admire her. But then the tastes of men and women about beauty are never the same. But I know
she is one that always lives with lords and countesses. A girl who always lived with countesses
feels it to be hard to settle down as a plain Mistress."

"She has had plenty of choice among all sorts of men. It was not the title. She would not have
accepted Chiltern unless she had--. But what is the use of talking of it?"

"They had known each other long?"

"Oh, yes,--as children. And the Earl desired it of all things."

"Ah;--then he arranged it."

"Not exactly. Nobody could arrange anything for Chiltern,--nor, as far as that goes, for Miss
Effingham. They arranged it themselves, I fancy."

"You had asked her?"

"Yes;--twice. And she had refused him more than twice. I have nothing for which to blame her;
but yet I had thought,--I had thought--"

"She is a jilt then?"

"No;--I will not let you say that of her. She is no jilt. But I think she has been strangely
ignorant of her own mind. What is the use of talking of it, Madame Goesler?"

"None;--only sometimes it is better to speak a word, than to keep one's sorrow to oneself."

"So it is;--and there is not one in the world to whom I can speak such a word, except yourself.
Is not that odd? I have sisters, but they have never heard of Miss Effingham, and would be
quite indifferent."

"Perhaps they have some other favourites."

"Ah;--well. That does not matter, And my best friend here in London is Lord Chiltern's own sister."

"She knew of your attachment?"

"Oh, yes."

"And she told you of Miss Effingham's engagement. Was she glad of it?"

"She has always desired the marriage. And yet I think she would have been satisfied had it
been otherwise. But of course her heart must be with her brother. I need not have troubled
myself to go to Blankenberg after all."

"It was for the best, perhaps. Everybody says you behaved so well."

"I could not but go, as things were then."

"What if you had--shot him?"

"There would have been an end of everything. She would never have seen me after that. Indeed
I should have shot myself next, feeling that there was nothing else left for me to do."

"Ah;--you English are so peculiar. But I suppose it is best not to shoot a man. And, Mr. Finn,
there are other ladies in the world prettier than Miss Violet Effingham. No;--of course you
will not admit that now. Just at this moment, and for a month or two, she is peerless, and
you will feel yourself to be of all men the most unfortunate. But you have the ball at your
feet. I know no one so young who has got the ball at his feet so well. I call it nothing to
have the ball at your feet if you are born with it there. It is so easy to be a lord if your
father is one before you,--and so easy to marry a pretty girl if you can make her a countess.
But to make yourself a lord, or to be as good as a lord, when nothing has been born to you,--that
I call very much. And there are women, and pretty women too, Mr. Finn, who have spirit enough
to understand this, and to think that the man, after all, is more important than the lord."
Then she sang the old well-worn verse of the Scotch song with wonderful spirit, and with a
clearness of voice and knowledge of music for which he had hitherto never given her credit.

"I did not know that you sung, Madame Goesler."

"Only now and then when something specially requires it. And I am very fond of Scotch songs.
I will sing to you now if you like it." Then she sang the whole song,--"A man's a man for a'
that," she said as she finished. "Even though he cannot get the special bit of painted Eve's
flesh for which his heart has had a craving." Then she sang again:--

   "There are maidens in Scotland more lovely by far,
    Who would gladly be bride to the young Lochinvar."

"But young Lochinvar got his bride," said Phineas.

"Take the spirit of the lines, Mr. Finn, which is true; and not the tale as it is told, which
is probably false. I often think that Jock of Hazledean, and young Lochinvar too, probably
lived to repent their bargains. We will hope that Lord Chiltern may not do so."

"I am sure he never will."

"That is all right. And as for you, do you for a while think of your politics, and your speeches,
and your colonies, rather than of your love. You are at home there, and no Lord Chiltern can
rob you of your success. And if you are down in the mouth, come to me, and I will sing you
a Scotch song. And, look you, the next time I ask you to dinner I will promise you that Mrs.
Bonteen shall not be here. Good-bye." She gave him her hand, which was very soft, and left
it for a moment in his, and he was consoled.

Madame Goesler, when she was alone, threw herself on to her chair and began to think of things.
In these days she would often ask herself what in truth was the object of her ambition, and
the aim of her life. Now at this moment she had in her hand a note from the Duke of Omnium.
The Duke had allowed himself to say something about a photograph, which had justified her in
writing to him,--or which she had taken for such justification. And the Duke had replied. "He
would not," he said, "lose the opportunity of waiting upon her in person which the presentation
of the little gift might afford him." It would be a great success to have the Duke of Omnium
at her house,--but to what would the success reach? What was her definite object,--or had she
any? In what way could she make herself happy? She could not say that she was happy yet. The
hours with her were too long and the days too many.

The Duke of Omnium should come,--if he would. And she was quite resolved as to this,--that
if the Duke did come she would not be afraid of him. Heavens and earth! What would be the feelings
of such a woman as her, were the world to greet her some fine morning as Duchess of Omnium!
Then she made up her mind very resolutely on one subject. Should the Duke give her any opportunity
she would take a very short time in letting him know what was the extent of her ambition.

CHAPTER LV

Lord Chiltern at Saulsby

Lord Chiltern did exactly as he said he would do. He wrote to his father as he passed through
Carlisle, and at once went on to his hunting at Willingford. But his letter was very stiff
and ungainly, and it may be doubted whether Miss Effingham was not wrong in refusing the offer
which he had made to her as to the dictation of it. He began his letter, "My Lord," and did
not much improve the style as he went on with it. The reader may as well see the whole letter;--

   Railway Hotel, Carlisle,
   December 27, 186--.

   MY LORD,

   I am now on my way from Loughlinter to London, and write
   this letter to you in compliance with a promise made by
   me to my sister and to Miss Effingham. I have asked Violet
   to be my wife, and she has accepted me, and they think
   that you will be pleased to hear that this has been done.
   I shall be, of course, obliged, if you will instruct Mr.
   Edwards to let me know what you would propose to do in
   regard to settlements. Laura thinks that you will wish to
   see both Violet and myself at Saulsby. For myself, I can
   only say that, should you desire me to come, I will do
   so on receiving your assurance that I shall be treated
   neither with fatted calves nor with reproaches. I am not
   aware that I have deserved either.

   I am, my lord, yours affect.,

   CHILTERN.

   P.S.--My address will be "The Bull, Willingford."

That last word, in which he half-declared himself to be joined in affectionate relations to
his father, caused him a world of trouble. But he could find no term for expressing, without
a circumlocution which was disagreeable to him, exactly that position of feeling towards his
father which really belonged to him. He would have written "yours with affection," or "yours
with deadly enmity," or "yours with respect," or "yours with most profound indifference," exactly
in accordance with the state of his father's mind, if he had only known what was that state.
He was afraid of going beyond his father in any offer of reconciliation, and was firmly fixed
in his resolution that he would never be either repentant or submissive in regard to the past.
If his father had wishes for the future, he would comply with them if he could do so without
unreasonable inconvenience, but he would not give way a single point as to things done and
gone. If his father should choose to make any reference to them, his father must prepare for
battle.

The Earl was of course disgusted by the pertinacious obstinacy of his son's letter, and for
an hour or two swore to himself that he would not answer it. But it is natural that the father
should yearn for the son, while the son's feeling for the father is of a very much weaker nature.
Here, at any rate, was that engagement made which he had ever desired. And his son had made
a step, though it was so very unsatisfactory a step, towards reconciliation. When the old man
read the letter a second time, he skipped that reference to fatted calves which had been so
peculiarly distasteful to him, and before the evening had passed he had answered his son as
follows;--

   Saulsby, December 29, 186--.

   MY DEAR CHILTERN,

   I have received your letter, and am truly delighted to hear that dear
   Violet has accepted you as her husband. Her fortune will be very
   material to you, but she herself is better than any fortune. You have
   long known my opinion of her. I shall be proud to welcome her as a
   daughter to my house.

   I shall of course write to her immediately, and will endeavour to
   settle some early day for her coming here. When I have done so, I
   will write to you again, and can only say that I will endeavour to
   make Saulsby comfortable to you.

   Your affectionate father,

   BRENTFORD.

   Richards, the groom, is still here. You had perhaps better write to
   him direct about your horses.

By the middle of February arrangements had all been made, and Violet met her lover at his father's
house. She in the meantime had been with her aunt, and had undergone a good deal of mild unceasing
persecution. "My dear Violet," said her aunt to her on her arrival at Baddingham, speaking
with a solemnity that ought to have been terrible to the young lady, "I do not know what to
say to you."

"Say 'how d'you do?' aunt," said Violet.

"I mean about this engagement," said Lady Baldock, with an increase of awe-inspiring severity
in her voice.

"Say nothing about it at all, if you don't like it," said Violet.

"How can I say nothing about it? How can I be silent? Or how am I to congratulate you?"

"The least said, perhaps, the soonest mended," and Violet smiled as she spoke.

"That is very well, and if I had no duty to perform, I would be silent. But, Violet, you have
been left in my charge. If I see you shipwrecked in life, I shall ever tell myself that the
fault has been partly mine."

"Nay, aunt, that will be quite unnecessary. I will always admit that you did everything in
your power to--to--to--make me run straight, as the sporting men say."

"Sporting men! Oh, Violet."

"And you know, aunt, I still hope that I shall be found to have kept on the right side of the
posts. You will find that poor Lord Chiltern is not so black as he is painted."

"But why take anybody that is black at all?"

"I like a little shade in the picture, aunt."

"Look at Lord Fawn."

"I have looked at him."

"A young nobleman beginning a career of useful official life, that will end in--; there is
no knowing what it may end in."

"I daresay not;--but it never could have begun or ended in my being Lady Fawn."

"And Mr. Appledom!"

"Poor Mr. Appledom. I do like Mr. Appledom. But, you see, aunt, I like Lord Chiltern so much
better. A young woman will go by her feelings."

"And yet you refused him a dozen times."

"I never counted the times, aunt; but not quite so many as that."

The same thing was repeated over and over again during the month that Miss Effingham remained
at Baddingham, but Lady Baldock had no power of interfering, and Violet bore her persecution
bravely. Her future husband was generally spoken of as "that violent young man," and hints
were thrown out as to the personal injuries to which his wife might be possibly subjected.
But the threatened bride only laughed, and spoke of these coming dangers as part of the general
lot of married women. "I daresay, if the truth were known, my uncle Baldock did not always
keep his temper," she once said. Now, the truth was, as Violet well knew, that "my uncle Baldock"
had been dumb as a sheep before the shearers in the hands of his wife, and had never been known
to do anything improper by those who had been most intimate with him even in his earlier days.
"Your uncle Baldock, miss," said the outraged aunt, "was a nobleman as different in his manner
of life from Lord Chiltern as chalk from cheese." "But then comes the question, which is the
cheese?" said Violet. Lady Baldock would not argue the question any further, but stalked out
of the room.

Lady Laura Kennedy met them at Saulsby, having had something of a battle with her husband before
she left her home to do so. When she told him of her desire to assist at this reconciliation
between her father and brother, he replied by pointing out that her first duty was at Loughlinter,
and before the interview was ended had come to express an opinion that that duty was very much
neglected. She in the meantime had declared that she would go to Saulsby, or that she would
explain to her father that she was forbidden by her husband to do so. "And I also forbid any
such communication," said Mr. Kennedy. In answer to which, Lady Laura told him that there were
some marital commands which she should not consider it to be her duty to obey. When matters
had come to this pass, it may be conceived that both Mr. Kennedy and his wife were very unhappy.
She had almost resolved that she would take steps to enable her to live apart from her husband;
and he had begun to consider what course he would pursue if such steps were taken. The wife
was subject to her husband by the laws both of God and man; and Mr. Kennedy was one who thought
much of such laws. In the meantime, Lady Laura carried her point and went to Saulsby, leaving
her husband to go up to London and begin the session by himself.

Lady Laura and Violet were both at Saulsby before Lord Chiltern arrived, and many were the
consultations which were held between them as to the best mode in which things might be arranged.
Violet was of opinion that there had better be no arrangement, that Lord Chiltern should be
allowed to come in and take his father's hand, and sit down to dinner,--and that so things
should fall into their places. Lady Laura was rather in favour of some scene. But the interview
had taken place before either of them were able to say a word. Lord Chiltern, on his arrival,
had gone immediately to his father, taking the Earl very much by surprise, and had come off
best in the encounter.

"My lord," said he, walking up to his father with his hand out, "I am very glad to come back
to Saulsby." He had written to his sister to say that he would be at Saulsby on that day, but
had named no hour. He now appeared between ten and eleven in the morning, and his father had
as yet made no preparation for him,--had arranged no appropriate words. He had walked in at
the front door, and had asked for the Earl. The Earl was in his own morning-room,--a gloomy
room, full of dark books and darker furniture, and thither Lord Chiltern had at once gone.
The two women still were sitting together over the fire in the breakfast-room, and knew nothing
of his arrival.

"Oswald!" said his father, "I hardly expected you so early."

"I have come early. I came across country, and slept at Birmingham. I suppose Violet is here."

"Yes, she is here,--and Laura. They will be very glad to see you. So am I." And the father
took the son's hand for the second time.

"Thank you, sir," said Lord Chiltern, looking his father full in the face.

"I have been very much pleased by this engagement," continued the Earl.

"What do you think I must be, then?" said the son, laughing. "I have been at it, you know,
off and on, ever so many years; and have sometimes thought I was quite a fool not to get it
out of my head. But I couldn't get it out of my head. And now she talks as though it were she
who had been in love with me all the time!"

"Perhaps she was," said the father.

"I don't believe it in the least. She may be a little so now."

"I hope you mean that she always shall be so."

"I shan't be the worst husband in the world, I hope; and I am quite sure I shan't be the best.
I will go and see her now. I suppose I shall find her somewhere in the house. I thought it
best to see you first."

"Stop half a moment, Oswald," said the Earl. And then Lord Brentford did make something of
a shambling speech, in which he expressed a hope that they two might for the future live together
on friendly terms, forgetting the past. He ought to have been prepared for the occasion, and
the speech was poor and shambling. But I think that it was more useful than it might have been,
had it been uttered roundly and with that paternal and almost majestic effect which he would
have achieved had he been thoroughly prepared. But the roundness and the majesty would have
gone against the grain with his son, and there would have been a danger of some outbreak. As
it was, Lord Chiltern smiled, and muttered some word about things being "all right," and then
made his way out of the room. "That's a great deal better than I had hoped," he said to himself;
"and it has all come from my going in without being announced." But there was still a fear
upon him that his father even yet might prepare a speech, and speak it, to the great peril
of their mutual comfort.

His meeting with Violet was of course pleasant enough. Now that she had succumbed, and had
told herself and had told him that she loved him, she did not scruple to be as generous as
a maiden should be who has acknowledged herself to be conquered, and has rendered herself to
the conqueror. She would walk with him and ride with him, and take a lively interest in the
performances of all his horses, and listen to hunting stories as long as he chose to tell them.
In all this, she was so good and so loving that Lady Laura was more than once tempted to throw
in her teeth her old, often-repeated assertions, that she was not prone to be in love,--that
it was not her nature to feel any ardent affection for a man, and that, therefore, she would
probably remain unmarried. "You begrudge me my little bits of pleasure," Violet said, in answer
to one such attack. "No;--but it is so odd to see you, of all women, become so love-lorn,"
"I am not love-lorn," said Violet, "but I like the freedom of telling him everything and of
hearing everything from him, and of having him for my own best friend. He might go away for
twelve months, and I should not be unhappy, believing, as I do, that he would be true to me."
All of which set Lady Laura thinking whether her friend had not been wiser than she had been.
She had never known anything of that sort of friendship with her husband which already seemed
to be quite established between these two.

In her misery one day Lady Laura told the whole story of her own unhappiness to her brother,
saying nothing of Phineas Finn,--thinking nothing of him as she told her story, but speaking
more strongly perhaps than she should have done, of the terrible dreariness of her life at
Loughlinter, and of her inability to induce her husband to alter it for her sake.

"Do you mean that he,--ill-treats you?" said the brother, with a scowl on his face which seemed
to indicate that he would like no task better than that of resenting such ill-treatment.

"He does not beat me, if you mean that."

"Is he cruel to you? Does he use harsh language?"

"He never said a word in his life either to me or, as I believe, to any other human being,
that he would think himself bound to regret."

"What is it then?"

"He simply chooses to have his own way, and his way cannot be my way. He is hard, and dry,
and just, and dispassionate, and he wishes me to be the same. That is all."

"I tell you fairly, Laura, as far as I am concerned, I never could speak to him. He is antipathetic
to me. But then I am not his wife."

"I am;--and I suppose I must bear it."

"Have you spoken to my father?"

"No."

"Or to Violet?"

"Yes."

"And what does she say?"

"What can she say? She has nothing to say. Nor have you. Nor, if I am driven to leave him,
can I make the world understand why I do so. To be simply miserable, as I am, is nothing to
the world."

"I could never understand why you married him."

"Do not be cruel to me, Oswald."

"Cruel! I will stick by you in any way that you wish. If you think well of it, I will go off
to Loughlinter to-morrow, and tell him that you will never return to him. And if you are not
safe from him here at Saulsby, you shall go abroad with us. I am sure Violet would not object.
I will not be cruel to you."

But in truth neither of Lady Laura's councillors was able to give her advice that could serve
her. She felt that she could not leave her husband without other cause than now existed, although
she felt, also, that to go back to him was to go back to utter wretchedness. And when she saw
Violet and her brother together there came to her dreams of what might have been her own happiness
had she kept herself free from those terrible bonds in which she was now held a prisoner. She
could not get out of her heart the remembrance of that young man who would have been her lover,
if she would have let him,--of whose love for herself she had been aware before she had handed
herself over as a bale of goods to her unloved, unloving husband. She had married Mr. Kennedy
because she was afraid that otherwise she might find herself forced to own that she loved that
other man who was then a nobody;--almost nobody. It was not Mr. Kennedy's money that had bought
her. This woman in regard to money had shown herself to be as generous as the sun. But in marrying
Mr. Kennedy she had maintained herself in her high position, among the first of her own people,--among
the first socially and among the first politically. But had she married Phineas,--had she become
Lady Laura Finn,--there would have been a great descent. She could not have entertained the
leading men of her party. She would not have been on a level with the wives and daughters of
Cabinet Ministers. She might, indeed, have remained unmarried! But she knew that had she done
so,--had she so resolved,--that which she called her fancy would have been too strong for her.
She would not have remained unmarried. At that time it was her fate to be either Lady Laura
Kennedy or Lady Laura Finn. And she had chosen to be Lady Laura Kennedy. To neither Violet
Effingham nor to her brother could she tell one half of the sorrow which afflicted her.

"I shall go back to Loughlinter," she said to her brother.

"Do not, unless you wish it," he answered.

"I do not wish it. But I shall do it. Mr. Kennedy is in London now, and has been there since
Parliament met, but he will be in Scotland again in March, and I will go and meet him there.
I told him that I would do so when I left."

"But you will go up to London?"

"I suppose so. I must do as he tells me, of course. What I mean is, I will try it for another
year."

"If it does not succeed, come to us."

"I cannot say what I will do. I would die if I knew how. Never be a tyrant, Oswald; or at any
rate, not a cold tyrant. And remember this, there is no tyranny to a woman like telling her
of her duty. Talk of beating a woman! Beating might often be a mercy."

Lord Chiltern remained ten days at Saulsby, and at last did not get away without a few unpleasant
words with his father,--or without a few words that were almost unpleasant with his mistress.
On his first arrival he had told his sister that he should go on a certain day, and some intimation
to this effect had probably been conveyed to the Earl. But when his son told him one evening
that the post-chaise had been ordered for seven o'clock the next morning, he felt that his
son was ungracious and abrupt. There were many things still to be said, and indeed there had
been no speech of any account made at all as yet.

"That is very sudden," said the Earl.

"I thought Laura had told you."

"She has not told me a word lately. She may have said something before you came here. What
is there to hurry you?"

"I thought ten days would be as long as you would care to have me here, and as I said that
I would be back by the first, I would rather not change my plans."

"You are going to hunt?"

"Yes;--I shall hunt till the end of March."

"You might have hunted here, Oswald." But the son made no sign of changing his plans; and the
father, seeing that he would not change them, became solemn and severe. There were a few words
which he must say to his son,--something of a speech that he must make;--so he led the way
into the room with the dark books and the dark furniture, and pointed to a great deep arm-chair
for his son's accommodation. But as he did not sit down himself, neither did Lord Chiltern.
Lord Chiltern understood very well how great is the advantage of a standing orator over a sitting
recipient of his oratory, and that advantage he would not give to his father. "I had hoped
to have an opportunity of saying a few words to you about the future," said the Earl.

"I think we shall be married in July," said Lord Chiltern.

"So I have heard;--but after that. Now I do not want to interfere, Oswald, and of course the
less so, because Violet's money will to a great degree restore the inroads which have been
made upon the property."

"It will more than restore them altogether."

"Not if her estate be settled on a second son, Oswald, and I hear from Lady Baldock that that
is the wish of her relations."

"She shall have her own way,--as she ought. What that way is I do not know. I have not even
asked about it. She asked me, and I told her to speak to you."

"Of course I should wish it to go with the family property. Of course that would be best."

"She shall have her own way,--as far as I am concerned."

"But it is not about that, Oswald, that I would speak. What are your plans of life when you
are married?"

"Plans of life?"

"Yes;--plans of life. I suppose you have some plans. I suppose you mean to apply yourself to
some useful occupation?"

"I don't know really, sir, that I am of much use for any purpose." Lord Chiltern laughed as
he said this, but did not laugh pleasantly.

"You would not be a drone in the hive always?"

"As far as I can see, sir, we who call ourselves lords generally are drones."

"I deny it," said the Earl, becoming quite energetic as he defended his order. "I deny it utterly.
I know no class of men who do work more useful or more honest. Am I a drone? Have I been so
from my youth upwards? I have always worked, either in the one House or in the other, and those
of my fellows with whom I have been most intimate have worked also. The same career is open
to you."

"You mean politics?"

"Of course I mean politics."

"I don't care for politics. I see no difference in parties."

"But you should care for politics, and you should see a difference in parties. It is your duty
to do so. My wish is that you should go into Parliament."

"I can't do that, sir."

"And why not?"

"In the first place, sir, you have not got a seat to offer me. You have managed matters among
you in such a way that poor little Loughton has been swallowed up. If I were to canvass the
electors of Smotherem, I don't think that many would look very sweet on me."

"There is the county, Oswald."

"And whom am I to turn out? I should spend four or five thousand pounds, and have nothing but
vexation in return for it. I had rather not begin that game, and indeed I am too old for Parliament.
I did not take it up early enough to believe in it."

All this made the Earl very angry, and from these things they went on to worse things. When
questioned again as to the future, Lord Chiltern scowled, and at last declared that it was
his idea to live abroad in the summer for his wife's recreation, and somewhere down in the
shires during the winter for his own. He would admit of no purpose higher than recreation,
and when his father again talked to him of a nobleman's duty, he said that he knew of no other
special duty than that of not exceeding his income. Then his father made a longer speech than
before, and at the end of it Lord Chiltern simply wished him good night. "It's getting late,
and I've promised to see Violet before I go to bed. Good-bye." Then he was off, and Lord Brentford
was left there, standing with his back to the fire.

After that Lord Chiltern had a discussion with Violet, which lasted nearly half the night;
and during the discussion she told him more than once that he was wrong. "Such as I am you
must take me, or leave me," he said, in anger. "Nay; there is no choice now," she answered.
"I have taken you, and I will stick by you,--whether you are right or wrong. But when I think
you wrong, I shall say so." He swore to her as he pressed her to his heart that she was the
finest, grandest, sweetest woman that ever the world had produced. But still there was present
on his palate, when he left her, the bitter taste of her reprimand.

CHAPTER LVI

What the People in Marylebone Thought

Phineas Finn, when the session began, was still hard at work upon his Canada bill, and in his
work found some relief for his broken back. He went into the matter with all his energy, and
before the debate came on, knew much more about the seven thousand inhabitants of some hundreds
of thousands of square miles at the back of Canada, than he did of the people of London or
of County Clare. And he found some consolation also in the good-nature of Madame Goesler, whose
drawing-room was always open to him. He could talk freely now to Madame Goesler about Violet,
and had even ventured to tell her that once, in old days, he had thought of loving Lady Laura
Standish. He spoke of those days as being very old; and then he perhaps said some word to her
about dear little Mary Flood Jones. I think that there was not much in his career of which
he did not say something to Madame Goesler, and that he received from her a good deal of excellent
advice and encouragement in the direction of his political ambition. "A man should work," she
said,--"and you do work. A woman can only look on, and admire and long. What is there that
I can do? I can learn to care for these Canadians, just because you care for them. If it was
the beavers that you told me of, I should have to care for the beavers." Then Phineas of course
told her that such sympathy from her was all and all to him. But the reader must not on this
account suppose that he was untrue in his love to Violet Effingham. His back was altogether
broken by his fall, and he was quite aware that such was the fact. Not as yet, at least, had
come to him any remotest idea that a cure was possible.

Early in March he heard that Lady Laura was up in town, and of course he was bound to go to
her. The information was given to him by Mr. Kennedy himself, who told him that he had been
to Scotland to fetch her. In these days there was an acknowledged friendship between these
two, but there was no intimacy. Indeed, Mr. Kennedy was a man who was hardly intimate with
any other man. With Phineas he now and then exchanged a few words in the lobby of the House,
and when they chanced to meet each other, they met as friends. Mr. Kennedy had no strong wish
to see again in his house the man respecting whom he had ventured to caution his wife; but
he was thoughtful; and thinking over it all, he found it better to ask him there. No one must
know that there was any reason why Phineas should not come to his house; especially as all
the world knew that Phineas had protected him from the garrotters. "Lady Laura is in town now,"
he said; "you must go and see her before long." Phineas of course promised that he would go.

In these days Phineas was beginning to be aware that he had enemies,--though he could not understand
why anybody should be his enemy now that Violet Effingham had decided against him. There was
poor Laurence Fitzgibbon, indeed, whom he had superseded at the Colonial Office, but Laurence
Fitzgibbon, to give merit where merit was due, felt no animosity against him at all. "You're
welcome, me boy; you're welcome,--as far as yourself goes. But as for the party, bedad, it's
rotten to the core, and won't stand another session. Mind, it's I who tell you so." And the
poor idle Irishman, in so speaking, spoke the truth as well as he knew it. But the Ratlers
and the Bonteens were Finn's bitter foes, and did not scruple to let him know that such was
the case. Barrington Erle had scruples on the subject, and in a certain mildly apologetic way
still spoke well of the young man, whom he had himself first introduced into political life
only four years since;--but there was no earnestness or cordiality in Barrington Erle's manner,
and Phineas knew that his first staunch friend could no longer be regarded as a pillar of support.
But there was a set of men, quite as influential,--so Phineas thought,--as the busy politicians
of the club, who were very friendly to him. These were men, generally of high position, of
steady character,--hard workers,--who thought quite as much of what a man did in his office
as what he said in the House. Lords Cantrip, Thrift, and Fawn were of this class,--and they
were all very courteous to Phineas. Envious men began to say of him that he cared little now
for any one of the party who had not a handle to his name, and that he preferred to live with
lords and lordlings. This was hard upon him, as the great political ambition of his life was
to call Mr. Monk his friend; and he would sooner have acted with Mr. Monk than with any other
man in the Cabinet. But though Mr. Monk had not deserted him, there had come to be little of
late in common between the two. His life was becoming that of a parliamentary official rather
than that of a politician;--whereas, though Mr. Monk was in office, his public life was purely
political. Mr. Monk had great ideas of his own which he intended to hold, whether by holding
them he might remain in office or be forced out of office; and he was indifferent as to the
direction which things in this respect might take with him. But Phineas, who had achieved his
declared object in getting into place, felt that he was almost constrained to adopt the views
of others, let them be what they might. Men spoke to him, as though his parliamentary career
were wholly at the disposal of the Government,--as though he were like a proxy in Mr. Gresham's
pocket,--with this difference, that when directed to get up and speak on a subject he was bound
to do so. This annoyed him, and he complained to Mr. Monk; but Mr. Monk only shrugged his shoulders
and told him that he must make his choice. He soon discovered Mr. Monk's meaning. "If you choose
to make Parliament a profession,--as you have chosen,--you can have no right even to think
of independence. If the country finds you out when you are in Parliament, and then invites
you to office, of course the thing is different. But the latter is a slow career, and probably
would not have suited you." That was the meaning of what Mr. Monk said to him. After all, these
official and parliamentary honours were greater when seen at a distance than he found them
to be now that he possessed them. Mr. Low worked ten hours a day, and could rarely call a day
his own; but, after all, with all this work, Mr. Low was less of a slave, and more independent,
than was he, Phineas Finn, Under-Secretary of State, the friend of Cabinet Ministers, and Member
of Parliament since his twenty-fifth year! He began to dislike the House, and to think it a
bore to sit on the Treasury bench;--he, who a few years since had regarded Parliament as the
British heaven on earth, and who, since he had been in Parliament, had looked at that bench
with longing envious eyes. Laurence Fitzgibbon, who seemed to have as much to eat and drink
as ever, and a bed also to lie on, could come and go in the House as he pleased, since his--resignation.

And there was a new trouble coming. The Reform Bill for England had passed; but now there was
to be another Reform Bill for Ireland. Let them pass what bill they might, this would not render
necessary a new Irish election till the entire House should be dissolved. But he feared that
he would be called upon to vote for the abolition of his own borough,--and for other points
almost equally distasteful to him. He knew that he would not be consulted,--but would be called
upon to vote, and perhaps to speak; and was certain that if he did so, there would be war between
him and his constituents. Lord Tulla had already communicated to him his ideas that, for certain
excellent reasons, Loughshane ought to be spared. But this evil was, he hoped, a distant one.
It was generally thought that, as the English Reform Bill had been passed last year, and as
the Irish bill, if carried, could not be immediately operative, the doing of the thing might
probably be postponed to the next session.

When he first saw Lady Laura he was struck by the great change in her look and manner. She
seemed to him to be old and worn, and he judged her to be wretched,--as she was. She had written
to him to say that she would be at her father's house on such and such a morning, and he had
gone to her there. "It is of no use your coming to Grosvenor Place," she said. "I see nobody
there, and the house is like a prison." Later in the interview she told him not to come and
dine there, even though Mr. Kennedy should ask him.

"And why not?" he demanded.

"Because everything would be stiff, and cold, and uncomfortable. I suppose you do not wish
to make your way into a lady's house if she asks you not." There was a sort of smile on her
face as she said this, but he could perceive that it was a very bitter smile. "You can easily
excuse yourself."

"Yes, I can excuse myself."

"Then do so. If you are particularly anxious to dine with Mr. Kennedy, you can easily do so
at your club." In the tone of her voice, and the words she used, she hardly attempted to conceal
her dislike of her husband.

"And now tell me about Miss Effingham," he said.

"There is nothing for me to tell."

"Yes there is;--much to tell. You need not spare me. I do not pretend to deny to you that I
have been hit hard,--so hard, that I have been nearly knocked down; but it will not hurt me
now to hear of it all. Did she always love him?"

"I cannot say. I think she did after her own fashion."

"I sometimes think women would be less cruel," he said, "if they knew how great is the anguish
they can cause."

"Has she been cruel to you?"

"I have nothing to complain of. But if she loved Chiltern, why did she not tell him so at once?
And why--"

"This is complaining, Mr. Finn."

"I will not complain. I would not even think of it, if I could help it. Are they to be married
soon?"

"In July;--so they now say."

"And where will they live?"

"Ah! no one can tell. I do not think that they agree as yet as to that. But if she has a strong
wish Oswald will yield to it. He was always generous."

"I would not even have had a wish,--except to have her with me."

There was a pause for a moment, and then Lady Laura answered him with a touch of scorn in her
voice,--and with some scorn, too, in her eye:--"That is all very well, Mr. Finn; but the season
will not be over before there is some one else."

"There you wrong me."

"They tell me that you are already at Madame Goesler's feet."

"Madame Goesler!"

"What matters who it is as long as she is young and pretty, and has the interest attached to
her of something more than ordinary position? When men tell me of the cruelty of women, I think
that no woman can be really cruel because no man is capable of suffering. A woman, if she is
thrown aside, does suffer."

"Do you mean to tell me, then, that I am indifferent to Miss Effingham?" When he thus spoke,
I wonder whether he had forgotten that he had ever declared to this very woman to whom he was
speaking, a passion for herself.

"Psha!"

"It suits you, Lady Laura, to be harsh to me, but you are not speaking your thoughts."

Then she lost all control of herself, and poured out to him the real truth that was in her.
"And whose thoughts did you speak when you and I were on the braes of Loughlinter? Am I wrong
in saying that change is easy to you, or have I grown to be so old that you can talk to me
as though those far-away follies ought to be forgotten? Was it so long ago? Talk of love! I
tell you, sir, that your heart is one in which love can have no durable hold. Violet Effingham!
There may be a dozen Violets after her, and you will be none the worse." Then she walked away
from him to the window, and he stood still, dumb, on the spot that he had occupied. "You had
better go now," she said, "and forget what has passed between us. I know that you are a gentleman,
and that you will forget it." The strong idea of his mind when he heard all this was the injustice
of her attack,--of the attack as coming from her, who had all but openly acknowledged that
she had married a man whom she had not loved because it suited her to escape from a man whom
she did love. She was reproaching him now for his fickleness in having ventured to set his
heart upon another woman, when she herself had been so much worse than fickle,--so profoundly
false! And yet he could not defend himself by accusing her. What would she have had of him?
What would she have proposed to him, had he questioned her as to his future, when they were
together on the braes of Loughlinter? Would she not have bid him to find some one else whom
he could love? Would she then have suggested to him the propriety of nursing his love for herself,--for
her who was about to become another man's wife,--for her after she should have become another
man's wife? And yet because he had not done so, and because she had made herself wretched by
marrying a man whom she did not love, she reproached him!

He could not tell her of all this, so he fell back for his defence on words which had passed
between them since the day when they had met on the braes. "Lady Laura," he said, "it is only
a month or two since you spoke to me as though you wished that Violet Effingham might be my wife."

"I never wished it. I never said that I wished it. There are moments in which we try to give
a child any brick on the chimney top for which it may whimper." Then there was another silence
which she was the first to break. "You had better go," she said. "I know that I have committed
myself, and of course I would rather be alone."

"And what would you wish that I should do?"

"Do?" she said. "What you do can be nothing to me."

"Must we be strangers, you and I, because there was a time in which we were almost more than
friends?"

"I have spoken nothing about myself, sir,--only as I have been drawn to do so by your pretence
of being love-sick. You can do nothing for me,--nothing,--nothing. What is it possible that
you should do for me? You are not my father, or my brother." It is not to be supposed that
she wanted him to fall at her feet. It is to be supposed that had he done so her reproaches
would have been hot and heavy on him; but yet it almost seemed to him as though he had no other
alternative. No!--He was not her father or her brother;--nor could he be her husband. And at
this very moment, as she knew, his heart was sore with love for another woman. And yet he hardly
knew how not to throw himself at her feet, and swear, that he would return now and for ever
to his old passion, hopeless, sinful, degraded as it would be.

"I wish it were possible for me to do something," he said, drawing near to her.

"There is nothing to be done," she said, clasping her hands together. "For me nothing. I have
before me no escape, no hope, no prospect of relief, no place of consolation. You have everything
before you. You complain of a wound! You have at least shown that such wounds with you are
capable of cure. You cannot but feel that when I hear your wailings, I must be impatient. You
had better leave me now, if you please."

"And are we to be no longer friends?" he asked.

"As far as friendship can go without intercourse, I shall always be your friend."

Then he went, and as he walked down to his office, so intent was he on that which had just
passed that he hardly saw the people as he met them, or was aware of the streets through which
his way led him. There had been something in the later words which Lady Laura had spoken that
had made him feel almost unconsciously that the injustice of her reproaches was not so great
as he had at first felt it to be, and that she had some cause for her scorn. If her case was
such as she had so plainly described it, what was his plight as compared with hers? He had
lost his Violet, and was in pain. There must be much of suffering before him. But though Violet
were lost, the world was not all blank before his eyes. He had not told himself, even in his
dreariest moments, that there was before him "no escape, no hope, no prospect of relief, no
place of consolation." And then he began to think whether this must in truth be the case with
Lady Laura. What if Mr. Kennedy were to die? What in such case as that would he do? In ten
or perhaps in five years time might it not be possible for him to go through the ceremony of
falling upon his knees, with stiffened joints indeed, but still with something left of the
ardour of his old love, of his oldest love of all?

As he was thinking of this he was brought up short in his walk as he was entering the Green
Park beneath the Duke's figure, by Laurence Fitzgibbon. "How dare you not be in your office
at such an hour as this, Finn, me boy,--or, at least, not in the House,--or serving your masters
after some fashion?" said the late Under-Secretary.

"So I am. I've been on a message to Marylebone, to find what the people there think about the
Canadas."

"And what do they think about the Canadas in Marylebone?"

"Not one man in a thousand cares whether the Canadians prosper or fail to prosper. They care
that Canada should not go to the States, because,--though they don't love the Canadians, they
do hate the Americans. That's about the feeling in Marylebone,--and it's astonishing how like
the Maryleboners are to the rest of the world."

"Dear me, what a fellow you are for an Under-Secretary! You've heard the news about little Violet."

"What news?"

"She has quarrelled with Chiltern, you know."

"Who says so?"

"Never mind who says so, but they tell me it's true. Take an old friend's advice, and strike
while the iron's hot."

Phineas did not believe what he had heard, but though he did not believe it, still the tidings
set his heart beating. He would have believed it less perhaps had he known that Laurence had
just received the news from Mrs. Bonteen.

CHAPTER LVII

The Top Brick of the Chimney

Madame Max Goesler was a lady who knew that in fighting the battles which fell to her lot,
in arranging the social difficulties which she found in her way, in doing the work of the world
which came to her share, very much more care was necessary,--and care too about things apparently
trifling,--than was demanded by the affairs of people in general. And this was not the case
so much on account of any special disadvantage under which she laboured, as because she was
ambitious of doing the very uttermost with those advantages which she possessed. Her own birth
had not been high, and that of her husband, we may perhaps say, had been very low. He had been
old when she had married him, and she had had little power of making any progress till he had
left her a widow. Then she found herself possessed of money, certainly; of wit,--as she believed;
and of a something in her personal appearance which, as she plainly told herself, she might
perhaps palm off upon the world as beauty. She was a woman who did not flatter herself, who
did not strongly believe in herself, who could even bring herself to wonder that men and women
in high position should condescend to notice such a one as her. With all her ambition, there
was a something of genuine humility about her; and with all the hardness she had learned there
was a touch of womanly softness which would sometimes obtrude itself upon her heart. When she
found a woman really kind to her, she would be very kind in return. And though she prized wealth,
and knew that her money was her only rock of strength, she could be lavish with it, as though
it were dirt.

But she was highly ambitious, and she played her game with great skill and great caution. Her
doors were not open to all callers;--were shut even to some who find but few doors closed against
them;--were shut occasionally to those whom she most specially wished to see within them. She
knew how to allure by denying, and to make the gift rich by delaying it. We are told by the
Latin proverb that he who gives quickly gives twice; but I say that she who gives quickly seldom
gives more than half. When in the early spring the Duke of Omnium first knocked at Madame Max
Goesler's door, he was informed that she was not at home. The Duke felt very cross as he handed
his card out from his dark green brougham,--on the panel of which there was no blazon to tell
the owner's rank. He was very cross. She had told him that she was always at home between four
and six on a Thursday. He had condescended to remember the information, and had acted upon
it,--and now she was not at home! She was not at home, though he had come on a Thursday at
the very hour she had named to him. Any duke would have been cross, but the Duke of Omnium
was particularly cross. No;--he certainly would give himself no further trouble by going to
the cottage in Park Lane. And yet Madame Max Goesler had been in her own drawing-room, while
the Duke was handing out his card from the brougham below.

On the next morning there came to him a note from the cottage,--such a pretty note!--so penitent,
so full of remorse,--and, which was better still, so laden with disappointment, that he forgave
her.

   MY DEAR DUKE,

   I hardly know how to apologise to you, after having told
   you that I am always at home on Thursdays; and I was at
   home yesterday when you called. But I was unwell, and I
   had told the servant to deny me, not thinking how much I
   might be losing. Indeed, indeed, I would not have given
   way to a silly headache, had I thought that your Grace
   would have been here. I suppose that now I must not even
   hope for the photograph.

   Yours penitently,

   MARIE M. G.

The note-paper was very pretty note-paper, hardly scented, and yet conveying a sense of something
sweet, and the monogram was small and new, and fantastic without being grotesque, and the writing
was of that sort which the Duke, having much experience, had learned to like,--and there was
something in the signature which pleased him. So he wrote a reply,--

   DEAR MADAME MAX GOESLER,

   I will call again next Thursday, or, if prevented, will
   let you know.

