Laurence Fitzgibbon made his way to Dover by the Saturday night's boat, and was able to show
himself in Portman Square on the Sunday. "Know anything about Phinny Finn?" he said afterwards
to Barrington Erle, in answer to an inquiry from that anxious gentleman. "Not a word! I think
you'd better send the town-crier round after him." Barrington, however, did not feel quite
so well assured of Fitzgibbon's truth as Lady Laura had done.

Dr. O'Shaughnessy remained during the Sunday and Monday at Ostend with his patient, and the
people at the inn only knew that Mr. Finn had sprained his shoulder badly; and on the Tuesday
they came back to London again, via Calais and Dover. No bone had been broken, and Phineas,
though his shoulder was very painful, bore the journey well. O'Shaughnessy had received a telegram
on the Monday, telling him that the division would certainly take place on the Tuesday,--and
on the Tuesday, at about ten in the evening, Phineas went down to the House. "By ----, you're
here," said Ratler, taking hold of him with an affection that was too warm. "Yes; I'm here,"
said Phineas, wincing in agony; "but be a little careful, there's a good fellow. I've been
down in Kent and put my arm out."

"Put your arm out, have you?" said Ratler, observing the sling for the first time. "I'm sorry
for that. But you'll stop and vote?"

"Yes;--I'll stop and vote. I've come up for the purpose. But I hope it won't be very late."

"There are both Daubeny and Gresham to speak yet, and at least three others. I don't suppose
it will be much before three. But you're all right now. You can go down and smoke if you like!"
In this way Phineas Finn spoke in the debate, and heard the end of it, voting for his party,
and fought his duel with Lord Chiltern in the middle of it.

He did go and sit on a well-cushioned bench in the smoking-room, and then was interrogated
by many of his friends as to his mysterious absence. He had, he said, been down in Kent, and
had had an accident with his arm, by which he had been confined. Here the line seems to terminate;
but just beyond and a little back, is a brass battery, concealed by bushes, every gun charged
with grape and canister. A house stands close behind the line, in a recess of the woods.

Now the enemy is seen advancing. Line after line comes swinging out. Shells come screaming over.
One explodes in front of Company D. Its fragments sever the flagstaff close to Jim Shaffer's
head, rip open Mike Coleman's cap, tear off Culp's arm near the shoulder.

Another bursts in the house, and sets it on fire. A woman, bearing a baby in one arm and leading
by the hand a little child, comes out of the house, still unharmed.
Frightened and bewildered, she is passing along the rear of the line
instead of hastening away from it. Again he wondered
at his own luck. He had told himself that a duel with Lord Chiltern must create a quarrel between
him and Lord Chiltern's relations, and also between him and Violet Effingham; that it must
banish him from his comfortable seat for Loughton, and ruin him in regard to his political
prospects. And now he had fought his duel, and was back in town,--and the thing seemed to have
been a thing of nothing. He had not as yet seen Lady Laura or Violet, but he had no doubt but
they both were as much in the dark as other people. The day might arrive, he thought, on which
it would be pleasant for him to tell Violet Effingham what had occurred, but that day had not
come as yet. Whither Lord Chiltern had gone, or what Lord Chiltern intended to do, he had not
any idea; but he imagined that he should soon hear something of her brother from Lady Laura.
That Lord Chiltern should say a word to Lady Laura of what had occurred,--or to any other person
in the world,--he did not in the least suspect. There could be no man more likely to be reticent
in such matters than Lord Chiltern,--or more sure to be guided by an almost exaggerated sense
of what honour required of him. Nor did he doubt the discretion of his friend Fitzgibbon;--if
only his friend might not damage the secret by being too discreet. Of the silence of the doctor
and the captain he was by no means equally sure; but even though they should gossip, the gossiping
would take so long a time in oozing out and becoming recognised information, as to have lost
much of its power for injuring him. Were Lady Laura to hear at this moment that he had been
over to Belgium, and had fought a duel with Lord Chiltern respecting Violet, she would probably
feel herself obliged to quarrel with him; but no such obligation would rest on her, if in the
course of six or nine months she should gradually have become aware that such an encounter
had taken place.

Lord Chiltern, during their interview at the rooms in Great Marlborough Street, had said a
word to him about the seat in Parliament;--had expressed some opinion that as he, Phineas Finn,
was interfering with the views of the Standish family in regard to Miss Effingham, he ought
not to keep the Standish seat, which had been conferred upon him in ignorance of any such intended
interference. Phineas, as he thought of this, could not remember Lord Chiltern's words, but
there was present to him an idea that such had been their purport. Was he bound, in circumstances
as they now existed, to give up Loughton? He made up his mind that he was not so bound unless
Lord Chiltern should demand from him that he should do so; but, nevertheless, he was uneasy
in his position. It was quite true that the seat now was his for this session by all parliamentary
law, even though the electors themselves might wish to be rid of him, and that Lord Brentford
could not even open his mouth upon the matter in a tone more loud than that of a whisper. But
Phineas, feeling that he had consented to accept the favour of a corrupt seat from Lord Brentford,
felt also that he was bound to give up the spoil if it were demanded from him. If it were demanded
from him, either by the father or the son, it should be given up at once.

On the following morning he found a leading article in the People's Banner devoted solely to
himself. "During the late debate,"--so ran a passage in the leading article,--"Mr. Finn, Lord
Brentford's Irish nominee for his pocket-borough at Loughton, did at last manage to stand on
his legs and open his mouth. If we are not mistaken, this is Mr. Finn's third session in Parliament,
and hitherto he has been unable to articulate three sentences, though he has on more than one
occasion made the attempt. For what special merit this young man has been selected for aristocratic
patronage we do not know,--but that there must be some merit recognisable by aristocratic eyes,
we surmise. Three years ago he was a raw young Irishman, living in London as Irishmen only
know how to live, earning nothing, and apparently without means; and then suddenly he bursts
out as a member of Parliament and as the friend of Cabinet Ministers. The possession of one
good gift must be acceded to the honourable member for Loughton,--he is a handsome young man,
and looks to be as strong as a coal-porter. Can it be that his promotion has sprung from this?
Be this as it may, we should like to know where he has been during his late mysterious absence
from Parliament, and in what way he came by the wound in his arm. Even handsome young members
of Parliament, fêted by titled ladies and their rich lords, are amenable to the laws,--to the
laws of this country, and to the laws of any other which it may suit them to visit for a while!"

"Infamous scoundrel!" said Phineas to himself, as he read this. "Vile, low, disreputable blackguard!" About
four o'clock, Sergeant Hasler woke me up to go on vidette post. I arose and followed him in
the deep darkness. Reaching the man whom I was to relieve, instructions were given in a whisper,
and in a moment I was alone.

This was the last watch of the night, and if a surprise was contemplated by the enemy, the attempt
would be made during these two hours. The rebel pickets were close at hand, and occasional sounds
and voices had been heard by my predecessor. The rain dripped monotonously from the trees, and
now and then a breath of wind moaned drearily through their branches. The ear alone could detect
approaching danger; and thus, with rifle in hand, I listened, jealously noting every sound.

Time
passed on, and at length the almost painful darkness began to disperse.
 And, singular to say, no questions were
asked. He had been to Kent and had come by an accident. No more than that was told, and his
dear sympathising friends were content to receive so much information, and to ask for no more.
But he had not as yet seen Violet Effingham, and he was beginning to think that this romance
about Violet might as well be brought to a close. He had not, however, as yet been able to
go into crowded rooms, and unless he went out to large parties he could not be sure that he
would meet Miss Effingham.

At last he resolved that he would tell Lady Laura the whole truth,--not the truth about the
duel, but the truth about Violet Effingham, and ask for her assistance. When making this resolution,
I think that he must have forgotten much that he had learned of his friend's character; and
by making it, I think that he showed also that he had not learned as much as his opportunities
might have taught him. He knew Lady Laura's obstinacy of purpose, he knew her devotion to her
brother, and he knew also how desirous she had been that her brother should win Violet Effingham
for himself. This knowledge should, I think, have sufficed to show him how improbable it was
that Lady Laura should assist him in his enterprise. But beyond all this was the fact,--a fact
as to the consequences of which Phineas himself was entirely blind, beautifully ignorant,--that
Lady Laura had once condescended to love himself. Nay;--she had gone farther than this, and
had ventured to tell him, even after her marriage, that the remembrance of some feeling that
had once dwelt in her heart in regard to him was still a danger to her. She had warned him
from Loughlinter, and then had received him in London;--and now he selected her as his confidante
in this love affair! Had he not been beautifully ignorant and most modestly blind, he would
surely have placed his confidence elsewhere.

It was not that Lady Laura Kennedy ever confessed to herself the existence of a vicious passion.
She had, indeed, learned to tell herself that she could not love her husband; and once, in
the excitement of such silent announcements to herself, she had asked herself whether her heart
was quite a blank, and had answered herself by desiring Phineas Finn to absent himself from
Loughlinter. During all the subsequent winter she had scourged herself inwardly for her own
imprudence, her quite unnecessary folly in so doing. What! could not she, Laura Standish, who
from her earliest years of girlish womanhood had resolved that she would use the world as men
use it, and not as women do,--could not she have felt the slight shock of a passing tenderness
for a handsome youth without allowing the feeling to be a rock before her big enough and sharp
enough for the destruction of her entire barque? Could not she command, if not her heart, at
any rate her mind, so that she might safely assure herself that, whether this man or any man
was here or there, her course would be unaltered? What though Phineas Finn had been in the
same house with her throughout all the winter, could not she have so lived with him on terms
of friendship, that every deed and word and look of her friendship might have been open to
her husband,--or open to all the world? She could have done so. She told herself that that
was not,--need not have been her great calamity. Whether she could endure the dull, monotonous
control of her slow but imperious lord,--or whether she must not rather tell him that it was
not to be endured,--that was her trouble. So she told herself, and again admitted Phineas to
her intimacy in London. But, nevertheless, Phineas, had he not been beautifully ignorant and
most blind to his own achievements, would not have expected from Lady Laura Kennedy assistance
with Miss Violet Effingham.

Phineas knew when to find Lady Laura alone, and he came upon her one day at the favourable
hour. The two first clauses of the bill had been passed after twenty fights and endless divisions.
Two points had been settled, as to which, however, Mr. Gresham had been driven to give way
so far and to yield so much, that men declared that such a bill as the Government could consent
to call its own could never be passed by that Parliament in that session. Immediately on his
entrance into her room Lady Laura began about the third clause. Would the House let Mr. Gresham
have his way about the--? Phineas stopped her at once. "My dear friend," he said, "I have come
to you in a private trouble, and I want you to drop politics for half an hour. I have come
to you for help."

"A private trouble, Mr. Finn! Is it serious?"

"It is very serious,--but it is no trouble of the kind of which you are thinking. But it is
serious enough to take up every thought."

"Can I help you?"

"Indeed you can. Whether you will or no is a different thing."

"I would help you in anything in my power, Mr. Finn. Do you not know it?"

"You have been very kind to me!"

"And so would Mr. Kennedy."

"Mr. Kennedy cannot help me here."

"What is it, Mr. Finn?"

"I suppose I may as well tell you at once,--in plain language, I do not know how to put my
story into words that shall fit it. I love Violet Effingham. Will you help me to win her to
be my wife?"

"You love Violet Effingham!" said Lady Laura. And as she spoke the look of her countenance
towards him was so changed that he became at once aware that from her no assistance might be
expected. His eyes were not opened in any degree to the second reason above given for Lady
Laura's opposition to his wishes, but he instantly perceived that she would still cling to
that destination of Violet's hand which had for years past been the favourite scheme of her
life. "Have you not always known, Mr. Finn, what have been our hopes for Violet?"

Phineas, though he had perceived his mistake, felt that he must go on with his cause. Lady
Laura must know his wishes sooner or later, and it was as well that she should learn them in
this way as in any other. "Yes;--but I have known also, from your brother's own lips,--and
indeed from yours also, Lady Laura,--that Chiltern has been three times refused by Miss Effingham."

"What does that matter? Do men never ask more than three times?"

"And must I be debarred for ever while he prosecutes a hopeless suit?"

"Yes;--you of all men."

"Why so, Lady Laura?"

"Because in this matter you have been his chosen friend,--and mine. We have told you everything,
trusting to you. We have believed in your honour. We have thought that with you, at any rate,
we were safe." These words were very bitter to Phineas, and yet when he had written his letter
at Loughton, he had intended to be so perfectly honest, chivalrously honest! Now Lady Laura
spoke to him and looked at him as though he had been most basely false--most untrue to that
noble friendship which had been lavished upon him by all her family. During the day we moved
out from our position near the run, into the woods in front, and formed line of battle. The
One Hundred and Ninetieth was in the line. The day was dismal. Rain and snow had fallen during
the preceding night, and now it was growing colder. Our line advanced over ground partly swampy.
In maneuvering to pass one of these difficult places, the Two Hundred and Tenth Pennsylvania
was massed behind us, and came crowding close after. Some of the men would break through the
crust of ice, and sink into the mud beneath. Among others, George Dunn, notwithstanding the size
of his feet, went plunging in, half-way to his knee. When the foot was withdrawn, it was found
that the shoe had been left in the depths below. "Mr. Finn," said Lady Laura,
"I can hardly believe this of you, even when you tell it me yourself."

"Listen to me, Lady Laura, for a moment."

"Certainly, I will listen. But that you should come to me for assistance! I cannot understand
it. Men sometimes become harder than stones."

"I do not think that I am hard." Poor blind fool! He was still thinking only of Violet, and
of the accusation made against him that he was untrue to his friendship for Lord Chiltern.
Of that other accusation which could not be expressed in open words he understood nothing,--nothing
at all as yet.

"Hard and false,--capable of receiving no impression beyond the outside husk of the heart."

"Oh, Lady Laura, do not say that. If you could only know how true I am in my affection for
you all."

"And how do you show it?--by coming in between Oswald and the only means that are open to us
of reconciling him to his father;--means that have been explained to you exactly as though
you had been one of ourselves. Oswald has treated you as a brother in the matter, telling you
everything, and this is the way you would repay him for his confidence!"

"Can I help it, that I have learnt to love this girl?"

"Yes, sir,--you can help it. What if she had been Oswald's wife;--would you have loved her
then? Do you speak of loving a woman as if it were an affair of fate, over which you have no
control? I doubt whether your passions are so strong as that. You had better put aside your
love for Miss Effingham. I feel assured that it will never hurt you." Then some remembrance
of what had passed between him and Lady Laura Standish near the falls of the Linter, when he
first visited Scotland, came across his mind. "Believe me," she said with a smile, "this little
wound in your heart will soon be cured."

