"No, Mr. George, you will not come in.  I little thought that a member of Tanner's Lane Church,
and my daughter's husband, would associate himself with such disgraceful proceedings as those
we have witnessed this evening."

"But, Mr. Broad, you are quite mistaken.  I was not with the mob.  I came here as soon as I
could to protect you."

Mr. Broad, terrified and wrathful, had, however, disappeared, and George heard the bolts drawn.
He was beside himself with passion, and knocked again and again, but there was no answer. 
He was inclined to try and break open the door at first, or seek an entrance through a window,
but he thought of Priscilla, and desisted.

He was turning homewards, when he reflected that it would be useless to attempt to go to sleep,
and he wandered out into the country towards Piddingfold, pondering over many things.  The
reaction of that night had been too severe.  His ardour was again almost entirely quenched
when he saw the men for whom he had worked, and who professed themselves his supporters, filthily
drunk.  He reflected that he, an ironmonger's son, was not born to save the world, and if the
great Dr. Johnson could say what he did, with how little ought not a humble Cowfold tradesman
to be satisfied!  We all of us have too vast a conception of the duty which Providence has
imposed upon us; and one great service which modern geology and astronomy have rendered is
the abatement of the fever by which earnest people are so often consumed. But George's meditations
all through that night were in the main about his wife, and as soon as he reached his shop
in the morning, the first thing he did was to write a note to her telling her to come home.
This she did, although her mother and father objected, and George found her there at dinner-time.
She looked pale and careworn, but this, of course, was set down to fright.  She was unusually
quiet, and George forbore to say anything about her father's behaviour.  He dreaded rather
to open the subject; he could not tell to what it might lead.  Priscilla knew all about George's
repulse from her father's door, and George could tell she knew it.

His father and he had determined that Cowfold would not be a pleasant place for them on the
following Sunday, and that business, moreover, demanded their presence in London.  Thither,
accordingly, they went on the Saturday, as usual; and Priscilla naturally communicating their
intention to her mother, Mr. Thomas Broad received an epistle from his father something like
one we have already read, but still more imperative in its orders that the dutiful son should
see whether the Allens made Zachariah's house their head-quarters.  That they did not sleep
there was well-known, but it was believed they had constant intercourse with that unregenerate
person, a disciple of Voltaire, as the Reverend John Broad firmly believed, and it would be
"advantageous to possess accumulated evidence of the fact." Priscilla knew that they lodged
always at the "George and Blue Boar"; but how they spent their time on Sunday she did not know.
There was also a postscript, this time with a new import:

"It has been reported that Coleman's daughter is a young female not without a certain degree
of attractiveness.  It may perhaps, my dear Thomas, be some day of service to me and to the
church if you were to inform me whether you have observed any tendencies towards familiarity
between George and this person.  I need not at the present moment give you my reasons for this
inquiry.  It will be sufficient to say that I have nothing more in view than the welfare of
the flock which Divine Providence has committed to my charge."

Mr. Thomas did his duty, and a letter was received by his father on the following Tuesday,
which was carefully locked up in the drawer in which the sermons were preserved.

The next day--that is to say, on Wednesday--George was at work, as usual, when his little maid
came to say that her mistress was very bad, and would he go home directly?  She had been unwell
for some days, but it was not thought that there was anything serious the matter with her.
George followed the girl at once, and found Priscilla in bed with a violent headache and very
feverish.  The doctor came, and pronounced it a case of "low fever," a disease well enough
known in Cowfold.  Let us make the dismal story as brief as possible.  Nurse Barton, hearing
of her "dear boy's" trouble, presented herself uninvited that evening at ten o'clock, and insisted
that George should not sit up.  She remained in the house, notwithstanding Mrs. Broad's assurances
that she really was not wanted, and watched over Priscilla till the end came.

About a week afterwards, just when Priscilla seemed to be getting a little better--she had
been delirious, but her senses had returned-- and Mrs. Allen, who had been in the house all
day, had departed, a change for the worse took place, and the doctor was summoned. George,
sitting in the parlour alone, heard Nurse Barton come downstairs.

"My dear boy," she said as she entered, "God in His mercy strengthen you in this trial as He
has laid upon you, but I thought I'd just come and tell you myself.  The doctor wor a-comm',
but I said 'No; my boy shall hear it from me.'  I don't think as your wife will get better;
she don't seem to pull herself up a bit.  She a'nt got no strength no more than a fly.  You'd
better see her, I think."

"Who is there?"

"Her mother and the doctor."

"Can't you get rid of them?"

"All right, my dear.  I must stay with you both, but you won't mind me--God bless you!" and
the woman put her arms round George's neck and kissed him tenderly.

She returned, and presently she redeemed her promise, for she actually got Mrs. Broad away.
At first she was obstinate, but Priscilla whispered that she wished to see her husband alone,
and the doctor took upon him to warn Mrs. Broad that resistance on her part might be dangerous.
She then retreated with him, and George found himself by the bedside.  His wife was so prostrate
that she was hardly able to make herself heard, but she lifted up her finger and made a sign
that he should bend his head down to her.  He bent it down, and her damp brown hair--the beautiful
brown hair he had loved so--lay on his forehead, and its scent was all about him once more.

"George, my dear," she just breathed out, "I am a poor silly girl, but I always loved you."

He stopped her instantly with his kisses, but Death had stopped her too.  He recoiled for a
moment, and with a sudden scream.  "O God, she's gone!" he fell into the arms of his nurse,
who stood behind him.

CHAPTER XXVI--A PROFESSIONAL CONSULTATION

