"Maitre Arbillot, you think doubtless with me, that we ought to begin operations by examining
the furniture of the bedroom?"

The notary inclined his head, and notified his chief clerk to remove his papers to the first floor.

"Show us the way, Madame," said the justice to the housekeeper; and the quartet of men of the
law followed Manette, carrying with them a huge bunch of keys.

Claudet had risen from his seat when the justice arrived.  As the party moved onward, he followed
hesitatingly, and then halted, uncertain how to decide between the desire to assist in the
search and the fear of intruding.  The notary, noticing his hesitation; called to him:

"Come, you also, Claudet, are not you one of the guardians of the seals?"

And they wended their silent way, up the winding staircase of the turret. The high, dark silhouette
of Manette headed the procession; then followed the justice, carefully choosing his foothold
on the well-worn stairs, the asthmatic old bailiff, breathing short and hard, the notary, beating
his foot impatiently every time that Seurrot stopped to take breath, and finally the principal
clerk and Claudet.

Manette, opening noiselessly the door of the deceased's room, entered, as if it were a church,
the somewhat stifling apartment.  Then she threw open the shutters, and the afternoon sun revealed
an interior decorated and furnished in the style of the close of the eighteenth century.  An
inlaid secretary, with white marble top and copper fittings, stood near the bed, of which the
coverings had been removed, showing the mattresses piled up under a down bed covered with blue-and-white
check.

As soon as the door was closed, the clerk settled himself at the table with his packet of stamped
paper, and began to run over, in a low, rapid voice, the preliminaries of the inventory.  In
this confused murmuring some fragments of phrases would occasionally strike the ear: "Chateau
of Vivey--deceased the eighth of October last--at the requisition of Marie- Julien de Buxieres,
comptroller of direct contributions at Nancy--styling himself heir to Claude Odouart de Buxieres,
his cousin-german by blood--"

This last phrase elicited from Claudet a sudden movement of surprise.

"The inventory," explained Maitre Arbillot, "is drawn up at the requisition of the only heir
named, to whom we must make application, if necessary, for the property left by the deceased."

There was a moment of silence, interrupted by a plaintive sigh from Manette Sejournant and
afterward by the tearing sound of the sealed bands across the bureau, the drawers and pigeonholes
of which were promptly ransacked by the justice and his assistant.

Odouart de Buxieres had not been much of a scribe.  A double Liege almanac, a memorandum-book,
in which he had entered the money received from the sale of his wood and the dates of the payments
made by his farmers; a daybook, in which he had made careful note of the number of head of
game killed each day--that was all the bureau contained.

"Let us examine another piece of furniture," murmured the justice.

Manette and Claudet remained unmoved.  They apparently knew the reason why none but insignificant
papers had been found in the drawers, for their features expressed neither surprise nor disappointment.

Another search through a high chest of drawers with large copper handles was equally unprofitable.
Then they attacked the secretary, and after the key had been turned twice in the noisy lock,
the lid went slowly down.  The countenances of both mother and son, hitherto so unconcerned,
underwent a slight but anxious change.  The bailiff continued his scrupulous search of each
drawer under the watchful eye of the justice, finding nothing but documents of mediocre importance;
old titles to property, bundles of letters, tradesmen's bills, etc.  Suddenly, at the opening
of the last drawer, a significant "Ah!"  from Stephen Seurrot drew round him the heads of the
justice and the notary, and made Manette and Claudet, standing at the foot of the bed, start
with expectation. On the dark ground of a rosewood box lay a sheet of white paper, on which
was written:

"This is my testament."

With the compression of lip and significant shake of the head of a physician about to take
in hand a hopeless case of illness, the justice made known to his two neighbors the text of
the sheet of paper, on which Claude Odouart de Buxieres had written, in his coarse, ill-regulated
hand, the following lines:

"Not knowing my collateral heirs, and caring nothing about them, I give and bequeath all my
goods and chattels--"

The testator had stopped there, either because he thought it better, before going any further,
to consult some legal authority more experienced than himself, or because he had been interrupted
in his labor and had deferred completing this testifying of his last will until some future
opportunity.

M. Destourbet, after once more reading aloud this unfinished sentence, exclaimed:

"Monsieur de Buxieres did not finish--it is much to be regretted!"

"My God!  is it possible?"  interrupted the housekeeper; "you think, then, Monsieur justice,
that Claudet does not inherit anything?"

"According to my idea," replied he, "we have here only a scrap of unimportant paper; the name
of the legatee is not indicated, and even were it indicated, the testament would still be without
force, being neither dated nor signed."

"But perhaps Monsieur de Buxieres made another?"

"I think not; I am more inclined to suppose that he did not have time to complete the arrangements
that he wished to make, and the proof lies in the very existence of this incomplete document
in the only piece of furniture in which he kept his papers." However, the greatest and most arduous
work to which the dogs are put is that of drawing the canoles and dog-sleds of travellers and tourists
or fur traders for long distances through various parts of that great
northern land.
Maitre Arbillot, Monsieur Julien de Buxieres must be notified, and asked to be here in Vivey
as soon as possible."

"I will write this evening," said the notary; "in the meanwhile, the keeping of the seals will
be continued by Claudet Sejournant."

The justice inclined his head to Manette, who was standing, pale and motionless, at the foot
of the bed; stunned by the unexpected announcement; the bailiff and the chief clerk, after
gathering up their papers, shook hands sympathizingly with Claudet.

"I am grieved to the heart, my dear fellow," said the notary, in his turn, "at what has happened!
It is hard to swallow, but you will always keep a courageous heart, and be able to rise to
the top; besides, even if, legally, you own nothing here, this unfinished testament of Monsieur
de Buxieres will constitute a moral title in your favor, and I trust that the heir will have
enough justice and right feeling to treat you properly."

"I want nothing from him!"  muttered Claudet, between his teeth; then, leaving his mother to
attend to the rest of the legal fraternity, he went hastily to his room, next that of the deceased,
tore off his dress-coat, slipped on a hunting-coat, put on his gaiters, donned his old felt
hat, and descended to the kitchen, where Manette was sitting, huddled up in front of the embers,
weeping and bewailing her fate.

Since she had become housekeeper and mistress of the Buxieres household, she had adopted a
more polished speech and a more purely French mode of expression, but in this moment of discouragement
and despair the rude dialect of her native country rose to her lips, and in her own patois
she inveighed against the deceased:

"Ah! the bad man, the mean man!  Didn't I tell him, time and again, that he would leave us
in trouble!  Where can we seek our bread this late in the day?  We shall have to beg in the
streets!"

"Hush!  hush!  mother," interrupted Claudet, sternly, placing his hand on her shoulder, "it
does not mend matters to give way like that.  Calm thyself--so long as I have hands on the
ends of my arms, we never shall be beggars.  But I must go out--I need air."

And crossing the gardens rapidly, he soon reached the outskirts of the brambly thicket.

This landscape, both rugged and smiling in its wildness, hardly conveyed the idea of silence,
but rather of profound meditation, absolute calm; the calmness of solitude, the religious meditation
induced by spacious forest depths.  The woods seemed asleep, and the low murmurings, which
from time to time escaped from their recesses, seemed like the unconscious sighs exhaled by
a dreamer.  The very odor peculiar to trees in autumn, the penetrating and spicy odor of the
dying leaves, had a delicate and subtle aroma harmonizing with this quietude of fairyland.

Now and then, through the vaporous golden atmosphere of the late autumn sunset, through the
pensive stillness of the hushed woods, the distant sound of feminine voices, calling to one
another, echoed from the hills, and beyond the hedges was heard the crackling of branches,
snapped by invisible hands, and the rattle of nuts dropping on the earth.  It was the noise
made by the gatherers of beechnuts, for in the years when the beech produces abundantly, this
harvest, under the sanction of the guardians of the forest, draws together the whole population
of women and children, who collect these triangular nuts, from which an excellent species of
oil is procured.

Wending his way along the copse, Claudet suddenly perceived, through an opening in the trees,
several large white sheets spread under the beeches, and covered with brown heaps of the fallen
fruit.  One or two familiar voices hailed him as he passed, but he was not disposed to gossip,
for the moment, and turned abruptly into the bushwood, so as to avoid any encounter.  The unexpected
event which had just taken place, and which was to change his present mode of life, as well
as his plans for the future, was of too recent occurrence for him to view it with any degree
of calmness.

He was like a man who has received a violent blow on the head, and is for the moment stunned
by it.  He suffered vaguely, without seeking to know from what cause; he had not been able
as yet to realize the extent of his misfortune; and every now and then a vague hope came over
him that all would come right.

So on he went, straight ahead, his eyes on the ground, and his hands in his pockets, until
he emerged upon one of the old forest roads where the grass had begun to burst through the
stony interstices; and there, in the distance, under the light tracery of weaving branches,
a delicate female silhouette was outlined on the dark background.  A young woman, dressed in
a petticoat of gray woolen material, and a jacket of the same, close- fitting at the waist,
her arms bare to the elbows and supporting on her head a bag of nuts enveloped in a white sheet,
advanced toward him with a quick and rhythmical step.  The manner in which she carried her
burden showed the elegance of her form, the perfect grace of her chest and throat.  She was
not very tall, but finely proportioned.  As she approached, the slanting rays of the setting
sun shone on her heavy brown hair, twisted into a thick coil at the back of her head, and revealed
the amber paleness of her clear skin, the long oval of her eyes, the firm outline of her chin
and somewhat full lips; and Claudet, roused from his lethargic reverie by the sound of her
rapid footsteps, raised his eyes, and recognized the daughter of Pere Vincart, the proprietor
of La Thuiliere.

At the same moment, the young girl, doubtless fatigued with the weight of her bundle, had laid
it down by the roadside while she recovered her breath.  In a few seconds Claudet was by her side.

"Good-evening, Reine," said he, in a voice singularly softened in tone, "shall I give you a
lift with that?"

"Good-evening, Claudet," replied she; "truly, now, that is not an offer to be refused.  The
weight is greater than I thought."

"Have you come far thus laden?"

"No; our people are nutting in the Bois des Ronces; I came on before, because I don't like
to leave father alone for long at a time and, as I was coming, I wished to bring my share with me."

"No one can reproach you with shirking work, Reine, nor of being afraid to take hold of things.
To see you all day trotting about the farm, no one would think you had been to school in the
city, like a young lady."

And Claudet's countenance became irradiated with a glow of innocent and tender admiration.
It was evident that his eyes looked with delight into the dark limpid orbs of Reine, on her
pure and rosy lips, and on her partly uncovered neck, the whiteness of which two little brown
moles only served to enhance.

"How can it be helped?"  replied she, smiling, "it must be done; when there is no man in the
house to give orders, the women must take a hand themselves.  My father was not very strong
when my mother died, and since he had that attack he has become quite helpless, and I have
had to take his place."

While she spoke, Claudet took hold of the bundle, and, lifting it as if it had been a feather,
threw it over his shoulder.  They walked on, side by side, in the direction of La Thuliere;
the sun had set, and a penetrating moisture, arising from the damp soil of the adjacent pasture
lands, encircled them in a bluish fog.

"So he is worse, your father, is he?"  said Claudet, after a moment's silence.

"He can not move from his armchair, his mental faculties are weakening, and I am obliged to
amuse him like a child.  But how is it with yourself, Claudet?"  she asked, turning her frank,
cordial gaze upon him.  "You have had your share of trouble since we last met, and great events
have happened.  Poor Monsieur de Buxieres was taken away very suddenly!"

The close relationship that united Claudet with the deceased was a secret to no one; Reine,
as well as all the country people, knew and admitted the fact, however irregular, as one sanctioned
by time and continuity. Therefore, in speaking to the young man, her voice had that tone of
affectionate interest usual in conversing with a bereaved friend on a death that concerns him.

The countenance of the 'grand chasserot', which had cleared for a time under her influence,
became again clouded.

"Yes;" sighed he, "he was taken too soon!"

"And now, Claudet, you are sole master at the chateau?"

"Neither--master--nor even valet!"  he returned, with such bitterness that the young girl stood
still with surprise.

"What do you mean?"  she exclaimed, "was it not agreed with Monsieur de Buxieres that you should
inherit all his property?"

"Such was his intention, but he did not have time to put it in execution; he died without leaving
any will, and, as I am nothing in the eye of the law, the patrimony will go to a distant relative,
a de Buxieres whom Monsieur Odouart did not even know."

Reine's dark eyes filled with tears.

"What a misfortune!"  she exclaimed, "and who could have expected such a thing?  Oh!  my poor
Claudet!" 

People living in more southern latitudes, where the transition from one season to another is
so slow and almost imperceptible, can hardly realise the suddenness with which the Frost King
can set up his throne and begin his despotic reign.

  Yes," he added, after a pause, "it is a rude shock to wake up one morning
without hearth or home, when one has been in the habit of living on one's income."

"What do you intend to do?"  inquired Reine, gravely.

Claudet shrugged his shoulders.

"To work for my bread--or, if I can find no suitable trade, enlist in a regiment.  I think
I should not make a bad soldier.  Everything is going round and round in my head like a millwheel.
The first thing to do is to see about my mother, who is lamenting down there at the house--I
must find her a comfortable place to live."

The young girl had become very thoughtful.

"Claudet," replied she, "I know you are very proud, very sensitive, and could not wish to hurt
your feelings.  Therefore, I pray you not to take in ill part that which I am going to say-in
short, if you should get into any trouble, you will, I hope, remember that you have friends
at La Thuiliere, and that you will come to seek us."

The 'grand chasserot' reddened.

"I shall never take amiss what you may say to me, Reine!"  faltered he; "for I can not doubt
your good heart--I have known it since the time when we played together in the cure's garden,
while waiting for the time to repeat the catechism.  But there is no hurry as yet; the heir
will not arrive for several weeks, and by that time, I trust, we shall have had a chance to
turn round."

They had reached the boundary of the forest where the fields of La Thuiliere begin.

By the last fading light of day they could distinguish the black outline of the ancient forge,
now become a grange, and a light was twinkling in one of the low windows of the farm.

"Here you are at home," continued Claudet, laying the bundle of nuts on the flat stone wall
which surrounded the farm buildings; "I wish you good-night."

"Will you not come in and get warm?"

"No; I must go back," replied he.

"Good-night, then, Claudet; au revoir and good courage!"

He gazed at her for a moment in the deepening twilight, then, abruptly pressing her hands:

"Thank you, Reine," murmured he in a choking voice, "you are a good girl, and I love you very
much!"

He left the young mistress of the farm precipitately, and plunged again into the woods.

CHAPTER II

THE HEIR TO VIVEY

While these events were happening at Vivey, the person whose name excited the curiosity and
the conversational powers of the villagers--Marie- Julien de Buxieres--ensconced in his unpretentious
apartment in the Rue Stanislaus, Nancy, still pondered over the astonishing news contained
in the Auberive notary's first letter.  The announcement of his inheritance, dropping from
the skies, as it were, had found him quite unprepared, and, at first, somewhat sceptical. 
He remembered, it is true, hearing his father once speak of a cousin who had remained a bachelor
and who owned a fine piece of property in some corner of the Haute Marne; but, as all intercourse
had long been broken off between the two families, M. de Buxieres the elder had mentioned the
subject only in relation to barely possible hopes which had very little chance of being realized.
Julien had never placed any reliance on this chimerical inheritance, and he received almost
with indifference the official announcement of the death of Claude Odouart de Buxieres.

By direct line from his late father, he became in fact the only legitimate heir of the chateau
and lands of Vivey; still, there was a strong probability that Claude de Buxieres had made
a will in favor of some one more within his own circle.  The second missive from Arbillot the
notary, announcing that the deceased had died intestate, and requesting the legal heir to come
to Vivey as soon as possible, put a sudden end to the young man's doubts, which merged into
a complex feeling, less of joy than of stupefaction.

