Plum Point looked as it had always looked by night, with the exception that now there were
beacons to mark the crossings, and also a lot of other lights on the Point and along its shore;
these latter glinting from the fleet of the United States River Commission, and from a village
which the officials have built on the land for offices and for the employees of the service.
The military engineers of the Commission have taken upon their shoulders the job of making
the Mississippi over again --a job transcended in size by only the original job of creating
it. They are building wing-dams here and there, to deflect the current; and dikes to confine
it in narrower bounds; and other dikes to make it stay there; and for unnumbered miles along
the Mississippi, they are felling the timber-front for fifty yards back, with the purpose of
shaving the bank down to low-water mark with the slant of a house roof, and ballasting it with
stones; and in many places they have protected the wasting shores with rows of piles.  One
who knows the Mississippi will promptly aver-- not aloud, but to himself--that ten thousand
River Commissions, with the mines of the world at their back, cannot tame that lawless stream,
cannot curb it or confine it, cannot say to it, Go here, or Go there, and make it obey; cannot
save a shore which it has sentenced; cannot bar its path with an obstruction which it will
not tear down, dance over, and laugh at. But a discreet man will not put these things into
spoken words; for the West Point engineers have not their superiors anywhere; they know all
that can be known of their abstruse science; and so, since they conceive that they can fetter
and handcuff that river and boss him, it is but wisdom for the unscientific man to keep still,
lie low, and wait till they do it.  Captain Eads, with his jetties, has done a work at the
mouth of the Mississippi which seemed clearly impossible; so we do not feel full confidence
now to prophesy against like impossibilities.  Otherwise one would pipe out and say the Commission
might as well bully the comets in their courses and undertake to make them behave, as try to
bully the Mississippi into right and reasonable conduct.

I consulted Uncle Mumford concerning this and cognate matters; and I give here the result,
stenographically reported, and therefore to be relied on as being full and correct; except
that I have here and there left out remarks which were addressed to the men, such as 'where
in blazes are you going with that barrel now?' and which seemed to me to break the flow of
the written statement, without compensating by adding to its information or its clearness. "But
I do, in proper deference to the head of the house," said Agatha, gravely.

"Murder in Irish!" cried Vera, bouncing away, while Paula argued,
"Really, Nag, life is not long enough to attend to all the M.A.'s
little worries."

UNCLE MUMFORD'S IMPRESSIONS

Uncle Mumford said--

'As long as I have been mate of a steamboat--thirty years--I have watched this river and studied
it.  Maybe I could have learnt more about it at West Point, but if I believe it I wish I may
be WHAT ARE YOU SUCKING YOUR FINGERS THERE FOR ?--COLLAR THAT KAG OF NAILS! Four years at West
Point, and plenty of books and schooling, will learn a man a good deal, I reckon, but it won't
learn him the river. You turn one of those little European rivers over to this Commission,
with its hard bottom and clear water, and it would just be a holiday job for them to wall it,
and pile it, and dike it, and tame it down, and boss it around, and make it go wherever they
wanted it to, and stay where they put it, and do just as they said, every time. But this ain't
that kind of a river.  They have started in here with big confidence, and the best intentions
in the world; but they are going to get left.  What does Ecclesiastes vii.  13 say? Says enough
to knock THEIR little game galley-west, don't it? Now you look at their methods once.  There
at Devil's Island, in the Upper River, they wanted the water to go one way, the water wanted
to go another.  So they put up a stone wall.  But what does the river care for a stone wall?
When it got ready, it just bulged through it. "My dear Agatha, I must tell you he reminds me
strangely of a young Mr. Merrifield whom I knew at Filsted when I was younger than you."

"A brother of Bessie?"

"Even so. He got into some kind of trouble at Filsted, his father
came and broke it off, and sent him out to Canada, where I fear he
did not do well, and nothing has been heard of him since, except -

She
spoke with a catch in her voice which made Agatha look up at her,
and detect a rising colour.

"Nothing!" she repeated. If the river has got a mortgage on that island,
it will foreclose, sure, pegs or no pegs. Away down yonder, they have driven two rows of piles
straight through the middle of a dry bar half a mile long, which is forty foot out of the water
when the river is low. What do you reckon that is for?  If I know, I wish I may land in-HUMP
YOURSELF, YOU SON OF AN UNDERTAKER!--OUT WITH THAT COAL-OIL, NOW, LIVELY, LIVELY!  And just
look at what they are trying to do down there at Milliken's Bend.  There's been a cut-off in
that section, and Vicksburg is left out in the cold.  It's a country town now. The river strikes
in below it; and a boat can't go up to the town except in high water.  Well, they are going
to build wing-dams in the bend opposite the foot of 103, and throw the water over and cut off
the foot of the island and plow down into an old ditch where the river used to be in ancient
times; and they think they can persuade the water around that way, and get it to strike in
above Vicksburg, as it used to do, and fetch the town back into the world again. That is, they
are going to take this whole Mississippi, and twist it around and make it run several miles
UP STREAM. Well you've got to admire men that deal in ideas of that size and can tote them
around without crutches; but you haven't got to believe they can DO such miracles, have you!
And yet you ain't absolutely obliged to believe they can't. I reckon the safe way, where a
man can afford it, is to copper the operation, and at the same time buy enough property in
Vicksburg to square you up in case they win. Government is doing a deal for the Mississippi,
now--spending loads of money on her.  When there used to be four thousand steamboats and ten
thousand acres of coal-barges, and rafts and trading scows, there wasn't a lantern from St.
Paul to New Orleans, and the snags were thicker than bristles on a hog's back; and now when
there's three dozen steamboats and nary barge or raft, Government has snatched out all the
snags, and lit up the shores like Broadway, and a boat's as safe on the river as she'd be in
heaven. And I reckon that by the time there ain't any boats left at all, the Commission will
have the old thing all reorganized, and dredged out, and fenced in, and tidied up, to a degree
that will make navigation just simply perfect, and absolutely safe and profitable; and all
the days will be Sundays, and all the mates will be Sunday-school su-WHAT-IN-THE-NATION-YOU-FOOLING-AROUND-THERE-FOR,
YOU SONS OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, HEIRS OF PERDITION!  GOING TO BE A YEAR GETTING THAT HOGSHEAD ASHORE?'

During our trip to New Orleans and back, we had many conversations with river men, planters,
journalists, and officers of the River Commission-- with conflicting and confusing results.
To wit:--

1.  Some believed in the Commission's scheme to arbitrarily and permanently confine (and thus
deepen) the channel, preserve threatened shores, etc.

2.  Some believed that the Commission's money ought to be spent only on building and repairing
the great system of levees.

3.  Some believed that the higher you build your levee, the higher the river's bottom will
rise; and that consequently the levee system is a mistake.

4.  Some believed in the scheme to relieve the river, in flood-time, by turning its surplus
waters off into Lake Borgne, etc.

5.  Some believed in the scheme of northern lake-reservoirs to replenish the Mississippi in
low-water seasons.

Wherever you find a man down there who believes in one of these theories you may turn to the
next man and frame your talk upon the hypothesis that he does not believe in that theory; and
after you have had experience, you do not take this course doubtfully, or hesitatingly, but
with the confidence of a dying murderer--converted one, I mean.  For you will have come to
know, with a deep and restful certainty, that you are not going to meet two people sick of
the same theory, one right after the other.  No, there will always be one or two with the other
diseases along between. And as you proceed, you will find out one or two other things. You
will find out that there is no distemper of the lot but is contagious; and you cannot go where
it is without catching it. You may vaccinate yourself with deterrent facts as much as you please--it
will do no good; it will seem to 'take,' but it doesn't; the moment you rub against any one
of those theorists, make up your mind that it is time to hang out your yellow flag.

Yes, you are his sure victim:  yet his work is not all to your hurt-- only part of it; for
he is like your family physician, who comes and cures the mumps, and leaves the scarlet-fever
behind. If your man is a Lake-Borgne-relief theorist, for instance, he will exhale a cloud
of deadly facts and statistics which will lay you out with that disease, sure; but at the same
time he will cure you of any other of the five theories that may have previously got into your
system.

I have had all the five; and had them 'bad;' but ask me not, in mournful numbers, which one
racked me hardest, or which one numbered the biggest sick list, for I do not know. In truth,
no one can answer the latter question. Mississippi Improvement is a mighty topic, down yonder.
Every man on the river banks, south of Cairo, talks about it every day, during such moments
as he is able to spare from talking about the war; and each of the several chief theories has
its host of zealous partisans; but, as I have said, it is not possible to determine which cause
numbers the most recruits.

All were agreed upon one point, however:  if Congress would make a sufficient appropriation,
a colossal benefit would result. Very well; since then the appropriation has been made--possibly
a sufficient one, certainly not too large a one. Let us hope that the prophecy will be amply
fulfilled.

One thing will be easily granted by the reader; that an opinion from Mr. Edward Atkinson, upon
any vast national commercial matter, comes as near ranking as authority, as can the opinion
of any individual in the Union. What he has to say about Mississippi River Improvement will
be found in the Appendix.{footnote [See Appendix B.]}

Sometimes, half a dozen figures will reveal, as with a lightning-flash, the importance of a
subject which ten thousand labored words, with the same purpose in view, had left at last but
dim and uncertain. Here is a case of the sort--paragraph from the 'Cincinnati Commercial'--

'The towboat "Jos.  B. Williams" is on her way to New Orleans with a tow of thirty-two barges,
containing six hundred thousand bushels (seventy- six pounds to the bushel) of coal exclusive
of her own fuel, being the largest tow ever taken to New Orleans or anywhere else in the world. "As
I am afraid Miss Prescott's is doing till your telegram reaches her. Did you say it was to go from
St. Malo?"

"Yes. I thought that the safest place to have a comprehensible
message copied."

"To whom did you say?" asked Lady Ivinghoe. At
$10 per ton, or $100 per car, which would be a fair price for the distance by rail, the freight
bill would amount to $180,000, or $162,000 more by rail than by river.  The tow will be taken
from Pittsburg to New Orleans in fourteen or fifteen days. It would take one hundred trains
of eighteen cars to the train to transport this one tow of six hundred thousand bushels of
coal, and even if it made the usual speed of fast freight lines, it would take one whole summer
to put it through by rail.'

When a river in good condition can enable one to save $162,000 and a whole summer's time, on
a single cargo, the wisdom of taking measures to keep the river in good condition is made plain
to even the uncommercial mind.

Chapter 29 A Few Specimen Bricks

WE passed through the Plum Point region, turned Craighead's Point, and glided unchallenged
by what was once the formidable Fort Pillow, memorable because of the massacre perpetrated
there during the war. Massacres are sprinkled with some frequency through the histories of
several Christian nations, but this is almost the only one that can be found in American history;
perhaps it is the only one which rises to a size correspondent to that huge and somber title.
We have the 'Boston Massacre,' where two or three people were killed; but we must bunch Anglo-Saxon
history together to find the fellow to the Fort Pillow tragedy; and doubtless even then we
must travel back to the days and the performances of Coeur de Lion, that fine 'hero,' before
we accomplish it.

More of the river's freaks.  In times past, the channel used to strike above Island 37, by
Brandywine Bar, and down towards Island 39. Afterward, changed its course and went from Brandywine
down through Vogelman's chute in the Devil's Elbow, to Island 39--part of this course reversing
the old order; the river running UP four or five miles, instead of down, and cutting off, throughout,
some fifteen miles of distance. This in 1876.  All that region is now called Centennial Island.

There is a tradition that Island 37 was one of the principal abiding places of the once celebrated
'Murel's Gang.'  This was a colossal combination of robbers, horse-thieves, negro-stealers,
and counterfeiters, engaged in business along the river some fifty or sixty years ago. While
our journey across the country towards St. Louis was in progress we had had no end of Jesse
James and his stirring history; for he had just been assassinated by an agent of the Governor
of Missouri, and was in consequence occupying a good deal of space in the newspapers. Cheap
histories of him were for sale by train boys.  According to these, he was the most marvelous
creature of his kind that had ever existed. It was a mistake. Sister Mena came over, wanting to join
Paula in bewailing entreaties; but Paula, in youthful hard-hearted wilfulness, declared that
it was impossible to see her; and it fell to Magdalen to try to discuss the grief with her.
 James's modest genius dreamed of no loftier flight
than the planning of raids upon cars, coaches, and country banks; Murel projected negro insurrections
and the capture of New Orleans; and furthermore, on occasion, this Murel could go into a pulpit
and edify the congregation. What are James and his half-dozen vulgar rascals compared with
this stately old-time criminal, with his sermons, his meditated insurrections and city-captures,
and his majestic following of ten hundred men, sworn to do his evil will!

Here is a paragraph or two concerning this big operator, from a now forgotten book which was
published half a century ago--

