THE GOLDEN SCARECROW

BY

HUGH WALPOLE

AUTHOR OF

"THE DUCHESS OF WREXE," "FORTITUDE," "THE PRELUDE TO ADVENTURE," "THE WOODEN HORSE." ETC.

NEW YORK

1915

GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                            PAGE
        PROLOGUE--HUGH SEYMOUR         11
     I. HENRY FITZGEORGE STRETHER      43
    II. ERNEST HENRY                   65
   III. ANGELINA                       94
    IV. BIM ROCHESTER                 121
     V. NANCY ROSS                    146
    VI. 'ENERY                        172
   VII. BARBARA FLINT                 198
  VIII. SARAH TREFUSIS                226
    IX. It was in this way that he became during
certain months of 1889 and 1890 and '91 a resident in the family of the
Rev. William Lasher, Vicar of Clinton St. Mary, that large rambling
village on the edge of Roche St. Mary Moor in South Glebeshire.

He spent there the two Christmases of 1890 and 1891 (when he was ten and eleven years of age),
and it is with the second of these that the following incident, and indeed the whole of this
book, has to do. Hugh Seymour could not, at the period of which I write, be called an attractive
child; he was not even "interesting" or "unusual." He was very minutely made, with bones so
brittle that it seemed that, at any moment, he might crack and splinter into sharp little pieces;
and I am afraid that no one would have minded very greatly had this occurred. But although,
he was so thin his face had a white and overhanging appearance, his cheeks being pale and puffy
and his under-lip jutted forward in front of projecting teeth--he was known as the "White Rabbit"
by his schoolfellows. He was not, however, so ugly as this appearance would apparently convey,
for his large, grey eyes, soft and even, at times agreeably humorous, were pleasant and cheerful.

During these years when he knew Mr. Lasher he was undoubtedly unfortunate. He was shortsighted,
but no one had, as yet, discovered this, and he was, therefore, blamed for much clumsiness
that he could not prevent and for a good deal of sensitiveness that came quite simply from
his eagerness to do what he was told and his inability to see his way to do it. He was not,
at this time, easy with strangers and seemed to them both conceited and awkward. Conceit was
far from him--he was, in fact, amazed at so feeble a creature as himself!--but awkward he was,
and very often greedy, selfish, impetuous, untruthful and even cruel: he was nearly always
dirty, and attributed this to the evil wishes of some malign fairy who flung mud upon him,
dropped him into puddles and covered him with ink simply for the fun of the thing!

He did not, at this time, care very greatly for reading; he told himself stories--long stories
with enormous families in them, trains of elephants, ropes and ropes of pearls, towers of ivory,
peacocks, and strange meals of saffron buns, roast chicken, and gingerbread. His active, everyday
concern, however, was to become a sportsman; he wished to be the best cricketer, the best footballer,
the fastest runner of his school, and he had not--even then faintly he knew it--the remotest
chance of doing any of these things even moderately well. He was bullied at school until his
appointment as his dormitory's story-teller gave him a certain status, but his efforts at cricket
and football were mocked with jeers and insults. He could not throw a cricket-ball, he could
not see to catch one after it was thrown to him, did he try to kick a football he missed it,
and when he had run for five minutes he saw purple skies and silver stars and has cramp in
his legs. He had, however, during these years at Mr. Lasher's, this great over mastering ambition.

In his sleep, at any rate, he was a hero; in the wide-awake world he was, in the opinion of
almost every one, a fool. He was exactly the type of boy whom the Rev. William Lasher could
least easily understand. Mr. Lasher was tall and thin (his knees often cracked with a terrifying
noise), blue-black about the cheeks hooked as to the nose, bald and shining as to the head,
genial as to the manner, and practical to the shining tips of his fingers. He has not, at Cambridge,
obtained a rowing blue, but "had it not been for a most unfortunate attack of scarlet fever-----"
He was President of the Clinton St. Mary Cricket Club, 1890 (matches played, six; lost, five;
drawn, one) knew how to slash the ball across the net at a tennis garden party, always read
the prayers in church as though he were imploring God to keep a straighter bat and improve
His cut to leg, and had a passion for knocking nails into walls, screwing locks into doors,
and making chicken runs. He was, he often thanked his stars, a practical Realist, and his wife,
who was fat, stupid, and in a state of perpetual wonder, used to say of him, "If Will hadn't
been a clergyman he would have made such an engineer. If God had blessed us with a boy, I'm
sure he would have been something scientific. Will's no dreamer." Mr. Lasher was kindly of
heart so long as you allowed him to maintain that the world was made for one type of humanity
only. He was as breezy as a west wind, loved to bathe in the garden pond on Christmas Day ("had
to break the ice that morning"), and at penny readings at the village schoolroom would read
extracts from "Pickwick," and would laugh so heartily himself that he would have to stop and
wipe his eyes. "If you must read novels," he would say, "read Dickens. Nothing to offend the
youngest among us--fine breezy stuff with an optimism that does you good and people you get
to know and be fond of. By Jove, I can still cry over Little Nell and am not ashamed of it."

He had the heartiest contempt for "wasters" and "failures," and he was afraid there were a
great many in the world. "Give me a man who is a man," he would say, "a man who can hit a ball
for six, run ten miles before breakfast and take his knocks with the best of them. Wasn't it
Browning who said,

  "'God's in His heaven,
  All's right with the world.'

Browning was a great teacher--after Tennyson, one of our greatest. Where are such men to-day!"

He was, therefore, in spite of his love for outdoor pursuits, a cultured man.

It was natural, perhaps, that he should find Hugh Seymour "a pity." Nearly everything that
he said about Hugh Seymour began with the words----

"It's a pity that----"

"It's a pity that you can't get some red into your cheeks, my boy."

"It's a pity you don't care about porridge. You must learn to like it."

"It's a pity you can't even make a little progress with your mathematics."

"It's a pity you told me a lie because----"

"It's a pity you were rude to Mrs. Lasher. No gentleman----"

"It's a pity you weren't attending when----"

Mr. Lasher was, very earnestly, determined to do his best for the boy, and, as he said, "You
see, Hugh, if we do our best for you, you must do your best for us. Now I can't, I'm afraid,
call this your best."

Hugh would have liked to say that it was the best that he could do in that particular direction
(very probably Euclid), but if only he might be allowed to try his hand in quite another direction,
he might do something very fine indeed. He never, of course, had a chance of saying this, nor
would such a declaration have greatly benefited him, because, for Mr. Lasher, there was only
one way for every one and the sooner (if you were a small boy) you followed it the better.

"Don't dream, Hugh," said Mr. Lasher, "remember that no man ever did good-work by dreaming.
The goal is to the strong. Remember that."

Hugh, did remember it and would have liked very much to be as strong as possible, but whenever
he tried feats of strength he failed and looked foolish.

"My dear boy, that's not the way to do it," said Mr. Lasher; "it's a pity that you don't listen
to what I tell you."

II

A very remarkable fact about Mr. Lasher was this--that he paid no attention whatever to the
county in which he lived. Now there are certain counties in England where it is possible to
say, "I am in England," and to leave it at that; their quality is simply English with no more
individual personality. But Glebeshire has such an individuality, whether for good or evil,
that it forces comment from the most sluggish and inattentive of human beings. Mr. Lasher was
perhaps the only soul, living or dead, who succeeded in living in it during forty years (he
is still there, he is a Canon now in Polchester) and never saying anything about it. When on
his visits to London people inquired his opinion of Glebeshire, he would say: "Ah well!...
I'm afraid Methodism and intemperance are very strong ... all the same, we're fighting 'em,
fighting 'em!"

This was the more remarkable in that Mr. Lasher lived upon the very edge of Roche St. Mary
Moor, a stretch of moor and sand. Roche St. Mary Moor, that runs to the sea, contains the ruins
of St. Arthe Church (buried until lately in the sand, but recently excavated through the kind
generosity of Sir John Porthcullis, of Borhaze, and shown to visitors, 6d. a head, Wednesday
and Saturday afternoons free), and in one of the most romantic, mist-laden, moon-silvered,
tempest-driven spots in the whole of Great Britain.

The road that ran from Clinton St. Mary to Borhaze across the moor was certainly a wild, rambling,
beautiful affair, and when the sea-mists swept across it and the wind carried the cry of the
Bell of Trezent Rock in and out above and below, you had a strange and moving experience. Mr.
Lasher was certainly compelled to ride on his bicycle from Clinton St. Mary to Borhaze and
back again, and never thought it either strange or moving. "Only ten at the Bible meeting to-night.
Borhaze wants waking up. We'll see what open-air services can do." What the moor thought about
Mr. Lasher it is impossible to know!

Hugh Seymour thought about the moor continually, but he was afraid to mention his ideas of
it in public. There was a legend in the village that several hundred years ago some pirates,
driven by storm into Borhaze, found their way on to the moor and, caught by the mist, perished
there; they are to be seen, says the village, in powdered wigs, red coats, gold lace, and swords,
haunting the sand-dunes. God help the poor soul who may fall into their hands! This was a very
pleasant story, and Hugh Seymour's thoughts often crept around and about it. He would like
to find a pirate, to bring him to the vicarage, and present him to Mr. Lasher. He knew that
Mrs. Lasher would say, "Fancy, a pirate. Well! now, fancy! Well, here's a pirate!" And that
Mr. Lasher would say, "It's a pity, Hugh, that you don't choose your company more carefully.
Look at the man's nose!"

Hugh, although he was only eleven, knew this. Hugh did on one occasion mention the pirates.
"Dreaming again, Hugh! Pity they fill your head with such nonsense! If they read their Bibles
more!"

Nevertheless, Hugh continued his dreaming. He dreamt of the moor, of the pirates, of the cobbled
street in Borhaze, of the cry of the Trezent Bell, of the deep lanes and the smell of the flowers
in them, of making five hundred not out at cricket, of doing a problem in Euclid to Mr. Lasher's
satisfaction, of having a collar at the end of the week as clean as it had been at the beginning,
of discovering the way to make a straight parting in the hair, of not wriggling in bed when
Mrs. Lasher kissed him at night, of many, many other things.

He was at this time a very lonely boy. Until Mr. Pidgen paid his visit he was most remarkably
lonely. After that visit he was never lonely again.

III

Mr. Pidgen came on a visit to the vicarage three days before Christmas. Hugh Seymour saw him
first from the garden. Mr. Pidgen was standing at the window of Mr. Lasher's study; he was
staring in front of him at the sheets of light that flashed and darkened and flashed again
across the lawn, at the green cluster of holly-berries by the drive-gate, at the few flakes
of snow that fell, lazily, carelessly, as though they were trying to decide whether they would
make a grand affair of it or not, and perhaps at the small, grubby boy who was looking at him
with one eye and trying to learn the Collect for the day (it was Sunday) with the other. Hugh
had never before seen any one in the least like Mr. Pidgen. He was short and round, and his
head was covered with tight little curls. His cheeks were chubby and red and his nose small,
his mouth also very small. He had no chin. He was wearing a bright blue velvet waistcoat with
brass buttons, and over his black shoes there shone white spats.

Hugh had never seen white spats before. Mr. Pidgen shone with cleanliness, and he had supremely
the air of having been exactly as he was, all in one piece, years ago. He was like one of the
china ornaments in Mrs. Lasher's drawing-room that the housemaid is told to be so careful about,
and concerning whose destruction Hugh heard her on at least one occasion declaring, in a voice
half tears, half defiance, "Please, ma'am, it wasn't me. It just slipped of itself!" Mr. Pidgen
would break very completely were he dropped.

The first thing about him that struck Hugh was his amazing difference from Mr. Lasher. It seemed
strange that any two people so different could be in the same house. Mr. Lasher never gleamed
or shone, he would not break with however violent an action you dropped him, he would certainly
never wear white spats.

Hugh liked Mr. Pidgen at once. They spoke for the first time at the mid-day meal, when Mr.
Lasher said, "More Yorkshire pudding, Pidgen?" and Mr. Pidgen said, "I adore it."

Now Yorkshire pudding happened to be one of Hugh's special passions just then, particularly
when it was very brown and crinkly, so he said quite spontaneously and without taking thought,
as he was always told to do,

"So do I!"

"My dear Hugh!" said Mrs. Lasher; "how very greedy! Fancy! After all you've been told! Well,
well! Manners, manners!"

"I don't know," said Mr. Pidgen (his mouth was full). "I said it first, and I'm older than
he is. I should know better.... I like boys to be greedy, it's a good sign--a good sign. Besides.
Sunday--after a sermon--one naturally feels a bit peckish. Good enough sermon, Lasher, but
a bit long."

Mr. Lasher of course did not like this, and, indeed, it was evident to any one (even to a small
boy) that the two gentlemen would have different opinions upon every possible subject. However,
Hugh loved Mr. Pidgen there and then, and decided that he would put him into the story then
running (appearing in nightly numbers from the moment of his departure to bed to the instant
of slumber--say ten minutes); he would also, in the imaginary cricket matches that he worked
out on paper, give Mr. Pidgen an innings of two hundred not out and make him captain of Kent.
He now observed the vision very carefully and discovered several strange items in his general
behaviour. Mr. Pidgen was fond of whistling and humming to himself; he was restless and would
walk up and down a room with his head in the air and his hands behind his broad back, humming
(out of tune) "Sally in our Alley," or "Drink to me only." Of course this amazed Mr. Lasher.

He would quite suddenly stop, stand like a top spinning, balanced on his toes, and cry, "Ah!
Now I've got it! No, I haven't! Yes, I have. By God, it's gone again!"

To this also Mr. Lasher strongly objected, and Hugh heard him say, "Really, Pidgen, think of
the boy! Think of the boy!" and Mr. Pidgen exclaimed, "By God, so I should!... Beg pardon,
Lasher! Won't do it again! Lord save me, I'm a careless old drunkard!" He had any number of
strange phrases that were new and brilliant and exciting to the boy, who listened to him. He
would say, "by the martyrs of Ephesus!" or "Sunshine and thunder!" or "God stir your slumbers!"
when he thought any one very stupid. He said this last one day to Mrs. Lasher, and of course
she was very much astonished. She did not from the first like him at all. Mr. Pidgen and Mr.
Lasher had been friends at Cambridge and had not met one another since, and every one knows
that that is a dangerous basis for the renewal of friendship. They had a little dispute on
the very afternoon of Mr. Pidgen's arrival, when Mr. Lasher asked his guest whether he played golf.

"God preserve my soul! No!" said Mr. Pidgen. Mr. Lasher then explained that playing golf made
one thin, hungry and self-restrained. Mr. Pidgen said that he did not wish to be the first
or last of these, and that he was always the second, and that golf was turning the fair places
of England into troughs for the moneyed pigs of the Stock Exchange to swill in.

"My dear Pidgen!" cried Mr. Lasher, "I'm afraid no one could call me a moneyed pig with any
justice--more's the pity--and a game of golf to me is----"

"Ah! you're a parson, Lasher," said his guest.

In fact, by the evening of the second day of the visit it was obvious that Clinton St. Mary
Vicarage might, very possibly, witness a disturbed Christmas. It was all very tiresome for
poor Mrs. Lasher. On the late afternoon of Christmas Eve, Hugh heard the stormy conversation
that follows--a conversation that altered the colour and texture of his after-life as such
things may, when one is still a child.

IV

Christmas Eve was always, to Hugh, a day with glamour. He did not any longer hang up his stocking
(although he would greatly have liked to do so), but, all day, his heart beat thickly at the
thought of the morrow, at the thought of something more than the giving and receiving of presents,
something more than the eating of food, something more than singing hymns that were delightfully
familiar, something more than putting holly over the pictures and hanging mistletoe on to the
lamp in the hall. Something there was in the day like going home, like meeting people again
whom one had loved once, and not seen for many years, something as warm and romantic and lightly
coloured and as comforting as the most inspired and impossible story that one could ever, lying
in bed and waiting for sleep, invent.

To-day there was no snow but a frost, and there was a long bar of saffron below the cold sky
and a round red ball of a sun. Hugh was sitting in a corner of Mr. Lasher's study, looking
at Doré's "Don Quixote," when the two gentlemen came in. He was sitting in a dark corner and
they, because they were angry with one another, did not recognise any one except themselves.
Mr. Lasher pulled furiously at his pipe and Mr. Pidgen stood up by the fire with his short
fat legs spread wide and his mouth smiling, but his eyes vexed and rather indignant.

"My dear Pidgen," said Mr. Lasher, "you misunderstand me, you do indeed! It may be (I would
be the first to admit that, like most men, I have my weakness) that I lay too much stress upon
the healthy, physical, normal life, upon seeing things as they are and not as one would like
to see them to be. I don't believe that dreaming ever did any good to any man!"

"It's only produced some of the finest literature the world has ever known," said Mr. Pidgen.

"Ah! Genius! If you or I were geniuses, Pidgen, that would be another affair. But we're not;
we're plain, common-place humdrum human beings with souls to be saved and work to do--work to do!"

There was a little pause after that, and Hugh, looking at Mr. Pidgen, saw the hurt look in
his eyes deepen.

"Come now, Lasher," he said at last. "Let's be honest one with another; that's your line, and
you say it ought to be mine. Come now, as man to man, you think me a damnable failure now--beg
pardon--complete failure--don't you? Don't be afraid of hurting me. I want to know!"

Mr. Lasher was really a kindly man, and when his eyes beheld things--there were of course many
things that they never beheld--he would do his best to help anybody. He wanted to help Mr.
Pidgen now; but he was also a truthful man.

"My dear Pidgen! Ha, ha! What a question! I'm sure many, many people enjoy your books immensely.
I'm sure they do, oh, yes!"

"Come, now, Lasher, the truth. You won't hurt my feelings. If you were discussing me with a
third person you'd say, wouldn't you? 'Ah, poor Pidgen might have done something if he hadn't
let his fancy run away with him. I was with him at Cambridge. He promised well, but I'm afraid
one must admit that he's failed--he would never stick to anything.'"

Now this was so exactly what Mr. Lasher had, on several occasions, said about his friend that
he was really for the moment at a loss. He pulled at his pipe, looked very grave, and then said:

"My dear Pidgen, you must remember our lives have followed such different courses. I can only
give you my point of view. I don't myself care greatly for romances--fairy tales and so on.
It seems to me that for a grown-up man.... However, I don't pretend to be a literary fellow;
I have other work, other duties, picturesque, but nevertheless necessary."

"Ah!" exclaimed Mr. Pidgen, who, considering that he had invited his host's honest opinion,
should not have become irritated because he had obtained it; "that's just it. You people all
think only you know what is necessary. Why shouldn't a fairy story be as necessary as a sermon?
A lot more necessary, I dare say. You think you're the only people who can know anything about
it. You people never use your imaginations."

"Nevertheless," said Mr. Lasher, very bitterly (for he had always said, "If one does not bring
one's imagination into one's work one's work is of no value"), "writers of idle tales are not
the only people who use their imaginations. And, if you will allow me, without offence, to
say so, Pidgen, your books, even amongst other things of the same sort, have not been the most
successful."

This remark seemed to pour water upon all the anger in Mr. Pidgen's heart. His eyes expressed
scorn, but not now for Mr. Lasher--for himself. His whole figure drooped and was bowed like
a robin in a thunderstorm.

"That's true enough. Bless my soul, Lasher, that's true enough. They hardly sell at all. I've
written a dozen of them now, 'The Blue Pouncet Box,' 'The Three-tailed Griffin,' 'The Tree
without any Branches,' but you won't want to be bothered with the names of them. 'The Griffin'
went into two editions, but it was only because the pictures were rather sentimental. I've
often said to myself, 'If a thing doesn't sell in these days it must be good,' but I've not
really convinced myself. I'd like them to have sold. Always, until now, I've had hopes of the
next one, and thought that it would turn out better, like a woman with her babies. I seem to
have given up expecting that now. It isn't, you know, being always hard-up that I mind so much,
although that, mind you, isn't pleasant, no, by Jehoshaphat, it isn't. But we would like now
and again to find that other people have enjoyed what one hoped they would enjoy. But I don't
know, they always seem too old for children and too young for grown-ups--my stories, I mean."

It was one of the hardest traits in Mr. Lasher's character, as Hugh well realised, "to rub
it in" over a fallen foe. He considered this his duty; it was also, I am afraid, a pleasure.
"It's a pity," he said, "that things should not have gone better; but there are so many writers
to-day that I wonder any one writes at all. We live in a practical, realistic age. The leaders
amongst us have decided that every man must gird his loins and go out to fight his battles
with real weapons in a real cause, not sit dreaming at his windows looking down upon the busy
market-place." (Mr. Lasher loved what he called "images." There were many in his sermons.)
"But, my dear Pidgen, it is in no way too late. Give up your fairy stories now that they have
been proved a failure."

Here Mr. Pidgen, in the most astonishing way, was suddenly in a terrible temper. "They're not!"
he almost screamed. "Not at all. Failures, from the worldly point of view, yes; but there are
some who understand. I would not have done anything else if I could. You, Lasher, with your
soup-tickets and your choir-treats, think there's no room for me and my fairy stories. I tell
you, you may find yourself jolly well mistaken one of these days. Yes, by Cæsar, you may. How
do you know what's best worth doing? If you'd listened a little more to the things you were
told when you were a baby, you'd be a more intelligent man now."

"When I was a baby," said Mr. Lasher, incredulously, as though that were a thing that he never
possibly could have been, "my dear Pidgen!"

"Ah, you think it absurd," said the other, a little cooler again. "But how do you know who
watched over your early years and wanted you to be a dreamy, fairy tale kind of person instead
of the cayenne pepper sort of man you are. There's always some one there, I tell you, and you
can have your choice, whether you'll believe more than you see all your life or less than you
see. Every baby knows about it; then, as they grow older, it fades and, with many people, goes
altogether. He's never left me, St. Christopher, you know, and that's one thing. Of course,
the ideal thing is somewhere between the two; recognise St. Christopher and see the real world
as well. I'm afraid neither you nor I is the ideal man, Lasher. Why, I tell you, any baby of
three knows more than you do! You're proud of never seeing beyond your nose. I'm proud of never
seeing my nose at all: we're both wrong. But I am ready to admit your uses. You never will
admit mine; and it isn't any use your denying my Friend. He stayed with you a bit when you
just arrived, but I expect he soon left you. You're jolly glad he did."

"My dear Pidgen," said Mr. Lasher, "I haven't understood a word."

Pidgen shook his head. "You're right. That's just what's the matter with me. I can't even put
what I see plainly." He sighed deeply. "I've failed. There's no doubt about it. But, although
I know that, I've had a happy life. That's the funny part of it. I've enjoyed it more than
you ever will, Lasher. At least, I'm never lonely. I like my food, too, and one's head's always
full of jolly ideas, if only they seemed jolly to other people."

"Upon my word, Pidgen," said Mr. Lasher. At this moment Mrs. Lasher opened the door.

"Well, well. Fancy! Sitting over the fire talking! Oh, you men! Tea! tea! Tea, Will! Fancy
talking all the afternoon! Well!"

No one had noticed Hugh. He, however, had understood Mr. Pidgen better than Mr. Lasher did. 

It is with thrilling interest that we read Isaiah's prophecy of the
destruction of Tyre, which was written at this very time.

For the Phenicians were the Canaanites of Bible history, and "Hiram King of Tyre" was their
king; and his "navy," which, together with Solomon's "came once in three years from Tarshish,"
was their navy; and Tarshish was none other than Tartessus, their own province, just beyond
Gibraltar on the Spanish coast. Nor is it at all improbable that Spanish gold was used to adorn
the temple which the great Solomon was building. (I Kings ix., x.) Shakspere, who says all things
better than anyone else, makes Othello find in the fatal handkerchief "confirmation strong as proofs
from holy writ." Where can be found "confirmation" stronger than these "proofs from holy writ"?
And where a more magnificent picture of the luxury, the sumptuous Oriental splendor of this nation
at that period, than in Ezekiel, chapters xxvii., xxviii.? What an eloquent apostrophe to
Tyre--"thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, a merchant of the people, for many isles."--"With
thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches," and, "by thy great
wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased, and thine heart is lifted up." And then follows
the terrible arraignment--"because of the iniquity of thy traffick."

And then the final prediction of ruin--"I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth"; "thou
shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more." Where in any literature can we find such
lurid splendor of description, and such a powerful appeal to the imagination of the reader! And
where could the student of history find a more graphic and accurate
picture of a vanished civilization!

In 850 B.C., the same year in which the Assyrians partly subjugated the Phenicians in the East,
the city of Carthage was founded upon the north coast of Africa, and there commenced a movement,
with that city as its center, which drew together all their scattered
possessions into a Punic confederacy.

This was composed of the islands of Sardinia, Corsica, part of Sicily, the Balearic Isles,
and the cities and colonies upon the Spanish Peninsula and African
coast.

As the power of this confederacy expands, the name Phenician passes
away and that of Carthaginian takes its place in history.

Carthage became a mighty city, and controlled with a strong hand the scattered empire which had
been planted by the Syrian tradesmen.

Carthaginian merchants and miners were in Tartessus, and were planting cities and colonies throughout
the peninsula, and a torrent of Carthaginian life was thus pouring
into Spain for many hundred years, and the blood of the two races
must have freely mingled.

There are memorials of this time now existing, not only in Phenician
coins, medals, and ruins, but in the names of the cities.

Barcelona, named after the powerful family of Barca in Carthage, to which Hannibal belonged.
Carthagena, a memorial of Carthage, which meant "the city"; and even Cordova is traced to its
primitive form,--Kartah-duba,--meaning "an important city." While Isabella, the name most famous
in Spanish annals, has a still greater antiquity; and was none other than Jezebel--after the beautiful
daughter of the King of Sidon (the "Zidoneans"), who married Ahab, and lured him to his downfall.
And we are told that this wicked siren whose dreadful fate Elijah foretold, was cousin to Dido,
she who Virgil tells us "wept in silence" for the faithless Æneas. With what a strange thrill
do we find these threads of association between history sacred and profane, and both mingled
with the modern history of Spain.

But Phenicia, for the "iniquity of her traffick," was doomed. The roots of this old Asiatic
tree had been slowly and surely perishing, while her branches in the West were expanding.
In the year 332 B.C. the siege and destruction of Tyre, predicted five hundred years before
by Isaiah, was accomplished by Alexander the Great, and the words of the prophet found their
complete fulfillment--that the people of Tarshish should find no city, no port, no welcome,
when they came back to Syria!

But on the northern coast of the Mediterranean there was another power which was waxing, while
the Carthaginian was waning. The occupation of the young Roman Republic
was not trade, but conquest.

A bitter enmity existed between the two nations. Rome was determined to break this grasping old
Asiatic confederacy and to drive it out of Europe. The Spanish Peninsula she knew little about,
but the rich islands near her own coast--they must be hers.

When, after the first Punic war (264-241 B.C.), the Carthaginians saw Sardinia and Sicily torn
from them, Hamilcar, their great general, determined upon a plan of vengeance which should make
of Italy a Punic province. His people were strong upon the sea, but for this war of invasion
they must have an army, too.

So he conceived the idea of making Spain the basis of his military operations, and recruiting
an immense army from the Iberian Peninsula.

CHAPTER III.

The Carthaginian occupation of Spain had not extended much beyond the coast, and had been rather
in the nature of a commercial alliance with a few cities.

Now Hamilcar determined, by placating, and by bribes, and if necessary by force, to take possession
of the Peninsula for his own purposes, and to make of the people a Punic nation under the complete
dominion of Carthage. So his first task was to win, or to subdue, the Keltiberians. He built
the city of New Carthage (now Carthagena), he showed the people how to develop their immense
resources, and by promises of increased prosperity won the confidence
and sympathy of the nation, and soon had a population of millions
from which to recruit its army.

When his son Hannibal was nine years old, at his father's bidding
he placed his hand upon the altar and swore eternal enmity to Rome.

The fidelity of the boy to his oath made a great deal of history.

He took up the task when his father laid it down, inaugurated the
second Punic war (218-201 B.C.); and for forty years carried on one
of the most desperate struggles the world has ever seen; the hoary
East in struggle with the young West.

Saguntum was that ancient city in Valencia which was said to have been founded by the Greeks
long before Homer sang of Troy, or, indeed, before Helen brought ruin upon that city. At all
events its antiquity was greater even than that of the Phenician
cities in Spain, and after being long forgotten by the Greeks it had
drifted under Roman protection.

It was the only spot in Spain which acknowledged allegiance to Rome; and for that reason was
marked for destruction as an act of defiance.

The Saguntines sent an embassy to Rome.

These men made a pitiful and passionate appeal in the Senate Chamber:
"Romans, allies, friends! help! help!

Hannibal is at the gates of our city.

Hannibal, the sworn enemy of Rome.

Hannibal the terrible. Hannibal who fears not the gods, neither keeps faith with men. ["Punic
faith" was a byword.] O Romans, fathers, friends! help while there is yet time."

But they found they had a "protector" who did not protect.

The senators sent an embassy to treat with Hannibal, but no soldiers.

So, with desperate courage, the Saguntines defended their beleaguered city for weeks, hurling
javelins, thrusting their lances, and beating down the besiegers
from the walls.

They had no repeating rifles nor dynamite guns, but they had the
terrible falaric, a shaft of fir with an iron head a yard long, at
the point of which was a mass of burning tow, which had been dipped
in pitch.

When a breach was made in the walls, the inflowing army would be met by a rain of this deadly falaric,
which was hurled with telling power and precision. Then, in the short interval of rest this
gave them, men, women, and children swiftly repaired the broken walls before the next assault.

But at last the resourceful Hannibal abandoned his battering rams, and with pickaxes undermined
the wall, which fell with a crash. When asked to surrender, the chief men of the city kindled a
great fire in the market-place, into which they then threw all the silver and gold in the
treasury, their own gold and silver and garments and furniture, and then cast themselves headlong
into the flames. This was their answer.

Saguntum, which for more than a thousand years had looked from its elevation out upon the sea,
was no more, and its destruction was one of the thrilling tragedies of ancient history. On its
site there exists to-day a town called Mur Viedro (old walls), and
these old walls are the last vestige of ancient Saguntum.

In order to understand the indifference of Rome to the Spanish Peninsula
at this time, it must be remembered that Spain was then the uttermost
verge of the known world, beyond which was only a dread waste of waters
and of mystery.

To the people of Tyre and of Greece, the twin "Pillars of Hercules" had marked the limit beyond
which there was nothing; and those two columns, Gibraltar and Ceuta, with the legend ne plus
ultra entwined about them, still survive, as a symbol, in the arms of Spain and upon the Spanish coins;
and what is still more interesting to Americans, in the familiar mark ($) which represents a dollar.
(The English name for the Spanish peso is pillar-dollar.)

Now Rome was aroused from its apathy. It sent an army into Spain, led by Scipio the Elder, known as Scipio
Africanus. When he fell, his son, only twenty-four years old, stood up in the Roman Forum and
offered to fill the undesired post; and, in 210 B.C., Scipio "the Younger"--and the greater--took
the command--as Livy eloquently says--"between the tombs of his father and his uncle", who had both
perished in Spain within a month.

The chief feature of Scipio's policy was, while he was defeating Hannibal
in battles, to be undermining him with his native allies; and to make
that people realize to what hard taskmasters they had bound themselves;
and by his own manliness and courtesy and justice to win them to his
side.

He marched his army swiftly and unexpectedly upon New Carthage, the capital and center of the
whole Carthaginian movement, sent his fleet to blockade the city, and planned his moves with
such precision that the fleet for the blockade and the army for the
siege arrived before the city on the same day.

Taken entirely by surprise. New Carthage was captured without a siege. Not one of the inhabitants
was spared, and spoil of fabulous amounts fell to the victors.

It seems like a fairy tale--or like the story of Mexico and Peru 1800 years later--to read of 276 golden
bowls which were brought to Scipio's tent, countless vessels of silver, and 18 tons of coined
and wrought silver.

But the richest part of the prize was the 750 Spanish hostages--high in rank of course--whom the
various tribes had given in pledge of their fidelity to Carthage. Now Scipio held these pledges,
and they were a menace and a promise. They were Roman slaves, but he could by kindness, and
by holding out the hope of emancipation, placate and further bind to him the native people.

By
an exercise of tact and clemency Scipio gained such an ascendancy over the inhabitants, and
so moved were they by this unexpected generosity and kindness, that many would gladly have made
him their king.

But he seems to have been the "noblest Roman of them all," and when saluted as king on one
occasion he said: "Never call me king. Other nations may revere that
name, but no Roman can endure it.

My soldiers have given me a more honorable title--that of general."

Such nobility, such a display of Roman virtue, was a revelation to these barbarians; and they
felt the grandeur of the words, though they could not quite understand them. They were won to
the cause of Rome, and formed loyal alliances with Scipio which they never broke.

In the year 206 B.C. Gades (Cadiz), the last stronghold, was surrendered to the Romans, and the entire
Spanish Peninsula had been wrenched from the Carthaginians.

Iberia was changed to Hispania, and fifteen years later the whole of the Peninsula was organized
into a Roman province, thenceforth known in history, not as Iberia, nor yet Hispania; but Spain,
and its people as Spaniards.

At the end of the third Punic war (149-146 B.C.), the ruin of the Carthaginians was complete.
Hannibal had died a fugitive and a suicide. His nation had not a single ship upon the seas,
nor a foot of territory upon the earth, and the great city of Carthage was plowed and sowed with
salt. Rome had been used by Fate to fulfill her stern decree--"Delenda
est Carthago."

It was really only a limited portion of the Peninsula; a fringe of provinces upon the south and east
coast, which had been under Carthaginian and now acknowledged Roman dominion. Beyond these the
Keltiberian tribes in the center formed a sort of confederation, and consented to certain alliances
with the Romans; while beyond them, intrenched in their own impregnable mountain fastnesses,
were brave, warlike, independent tribes, which had never known anything but freedom, whose names
even, Rome had not yet heard. The stern virtue and nobility of Scipio proved a delusive promise.
Rome had not an easy task, and other and brutal methods were to be employed in subduing stubborn
tribes and making of the whole a Latin nation.

In one of the defiles of the Pyrenees there may now be seen the ruins of fortifications built
by Cato the Elder, not long after Scipio, which show how early those free people in the north
were made to feel the iron heel of the master and to learn their lesson of submission.

The century which followed Scipio's conquest was one of dire experience for Spain. A Roman army
was trampling out every vestige of freedom in provinces which had
known nothing else; and more than that, Roman diplomacy was making
of their new possession a fighting ground for the civil war which
was then raging at Rome; and partisans of Marius and of Sylla were
using and slaughtering the native tribes in their own desperate struggle.

Roman rule was arrogant and oppressive, Roman governors cruel, arbitrary,
and rapacious, and the boasted "Roman virtue" seemed to have been
left in Rome, when treaties were made only to be violated at pleasure.

CHAPTER IV.

As nature delights in adorning the crevices of crumbling ruins with
mosses and graceful lichens, so literature has busied itself with
these historic ruins; and Cervantes has made the siege of Numantia
(134 B.C.)--more terrible even than that of Saguntum--the subject
of a poem, in which he depicts the horrors of the famine.

Lira, the heroine, answers her ardent lover Mirando in high-flown Spanish phrase, which, when
summed up in plain English prose, means that she cannot listen to his wooing, because she is
so hungry--which, in view of the fact that she has not tasted food
for weeks, seems to us not surprising!

Sertorius, whose story is told by Plutarch, affords another picturesque
subject for Corneille in one of his most famous tragedies.

This Roman was an adherent of Marius in the long struggle with Sylla,
and while upholding his cause in Spain he won to his side the people
of Lusitania (Portugal), who made him their ruler, and helped him
to fight the great army of the opposing Roman faction, part of which
was led by Pompey.

Mithridates, in Asia Minor, was also in conflict with Sylla, and sent an embassy to Sertorius
which led to a league between the two for mutual aid, and for the defense of the cause of
Marius. But senators of his own party became jealous of the great elevation of Sertorius, and
conspired to assassinate him at a feast to which he was invited. So ended (72 B.C.) one of the
most picturesque characters and interesting episodes in the difficult march of barbarous Spain
toward enlightenment and civilization.

Sertorius seems to have been a great administrator as well as fighter, and must also be counted
one of the civilizers of Spain. He founded a school at Osca,--now Huesca,--where he had Roman
and Greek masters for the Spanish youth. And it is interesting to learn that there is to-day at that
city a university which bears the title "University of Sertorius."

But it is not the valor nor the sagacity of Sertorius which made him
the favorite of poets; but the story of the White Hind, which he made
to serve him so ingeniously in establishing his authority with the
Lusitanians.

A milk-white fawn, on account of its rarity, was given him by a peasant.

He tamed her, and she became his constant companion, unaffrighted
even in the tumult of battle.

He saw that the people began to invest the little animal with supernatural
qualities; so, finally, he confided to them that she was sent to him
by the Goddess Diana, who spoke to him through her, and revealed important
secrets.

Such is the story which Corneille and writers in other lands have found so fascinating, and which
an English author has made the subject of his poem "The White Hind
of Sertorius."

Another Roman civil war, more pregnant of great results, was to be
fought out in Spain.

Julius Cæsar's conspiracy against the Roman Republic, and his desperate fight with Pompey
for the dictatorship, long drenched Spanish soil with blood, and
had its final culmination (after Pompey's tragic death in Egypt) in
Cæsar's victory over Pompey's sons at Munda, in Spain, 45 B.C.

With
this event, the military triumphs and the intrigues of Cæsar had accomplished
his purpose.

He was declared Imperator, perpetual Dictator of Rome, and religious
sacrifices were decreed to him as if he were a god.

Unconscious of the chasm which was yawning at his feet he haughtily accepted the honors and
adulation of men who were at that very moment conspiring for his
death.

On the fatal "Ides of March" (44 B.C.) he was stricken in the Senate Chamber by the hands of his
friends, and the great Cæsar lay dead at the feet of Pompey's statue.

The world had reached a supreme crisis in its existence. Two events--the most momentous it has ever
known--were at hand: the birth of a Roman Empire, which was to perish in a few centuries,
after a life of amazing splendor; and the birth of a spiritual kingdom,
which would never die!

Cæsar's nephew, Octavius Augustus, by gradual approaches reached the goal toward which no doubt
his greater uncle was moving. After defeating Brutus and Cassius
at Philippi (42 B.C.) and then after destroying his only competitor,
Antony, at Actium (31 B.C.) he assumed the imperial purple under the
name of Augustus. The title sounded harmless, but its wearer had founded
the "Roman Empire."

At last there was peace. Spain was pacified,
and only here and there did she struggle in the grasp of the Romans.
Augustus, to make sure of the permanence of this pacification, himself
went to the Peninsula. He built cities in the plains, where he compelled
the stubborn mountaineers to reside, and established military colonies
in the places they had occupied.

Saragossa was one of these cities
in the plains, and its name was "Cæsar Augusta," and many others have
wandered quite as far from their original names, which may, however,
still be traced.

It is said that "the annals of the happy are brief."

She gave him her hand, and he closed his fingers about one of hers; but even that grasp was
abstracted, as though he were not thinking of her at all, but was simply behaving like a gentleman.

"I don't believe he's realised me a bit, nurse," she said, turning away from the cot.

"Well, Your Grace, they always take time. It's early days."

"But what's he thinking of all the time?"

"Oh, just nothing, Your Grace."

"I don't believe it's nothing. He's trying to settle things. This--what it's all about--what
he's got to do about it."

"It may be so, Your Grace. All babies are like that at first."

"His eyes are so old, so grave."

"He's a jolly little fellow, Your Grace."

"He's very little trouble, isn't he?"

"Less trouble than any baby I've ever had to do with. Got His Grace's happy temperament, if
I may say so."

"Yes," the mother laughed. She crossed over to the window and looked down. "That poor woman
singing down there. How awful! He'll be going down to Crole very shortly, Roberts. Splendid
air for him there. But the Square's cheerful. He likes the garden, doesn't he?"

"Oh, yes, Your Grace; all the children and the fountain. But he's a happy baby. I should say
he'd like anything."

For a moment longer she looked down into the Square. The discordant voice was giving "Annie
Laurie" to the world.

"Good-bye, darling." She stepped forward, shook the silver and coral rattle. "See what grannie's
given you!" She left it lying near his hand, and, with a little sigh, was gone.

III

Now, as the sun was setting, the clouds had broken into little pink bubbles, lying idly here
and there upon the sky. Higher, near the top of the window, they were large pink cushions,
three fat ones, lying sedately against the blue. During three months now Henry Fitzgeorge Strether
had been confronted with the new scene, the new urgency on his part to respond to it. At first
he had refused absolutely to make any response; behind him, around him, above him, below him,
were still the old conditions; but they were the old conditions viewed, for some reason unknown
to him, at a distance, and at a distance that was ever increasing. With every day something
here in this new and preposterous world struck his attention, and with every fresh lure was
he drawn more certainly from his old consciousness. At first he had simply rebelled; then,
very slowly, his curiosity had begun to stir. It had stirred at first through food and touch;
very pleasant this, very pleasant that.

Milk, sleep, light things that he could hold very tightly with his hands. Now, upon this March
afternoon, he watched the pink clouds with a more intent gaze than he had given to them before.
Their colour and shape bore some reference to the life that he had left. They were "like" a
little to those other things. There, too, shadowed against the wall, was his Friend, his Friend,
now the last link with everything that he knew.

At first, during the first week, he had demanded again and again to be taken back, and always
he had been told to wait, to wait and see what was going to happen. So long as his Friend was
there, he knew that he was not completely abandoned, and that this was only a temporary business,
with its strange limiting circumstances, the way that one was tied and bound, the embarrassment
of finding that all one's old means of communication were here useless. How desperate, indeed,
would it have been had his Friend not been there, reassuring pervading him, surrounding him,
always subduing those sudden inexplicable alarms.

He would demand: "When are we going to leave all this?"

"Wait. I know it seems absurd to you, but it's commanded you."

"Well, but--this is ridiculous. Where are all my old powers I Where are all the others?"

"You will understand everything one day. I'm afraid you're very uncomfortable. You will be
less so as time passes. Indeed, very soon you will be very happy."

"Well, I'm doing my best to be cheerful. But you won't leave me?"

"Not so long as you want me."

"You'll stay until we go back again!"

"You'll never go back again."

"Never?"

"No."

Across the light the nurse advanced. She took him in her arms for a moment, turned his pillows,
then layed him down again. As he settled down into comfort he saw his Friend, huge, a great
shadow, mingling with the coloured lights of the flaming sky. All the world was lit, the white
room glowed. A pleasant smell was in his nostrils.

"Where are all the others? They would like to share this pleasant moment, and I would warn
them about the unpleasant ones."

"They are coming, some of them. I am with them as I am with you." Swinging across the Square
were the evening bells of St. Matthew's.

Henry Fitzgeorge smiled, then chuckled, then dozed into a pleasant sleep.

IV

Asleep, awake, it had been for the most part the same to him. He swung easily, lazily upon
the clouds; warmth and light surrounded him; a part of him, his toes, perhaps, would be suddenly
cold, then he would cry, or he would strike his head against the side of his cot and it would
hurt, and so then he would cry again. But these tears would not be tears of grief, but simply
declarations of astonishment and wonder.

He did not, of course, realise that as, very slowly, very gradually he began to understand
the terms and conditions of his new life, so with the same gradation, his Friend was expressed
in those terms. Slowly that great shadow filled the room, took on human shape, until at last
it would be only thus that he would appear. But Henry would not realise the change, soon he
would not know that it had ever been otherwise. Dimly, out of chaos, the world was being made
for him. There a square of colour, here something round and hard that was cool to touch, now
a gleaming rod that ran high into the air, now a shape very soft and warm against which it
was pleasant to lean. The clouds, the sweep of dim colour, the vast horizons of that other
world yielded, day by day, to little concrete things--a patch of carpet, the leg of a chair,
the shadow of the fire, clouds beyond the window, buttons on some one's clothes, the rails
of his cot. Then there were voices, the touch of hands, some one's soft hair, some one who
sang little songs to him.

He woke early one morning and realised the rattle that his grandmother had given to him. He
suddenly realised it. He grasped the handle of it with his hand and found this cool and pleasant
to touch. He then, by accident, made it tinkle, and instantly the prettiest noise replied to
him. He shook it more lustily and the response was louder. He was, it seemed, master of this
charming thing and could force it to do what he wished. He appealed to his Friend. Was not
this a charming thing that he had found? He waved it and chuckled and crowed, and then his
toes, sticking out beyond the bed-clothes, were nipped by the cold so that he halloed loudly.
Perhaps the rattle had nipped his toes. He did not know, but he would cry because that eased
his feelings.

That morning there came with his grandmother and mother a silly young woman who had, it was
supposed, a great way with babies. "I adore babies," she said. "We understand one another in
the most wonderful way."

Henry Fitzgeorge looked at her as she leaned over the cot and made faces at him. "Goo-goo-gum-goo,"
she cried.

"What is all this?" he asked his Friend. He laid down the rattle, and felt suddenly lonely
and unhappy.

"Little pet--ug--la--la--goo--losh!" Henry Fitzgeorge raised his eyes. His Friend was a long,
long way away; his eyes grew cold with contempt. He hated this thing that made the noises and
closed out the light. He opened his eyes, he was about to burst into one of his most abandoned
roars when his stare encountered his mother. Her eyes were watching him, and they had in them
a glow and radiance that gave him a warm feeling of companionship. "I know," they seemed to
say, "what you are thinking of. I agree with all that you are feeling about her. Only don't
cry, she really isn't worth it." His mouth slowly closed then to thank her for her assistance,
he raised the rattle and shook it at her. His eyes never left her face.

"Little darling," said the lady friend, but nevertheless disappointed. "Lift him up, Jane.
I'd like to see him in your arms."

But she shook her head. She moved away from the cot. Something so precious had been in that
smile of her son's that she would not risk any rebuff.

Henry Fitzgeorge gave the strange lady one last look of disgust.

"If that comes again I'll bite it," he said to his Friend.

When these visitors had departed, he lay there remembering those eyes that had looked into
his. All that day he remembered them, and it may be that his Friend, as he watched, sighed
because the time for launching him had now come, that one more soul had passed from his sheltering
arms out into the highroad of fine adventures. How easily they forget! How readily they forget!
How eagerly they fling the pack of their old world from off their shoulders! He had seen, perhaps,
so many go, thus lustily, upon their way, and then how many, at the end of it all, tired, worn,
beaten to their very shadows, had he received at the end!

But it was so. This day was to see Henry Fitzgeorge's assertions of his independence. The hour
when this life was to close, so definitely, so securely, the doors upon that other, had come.
The shadow that had been so vast that it had filled the room, the Square, the world, was drawn
now into small and human size.

Henry Fitzgeorge was never again to look so old.

V

As the fine, dim afternoon was closing, he was allowed, for half an hour before sleep, to sprawl
upon the carpet in front of the fire. He had with him his rattle and a large bear which he
stroked because it was comfortable; he had no personal feeling about it.

His mother came in.

"Let me have him for half an hour, nurse. Come back in half an hour's time."

The nurse left them.

Henry Fitzgeorge did not look at his mother.

He had the bear in his arms and was feeling it, and in his mind the warmth from the flickering,
jumping flame and the soft, friendly submission of the fur beneath his fingers were part of
the same mystery.

His mother had been motoring; her cheeks were flushed, and her dark clothes heightened, by
their contrast, her colour. She knelt down on the carpet and then, with her hands folded on
her lap, watched her son. He rolled the bear over and over, he poked it, he banged its head
upon the ground. Then he was tired with it and took up the rattle. Then he was tired of that,
and he looked across at his mother and chuckled.

His mind, however, was not at all concentrated upon her. He felt, on this afternoon, a new,
a fresh interest in things. The carpet before him was a vast country and he did not propose
to explore it, but sucking his thumb, stroking the bear's coat, feeling the firelight upon
his face, he felt that now something would occur. He had realised that there was much to explore
and that, after all, perhaps there might be more in this strange condition of things than he
had only a little time ago considered possible. It was then that he looked up and saw hanging
round his mother's neck a gold chain. This was a long chain hanging right down to her lap;
as it hung there, very slowly it swayed from side to side, and as it swayed, the firelight
caught it and it gleamed and was splashed with light. His eyes, as he watched, grew rounder
and rounder; he had never seen anything so wonderful. He put down the rattle, crawled, with
great difficulty because of his long clothes, on to his knees and sat staring, his thumb in
his mouth. His mother stayed, watching him. He pointed his finger, crowing. "Come and fetch
it," she said.

He tumbled forward on to his nose and then lay there, with his face raised a little, watching
it. She did not move at all, but knelt with her hands straight out upon her knees, and the
chain with its large gold rings like flaming eyes swung from hand to hand. Then he tried to
move forward, his whole soul in his gaze. He would raise a hand towards the treasure and then
because that upset his balance he would fall, but at once he would be up again. He moved a
little and breathed little gasps of pleasure.

She bent forward to him, his hand was outstretched. His eyes went up and, meeting hers, instantly
the chain was forgotten. That recognition that they had given him before was there now.

With a scramble and a lurch, desperate, heedless in its risks, he was in his mother's lap.
Then he crowed. He crowed for all the world to hear because now, at last, he had become its
citizen.

Was there not then, from some one, disregarded and forgotten at that moment, a sigh, lighter
than the air itself, half-ironic, half-wistful regret?

CHAPTER II

ERNEST HENRY

I

Young Ernest Henry Wilberforce, who had only yesterday achieved his second birthday, watched,
with a speculative eye, his nurse. He was seated on the floor with his back to the high window
that was flaming now with the light of the dying sun; his nurse was by the fire, her head,
shadowed huge and fantastic on the wall, nodded and nodded and nodded. Ernest Henry was, in
figure, stocky and square, with a head round, hard, and covered with yellow curls; rather light
and cold blue eyes and a chin of no mean degree were further possessions. He was wearing a
white blouse, a white skirt, white socks and shoes; his legs were fat and bulged above his
socks; his cold blue eyes never moved from his nurse's broad back.

He knew that, in a very short time, disturbance would begin. He knew that doors would open
and shut, that there would be movement, strange noises, then an attack upon himself, ultimately
a removal of him to another place, a stripping off him of his blouse, his skirt, his socks
and his shoes, a loathsome and strangely useless application of soap and water--it was only,
of course, in later years that he learned the names of those abominable articles--and, finally,
finally darkness. All this he felt hovering very close at hand; one nod too many of his nurse's
head, and up she would start, off she would go, off he would go.... He watched her and stroked
very softly his warm, fat calf.

It was a fine, spacious room that he inhabited. The ceiling--very, very far away--was white
and glimmering with shadowy spaces of gold flung by the sun across the breast of it. The wallpaper
was dark-red, and there were many coloured pictures of ships and dogs and snowy Christmases,
and swans eating from the hands of beautiful little girls, and one garden with roses and peacocks
and a tumbling fountain. To Ernest Henry these were simply splashes of colour, and colour,
moreover, scarcely so convincing as the bright blue screen by the fire, or the golden brown
rug by the door; but he was dimly aware that, as the days passed, so did he find more and more
to consider in the shapes and sizes between the deep black frames.... There might, after all,
be something in it.

But it was not the pictures that he was now considering.

Before his nurse's descent upon him he was determined that he would walk--not crawl, but walk
in his socks and shoes--from his place by the window to the blue screen by the fire. There
had been days, and those not so long ago, when so hazardous an Odyssey had seemed the vainest
of Blue Moon ambitions; it had once been the only rule of existence to sprawl and roll and
sprawl again; but gradually some further force had stirred his limbs. It was a finer thing
to be upright; there was a finer view, a more lordly sense of possession could be summoned
to one's command. That, then, once decided, upright one must be and upright, with many sudden
and alarming collapses, Ernest Henry was.

He had marked out, from the first, the distance from the wall to the blue screen as a very
decent distance. There was, half-way, a large rocking-chair that would be either a danger or
a deliverance, as Fate should have it. Save for this, it was, right across the brown, rose-strewn
carpet, naked country. Truly a perilous business. As he sat there and looked at it, his heart
a little misgave him; in this strange, new world into which he had been so roughly hustled,
amongst a horde of alarming and painful occurrences, he had discovered nothing so disconcerting
as that sudden giving of the knees, that rising of the floor to meet you, the collapse, the
pain, and above all the disgrace. Moreover, let him fail now, and it meant, in short,--banishment--banishment
and then darkness. There were risks. It was the most perilous thing that, in this new country,
he had yet attempted, but attempt it he would.... He was as obstinate as his chin could make him.

With his blue eyes still cautiously upon his nurse's shadow he raised himself very softly,
his fat hand pressed against the wall, his mouth tightly closed, and from between his teeth
there issued the most distant relation of that sound that the traditional ostler makes when
he is cleaning down a horse. His knees quivered, straightened; he was up. Far away in the long,
long distance were piled the toys that yesterday's birthday had given him. They did not, as
yet, mean anything to him at all. One day, perhaps when he had torn the dolls limb from limb,
twisted the railways until they stood end upon end in sheer horror, disembowelled the bears
and golliwogs so that they screamed again, he might have some personal feeling for them. At
present there they lay in shining impersonal newness, and there for Ernest Henry they might
lie for ever.

For an instant, his hand against the wall, he was straight and motionless; then he took his
hand away, and his journey began. At the first movement a strange, an amazing glory filled
him. From the instant, two years ago, of his first arrival he had been disturbed by an irritating
sense of inadequacy; he had been sent, it seemed, into this new and tiresome condition of things
without any fitting provisions for his real needs. Demands were always made upon him that were,
in the absurd lack of ways and means, impossible of fulfilment. But now, at last, he was using
the world as it should be used.... He was fine, he was free, he was absolutely master. His
legs might shake, his body lurch from side to side, his breath come in agitating gasps and
whistles; the wall was now far behind him, the screen most wonderfully near, the rocking-chair
almost within his grasp. Great and mighty is Ernest Henry Wilberforce, dazzling and again dazzling
the lighted avenues opening now before him; there is nothing, nothing, from the rendings of
the toys to the deliberate defiance of his nurse and all those in authority over him, that
he shall not now perform.... With a cry, with a wild wave of the arms, with a sickening foretaste
of the bump with which the gay brown carpet would mark him, he was down, the Fates were upon
him--the disturbance, the disrobing, the darkness. Nevertheless, even as he was carried, sobbing,
into the farther room, there went with him a consciousness that life would never again be quite
the dull, purposeless, monotonous thing that it had hitherto been.

II

After a long time he was alone. About him the room, save for the yellow night-light above his
head, was dark, humped with shadows, with grey pools of light near the windows, and a golden
bar that some lamp beyond the house flung upon the wall. Ernest Henry lay and, now and again,
cautiously felt the bump on his forehead; there was butter on the bump, and an interesting
confusion and pain and importance round and about it. Ernest Henry's eyes sought the golden
bar, and then, lingering there, looked back upon the recent adventure. He had walked; yes,
he had walked. This would, indeed, be something to tell his Friend.

His friend, he knew, would be very shortly with him. It was not every night that he came, but
always, before his coming, Ernest Henry knew of his approach--knew by the happy sense of comfort
that stole softly about him, knew by the dismissal of all those fears and shapes and terrors
that, otherwise, so easily beset him. He sucked his thumb now, and felt his bump, and stared
at the ceiling and knew that he would come. During the first months after Ernest Henry's arrival
on this planet his friend was never absent from him at all, was always there, drawing through
his fingers the threads of the old happy life and the new alarming one, mingling them so that
the transition from the one to the other might not be too sharp--reassuring, comforting, consoling.
Then there had been hours when he had withdrawn himself, and that earlier world had grown a
little vaguer, a little more remote, and certain things, certain foods and smells and sounds
had taken their place within the circle of realised facts. Then it had come to be that the
friend only came at night, came at that moment when the nurse had gone, when the room was dark,
and the possible beasts--the first beast, the second beast, and the third beast--began to creep
amongst those cool, grey shadows in the hollow of the room. He always came then, was there
with his arm about Ernest Henry, his great body, his dark beard, his large, firm hands--all
so reassuring that the beasts might do the worst, and nothing could come of it. He brought
with him, indeed, so much more than himself--brought a whole world of recollected wonders,
of all that other time when Ernest Henry had other things to do, other disciplines, other triumphs,
other defeats, and other glories. Of late his memory of the other time had been untrustworthy.
Things during the day-time would remind him, but would remind him, nevertheless, with a strange
mingling of the world at present about him, so that he was not sure of his visions. But when
his friend was with him the memories were real enough, and it was the nurse, the fire, the
red wallpaper, the smell of toast, the taste of warm milk, that were faint and shadowy.

His friend was there, just as always, suddenly sitting there on the bed with his arm round
Ernest Henry's body, his dark beard just tickling Ernest Henry's neck, his hand tight about
Ernest Henry's hand. They told one another things in the old way without tiresome words and
sounds; but, for the benefit of those who are unfortunately too aged to remember that old and
pleasant intercourse, one must make use of the English language. Ernest Henry displayed his
bump, and explained its origin; and then, even as he did so, was aware that the reality of
the bump made the other world just a little less real. He was proud that he had walked and
stood up, and had been the master of his circumstance; but just because he had done so he was
aware that his friend was a little, a very little farther away to-night than he had ever been
before.

"Well, I'm very glad that you're going to stand on your own, because you'll have to. I'm going
to leave you now--leave you for longer, far longer than I've ever left you before."

"Leave me?"

"Yes. I shan't always be with you; indeed, later on you won't want me. Then you'll forget me,
and at last you won't even believe that I ever existed--until, at the end of it all, I come
to take you away. Then it will all come back to you."

"Oh, but that's absurd!" Ernest Henry said confidently. Nevertheless, in his heart he knew
that, during the day-time, other things did more and more compel his attention. There were
long stretches during the day-time now when he forgot his friend.

"After your second birthday I always leave you more to yourselves. I shall go now for quite
a time, and you'll see that when the old feeling comes, and you know that I'm coming back,
you'll be quite startled and surprised that you'd got on so well without me. Of course, some
of you want me more than others do, and with some of you I stay quite late in life. There are
one or two I never leave at all. But you're not like that; you'll get on quite well without me."

"Oh, no, I shan't," said Ernest Henry, and he clung very tightly and was most affectionate.
But he suddenly put his fingers to his bump, felt the butter, and his chin shot up with self-satisfaction.

"To-morrow I'll get ever so much farther," he said.

"You'll behave, and not mind the beasts or the creatures?" his friend said. "You must remember
that it's not the slightest use to call for me. You're on your own. Think of me, though. Don't
forget me altogether. And don't forget all the other world in your new discoveries. Look out
of the window sometimes. That will remind you more than anything."

He had kissed him, had put his hand for a moment on Ernest Henry's curls, and was gone. Ernest
Henry, his thumb in his mouth, was fast asleep.

III

Suddenly, with a wild, agonising clutch at the heart, he was awake. He was up in bed, his hands,
clammy and hot, pressed together, his eyes staring, his mouth dry. The yellow night-light was
there, the bars of gold upon the walls, the cool, grey shadows, the white square of the window;
but there, surely, also, were the beasts. He knew that they were there--one crouching right
away there in the shadow, all black, damp; one crawling, blacker and damper, across the floor;
one--yes, beyond question--one, the blackest and cruellest of them all, there beneath the bed.
The bed seemed to heave, the room flamed with terror. He thought of his friend; on other nights
he had invoked him, and instantly there had been assurance and comfort. Now that was of no
avail; his friend would not come. He was utterly alone. Panic drove him; he thought that there,
on the farther side of the bed, claws and a black arm appeared. He screamed and screamed and
screamed.

The door was flung open, there were lights, his nurse appeared. He was lying down now, his
face towards the wall, and only dry, hard little sobs came from him. Her large red hand was
upon his shoulder, but brought no comfort with it. Of what use was she against the three beasts?
A poor creature.... He was ashamed that he should cry before her. He bit his lip.

"Dreaming, I suppose, sir," she said to some one behind her. Another figure came forward. Some
one sat down on the edge of the bed, put his arm round Ernest Henry's body and drew him towards
him. For one wild moment Ernest Henry fancied that his friend had, after all, returned. But
no. He knew that these were the conditions of this world, not of that other. When he crept
close to his friend he was caught up into a soft, rosy comfort, was conscious of nothing except
ease and rest. Here there were knobs and hard little buttons, and at first his head was pressed
against a cold, slippery surface that hurt. Nevertheless, the pressure was pleasant and comforting.
A warm hand stroked his hair. He liked it, jerked his head up, and hit his new friend's chin.

"Oh, damn!" he heard quite clearly. This was a new sound to Ernest Henry; but just now he was
interested in sounds, and had learnt lately quite a number. This was a soft, pleasant, easy
sound. He liked it.

And so, with it echoing in his head, his curly head against his father's shoulder, the bump
glistening in the candle-light, the beasts defeated and derided, he tumbled into sleep.

IV

A pleasant sight at breakfast was Ernest Henry, with his yellow curls gleaming from his bath,
his bib tied firmly under his determined chin, his fat fingers clutching a large spoon, his
body barricaded into a high chair, his heels swinging and kicking and swinging again. Very
fine, too, was the nursery on a sunny morning--the fire crackling, the roses on the brown carpet
as lively as though they were real, and the whole place glittering, glowing with size and cleanliness
and vigour. In the air was the crackling smell of toast and bacon, in a glass dish was strawberry
jam, through the half-open window came all the fun of the Square--the sparrows, the carts,
the motor-cars, the bells, and horses.... Oh, a fine morning was fine indeed!

Ernest Henry, deep in the business of conveying securely his bread and milk from the bowl--a
beautiful bowl with red robins all round the outside of it--to his mouth, laughed at the three
beasts. Let them show themselves here in the sunlight, and they'd see what they'd get. Let
them only dare!

He surveyed, with pleased anticipation, the probable progress of his day. He glanced at the
pile of toys in the farther corner of the room, and thought to himself that he might, after
all, find some diversion there. Yesterday they had seemed disappointing; to-day in the glow
of the sun they suggested, adventure. Then he looked towards that stretch of country--that
wall-to-screen marathon--and, with an eye upon his nurse, meditated a further attempt. He put
down his spoon, and felt his bump. It was better; perchance there would be two bumps by the
evening. And then, suddenly, he remembered.... He felt again the terror, saw the lights and
his nurse, then that new friend.... He pondered, lifted his spoon, waved it in the air; and
then smiling with the happy recovery of a pleasant, friendly sound, repeated half to himself,
half to his nurse: "Damn! Damn! Damn!"

That began for him the difficulties of his day. He was hustled, shaken; words, words, words
were poured down upon him. He understood that, in some strange, unexpected, bewildering fashion
he had done wrong. There was nothing more puzzling in his present surroundings than that amazingly
sudden transition from serenity to danger. Here one was, warm with food, bathed in sunlight,
with a fine, ripe day in front of one.... Then the mere murmur of a sound, and all was tragedy.

He hated his toys, his nurse, his food, his world; he sat in a corner of the room and glowered....
How was he to know? If, under direct encouragement, he could be induced to say "dada," or "horse,"
or "twain," he received nothing but applause and, often enough, reward. Yet, let him make use
of that pleasant new sound that he had learnt, and he was in disgrace. Upon this day, more
than any other in his young life, he ached, he longed for some explanation. Then, sitting there
in his corner, there came to him a discovery, the force of which was never, throughout all
his later life, to leave him. He had been deserted by his friend. His last link with that other
life was broken. He was here, planted in the strangest of strange places, with nothing whatever
to help him. He was alone; he must fight for his own hand. He would--from that moment, seated
there beneath the window, Ernest Henry Wilberforce challenged the terrors of this world, and
found them sawdust--he would say "damn" as often as he pleased. "Damn, damn, damn, damn," he
whispered, and marked again, with meditative eye, the space from wall to screen.

After this, greatly cheered, he bethought him of the Square. Last night his friend had said
to him that when he wished to think of him, and go back for a time to the other world, a peep
into the Square would assist him. He clambered up on to the window-seat, caught behind him
those sounds, "Now, Master Ernest," which he now definitely connected with condemnation and
disapproval, shook his curls in defiance, and pressed his nose to the glass. The Square was
a dazzling sight. He had not as yet names for any of the things that he saw there, nor, when
he went out on his magnificent daily progress in his perambulator did he associate the things
that he found immediately around him with the things that he saw from his lofty window; but,
with every absorbed gaze they stood more securely before him, and were fixed ever more firmly
in his memory.

This was a Square with fine, white, lofty houses, and in the houses were an infinite number
of windows, sometimes gay and sometimes glittering. In the middle of the Square was a garden,
and in the middle of the garden, very clearly visible from Ernest Henry's window, was a fountain.
It was this fountain, always tossing and leaping, that gave Ernest Henry the key to his memories.
Gazing at it he had no difficulty at all to find himself back in the old life. Even now, although
only two years had passed, it was difficult not to reveal his old experiences by means of terms
of his new discoveries. He thought, for instance, of the fountain as a door that led into the
country whose citizen he had once been, and that country he saw now in terms of doors and passages
and rooms and windows, whereas, in reality, it had been quite otherwise.

But now, perched up there on the window-sill, he felt that if he could only bring the fountain
in with him out of the Square into his nursery, he would have the key to both existences. He
wanted to understand--to understand what was the relation between his friend who had left last
night, why he might say "dada," but mustn't say "damn," why, finally, he was here at all. He
did not consciously consider these things; his brain was only very slightly, as yet, concerned
in his discoveries; but, like a flowing river, beneath his movements and actions, the interplay
of his two existences drove him on through, his adventure.

There were, of course, many other things in the Square besides the fountain. There was, at
the farther corner, just out of the Square, but quite visible from Ernest Henry's window, a
fruit-shop with coloured fruit piled high on the boards outside the windows. Indeed, that side
street, of which one could only catch this glimpse, promised to be most wonderful always; when
evening came a golden haze hovered round and about it. In the garden itself there were often
many children, and for an hour every afternoon Ernest Henry might be found amongst them. There
were two statues in the Square--one of a gentleman in a beard and a frock-coat, the other of
a soldier riding very finely upon a restless horse; but Ernest Henry was not, as yet, old enough
to realise the meaning and importance of these heroes.

Outside the Square there were many dogs, and even now as he looked down from his window he
could see a number of them, black and brown and white.

The trees trembled in a little breeze, the fountain flashed in the sun, somewhere a barrel-organ
was playing.... Ernest Henry gave a little sigh, of satisfaction.

He was back! He was back! He was slipping, slipping into distance through the window into the
street, under the fountain, its glittering arms had caught him; he was up, the door was before
him, he had the key.

"Time for you to put your things on, Master Ernest. And 'ow you've dirtied your knees! There!
Look!"

He shook himself, clambered down from the window, gave his nurse what she described as "One
of his old, old looks. Might be eighty when he's like that.... They're all like it when they're
young."

With a sigh he translated himself back into this new, tiresome existence.

V

But after that morning things were never again quite the same. He gave himself up deliberately
to the new life.

With that serious devotion towards anything likely to be of real practical value to him that
was, in his later years, never to fail him, he attacked this business of "words." He discovered
that if he made certain sounds when certain things were said to him he provoked instant applause.
He liked popularity; he liked the rewards that popularity brought him. He acquired a formula
that amounted practically to "Wash dat?" And whenever he saw anything new he produced his question.
He learnt with amazing rapidity. He was, his nurse repeatedly told his father, "a most remarkable
child."

It could not truthfully be said that during these weeks he forgot his friend altogether. There
were still the dark hours at night when he longed for him, and once or twice he had cried aloud
for him. But slowly that slipped away. He did not look often now at the fountain.

There were times when his friend was almost there. One evening, kneeling on the floor before
the fire, arranging shining soldiers in a row, he was aware of something that made him sharply
pause and raise his head. He was, for the moment, alone in the room that was glowing and quivering
now in the firelight. The faint stir and crackle of the fire, the rich flaming colour that
rose and fell against the white ceiling might have been enough to make him wonder. But there
was also the scent of a clump of blue hyacinths standing in shadow by the darkened window,
and this scent caught him, even as the fountain had caught him, caught him with the stillness,
the leaping fire, the twisted sense of romantic splendours that came, like some magician's
smoke and flame, up to his very heart and brain. He did not turn his head, but behind him he
was sure, there on the golden-brown rug, his friend was standing, watching him with his smiling
eyes, his dark beard; he would be ready, at the least movement, to catch him up and hold him.
Swiftly, Ernest Henry turned. There was no one there.

But those moments were few now; real people were intervening. He had no mother, and this was
doubtless the reason why his nurse darkly addressed him as "Poor Lamb" on many occasions; but
he was, of course, at present unaware of his misfortune. He had an aunt, and of this lady he
was aware only too vividly. She was long and thin and black, and he would not have disliked
her so cordially, perhaps, had he not from the very first been aware of the sharpness of her
nose when she kissed him. Her nose hurt him, and so he hated her. But, as he grew, he discovered
that this hatred was well-founded. Miss Wilberforce had not a happy way with children; she
was nervous when she should have been bold, and secret when she should have been honesty itself.
When Ernest Henry was the merest atom in a cradle, he discovered that she was afraid of him;
he hated the shiny stuff of her dress. She wore a gold chain that--when you pulled it--snapped
and hit your fingers. There were sharp pins at the back of her dress. He hated her; he was
not afraid of her, and yet on that critical night when his friend told him of his departure,
it was the fear of being left alone with the black cold shiny thing that troubled him most;
she bore of all the daylight things the closest resemblance to the three beasts.

There was, of course, his nurse, and a great deal of his time was spent in her company; but
she had strangely little connection with his main problem of the relation of this, his present
world, to that, his preceding one. She was there to answer questions, to issue commands, to
forbid. She had the key to various cupboards--to the cupboard with pretty cups and jam and
sugar, to the cupboard with ugly things that tasted horrible, things that he resisted by instinct
long before they arrived under his nose. She also had certain sounds, of which she made invariable
use on all occasions. One was, "Now, Master Ernest!" Another: "Mind-what-you're-about-now!"
And, at his "Wash dat!" always "Oh-bother-the-boy!" She was large and square to look upon,
very often pins were in her mouth, and the slippers that she wore within doors often clipclapped
upon the carpet. But she was not a person; she had nothing to do with his progress.

The person who had to do with it was, of course, his father. That night when his friend had
left him had been, indeed, a crisis, because it was on that night that his father had come
to him. It was not that he had not been aware of his father before, but he had been aware of
him only as he had been aware of light and heat and food. Now it had become a definite wonder
as to whether this new friend had been sent to take the place of the old one. Certainly the
new friend had very little to do with all that old life of which the fountain was the door.
He belonged, most definitely, to the new one, and everything about him--the delightfully mysterious
tick of his gold watch, the solid, firm grasp of his hand, the sure security of his shoulder
upon which Ernest Henry now gloriously rode--these things were of this world and none other.

It was a different relationship, this, from any other that Ernest Henry had ever known, but
there was no doubt at all about its pleasant flavour. Just as in other days he had watched
for his friend's appearance, so now he waited for that evening hour that always brought his
father. The door would open, the square, set figure would appear.... Very pleasant, indeed.
Meanwhile Ernest Henry was instructed that the right thing to say on his father's appearance
was "Dada."

But he knew better. His father's name was really "Damn."

VI

The days and weeks passed. There had been no sign of his friend.... Then the crisis came.

That old wall-to-screen marathon had been achieved, and so contemptuously banished. There was
now the great business of marching without aid from one end of the room to the other. This
was a long business, and always hitherto somewhere about the middle of it Ernest Henry had
sat down suddenly, pretending, even to himself, that his shoe hurt, or that he was bored with
the game, and would prefer some other.

There came, then, a beautiful spring evening. The long low evening sun flooded the room, and
somewhere a bell was calling Christian people to their prayers, and somewhere else the old
man with the harp, who always came round the Square once every week, was making beautiful music.

Ernest Henry's father had taken the nurse's place for an hour, and was reading a Globe with
absorbed attention by the window; Mr. Wilberforce, senior, was one of London's most famous
barristers, and the Globe on this particular afternoon had a great deal to say about this able
man's cleverness. Ernest Henry watched his father, watched the light, heard the bell and the
harp, felt that the hour was ripe for his attempt.

He started, and, even as he did so, was aware that, after he had succeeded in this great adventure,
things--that is, life--would never be quite the same again. He knew by now every stage of the
first half of his journey. The first instalment was defined by that picture of the garden and
the roses and the peacocks; the second by the beginning of the square brown nursery table;
and here there was always a swift and very testing temptation to cling, with a sticky hand,
to the hard and shining corner. The third division was the end of the nursery table where one
was again tempted to give the corner a final clutch before passing forth into the void. After
this there was nothing, no rest, no possible harbour until the end.

Off Ernest Henry started. He could see his father, there in the long distance, busied with
his paper; he could see the nursery table, with bright-blue and red reels of cotton that nurse
had left there; he could see a discarded railway engine that lay gaping there half-way across,
ready to catch and trip him if he were not careful. His eyes were like saucers, the hissing
noise came from between his teeth, his forehead frowned. He passed the peacock, he flung contemptuously
aside the proffered corner of the table; he passed, as an Atlantic liner passes the Eddystone,
the table's other end; he was on the last stretch.

Then suddenly he paused. He lifted his head, caught with his eye a pink, round cloud that sailed
against the evening blue beyond the window, heard the harpist, heard his father turn and exclaim,
as he saw him.

He knew, as he stood there, that at last the moment had come. His friend had returned.

All the room was buzzing with it. The dolls fell in a neglected heap, the train on the carpet,
the fire behind the fender, the reels of cotton that were on the table--they all knew it.

His friend had returned.

His impulse was, there and then, to sit down.

His friend was whispering: "Come along!... Come along!... Come along!" He knew that, on his
surrender, his father would make sounds like, "Well, old man, tired, eh? Bed, I suggest." He
knew that bed would follow. Then darkness, then his friend.

For an instant there was fierce battle between the old forces and the new. Then, with his eyes
upon his father, resuming that hiss that is proper only to ostlers, he continued his march.

He reached the wall. He caught his father's leg. He was raised on to his father's lap, was
kissed, was for a moment triumphant; then suddenly burst into tears.

"Why, old man, what's the matter?"

But Ernest Henry could not explain. Had he but known it he had, in that rejection of his friend,
completed the first stage of his "Pilgrimage from this world to the next."

CHAPTER III

ANGELINA

I

Angelina Braid, on the morning of her third birthday, woke very early. It would be too much
to say that she knew it was her birthday, but she awoke, excited. She looked at the glimmering
room, heard the sparrows beyond her windows, heard the snoring of her nurse in the large bed
opposite her own, and lay very still, with her heart thumping like anything. She made no noise,
however, because it was not her way to make a noise. Angelina Braid was the quietest little
girl in all the Square. "You'd never meet one nigher a mouse in a week of Sundays," said her
nurse, who was a "gay one" and liked life.

It was not, however, entirely Angelina's fault that she took life quietly; in 21 March Square,
it was exceedingly difficult to do anything else. Angelina's parents were in India, and she
was not conscious, very acutely, of their existence. Every morning and evening she prayed,
"God bless mother and father in India," but then she was not very acutely conscious of God
either, and so her mind was apt to wander during her prayers.

She lived with her two aunts--Miss Emmy Braid and Miss Violet Braid--in the smallest house
in the Square. So slim was No. 21, and so ruthlessly squeezed between the opulent No. 20 and
the stout ruddy-faced No. 22, that it made one quite breathless to look at it; it was exactly
as though an old maid, driven by suffragette wildness, had been arrested by two of the finest
possible policemen, and carried off into custody. Very little of any kind of wildness was there
about the Misses Braid. They were slim, neat women, whose rather yellow faces had the flat,
squashed look of lawn grass after a garden roller has passed over it. They believed in God
according to the Reverend Stephen Hunt, of St. Matthew-in-the-Crescent--the church round the
corner--but in no other kind of God whatever. They were not rich, and they were not poor; they
went once a week--Fridays--to visit the poor of St. Matthew's, and found the poor of St. Matthew's
on the whole unappreciative of their efforts, but that made their task the nobler. Their house
was dark and musty, and filled with little articles left them by their grand-parents, their
parents, and other defunct relations. They had no friendly feeling towards one another, but
missed one another when they were separated. They were, both of them, as strong as horses,
but very hypochondriacal, and Dr. Armstrong of Mulberry Place made a very pleasant little income
out of them.

I have mentioned them at length, because they had a great deal to do with Angelina's quiet
behaviour. No. 21 was not a house that welcomed a child's ringing laughter. But, in any case,
the Misses Braid were not fond of children, but only took Angelina because they had a soft
spot in their dry hearts for their brother Jim, and in any case it would have been difficult
to say no.

Their attitude to children was that they could not understand why they did not instantly see
things as they, their elders, saw them; but then, on the other hand, if an especially bright
child did take a grown-up point of view about anything that was considered "forward" and "conceited,"
so that it was really very difficult for Angelina.

"It's a pity Jim's got such a dull child," Miss Violet would say. "You never would have expected
it."

"What I like about a child," said Miss Emmy, "is a little cheerfulness and natural spirit--not
all this moping."

Angelina was not, on the whole, popular.... The aunts had very little idea of making a house
cheerful for a child. The room allotted to Angelina as a nursery was at the top of the house,
and had once been a servant's bedroom. It possessed two rather grimy windows, a faded brown
wallpaper, an old green carpet, and some very stiff, hard chairs. On one wall was a large map
of the world, and on the other an old print of Romans sacking Jerusalem, a picture which frightened
Angelina every night of her life, when the dark came and the lamp illuminated the writhing
limbs, the falling bodies, the tottering walls. From the windows the Square was visible, and
at the windows Angelina spent a great deal of her time, but her present nurse--nurses succeeded
one another with startling frequency--objected to what she called "window-gazing." "Makes a
child dreamy," she said; "lowers her spirits."

Angelina was, naturally, a dreamy child, and no amount of nurses could prevent her being one.
She was dreamy because her loneliness forced her to be so, and if her dreams were the most
real part of her day to her that was surely the faults of her aunts. But she was not at all
a quick child; although to-day was her third birthday she could not talk very well, could not
pronounce her r's, and lisped in what her trail of nurses told her was a ridiculous fashion
for so big a girl. But, then, she was not really a big girl; her figure was short and stumpy,
her features plain and pale with the pallor of her first Indian year. Her eyes were large and
black and rather fine.

On this morning she lay in bed, and knew that she was excited because her friend had come the
night before and told her that to-day would be an important day. Angelina clung, with a desperate
tenacity, to her memories of everything that happened to her before her arrival on this unpleasant
planet. Those memories now were growing faint, and they came to her only in flashes, in sudden
twists and turns of the scene, as though she were surrounded by curtains and, every now and
then, was allowed a peep through. Her friend had been with her continually at first, and, whilst
he had been there, the old life had been real and visible enough; but on her second birthday
he had told her that it was right now that she should manage by herself. Since then, he had
come when she least expected him; sometimes when she had needed him very badly he had not appeared....
She never knew. At any rate, he had said that to-day would be important.... She lay in bed,
listening to her nurse's snores, and waited.

II

At breakfast she knew that it was her birthday. There were presents from her aunts--a picture-book
and a box of pencils--there was also a mysterious parcel. Angelina could not remember that
she had ever had a parcel before, and the excitement of this one must be prolonged. She would
not open it, but gazed at it, with her spoon in the air and her mouth wide open.

"Come, Miss Angelina--what a name to give the poor lamb!--get on with your breakfast now, or
you'll never have done. Why not open the pretty parcel?"

"No. Do you think it is a twain?"

"Say train--not twain."

"Train."

"No, of course not; not a thing that shape."

"Oh! Do you think it's a bear?"

"Maybe--maybe. Come now, get on with your bread and butter."

"Don't want any more."

"Get down from your chair, then. Say your grace now."

"Thank God nice bweakfast, Amen."

"That's right! Now open it, then."

"No, not now."

"Drat the child! Well, wipe your face, then."

Angelina carried her parcel to the window, and then, after gazing at it for a long time, at
last opened it. Her eyes grew wider and wider, her chubby fingers trembled. Nurse undid the
wrappings of paper, slowly folded up the sheets, then produced, all naked and unashamed, a
large rag doll.

"There! There's a pretty thing for you, Miss 'Lina."

She had her hand about the doll's head, and held her there, suspended.

"Give her me! Give her me!" Angelina rescued her, and, with eyes flaming, the doll laid lengthways
in her arms, tottered off to the other corner of the room.

"Well, there's gratitude," said the nurse, "and never asking so much as who it's from."

But nurse, aunts, all the troubles and disappointments of this world had vanished from Angelina's
heart and soul. She had seen, at that first glimpse that her nurse had so rudely given her,
that here at last, after long, long waiting, was the blessing that she had so desired. She
had had other dolls--quite a number of them. Even now Lizzie (without an eye) and Rachel (rather
fine in bridesmaid's attire) were leaning their disconsolate backs against the boarding beneath
the window seat. There had been, besides Rachel and Lizzie, two Annies, a Mary, a May, a Blackamoor,
a Jap, a Sailor, and a Baby in a Bath. They were now as though they had never been; Angelina
knew with absolute certainty of soul, with that blending of will and desire, passion, self-sacrifice
and absence of humour that must inevitably accompany true love that here was her Fate.

"It's been sent you by your kind Uncle Teny," said nurse. "You'll have to write a nice letter
and thank him."

       *       *       *       *       *

But Angelina knew better. She--a name had not yet been chosen--had been sent to her by her
friend.... He had promised her last night that this should be a day of days.

Her aunts, appearing to receive thanks where thanks were due, darkened the doorway.

"Good-morning, mum. Good-morning, mum. Now, Miss 'Lina, thank your kind aunties for their beautiful
presents."

She stood up, clutching the doll.

"T'ank you, Auntie Vi'let; t'ank you, Auntie Em'ly--your lovely pwesents."

"That's right, Angelina. I hope you'll use them sensibly. What's that she's holding, nurse?"

"It's a doll Mr. Edward's sent her, mum."

"What a hideous creature! Edward might have chosen something---- Time for her to go out, nurse,
I think--now, while the sun's warm."

But she did not hear. She did not know that they had gone. She sat there in a dreamy ecstasy
rocking the red-cheeked creature in her arms, seeing, with her black eyes, visions and the
beauty of a thousand worlds.

III

The name Rose was given to her. Rose had been kept, as a name, until some one worthy should
arrive.... "Wosie Bwaid," a very good name. Her nakedness was clothed first in Rachel's bridesmaid's
attire--alas! poor Rachel!--but the lace and finery did not suit those flaming red cheeks and
beady black eyes. Rose was, there could be no question, a daughter of the soil; good red blood
ran through her stout veins. Tess of the countryside, your laughing, chaffing, arms-akimbo
dairymaid; no poor white product of the over-civilised cities. Angelina felt that the satin
and lace were wrong; she tore them off, searched in the heaped-up cupboard for poor neglected
Annie No. 1, found her, tore from her her red woollen skirt and white blouse, stretched them
about Rose's portly body.

"T'ank God for nice Wose, Amen," she said, but she meant, not God, but her friend. He, her
friend, had never sent her anything before, and now that Rose had come straight from him, she
must have a great deal to tell her about him. Nothing puzzled her more than the distressing
fact that she wondered sometimes whether her friend was ever really coming again, whether any
of the wonderful things that were happening on every side of her wouldn't suddenly one fine
morning vanish altogether, and leave her to a dreary world of nurse, bread and milk, and the
Romans sacking Jerusalem. She didn't, of course, put it like that; all that it meant to her
was that stupid people and tiresome things were always interfering between herself and real
fun. Now it was time to go out, now to go to bed, now to eat, now to be taken downstairs into
that horrid room where she couldn't move because things would tumble off the tables so ...
all this prevented her own life when she would sit and try, and try, and remember what it was
all like once, and wonder why when once things had been so beautiful they were so ugly and
disappointing now.

Now Rose had come, and she could talk to Rose about it. "What she sees in that ugly old doll!"
said the nurse to the housemaid. "You can take my word, Mary, she'll sit in that window looking
down at the gardens, nursing that rag and just say nothing. It fair gives you the creeps ...
left too much to herself, the poor child is. As for those old women downstairs, if I 'ad my
way--but there! Living's living, and bread and butter's bread and butter!"

But, of course, Angelina's heart was bursting with affection, and there had been, until Rose's
arrival, no one upon whom she might bestow it. Rose might seem to the ordinary observer somewhat
unresponsive. She sat there, whether it were tea-time, dressing-time, bed-time, always staring
in front of her, her mouth closed, her arms, bow-shaped, standing stiffly away from her side,
taking, it might seem, but little interest in her mistress's confidences. Did one give her
tea she only dribbled at the lip; did one place upon her head a straw hat with red ribbon torn
from poor May--once a reigning favourite--she made no effort to keep it upon her head. Jewels
and gold could rouse no appreciation from her; she was sunk in a lethargy that her rose-red
cheeks most shamefully belied.

But Angelina had the key to her. Angelina understood that confiding silence, appreciated that
tactful discretion, adored that complete submission to her will. It was true that her friend
had only come once to her now within the space of many, many weeks, but he had sent her Rose.
"He's coming soon, Wose--weally soon--to tell us stowies. Bu-ootiful ones."

She sat, gazing down into the Square, and her dreams were longer and longer and longer.

IV

Miss Emily Braid was a softer creature than her sister, and she had, somewhere in her heart,
some sort of affection for her niece. She made, now and then, little buccaneering raids upon
the nursery, with the intention of arriving at some intimate terms with that strange animal.
But she had no gift of ease with children; her attempts at friendliness were viewed by Angelina
with the gravest suspicion and won no return. This annoyed Miss Emily, and because she was
conscious that she herself was in reality to blame, she attacked Angelina all the more fiercely.
"This brooding must be stopped," she said. "Really, it's most unhealthy."

It was quite impossible for her to believe that a child of three could really be interested
by golden sunsets, the colours of the fountain that was in the centre of the gardens, the soft,
grey haze that clothed the houses on a spring evening; and when, therefore, she saw Angelina
gazing at these things, she decided that the child was morbid. Any interest, however, that
Angelina may have taken in her aunts before Rose's arrival was now reduced to less than nothing
at all.

"That doll that Edward gave the child," said Miss Emily to her sister, "is having a very bad
effect on her. Makes her more moody than ever."

"Such a hideous thing!" said Miss Violet. "Well, I shall take it away if I see much more of
this nonsense."

It was lucky for Rose meanwhile that she was of a healthy constitution. The meals, the dressing
and undressing, the perpetual demands upon her undivided attention, the sudden rousings from
her sleep, the swift rockings back into slumber again, the appeals for response, the abuses
for indifference, these things would have slain within a week one of her more feeble sisters.
But Rose was made of stern stuff, and her rosy cheeks were as rosy, the brightness of her eyes
was undimmed. We may believe--and surely many harder demands are made upon our faith--that
there did arise a very special relationship between these two. The whole of Angelina's heart
was now devoted to Rose's service, Rose's was not devoted to Angelina?... And always Angelina
wondered when her friend would return, watched for him in the dusk, awoke in the early mornings
and listened for him, searched the Square with its trees and its fountain for his presence.

"Wosie, when did he say he'd come next?" But Rose could not tell. There were times when Rose's
impenetrability was, to put it at its mildest, aggravating.

Meanwhile, the situation with Aunt Emily grew serious. Angelina was aware that Aunt Emily disliked
Rose, and her mouth now shut very tightly and her eyes glared defiance when she thought of
this, but her difference with her aunt went more deeply than this. She had known for a long,
long time that both her aunts would stop her "dreaming" if they could. Did she tell them about
her friend, about the kind of pictures of which the fountain reminded her, about the vivid,
lively memories that the tree with the pink flowers--the almond tree--in the corner of the
gardens--you could just see it from the nursery window--called to her mind; she knew that she
would be punished--put in the corner, or even sent to bed. She did not think these things out
consecutively in her mind, but she knew that the dark room downstairs, the dark passages, the
stillness and silence of it all frightened her, and that it was always out of these things
that her aunts rose.

At night when she lay in bed with Rosie clasped tightly to her, she whispered endlessly about
the gardens, the fountain, the barrel organs, the dogs, the other children in the Square--she
had names of her own for all these things--and him, who belonged, of course, to the world outside....
Then her whisper would sink, and she would warn Rose about the rooms downstairs, the dining-room
with the black chairs, the soft carpet, and the stuffed birds in glass cases--for these things,
too, she had names. Here was the hand of death and destruction, the land of crooked stairs,
sudden dark doors, mysterious bells and drippings of water--out of all this her aunts came....

Unfortunately it was just at this moment that Miss Emily Braid decided that it was time to
take her niece in hand. "The child's three, Violet, and very backward for her age. Why, Mrs.
Mancaster's little girl, who's just Angelina's age, can talk fluently, and is beginning with
her letters. We don't want Jim to be disappointed in the child when he comes home next year."
It would be difficult to determine how much of this was true; Miss Emily was aggravated and,
although she would never have confessed to so trivial a matter, the perpetual worship of Rose--"the
ugliest thing you ever saw"--was irritating her. The days followed, then, when Angelina was
constantly in her aunt's company, and to neither of them was this companionship pleasant.

"You must ask me questions, child. How are you ever going to learn to talk properly if you
don't ask me questions?"

"Yes, auntie."

"What's that over there?"

"Twee."

"Say tree, not twee."

"Tree."

"Now look at me. Put that wretched doll down.... Now.... That's right. Now tell me what you've
been doing this morning."

"We had bweakfast--nurse said I--(long pause for breath)--was dood girl; Auntie Vi'let came;
I dwew with my pencil."

"Say 'drew,' not 'dwew.'"

"Drew."

All this was very exhausting to Aunt Emily. She was no nearer the child's heart.... Angelina
maintained an impenetrable reserve. Old maids have much time amongst the unsatisfied and sterile
monotonies of their life--this is only true of some old maids; there are very delightful ones--to
devote to fancies and microscopic imitations. It was astonishing now how largely in Miss Emily
Braid's life loomed the figure of Rose, the rag doll.

"If it weren't for that wretched doll, I believe one could get some sense out of the child."

"I think it's a mistake, nurse, to let Miss Angelina play with that doll so much."

"Well, mum, it'd be difficult to take it from her now. She's that wrapped in it." ... And so
she was.... Rose stood to Angelina for so much more than Rose.

"Oh, Wosie, when will he come again.... P'r'aps never. And I'm forgetting. I can't remember
at all about the funny water and the twee with the flowers, and all of it. Wosie, you 'member--Whisper."
And Rose offered in her own mysterious, taciturn way the desired comfort.

And then, of course, the crisis arrived. I am sorry about this part of the story. Of all the
invasions of Aunt Emily, perhaps none were more strongly resented by Angelina than the appropriation
of the afternoon hour in the gardens. Nurse had been an admirable escort because, as a lady
of voracious appetite for life with, at the moment, but slender opportunities for satisfying
it, she was occupied alertly with the possible vision of any male person driven by a similar
desire. Her eye wandered; the hand to which Angelina clung was an abstract, imperceptive hand--Angelina
and Rose were free to pursue their own train of fancy--the garden was at their service. But
with Aunt Emily how different! Aunt Emily pursued relentlessly her educational tactics. Her
thin, damp, black glove gripped Angelina's hand; her eyes (they had a "peering" effect, as
though they were always searching for something beyond their actual vision) wandered aimlessly
about the garden, looking for educational subjects. And so up and down the paths they went,
Angelina trotting, with Rose clasped to her breast, walking just a little faster than she conveniently
could.

Miss Emily disliked the gardens, and would have greatly preferred that nurse should have been
in charge, but this consciousness of trial inflamed her sense of merit. There came a lovely
spring afternoon; the almond tree was in full blossom; a cloud of pink against the green hedge,
clumps of daffodils rippled with little shudders of delight, even the statues of "Sir Benjamin
Bundle" and "General Sir Robinson Cleaver" seemed to unbend a little from their stiff angularity.
There were many babies and nurses, and children laughing and crying and shouting, and a sky
of mild forget-me-not blue smiled protectingly upon them. Angelina's eyes were fixed upon the
fountain, which flashed and sparkled in the air with a happy freedom that seemed to catch all
the life of the garden within its heart. Angelina felt how immensely she and Rose might have
enjoyed all this had they been alone. Her eyes gazed longingly at the almond tree; she wished
that she might go off on a voyage of discovery for, on this day of all days, did its shadow
seem to hold some pressing, intimate invitation. "I shall get back--I shall get back.... He'll
come and take me; I'll remember all the old things," she thought. She and Rose--what a time
they might have if only---- She glanced up at her aunt.

"Look at that nice little boy, Angelina," Aunt Emily said. "See how good----" But at that very
instant that same playful breeze that had been ruffling the daffodils, and sending shimmers
through the fountain decided that now was the moment to catch Miss Emily's black hat at one
corner, prove to her that the pin that should have fastened it to her hair was loose, and swing
the whole affair to one side. Up went her hands; she gave a little cry of dismay.

Instantly, then, Angelina was determined. She did not suppose that her freedom would be for
long, nor did she hope to have time to reach the almond tree; but her small, stumpy legs started
off down the path almost before she was aware of it. She started, and Rose bumped against her
as she ran. She heard behind her cries; she saw in front of her the almond tree, and then coming
swiftly towards her a small boy with a hoop.... She stopped, hesitated, and then fell. The
golden afternoon, with all its scents and sounds, passed on above her head. She was conscious
that a hand was on her shoulder, she was lifted and shaken. Tears trickling down the side of
her nose were checked by little points of gravel. She was aware that the little boy with the
hoop had stopped and said something. Above her, very large and grim, was her aunt. Some bird
on a tree was making a noise like the drawing of a cork. (She had heard her nurse once draw
one.) In her heart was utter misery. The gravel hurt her face, the almond tree was farther
away than ever; she was captured more completely than she had ever been before.

"Oh, you naughty little girl--you naughty girl," she heard her aunt say; and then, after her,
the bird like a cork. She stood there, her mouth tightly shut, the marks of tears drying to
muddy lines on her face.

She was dragged off. Aunt Emily was furious at the child's silence; Aunt Emily was also aware
that she must have looked what she would call "a pretty figure of fun" with her hat askew,
her hair blown "anyway," and a small child of three escaping from her charge as fast as she
could go.

Angelina was dragged across the street, in through the squeezed front door, over the dark stairs,
up into the nursery. Miss Violet's voice was heard calling, "Is that you, Emily? Tea's been
waiting some time."

It was nurse's afternoon out, and the nursery was grimly empty; but through the open, window
came the evening sounds of the happy Square. Miss Emily placed Angelina in the middle of the
room. "Now say you're sorry, you wicked child!" she exclaimed breathlessly.

"Sowwy," came slowly from Angelina. Then she looked down at her doll.

"Leave that doll alone. Speak as though you were sorry."

"I'm velly sowwy."

"What made you run away like that?" Angelina said nothing. "Come, now! Didn't you know it was
very wicked?"

"Yes."

"Well, why did you do it, then?"

"Don't know."

"Don't say 'don't know' like that. You must have had some reason. Don't look at the doll like
that. Put the doll down." But this Angelina would not do. She clung to Rose with a ferocious
tenacity. I do not think that one must blame Miss Emily for her exasperation. That doll had
had a large place in her mind for many weeks. It were as though she, Miss Emily Braid, had
been personally, before the world, defied by a rag doll. Her temper, whose control had never
been her strongest quality, at the vision of the dirty, obstinate child before her, at the
thought of the dancing, mocking gardens behind her, flamed into sudden, trembling rage.

She stepped forward, snatched Rose from Angelina's arms, crossed the room and had pushed the
doll, with a fierce, energetic action, as though there was no possible time to be lost, into
the fire. She snatched the poker, and with trembling hands pressed the doll down. There was
a great flare of flame; Rose lifted one stolid arm to the gods for vengeance, then a stout
leg in a last writhing agony. Only then, when it was all concluded, did Aunt Emily hear behind
her the little half-strangled cry which made her turn. The child was standing, motionless,
with so old, so desperate a gaze of despair that it was something indecent for any human being
to watch.

V

Nurse came in from her afternoon. She had heard nothing of the recent catastrophe, and, as
she saw Angelina sitting quietly in front of the fire she thought that she had had her tea,
and was now "dreaming" as she so often did. Once, however, as she was busy in another part
of the room, she caught half the face in the light of the fire. To any one of a more perceptive
nature that glimpse must have seemed one of the most tragic things in the world. But this was
a woman of "a sensible, hearty" nature; moreover, her "afternoon" had left her with happy reminiscences
of her own charms and their effect on the opposite sex.

She had, however, her moment.... She had left the room to fetch something. Returning she noticed
that the dusk had fallen, and was about to switch on the light when, in the rise and fall of
the firelight, something that she saw made her pause. She stood motionless by the door.

Angelina had turned in her chair; her eyes were gazing, with rapt attention, toward the purple
dusk by the window. She was listening. Nurse, as she had often assured her friends, "was not
cursed with imagination," but now fear held her so that she could not stir nor move save that
her hand trembled against the wall paper. The chatter of the fire, the shouts of some boys
in the Square, the ringing of the bell of St. Matthew's for evensong, all these things came
into the room. Angelina, still listening, at last smiled; then, with a little sigh, sat back
in her chair.

"Heavens! Miss 'Lina! What were you doing there? How you frightened me!" Angelina left her
chair, and went across to the window. "Auntie Emily," she said, "put Wosie into the fire, she
did. But Wosie's saved.... He's just come and told me."

"Lord, Miss 'Lina, how you talk!" The room was right again now just as, a moment before, it
had been wrong. She switched on the electric light, and, in the sudden blaze, caught the last
flicker in the child's eyes of some vision, caught, held, now surrendered.

"'Tis company she's wanting, poor lamb," she thought, "all this being alone.... Fair gives
one the creeps."

She heard with relief the opening of the door. Miss Emily came in, hesitated a moment, then
walked over to her niece. In her hands she carried a beautiful doll with flaxen hair, long
white robes, and the assured confidence of one who is spotless and knows it.

"There, Angelina," she said. "I oughtn't to have burnt your doll. I'm sorry. Here's a beautiful
new one."

Angelina took the spotless one; then with a little thrust of her hand she pushed the half-open
window wider apart. Very deliberately she dropped the doll (at whose beauty she had not glanced)
out, away, down into the Square. 

But theft such as white men practice was a puzzle to these people, amongst whom it was unknown.

The
most noticeable feature of the scrip issue was the never-ending stream
of applicants, a surprising evidence of the growth of population in
this remote wilderness.

Its most interesting feature lay in the peculiarities and manners
of the people themselves.

They were unquestionably half-breeds, and had received Christian
names, and most of them had houses of their own, and, though hunters,
fishermen and trippers, their families lived comparatively settled
lives.

Yet the glorious instinct of the Indian haunted them.

As a rule they had been born on the "pitching-track," in the forest,
or on the prairies--in all sorts of places, they could not say exactly
where--and when they were born was often a matter of doubt as well.

[With reference to these nondescript birthplaces, the wonderful ease of parturition among
Indian women may be referred to here. This is common, probably, to all primitive races, but is perhaps
more marked amongst Indian mothers than any other. The event may happen in a canoe, on the trail,
at any place, or at any moment, without hindering the ordinary progress of a travelling party,
which is generally overtaken by the mother in a few hours.

But nothing I heard here equalled in grotesque circumstances occurrences, whose truth I can vouch
for, many years ago on the Saskatchewan River. In 1874, if I remember aright, a great spring
freshet in the North Branch was accompanied by a tremendous ice-jam, which backed the water up,
and flooded the river bank so suddenly that many Indians were drowned. On an island below Prince
Albert, a woman, to save her life, had to climb a neighbouring tree, and gave birth to a child
amongst the branches. The jam broke, and, wonderful to say, both mother and child got down
to firm ground alive. Another case, even more gruesome, happened on the Lower Saskatchewan
not so many years ago. A woman and her husband were hastening on snowshoes from their winter camp
to the river, in order to share in the usual Christmas bounty and festivities at the Hudson's Bay
Company's post. The woman was seized with incipient labour, and darting from her husband, with
whom she had been quarrelling on the way, pushed on, and, in a frozen marsh, amongst bulrushes,
on a bitterly cold night, was delivered of a child. Grumous as she was, she picked herself
up, and, with incredible nerve, walked ten miles to the Pas, carrying her live infant with her,
wrapped in a rabbit-skin robe.] It was not in February, but in Meeksuo
pésim, "The month when the eagles return"; not in August, but in Oghpáho
pésim, "The month when birds begin to fly."

When called upon they could give their Christian names and answer to William or Magloire, to
Mary or Madaline, but, in spite of priest or parson, their home name was a Cree one. In many
cases the white forefather's name had been dropped or forgotten, and a Cree surname had taken
its place, as, for example, in the name Louis Maskegósis, or Madeline Noóskeyah. Some of the Cree
names were in their meaning simply grotesque. Mishoóstiquan meant "The man who stands with
the red hair"; Waupunékapow, "He who stands till morning." One of the applicants was Kanawatchaguáyo,
or "The ghost-keeper."

[It may be mentioned here that this half-breed's "inner" name, so to speak, meant "The Ghost-Keeper,"
for the name he gave, following an Indian usage, was not the real one. Kanawatchaguáyo was the
one given by the interpreter, but accompanied by the translation of the inner name, to wit, "The
Ghost-Keeper." This curious custom is more fully referred to in a forthcoming work on Indian folk-lore,
traditions, legends, usages, methods and manner of life, etc., by Mrs. F. H. Paget, of Ottawa.
This lady is an expert Cree scholar, and her work, which I have had the pleasure of hearing her
read, is the result of diligent research and of ample knowledge of Indian life and character.]

But
others were strikingly poetical, particularly the female names. Payúcko geesigo, "One in the
Skies"; Pesawakoona kapesisk, "The silent snow in falling forming signs or symbols"; Matyatse wunoguayo,
or rather, for this is a doubtful name, Powástia ka nunaghquánetungh,
"Listener to the unseen rapids"; Kese koo ápeoo, "She sits in heaven,"
were all the names of applicants for scrips, and many others could
be added of like tenor.

In a word, the Christian or baptismal names have not displaced the
native ones, as they did in Wales and elsewhere, and amongst some
of our far Eastern Indians.

But there were terrifying and repulsive names as well, such as Sese kenápik kaow apeoo, "She
sits like a rattle-snake"; and one individual rejoiced in the appalling surname of "Grand Bastard."
These instances serve to illustrate the tendency of half-breed nomenclature at the lake towards
the mother's side. Here, too, there was no reserve in giving the family name; it was given at
once when asked for, and there was no shyness otherwise in demeanour. There was a readiness,
for example, to be photographed which was quite distinctive. In this connection it may interest
the reader to recall some of the names of girls given by the same race thousands of miles away
in the East. Take those recorded by Mrs. Jameson ["Winter Studies and Summer Rambles," 1835.] during
her visit to Mrs. McMurray and the Schoolcrafts, on the Island of Mackinac, over seventy years
ago: Oba baumwawa geezegoquay, "The Sounds which the stars make rushing
through the skies"; Zaga see goquay, "Sunbeams breaking through a
cloud"; Wah́sagewanoquay, "Woman of the bright foam."

The people so far apart, yet their home names so similarly figurative! The education of the Red Indian
lies in his intimate contact with nature in all her phases--a good education truly, which
serves him well. But, awe-struck always by the mysterious beauty of the world around him, his
mind reflects it instinctively in his Nature-worship and his system of names.

In speaking of the "Lakers" I refer, of course, to the primitive people of the region, and not to
half-breed incomers from Manitoba or elsewhere. There were a few patriarchal families into
which all the others seemed to dovetail in some shape or form. The Noóskeyah family was one
of these, also the Gladu, the Cowitoreille, [A corruption, no doubt, of "Courtoreille."] and the
Calahaisen. The collateral branches of these families constituted the main portion of the native
population, and yet inbreeding did not seem to have deteriorated the stock, for a healthier-looking
lot of young men, women and children it would be hard to find, or one more free from scrofula.
There were instances, too, among these people, of extreme old age; one in particular which from confirmatory
evidence, particularly the declarations of descendants, seemed quite authentic. This was a woman called
Catherine Bisson--the daughter of Baptiste Bisson and an Indian woman
called Iskwao--who was born on New Year's Day, 1793, at Lesser Slave
Lake, and had spent all her life there since.

She had a numerous progeny which she bore to Kisiśkakápo, "The man who stands still." She was now
blind, and was partly led, partly carried into our tent--a small, thin, wizened woman, with
keen features and a tongue as keen, which cackled and joked at a
great rate with the crowd around her.

It was almost awesome to look at this weird piece of antiquity, who was born in the Reign
of Terror, and was a young woman before the war of 1812. She was quite lively yet, so far as
her wits went, and seemed likely to go on living. [This very old woman died, I believe, at
Lesser Slave Lake only last spring (1908).

The date of her birth was correct, and we had good reason to believe it, she must have been
far over 100 years old when she died.]

There were many good points in the disposition of the "Lakers" generally,
both young and old.

Their kindness and courtesy to strangers and to each other was marked,
and profanity was unknown.

Indeed, if one heard bad language at all it was from the lips of some Yankee or Canadian teamster,
airing his superior knowledge of the world amongst the natives.

The place, in fact, surprised one--no end of buggies, buckboards and
saddles, and brightly dressed women, after a not altogether antique
fashion; the men, too, orderly, civil, and obliging.

Infants were generally tucked into the comfortable moss-bag, but
boys three or four years old were seen tugging at their mothers' breasts,
and all fat and generally good-looking.

The whole community seemed well fed, and were certainly well clad--some
girls extravagantly so, the love of finery being the ruling trait
here as elsewhere.

One lost, indeed, all sense of remoteness, there was such a well-to-do,
familiar air about the scene, and such a bustle of clean-looking people.

How all this could be supported by fur it was difficult to see, but
it must have been so, for there was, as yet, little or no farming
amongst the old "Lakers."

It was, of course, a great fur country, and though the fur-bearing
animals were sensibly diminishing, yet the prices of peltries had
risen by competition, whilst supplies had been correspondingly cheapened.

It was a good marten country, and, as this fur was the fad of fashion,
and brought an extravagant price, the animal, like the beaver, was
threatened with extinction, the more so as the rabbits were then in
their period of scarcity.

There were other aspects of Lake life which there is neither space nor inclination to describe.
If some features of "advanced civilization" had been anticipated there, it was simply another
proof that extremes meet.

Whatever else was hidden, however, there was one thing omnipresent, namely, the mongrel dog. It
was hopeless to explore the origin of an animal which seemed to draw
from all sources, including the wolf and fox, and whose appetite stopped
at nothing, but attacked old shirts, trousers, dunnage-bags, fry-pans,
and even the outfit of a geologist, to appease the sacred rage of
hunger.

It was believed that over a thousand of these dogs, mainly used in
winter to haul fish, surrounded our tent, and when it is said that
an ordinary half-breed family harboured from fifteen to twenty of
the tribe, there is no exaggeration in the estimate.

They were of all shapes, sizes and colours, and, though very civil
to man, from whom they got nothing but kicks and stones, they kept
up a constant row amongst themselves.

To see a scrimmage of fifty or sixty of them on land or in the water,
where they went daily to fish, was a scene to be remembered.

They did not bark, but loped through the woods, which were the camp's
latrines, as scavengers by day, and howled in unison at regular intervals
by night; for there was a sort of horrible harmony in the performance,
and when the tom-toms of the gamblers accompanied it on all sides,
and the pounding of dancers' feet--for in this enchanted land nobody
ever seemed to go to bed--the saturnalia was complete.

It was indeed a gala time for the happy-go-lucky Lakers, and the effects
of the issue and sale of scrip certificates were soon manifest in
our neighbourhood.

The traders' booths were thronged with purchasers, also the refreshment
tents where cigars and ginger ale were sold; and, in tepees improvised
from aspen saplings, the sporting element passed the night at some
interesting but easy way of losing money, illuminating their game
with guttering candles, minus candlesticks, and presenting a picture
worthy of an impressionist's pencil.

But the two dancing floors were the chief attraction. These also had been walled and roofed with
leafy saplings, their fronts open to the air, and, thronged as they generally were, well repaid
a visit. Here the comely brunettes, in moccasins or slippers, their luxuriant hair falling in a braided
queue behind their backs, served not only as tireless partners, but as foils to the young men,
who were one and all consummate masters of step-dancing, an art which, I am glad to say, was
still in vogue in these remote parts.

"French-fours" and the immortal "Red River Jig" were repeated again and again, and, though a tall
and handsome young half-breed, who had learned in Edmonton, probably, the airs and graces of
the polite world, introduced cotillions and gave "the calls" with
vigorous precision, yet his efforts were not thoroughly successful.

Snarls arose, and knots and confusion, which he did his best to undo.

But it was evident that the hearts of the dancers were not in it.

No sooner was the fiddler heard lowering his strings for the time-honoured "Jig" than eyes
brightened, and feet began to beat the floor, including, of course, those of the fiddler himself,
who put his whole soul into that weird and wonderful melody, whose fantastic glee is so strangely
blended with an indescribable master-note of sadness. The dance itself is nothing; it might as well
be called a Rigadoon or a Sailor's Hornpipe, so far as the steps go. The tune is everything;
it is amongst the immortals. Who composed it?

Did it come from Normandy, the ancestral home of so many French Canadians and of French Canadian
song? Or did some lonely but inspired voyageur, on the banks of Red River, sighing for Detroit
or Trois Rivières--for the joys and sorrows of home--give birth to its mingled chords in the
far, wild past?

As I looked on, many memories recurred to me of scenes like this in which I had myself taken
part in bygone days--Eheu! fugaces--in old Red River and the Saskatchewan; and, with these in
my heart, I retired to my tent, and gradually fell asleep to the monotonous sound of the familiar
yet inexplicable air.

Chapter V

Resources Of Lesser Slave Lake Region.

It was expected that the sergeant of the Mounted Police stationed at the Lake would have set
out by boat on the 3rd for Athabasca Landing, taking with him the witnesses in the Weeghteko
case--a case not common amongst the Lesser Slave Lake Indians, but which was said to be on
the increase. One Pahaýo--"The Pheasant"--had gone mad and threatened to kill and eat people.
Of course, this was attributed by his tribe to the Weeghteko, by
which he was believed to be possessed, a cannibal spirit who inhabits
the human heart in the form of a lump of ice, which must be got rid
of by immersion of the victim in boiling water, or by pouring boiling
fat down his throat.

This failing, they destroy the man-eater, rip him up to let out the evil spirit, cut off his
head, and then pin his four quarters to the ground, all of which was done by his tribe in
the case of Pahaýo. Napesósus--"The Little Man"--struck the first blow, Moośtoos followed, and
the poor lunatic was soon dispatched.

Arrests were ultimately made, and a boatload of witnesses was about to leave for Athabasca
Landing, en route to attend the trial at Edmonton, the first of its kind, I think, on record.

There
can be no doubt that such slayings are effected to safeguard the tribe. Indians have no asylums,
and, in order to get a dangerous lunatic out of the way, can only kill him. There would therefore be
no hangings. But, now that the Indians and ourselves were coming under treaty obligations,
it was necessary that an end should be put to such proceedings.

Yet the reader must not be too severe upon the Indian for his treatment of the Weeghteko. He
attributes the disease to the evil spirit, acts accordingly, and slays the victim. But an old
author, Mrs. Jameson, tells us that in her day in Upper Canada lunatics were allowed to stray
into the forest to roam uncared for, and perish there, or were thrust into common jails. One at
Niagara, she says, was chained up for four years.

Aside from such cases of madness, which have often resulted in the killing and eating of children,
etc., and which arouse the most superstitious horror in the minds of all Indians, the "savages"
of this region are the most inoffensive imaginable. They have always made a good living by
hunting and trapping and fishing, and I believe when the time comes they will adapt themselves
much more readily and intelligently to farming and stock-raising than did the Indians to the
south. The region is well suited to both industries, and will undoubtedly attract white settlers
in due time.

The fisheries in Lesser Slave Lake have always been counted the best in all Athabasca. The whitefish,
to be sure, are diminishing towards the head of the lake, but it is possible that this is owing
to some deficiency in their usual supply of food in that quarter. Just as birds and wild-fowl
return, if not disturbed, to their accustomed breeding-places, so,
it is said, the fishes, year by year, drop and impregnate their spawn
upon the same gravelly shallows.

The food of the whitefish in the lake is partly the worms bred from the eggs of a large fly resembling
the May-fly of the East.

This worm has probably decreased in the upper part of the lake, and therefore the fish go farther
down for food. There they are exceedingly numerous, an evidence of which is the fact that
the Roman Catholic Mission alone secured 17,000 fine whitefish the previous fall. Properly protected
this lake will be a permanent source of supply to natives and incomers for many years to come.

Stock-raising was already becoming a feature of the region.

Some three miles above the Heart River is Buffalo Lake, an enlargement of that stream, and
around and above this, as also along the Wyaweekamon, or "Passage
between the Lakes," are immense hay meadows, capable of winter feeding
thousands of cattle.

The view of these vast meadows from the Hudson's Bay post, or from the Roman Catholic Mission
close by, is magnificent.

These buildings are situated above Buffalo Lake, upon a lofty bank,
with the Heart River in the foreground; and the great meadows, threaded
by creeks and inlets, stretching for miles to the south of them, are
one of the finest sights of the kind in the country.

In the far south was the line of forest, and to the eastward a flat-topped
mountain, called by the Crees Waskahékum Kahassástakee-- "The House
Butte."

Near this mountain is the Swan River, which joins the Lesser Slave Lake below the Narrows, and upon
which, we were told, were rich and extensive prairies, and abundance of coal of a good quality.
To the west were the prairies of the Salt River, well watered by
creeks, with a large extent of good land now being settled on, and
where wheat ripens perfectly.

There are other available areas of open country on Prairie River, which enters Buffalo Lake at its
south-western end, and on which also there is coal, so that prairie
land is not entirely lacking.

Though emphatically now a region of forest, there is reason to believe that vast areas at present
under timber were once prairies, fed over by innumerable herds of
buffalo, whose paths and wallows can still be traced in the woods.

Indeed, very large trees are found growing right across those paths, and this fact, not to speak
of the recollections, or traditions, of very old people, points to
extensive prairies at one time rather than to an entirely wooded country.

Much

of the forest soil is excellent, and the land has only to be cleared
to furnish good farms.

Indeed, it needs no stretch of imagination to foresee in future years a continuous line of them
from Edmonton to the lake, along the three hundred miles of country
intersected by the trail laid out by the Territorial Government.

As for the wheat problem, it is not at all likely that the Roman Catholic Mission would put up
a flour mill, as they were then doing, if it was not a wheat country.

Bishop Clût assured me that potatoes in their garden reached three and a half pounds' weight
in some instances, and turnips twenty-five pounds.

The kind people of both this and the Church of England Mission generously
supplied our table with vegetables and salads, and we craved no better.

Chives, lettuce, radishes, cress and onions were full flavoured, fresh and delicious, and quite
as early as in Manitoba

.


The rest is his story. I cannot, as I have already said, vouch for the truth of it. At first,
fortune was on his side. There seemed to be no one about the house. He went down the wide staircase
without making any sound; in the hall he stopped for a moment because he heard voices, but
no one came. Then with both hands, and standing on tiptoe, he turned the lock of the door,
and was outside.

The Square was bathed in golden sun, a sun, the stronger for his concealment, but tempered,
too, with the fine gleam that the rain had left. Never before had Bim been outside that door
alone; he was aware that this was a very tremendous adventure. The sky was a washed and delicate
purple, and behold! on the high railings, a row of sparrows were chattering. Voices were cold
and clear, echoing, as it seemed, against the straight, grey walls of the houses, and all the
trees in the garden glistened with their wet leaves shining with gold; there seemed to be,
too, a dim veil of smoke that was homely and comfortable.

It is not usual to see a small boy of four alone in a London square, but Bim met, at first,
no one except a messenger boy, who stopped and looked after him. At the corner of the Square--just
out of the Square so that it might not shame its grandeur--was a fruit and flower shop, and
this shop was the entrance to a street that had much life and bustle about it. Here Bim paused
with his money-box clasped very tightly to him. Then he made a step or two and was instantly
engulfed, it seemed, in a perfect whirl of men and women, of carts and bicycles, of voices
and cries and screams; there were lights of every colour, and especially one far above his
head that came and disappeared and came again with terrifying wizardry.

He was, quite suddenly, and as it were, by the agency of some outside person, desperately frightened.
It was a new terror, different from anything that he had known before. It was as though a huge
giant had suddenly lifted him up by the seat of his breeches, or a witch had transplanted him
on to her broomstick and carried him off. It was as unusual as that.

His under lip began to quiver, and he knew that presently he would be crying. Then, as he always
did, when something unusual occurred to him, he thought of "Mr. Jack." At this point, when
you ask him what happened, he always says: "Oh! He came, you know--came walking along--like
he always did."

"Was he just like other people, Bim?"

"Yes, just. With a beard, you know--just like he always was."

"Yes, but what sort of things did he wear?" "Oh, just ord'nary things, like you." There was
no sense of excitement or wonder to be got out of him. It was true that Mr. Jack hadn't shown
himself for quite a long time, but that, Bim felt, was natural enough. "He'll come less and
seldomer and seldomer as you get big, you know. It was just at first, when one was very little
and didn't know one's way about--just to help babies not to be frightened. Timothy would tell
you only he won't. Then he comes only a little--just at special times like this was."

Bim told you this with a slightly bored air, as though it were silly of you not to know, and
really his air of certainty made an incredulous challenge a difficult thing. On the present
occasion Mr. Jack was just there, in the middle of the crowd, smiling and friendly. He took
Bim's hand, and, "Of course," Bim said, "there didn't have to be any 'splaining. He knew what
I wanted." True or not, I like to think of them, in the evening air, serenely safe and comfortable,
and in any case, it was surely strange that if, as one's common sense compels one to suppose,
Bim were all alone in that crowd, no one wondered or stopped him nor asked him where his home
was. At any rate, I have no opinions on the subject. Bim says that, at once, they found themselves
out of the crowd in a quiet, little "dinky" street, as he called it, a street that, in his
description of it, answered to nothing that I can remember in this part of the world. His account
of it seems to present a dark, rather narrow place, with overhanging roofs and swinging signs,
and nobody, he says, at all about, but a church with a bell, and outside one shop a row of
bright-coloured clothes hanging. At any rate, here Bim found the place that he wanted. There
was a little shop with steps down into it and a tinkling bell which made a tremendous noise
when you pushed the old oak door. Inside there was every sort of thing. Bim lost himself here
in the ecstasy of his description, lacking also names for many of the things that he saw. But
there was a whole suit of shining armour, and there were jewels, and old brass trays, and carpets,
and a crocodile, which Bim called a "crodocile." There was also a friendly old man with a white
beard, and over everything a lovely smell, which Bim said was like "roast potatoes" and "the
stuff mother has in a bottle in her bedwoom."

Bim could, of course, have stayed there for ever, but Mr. Jack reminded him of a possibly anxious
family. "There, is that what you're after?" he said, and, sure enough, there on a shelf, smiling
and eager to be bought, was a mug exactly like the one that Bim had broken.

There was then the business of paying for it, the money-box was produced and opened by the
old man with "a shining knife," and Bim was gravely informed that the money found in the box
was exactly the right amount. Bim had been, for a moment, in an agony of agitation lest he
should have too little, but as he told us, "There was all Uncle Alfred's Christmas money, and
what mother gave me for the tooth, and that silly lady with the green dress who would kiss
me." So, you see, there must have been an awful amount.

Then they went, Bim clasping his money-box in one hand and the mug in the other. The mug was
wrapped in beautiful blue paper that smelt, as we were all afterwards to testify, of dates
and spices. The crocodile flapped against the wall, the bell tinkled, and the shop was left
behind them. "Most at once," Bim said they were by the fruit shop again; he knew that Mr. Jack
was going, and he had a sudden most urgent longing to go with him, to stay with him, to be
with him always. He wanted to cry; he felt dreadfully unhappy, but all of his thanks, his strange
desires, that he could bring out was, in a quavering voice, trying hard, you understand, not
to cry, "Mr. Jack. Oh! Mr.----" and his friend was gone.

IV

He trotted home; with every step his pride increased. What would Lucy say? And dim, unrealised,
but forming, nevertheless, the basis for the whole of his triumph, was his consciousness that
she who had scoffed, derided, at his "Mr. Jack," should now so absolutely benefit by him. This
was bringing together, at last, the two of them.

His nurse, in a fine frenzy of agitation, met him. Her relief at his safety swallowed her anger.
She could only gasp at him. "Well, Master Bim, and a nice state---- Oh, dear! to think; wherever----"

On the doorstep he forced his nurse to pause, and, turning, looked at the gardens now in shadow
of spun gold, with the fountain blue as the sky. He nodded his head with satisfaction. It had
been a splendid time. It would be a very long while, he knew, before he was allowed out again
like that. Yes. He clasped the mug tightly, and the door closed behind him.

I don't know that there is anything more to say. There were the empty money-box and the mug.
There was Bim's unhesitating and unchangeable story. There is a shop, just behind the Square,
where they have some Russian crockery. But Bim alone!

I don't know.

CHAPTER V

NANCY ROSS

I

Mr. Munty Ross's house was certainly the smartest in March Square; No. 14, where the Duchess
of Crole lived, was shabby in comparison. Very often you may see a line of motor-cars and carriages
stretching down the Square, then round the corner into Lent Street, and you may know then--as,
indeed, all the Square did know and most carefully observed--that Mrs. Munty Boss was giving
another of her smart little parties. That dark-green door, that neat overhanging balcony, those
rows--in the summer months--of scarlet geraniums, that roll of carpet that ran, many times
a week, from the door over the pavement to the very foot of the waiting vehicle--these things
were Mrs. Munty Ross's.

Munty Ross--a silent, ugly, black little man--had had made his money in potted shrimps, or
something equally compact and indigestible, and it really was very nice to think that anything
in time could blossom out into beauty as striking as Mrs. Munty's lovely dresses, or melody
as wonderful as the voice of M. Radiziwill, the famous tenor, whom she often "turned on" at
her little evening parties. Upon Mr. Munty alone the shrimps seemed to have made no effect.
He was as black, as insignificant, as ugly as ever he had been in the days before he knew of
a shrimp's possibilities. He was very silent at his wife's parties, and sometimes dropped his
h's. What Mrs. Munty had been before her marriage no one quite knew, but now she was flaxen
and slim and beautifully clothed, with a voice like an insincere canary; she had "a passion
for the Opera," a "passion for motoring," "a passion for the latest religion," and "a passion
for the simple life." All these things did the shrimps enable her to gratify, and "the simple
life" cost her more than all the others put together.

Heaven had blessed them with one child, and that child was called Nancy. Nancy, her mother
always said with pride, was old for her age, and, as her age was only just five, that remark
was quite true. Nancy Ross was old for any age. Had she herself, one is compelled when considering
her to wonder, any conception during those first months of the things that were going to be
made out of her, and had she, perhaps at the very commencement of it all, some instinct of
protest and rebellion? Poor Nancy! The tragedy of her whole case was now none other than that
she hadn't, here at five years old in March Square, the slightest picture of what she had become,
nor could she, I suppose, have imagined it possible for her to become anything different. Nancy,
in her own real and naked person, was a small child with a good flow of flaxen hair and light-blue
eyes. All her features were small and delicate, and she gave you the impression that if you
only pulled a string or pushed a button somewhere in the middle of her back you could evoke
any cry, smile or exclamation that you cared to arouse. Her eyes were old and weary, her attitude
always that of one who had learnt the ways of this world, had found them sawdust, but had nevertheless
consented still to play the game. Just as the house was filled with little gilt chairs and
china cockatoos, so was Nancy arrayed in ribbons and bows and lace. Mrs. Munty had, one must
suppose, surveyed during certain periods in her life certain real emotions rather as the gaping
villagers survey the tiger behind his bars in the travelling circus.

The time had then come when she put these emotions away from her as childish things, and determined
never to be faced with any of them again. It was not likely, then, that she would introduce
Nancy to any of them. She introduced Nancy to clothes and deportment, and left it at that.
She wanted her child to "look nice." She was able, now that Nancy was five years old, to say
that she "looked very nice indeed."

II

From the very beginning nurses were chosen who would take care of Nancy Boss's appearance.
There was plenty of money to spend, and Nancy was a child who, with her flaxen hair and blue
eyes, would repay trouble. She did repay it, because she had no desires towards grubbiness
or rebellion, or any wildnesses whatever. She just sat there with her doll balanced neatly
in her arms, and allowed herself to be pulled and twisted and squeezed and stretched. "There's
a pretty little lady," said nurse, and a pretty little lady Nancy was sure that she was. The
order for her day was that in the morning she went out for a walk in the gardens in the Square,
and in the afternoon she went out for another. During these walks she moved slowly, her doll
delicately carried, her beautiful clothes shining with approval of the way that they were worn,
her head high, "like a little queen," said her nurse. She was conscious of the other children
in the gardens, who often stopped in the middle of their play and watched her. She thought
them hot and dirty and very noisy. She was sorry for their mothers.

It happened sometimes that she came downstairs, towards the end of a luncheon party, and was
introduced to the guests. "You pretty little thing," women in very large hats said to her.
"Lovely hair," or "She's the very image of you, Clarice," to her mother. She liked to hear
that because she greatly admired her mother. She knew that she, Nancy Ross, was beautiful;
she knew that clothes were of an immense importance; she knew that other children were unpleasant.
For the rest, she was neither extravagantly glad nor extravagantly sorry. She preserved a fine
indifference.... And yet, although, here my story may seem to matter-of-fact persons to take
a turn towards the fantastic, this was not quite all. Nancy herself, dimly and yet uneasily,
was aware that there was something else.

She was not a little girl who believed in fairies or witches or the "bogey man," or anything
indeed that she could not see. She inherited from her mother a splendid confidence in the reality,
the solid, unquestioned reality of all concrete and tangible things. She had been presented
once with a fine edition of "Grimm's Fairy Tales," an edition with coloured pictures and every
allure. She had turned its pages with a look of incredulous amazement. "What," she seemed to
say--she was then aged three and a half--"are these absurd things that you are telling me?
People aren't like that. Mother isn't in the least like that. I don't understand this, and
it's tedious!"

"I'm afraid the child has no imagination," said her nurse.

"What a lucky thing!" said her mother.

Nor could Mrs. Ross's house be said to be a place that encouraged fairies. They would have
found the gilt chairs hard to sit upon, and there were no mysterious corners. There was nothing
mysterious at all. And yet Nancy Ross, sitting in her magnificent clothes, was conscious as
she advanced towards her sixth year that she was not perfectly comfortable. To say that she
felt lonely would be, perhaps, to emphasise too strongly her discomfort. It was perhaps rather
that she felt inquisitive--only a little, a very little--but she did begin to wish that she
could ask a few questions.

There came a day--an astonishing day--when she felt irritated with her mother. She had during
her walk through the garden seen a little boy and a little girl, who were grubbing about in
a little pile of earth and sand there in the corner under the trees, and grubbing very happily.
They had dirt upon their faces, but their nurse was sitting, apparently quite easy in her mind,
and the sun had not stopped in its course nor had the birds upon the trees ceased to sing.
Nancy stayed for a moment her progress and looked at them, and something not very far from
envy struck, in some far-distant hiding-place, her soul. She moved on, but when she came indoors
and was met by her mamma and a handsome lady, her mamma's friend, who said: "Isn't she a pretty
dear?" and her mother said: "That's right, Nancy darling, been for your walk?" she was, for
an amazing moment, irritated with her beautiful mother.

III

Once she was conscious of this desire to ask questions she had no more peace. Although she
was only five years of age, she had all the determination not "to give herself away" of a woman
of forty. She was not going to show that she wanted anything in the world, and yet she would
have liked--A little wistfully she looked at her nurse. But that good woman, carefully chosen
by Mrs. Ross, was not the one to encourage questions. She was as shining as a new brass nail,
and a great deal harder.

The nursery was as neat as a pin, with a lovely bright rocking-horse upon which Nancy had never
ridden; a pink doll's-house with every modern contrivance, whose doors had never been opened;
a number of expensive dolls, which had never been disrobed. Nancy approached these joys--diffidently
and with caution. She rode upon the horse, opened the doll's-house, embraced the dolls, but
she had no natural imagination to bestow upon them, and the horse and the dolls, hurt, perhaps,
at their long neglect, received her with frigidity. Those grubby little children in the Square
would, she knew, have been "there" in a moment. She began then to be frightened. The nursery,
her bedroom, the dark little passage outside, were suddenly alarming. Sometimes, when she was
sitting quietly in her nursery, the house was so silent that she could have screamed.

"I don't think Miss Nancy's quite well, ma'am," said the nurse.

"Oh, dear! What a nuisance," said Mrs. Ross who liked her little girl to be always well and
beautiful. "I do hope she's not going to catch something."

"She doesn't take that pleasure in her clothes she did," said the nurse.

"Perhaps she wants some new ones," said her mother. "Take her to Florice, nurse." Nancy went
to Florice, and beautiful new garments were invented, and once again she was squeezed, and
tightened, and stretched, and pulled. But Nancy was indifferent. As they tried these clothes,
and stood back, and stepped forward, and admired and criticised, she was thinking, "I wish
the nursery clock didn't make such a noise."

Her little bedroom next to nurse's large one was a beautiful affair, with red roses up and
down the wall-paper and in and out of the crockery and round and round the carpet. Her bed
was magnificent, with lace and more roses, and there was a fine photograph of her beautiful
mother in a silver frame on the mantelpiece. But all these things were of little avail when
the dark came. She began to be frightened of the dark.

There came a night when, waking with a suddenness that did of itself contribute to her alarm,
she was conscious that the room was intensely dark, and that every one was very far away. The
house, as she listened, seemed to be holding its breath, the clock in the nursery was ticking
in a frightened, startled terror, and hesitating, whimsical noises broke, now close, now distant,
upon the silence. She lay there, her heart beating as it had surely never been allowed to beat
before. She was simply a very small, very frightened little girl. Then, before she could cry
out, she was aware that some one was standing beside her bed. She was aware of this before
she looked, and then, strangely (even now she had taken no peep), she was frightened no longer.

The room, the house, were suddenly comfortable and safe places; as water slips from a pool
and leaves it dry, so had terror glided from her side. She looked up then, and, although the
place had been so dark that she had been unable to distinguish the furniture, she could figure
to herself quite clearly her visitor's form. She not only figured it, but also quite easily
and readily recognised it. All these years she had forgotten him, but now at the vision of
his large comfortable presence she was back again amongst experiences and recognitions that
evoked for her once more all those odd first days when, with how much discomfort and puzzled
dismay, she had been dropped, so suddenly, into this distressing world. He put his arms around
her and held her; he bent down and kissed her, and her small hand went up to his beard in exactly
the way that it used to do. She nestled up against him.

"It's a very long time, isn't it," he said, "since I paid you a visit!"

"Yes, a long, long time."

"That's because you didn't want me. You got on so well without me."

"I didn't forget about you," she said. "But I asked mummy about you once, and she said you
were all nonsense, and I wasn't to think things like that."

"Ah! your mother's forgotten altogether. She knew me once, but she hasn't wanted me for a very,
very long time. She'll see me again, though, one day."

"I'm so glad you've come. You won't go away again now, will you?"

"I never go away," he said. "I'm always here. I've seen everything you've been doing, and a
very dull time you've been making of it."

He talked to her and told her about some of the things the other children in the Square were
doing. She was interested a little, but not very much; she still thought a great deal more
about herself than about anything or anybody else.

"Do they all love you?" she said.

"Oh, no, not at all. Some of them think I'm horrid. Some of them forget me altogether, and
then I never come back, until just at the end. Some of them only want me when they're in trouble.
Some, very soon, think it silly to believe in me at all, and the older they grow the less they
believe, generally. And when I do come they won't see me, they make up their minds not to.
But I'm always there just the same; it makes no difference what they do. They can't help themselves.
Only it's better for them just to remember me a little, because then it's much safer for them.
You've been feeling rather lonely lately, haven't you?"

"Yes," she said. "It's stupid now all by myself. There's nobody to ask questions of."

"Well, there's somebody else in your house who's lonely."

"Is there?" She couldn't think of any one.

"Yes. Your father."

"Oh! Father----" She was uninterested.

"Yes. You see, if he isn't----" and then, at that, he was gone, she was alone and fast asleep.

In the morning when she awoke, she remembered it all quite clearly, but, of course, it had
all been a dream. "Such a funny dream," she told her nurse, but she would give out no details.

"Some food she's been eating," said her nurse.

Nevertheless, when, on that afternoon, coming in from her walk, she met her dark, grubby little
father in the hall, she did stay for a moment on the bottom step of the stairs to consider him.

"I've been for a walk, daddy," she said, and then, rather frightened at her boldness, tumbled
up on the next step. He went forward to catch her.

"Hold up," he said, held her for a moment, and then hurried, confused and rather agitated,
into his dark sanctum. These were, very nearly, the first words that they had ever, in the
course of their lives together, interchanged. Munty Ross was uneasy with grown-up persons (unless
he was discussing business with them), but that discomfort was nothing to the uneasiness that
he felt with children. CHAPTER I. Ancient Iberia--The Basques--The Keltberians--The Phenicians--Cadiz
Founded, 1

CHAPTER II. Struggle between Phenicians and Assyrians--Founding of Carthage--Decline of Phenicia--Rise
of Roman Power--First Punic War, 9

CHAPTER III. Hamilcar--Hannibal--Siege and Fall of Saguntum--Rome Invades Spain--Scipio's Policy--Cadiz,
(Gades) Surrendered to the Romans--By What Steps IBERIA Became SPAIN--Fall of Carthaginian
Power--How Spain Became a Roman Province, 15

CHAPTER IV. Sertorius--Story of the White Hind--Rome Fights Her Own Battles on Spanish Soil--Battle
of Munda--Cæsar Declared Dictator--The Ides of March--Octavius Augustus--Spain Latinized--Four
Hundred Years of Peace, 24

CHAPTER V. Northern Races in the History of Civilization--Roman Empire
Expiring--Ataulfus--Attila and the Huns--Theodoric--Evaric Completes
Conquest of Spanish Peninsula--Europe Teutonized--Difference between
Anglo-Saxon and Latin Races, 30

CHAPTER VI. Ulfilas--Arianism--The
Spanish Language--Brunhilde--Leovigild--His Son's Apostasy--Arianism
Ceases to be the Established Religion of Spain, 39

CHAPTER VII.

Toledo--Church of Santa Maria--Wamba, 45

CHAPTER VIII.

Decline of Visigoths--Roderick--Count Julian's Treachery--Mahommedanism--Tarif--Prophecy Found
in the Enchanted Tower--Tarik--Roderick's Defeat and Death--Moslem Empire Established in Spain,
50

CHAPTER IX. Musa's Dream of European Conquest--Charles Martel--Characteristics of Mahommedan
Rule--Mission of the Saracen in Europe--The Germ of a Christian Kingdom
in the North of Spain, 58

CHAPTER X. Pelayo and the Cave of Covadonga--Alfonso
I.--Berbers and Arabs at War on African Coast--War Extends to Spain--The
Omeyyad Khalifs Superseded by the Abbasides--Abd-er-Rahman--Omeyyad
Dynasty Established at Cordova--Ineffectual Attempt of the Abbasides
to Overthrow Abd-er-Rahman--Character of This Conqueror, 64

CHAPTER
XI.

Charlemagne--Battle of Roncesvalles, 69

CHAPTER XII.

Conditions after Death of Abd-er-Rahman--Abd-er-Rahman II.--Arab Refinements--Eulogius and the Christian
Martyrs--Abd-er-Rahman III.--A Khalifate at Cordova--The Great Mosque--The City of "The Fairest"--Death
of Abd-er-Rahman III., 72

CHAPTER XIII.

Rough Cradle of a Spanish Nationality in the Asturias--Alfonso III. and His Hidalgos and Dons--Guerrilla
Warfare with Moors--Jealousies and Strife between Christian Kingdoms--Civil War--Almanzor--Ruin
of Christian State Seemed Imminent--Death of Almanzor--Berber Revolt--Anarchy
in Moorish State--A Khalif Begging a Crust of Bread--Berbers Destroy
Cordova--Library Burned--City of "The Fairest" a Ruin--Asturias--Leon
and Castile United--Alfonso VI.--The Cid--Triumph of Christians--Moors
Ask Aid of the Almoravides--Christians Driven Back--Death of the Cid--A
Dynasty of the Almoravides--The Alhomades--The Great Mahdi--Moorish
People Become Subject to Emperor of Morocco--His Designs upon Europe--The
Pope Proclaims a Crusade--Alhomades Driven Out of Spain by Christians--Moorish
Kingdom Reduced to Province of Granada, 78

CHAPTER XIV.

European Conditions in Thirteenth Century--Visigoth Kings Recover
Their Land--Its Changed Conditions--Effect of Arab Civilization upon
Spanish Nation--Fernando III.--Spain Draws into Closer Companionship
with European States--Alfonso X.--Spain Becoming Picturesque--The
Bull-Fight--Beautiful Granada--The Alhambra, 87

CHAPTER XV.

Perpetual Civil War between Spanish States--Castile and Aragon Absorb
the Others and in Conflict for Supremacy--Pedro the Cruel--The "Black
Prince"

His Champion against Aragon--John of Gaunt--His Claim upon the Throne
of Castile--His Final Compromise--Political Conditions Contrasted
with Those of Other States, 94

CHAPTER XVI.

Death of Juan II.--Enrique IV.--Isabella--Her Marriage with Ferdinand
of Aragon--Isabella Crowned Queen of Castile--Ferdinand, King of Aragon--The
Two Crowns United--Characteristics of the Two Sovereigns--The Inquisition
Created--Jews Driven out of the Kingdom--Abdul-Hassan's Defiance--Zahara--Family
Troubles at the Alhambra--Ayesha and Boabdil--Alhama Captured by Ferdinand--Boabdil
Supplants His Father--Massacre of the Abencerrages--Granada Besieged--Its
Capitulation--Moorish Rule Ended in Spain, 100

CHAPTER XVII.

Columbus and Isabella--Isabella's Private Griefs--Her Death--Charles, King under a Regency--Charles
Elected Emperor of Germany--Spain during His Reign--Cruelties in the East and in the West--Vain
Struggle with Protestantism--Abdication and Death of Charles, 108

CHAPTER XVIII. Philip II.--Union of Spain and Portugal--The Duke of Alva in the Netherlands--War
with England--Spanish Armada Destroyed--Death of Philip II.--Spain's Decline--Glory of the Name
"Castilian," 117

CHAPTER XIX. Philip III.--Rebellion of the Moriscos--Last of the Moors Conveyed to African Coast--Don
Quixote--Philip IV.--Louis XIV.

Marries Spanish Infanta--A Diminishing Kingdom--Carlos II.--First Collision between Anglo-Saxon
and Spaniard in America--Close of Hapsburg Dynasty in Spain, 125

CHAPTER
XX.

New European Conditions--Louis XIV.--War of the "Spanish Succession"--Marlborough Checks Louis
at Blenheim--Archduke Abandons Sovereignty in Spain--Peace of Utrecht--Further Dismemberment of Spain--Gibraltar
Passes to England--Bourbon Dynasty--Commences with Philip V.--Ferdinand VI.--Carlos III.--Expulsion
of the Jesuits, 131

CHAPTER XXI.

A Dismantled Kingdom--Spanish-American Colonies--England and France
at War over American Boundaries--Spain the Ally of France--Loss of
Some of Her West India Islands, and Capture of Havana and Manila by
British--Florida Given in Exchange for Return of Conquered Territory--Growing
Irritation against England--France Aids American Colonies in War with
England--Spain's Satisfaction at Their Success--Its Effect in Peru--Revolution
in France--Rapid Rise of Napoleon--Carlos IV.

Removed and Joseph Bonaparte King--Spain Joins Napoleon in War against
England--Trafalgar--Arthur Wellesley--Joseph Flees from His Kingdom,
137

CHAPTER XXII.

Liberal Sentiment Developing--Constitution of 1812--Ferdinand VI.
and Reactionary Measures--Revolt of all the Spanish-American Colonies--The
Holy Alliance--The Monroe Doctrine--Revolution in Spain--Spain under
the Protectorate of the Holy Alliance--Ferdinand Reinstated--Two Political
Parties--Six Spanish-American Colonies Freed, 144

CHAPTER XXIII.

The Salic Law and the Princess Isabella--The Carlists--Regency of
Christine--Isabella II.--Her Expulsion from Spain--Amadeo--An Era
of Republicanism--Castelar--Alfonso XII.

Recalled--His Brief Reign and Death--Alfonso XIII., 150

CHAPTER
XXIV.

Birth of an Insurgent Party in Cuba--Ten Years' War--Impossible Reforms
Promised--Revolution Started by José Marti, 1895--Attitude of the
American Government--General Weyler's Methods--Effect upon Sentiment
in America--Destruction of the Battle-Ship Maine--Verdict of Court
of Inquiry--War Declared between Spain and America--Victories of Manila
and in Cuba--Terms of Peace--Marriage of Alfonso XIII. and the Princess
Ena, 154

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Charles V. Frontispiece

FACING PAGE

Columbus at the Court of Ferdinand and Isabella 108

The Surrender of Breda 118

Philip IV. of Spain 126

Heroic Combat
in the Pulpit of the Church of St. Augustine, Saragossa, 1809 144

The
Duke de la Torre sworn in as Regent before the Cortes of 1869 152

A
SHORT HISTORY OF SPAIN.

CHAPTER I.

No name is more fraught with picturesque and romantic interest than that of the "Spanish Peninsula."

After
finishing this rare bit of handiwork nature seems to have thrown up a great ragged wall, stretching
from sea to sea, to protect it; and the Pyrenees have stood for ages a frowning barrier, descending
toward France on the northern side from gradually decreasing heights--but
on the Spanish side in wild disorder, plunging down through steep
chasms, ravines, and precipices--with sharp cliffs towering thousands
of feet skyward, which better than standing armies protect the sunny
plains below.

But the "Spanish Peninsula," at the time we are about to consider,
was neither "Spanish" nor was it a "peninsula."

At the dawn of history this sunny corner of Europe was known as Iberia,
and its people as Iberians.

Time has effaced all positive knowledge of this aboriginal race; but they are believed to have
come from the south, and to have been allied to the Libyans, who inhabited the northern coast
of Africa. In fact, Iberi in the Libyan tongue meant freeman; and Berber, apparently derived
from that word, was the term by which all of these western peoples were known to the Ancient
Egyptians.

But it is suspected that the Iberians found it an easy matter to flow into the land south of
the Pyrenees, and that they needed no boats for the transit.

There has always existed a tradition of the joining of the two continents,
and now it is believed by geologists that an isthmus once really stretched
across to the African coast at the narrowest point of the Straits,
at a time when the waters of a Mediterranean gulf, and the waters
flowing over the sands of Sahara, together found their outlet in the
Indian Ocean.

There is also a tradition that the adventurous Phenicians, who are
known to have been in Iberia as early as 1300 B.C., cut a canal through
the narrow strip of land, and then built a bridge across the canal.

But a bridge was a frail link by which to hold the mighty continents together. The Atlantic,
glad of such an entrance to the great gulf beyond, must have rushed impetuously through, gradually
widening the opening, and (may have) thus permanently severed Europe and Africa; drained the
Sahara dry; transformed the Mediterranean gulf into a Mediterranean Sea; and created a "Spanish
Peninsula."

How long this fair Peninsula was the undisturbed home of the Iberians no one knows. Behind the
rocky ramparts of the Pyrenees they may have remained for centuries
unconscious of the Aryan torrent which was flooding Western Europe
as far as the British Isles.

Nothing has been discovered by which we may reconstruct this prehistoric
people and (perhaps) civilization.

But their physical characteristics we are enabled to guess; for just as we find in Cornwall,
England, lingering traces of the ancient Britons, so in the mountain
fastnesses of northern Spain linger the Basques, who are by many supposed
to be the last survivors of that mysterious primitive race.

The language of the Basques bears no resemblance to any of the Indo-European, nor indeed to any
known tongue.

It is so difficult, so intricate in construction, that only those who learn it in infancy can ever
master it. It is said that, in Basque, "you spell Solomon, and pronounce it Nebuchadnezzar." Its
antiquity is so great that one legend calls it the "language of the
angels," and another says that Tubal brought it to Spain before the
lingual disaster at Babel!

And still another relates that the devil once tried to learn it, but that, after studying
it for seven years and learning only three words, he gave it up in despair.

A language which, without literature, can so resist change, can so persist unmodified by another
tongue spoken all around and about it, must have great antiquity; and there is every reason
to believe that the Basque is a survival of the tongue spoken by
the primitive Iberians, before the Kelts began to flow over and around
the Pyrennees; and also that the physical characteristics of this
people are the same as those of their ancient progenitors; small-framed,
dark, with a faint suggestion of the Semitic in their swarthy faces.

We cannot say when it occurred, but at last the powerful, warlike
Kelts had surmounted the barrier and were mingled with this non-Aryan
people, and the resulting race thus formed was known to antiquity
as the Keltiberians.

It is probable that the rugged Kelt easily absorbed the race of more
delicate type, and made it, in religion and customs, not unlike the
Keltic Aryan in Gaul.

But the physical characteristics of the other and primitive race are indelibly stamped upon
the Spanish people; and it is probably to the Iberian strain in the blood that may be traced the
small, dark type of men which largely prevails in Spain, and to some extent also in central
and southern France.

But the Keltiberians were Keltic in their religion. There are now in Spain the usual monuments found
wherever Druid worship prevailed.

Huge blocks of stone, especially in Cantabria and Lusitania (Portugal), standing alone or in circles,
tell the story of Druidical rites, and of the worship of the ocean, the wind, and the thunder,
and of the placating of the powers of nature by human sacrifices.

The mingling of the Kelts and the Iberians in varying proportions in different parts of Spain,
and in some places (as among the Basques) their mingling not at all, produced that diversity of
traits which distinguished the Asturians in the mountain gorges from
their neighbors the Cantabrians, and both these from the Catalonians
in the northeast and the Gallicians on the northwest coast, and from
the Lusitanians, where now is Portugal; and still more distinguished
the Basques, in the rocky ravines of the Pyrenees, from each and all
of the others.

And yet these unlike members of one family were collectively known as Keltiberians.

While this race--hardy, temperate, brave, and superstitious--was leading
its primitive life upon the Iberian peninsula, while they were shooting
arrows at the sky to threaten the thunder, drawing their swords against
the rising tide, and prizing iron more dearly than their abundant
gold and silver, because they could hammer it into hooks, and swords,
and spears--there had long existed in the East a group of wonderful
civilizations: the Egyptian, hoary with age and steeped in wisdom
and in wickedness; the Chaldeans, who, with "looks commercing with
the skies," were the fathers of astronomy; the Assyrians and Babylonians,
with their wonderful cities of Nineveh and Babylon, and the Phenicians,
with their no less famous cities of Sidon and Tyre.

Sidon, which was the more ancient of these two, is said to have been founded by Sidon, the son
of Canaan, who was the great-grandson of Noah.

Of all these nations it was the Phenicians who were the most adventurous. They were a Semitic
people, Syrian in blood, and their home was a narrow strip of coast
on the east of the Mediterranean, where a group of free cities was
joined into a confederacy held together by a strong national spirit.

 Henry, although you would never think it to
look at him, was not quite like other children; he had been, from his birth, a "little queer,
bless his heart," and Mrs. Slater attributed this to the fact that three weeks before the boy's
birth, Horny Slater, Senior, had, in a fine frenzy of inebriation, hit her over the head with
a chair. "Dead drunk, 'e was, and never a thought to the child coming, ''Enery,' I said to
him, 'it's the child you're hitting as well as me'; but 'e was too far gone, poor soul, to
take a thought."

Henry was a fine, robust child, with rosy cheeks and a sturdy, thick-set body. He had large
blue eyes and a happy, pleasant smile, but, although he was six years of age, he could hardly
talk at all, and liked to spend the days twirling pieces of string round and round or looking
into the fire. His eyes were unlike the eyes of other children, and in their blue depths there
lurked strange apprehensions, strange anticipations, strange remembrances. He had never, from
the day of his birth, been known to cry. When he was frightened or distressed the colour would
pass slowly from his cheeks, and strange little gasping breaths would come from him; his body
would stiffen and his hands clench. If he was angry the colour in his face would darken and
his eyes half close, and it was then that he did, indeed, seem in the possession of some disastrous
thraldom--but he was angry very seldom, and only with certain people; for the most part he
was a happy child, "as quiet as a mouse." He was unusual, too, in that he was a very cleanly
child, and loved to be washed, and took the greatest care of his clothes. He was very affectionate,
fond of almost every one, and passionately devoted to his mother.

Mrs. Slater was a woman with very little imagination. She never speculated on "how different
things would be if they were different," nor did she sigh after riches, nor possessions, nor
any of the goods Fate bestows upon her favourites. She would, most certainly, have been less
fond of Henry had he been more like other children, and his dependence upon her gave her something
of the feeling that very rich ladies have for very small dogs. She was too, in a way, proud.
"Never been able to talk, nor never will, they tell me, the lamb," she would assure her friends,
"but as gentle and as quiet!"

She would sit, sometimes, in the evening before the fire and think of the old noisy, tiresome
days when Henry, Senior, would beat her black and blue, and would feel that her life had indeed
fallen into pleasant places.

There was nothing whatever in the house, all silent about her and filled with shrouded furniture,
that could alarm her. "Ghosts!" she would cry. "You show me one, that's all. I'll give you ghosts!"

Her digestion was excellent, her sleep undisturbed by conscience or creditors. She was a happy
woman.

Henry loved March Square. There was a window in an upstairs passage from behind whose glass
he could gaze at the passing world. The Passing World!... the shrouded house behind him. One
was as alive, as bustling, as demonstrative to him as the other, but between the two there
was, for him, no communication. His attitude to the Square and the people in it was that he
knew more about them than anyone else did; his attitude to the House, that he knew nothing
at all compared with what "They" knew. In the Square he could see through the lot of them,
so superficial were they all; in the House he could only wait, with fingers on lip, for the
next revelation that they might vouchsafe to him.

Doors were, for the most part, locked, yet there were many days when fires were lit because
the house was an old one, and damp Lady Cathcart had a horror of.

Always for young Henry the house wore its buried and abandoned air. He was never to see it
when the human beings in it would count more than its furniture, and the human life in it more
than the house itself. He had come, a year and a half ago, into the very place that his dreams
had, from the beginning, built for him. Those large, high rooms with the shining floors, the
hooded furniture, the windows gaping without their curtains, the shadows and broad squares
of light, the little whispers and rattles that doors and cupboards gave, the swirl of the wind
as it sprang released from corners and crevices, the lisp of some whisper, "I'm coming! I'm
coming! I'm coming!" that, nevertheless, again and again defeated expectation. How could he
but enjoy the fine field of affection that these provided for him?

His mother watched him with maternal pride. "He's that contented!" she would say. "Any other
child would plague your life away, but 'Enery----"

It was part of Henry's unusual mind that he wondered at nothing. He remained in constant expectation,
but whatever was to come to him it would not bring surprise with it. He was in a world where
anything might happen. In all the house his favourite room was the high, thin drawing-room
with an old gold mirror at one end of it and a piano muffled in brown holland. The mirror caught
the piano with its peaked inquiring shape, that, in its inflection, looked so much more tremendous
and ominous than it did in plain reality. Through the mirror the piano looked as though it
might do anything, and to Henry, who knew nothing about pianos, it was responsible for almost
everything that occurred in the house.

The windows of the room gave a fine display of the gardens, the children, the carriages, and
the distant houses, but it was when the Square was empty that Henry liked best to gaze down
into it, because then the empty house and the empty square prepared themselves together for
some tremendous occurrence. Whenever such an interval of silence struck across the noise and
traffic of the day, it seemed that all the world screwed itself up for the next event. "One--two--three."
But the crisis never came. The noise returned again, people laughed and shouted, bells rang
and motors screamed. Nevertheless, one day something would surely happen.

The house was full of company, and the boy would, sometimes, have yielded to the Fear that
was never far away, had it not been for some one whom he had known from the very beginning
of everything, some one who was as real as his mother, some one who was more powerful than
anything or any one in the house, and kinder, far, far kinder.

Often when Mrs. Slater would wonder of what her son was thinking as he sat twisting string
round and round in front of the fire, he would be aware of his Friend in the shadow of the
light, watching gravely, in the cheerful room, having beneath his hands all the powers, good
and evil, of the house. Just as Henry pictured quite clearly to himself other occupants of
the house--some one with taloned claws behind the piano, another with black-hooded eyes and
a peaked cap in the shadows of an upstairs passage, another brown, shrivelled and naked, who
dwelt in a cupboard in one of the empty bedrooms so, too, he could see his Friend, vast and
shadowy, with a flowing beard and eyes that were kind and shining.

Often he had felt the pressure of his hand, had heard his reassuring whisper in his ears, had
known the touch of his lips upon his forehead. No harm could come to him whilst his Friend
was in the house--and his Friend was always there.

He went always with his mother into the streets when she did her shopping or simply took the
air. It was natural that on these occasions, he should be more frightened than during his hours
in the house. In the first place his Friend did not accompany him on these out-of-door excursions,
and his mother was not nearly so strong a protector as his Friend.

Then he was disturbed by the people who pressed and pushed about him--he had a sense that they
were all like birds with flapping wings and strange cries, rushing down upon him--the colours
and confusion of the shops bewildered him. There was too much here for him properly to understand;
he had enough to do with the piano, the mirror, the shadowed passages, the staring windows.

But in the Square he was happy again. Mrs. Slater never ventured into the gardens; they were
for her superiors, and she complacently accepted a world in which things were so ordered as
the only world possible. But there was plenty of life outside the gardens.

There were, on the different days of the week, the various musicians, and Henry was friendly
with them all. He delighted in music; as he stood there, listening to the barrel-organ, the
ideas, pictures, dreams, flew like flocks of beautiful birds through his brain, fleet, and
always just beyond his reach, so that he could catch nothing, but would nod his head and would
hope that the tune would be repeated, because next time he might, perhaps, be more fortunate.

The Major, who played the harp on Saturdays, was a friend of Mrs. Slater. "Nice little feller,
that of yours, mum," he would say. "'Ad one meself once."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, sure enough.... Nice day.... Would you believe it, this is the only London square left
for us to play in?... 'Tis, indeed. Cruel shame, I call it; life's 'ard.... You're right, mum,
it is. Well, good-day."

Mrs. Slater looked after him affectionately. "Pore feller; and yet I dare say he makes a pretty
hit of it if all was known."

Henry sighed. The birds were flown again. He was left with the blue-flecked sky and the grey
houses that stood around the gardens like beasts about a water-pool. The sun (a red disc) peered
over their shoulders. He went, with his mother within doors. Instantly on his entrance the
house began to rustle and whisper.

II

Mrs. Slater, although an amiable and kind-hearted human being who believed with confident superstition
in a God of other people's making, did not, on the whole, welcome her lady friends with much
cordiality. It was not, as she often explained, as though she had her own house into which
to ask them. Her motto was, "Friendly with All, Familiar with None," and to this she very faithfully
held. But in her heart there was reason enough for this caution; there had been days--yes,
and nights too--when, during her lamented husband's lifetime, she had "taken a drop," taken
it, obviously enough, as a comfort, and a solace when things were going very hard with her,
and "'Enery preferrin' 'er to be jolly 'erself to keep 'im company." She had protested, but
Fate and Henry had been too strong for her. "She had fallen into the habit!" Then, when No.
21 had come under her care, she had put it all sternly behind her, but one did not know how
weak one might be, and a kindly friend might with her persuasion----

Therefore did Mrs. Slater avoid her kindly friends. There was, however, one friend who was
not so readily to be avoided; that was Mrs. Carter. Mrs. Carter also was a widow, or rather,
to speak the direct truth, had discovered one morning, twenty years ago, that Mr. Carter "was
gone"; he had never returned. Those who knew Mrs. Carter intimately said that, on the whole,
"things bein' as they was," his departure was not entirely to be wondered at. Mrs. Carter had
a temper of her own, and nothing inflamed it so much as a drop of whisky, and there was nothing
in the world she liked so much as "a drop."

To meet her casually, you would judge her nothing less than the most amiable of womankind--a
large, stout, jolly woman, with a face like a rose, and a quantity of black hair. At her best,
in her fine Sunday clothes, she was a superb figure, and wore round her neck a rope of sham
pearls that would have done credit to a sham countess. During the week, however, she slipped,
on occasion, into "déshabille," and then she appeared not quite so attractive. No one knew
the exact nature of her profession. She did a bit of "char"; she had at one time a little sweetshop,
where she sold sweets, the Police Budget, and--although this was revealed only to her best
friends--indecent photographs. It may be that the police discovered some of the sources of
her income; at any rate the sweetshop was suddenly, one morning, abandoned. Her movements in
everything were sudden; it was quite suddenly that she took a fancy to Mrs. Slater. She met
her at a friend's, and at once, so she told Mrs. Slater, "I liked yer, just as though I'd met
yer before. But I'm like that. Sudden or not at all is my way, and not a bad way either!"

Mrs. Slater could not be said to be everything that was affectionate in return. She distrusted
Mrs. Carter, disliked her brilliant colouring and her fluent experiences, felt shy before her
rollicking suggestiveness, and timid at her innuendoes. For a considerable time she held her
defences against the insidious attack. Then there came a day when Mrs. Carter burst into reluctant
but passionate tears, asserting that Life and Mr. Carter had been, from the beginning, against
her; that she had committed, indeed, acts of folly in the past, but only when driven desperately
against a wall; that she bore no grudge against any one alive, but loved all humanity; that
she was going to do her best to be a better woman, but couldn't really hope to arrive at any
satisfactory improvement without Mrs. Slater's assistance; that Mrs. Slater, indeed, had shown
her a New Way, a New Light, a New Path.

Mrs. Slater, humble woman, had no illusions as to her own importance in the scheme of things;
nothing touched her so surely as an appeal to her strength of character. She received Mrs.
Carter with open arms, suggested that they should read the Bible together on Sunday mornings,
and go, side by side, to St. Matthew's on Sunday evenings. There was nothing like a study of
the "Holy Word" for "defeating the bottle," and there was nothing like "defeating the bottle"
for getting back one's strength and firmness of character.

It was along these lines that Mrs. Slater proposed to conduct Mrs. Carter.

Now unfortunately Henry took an instant and truly savage dislike to his mother's new friend.
He had been always, of course, "odd" in his feelings about people, but never was he "odder"
than he was with Mrs. Carter. "Little lamb," she said, when she saw him for the first time.
"I envy you that child, Mrs. Slater, I do indeed. Backwards 'e may be, but 'is being dependent,
as you may say, touches the 'eart. Little lamb!"

She tried to embrace him; she offered him sweets. He shuddered at her approach, and his face
was instantly grey, like a pool the moment after the sun's setting. Had he been himself able
to put into words his sensations, he would have said that the sight of Mrs. Carter assured
him, quite definitely, that something horrible would soon occur.

The house upon whose atmosphere he so depended instantly darkened; his Friend was gone, not
because he was no longer able to see him (his consciousness of him did not depend at all upon
any visual assurance), but because there was now, Henry was perfectly assured, no chance whatever
of his suddenly appearing. And, on the other hand, those Others--the one with the taloned claws
behind the piano, the one with the black-hooded eyes--were stronger, more threatening, more
dominating. But, beyond her influence on the house, Mrs. Carter, in her own physical and actual
presence, tortured Henry. When she was in the room, Henry suffered agony. He would creep away
were he allowed, and, if that were not possible, then he would retreat into the most distant
corner and watch. If he were in the room his eyes never left Mrs. Carter for a moment, and
it was this brooding gaze more than his disapproval that irritated her. "You never can tell
with poor little dears when they're 'queer' what fancies they'll take. Why, he quite seems
to dislike me, Mrs. Slater!"

Mrs. Slater could venture no denial; indeed, Henry's attitude aroused once again in her mind
her earlier suspicions. She had all the reverence of her class for her son's "oddness." He
knew more than ordinary mortal folk, and could see farther; he saw beyond Mrs. Carter's red
cheeks and shining black hair, and the fact that he was, as a rule, tractable to cheerful kindness,
made his rejection the more remarkable. But it might, nevertheless, be that the black things
in Mrs. Carter's past were the marks impressed upon Henry's sensitive intelligence; and that
he had not, as yet, perceived the new Mrs. Carter growing in grace now day by day.

"'E'll get over 'is fancy, bless 'is 'eart." Mrs. Slater pursued then her work of redemption.

III

On a certain evening in November, Mrs. Carter, coming in to see her friend, invited sympathy
for a very bad cold.

"Drippin' and runnin' at the nose I've been all day, my dear. Awake all night I was with it,
and 'tain't often that I've one, but when I do it's somethin' cruel." It seemed to be better
this evening, Mrs. Slater thought, but when she congratulated her friend on this, Mrs. Carter,
shaking her head, remarked that it had left the nose and travelled into the throat and ears.
"Once it's earache, and I'm done," she said. Horrible pictures she drew of this earache, and
it presently became clear that Mrs. Carter was in perfect terror of a night made sleepless
with pain. Once, it seemed, had Mrs. Carter tried to commit suicide by hanging herself to a
nail in a door, so maddening had the torture been. Luckily (Mrs. Carter thanked Heaven) the
nail had been dragged from the door by her weight--"not that I was anything very 'eavy, you
understand." Finally, it appeared that only one thing in the world could be relied upon to
stay the fiend.

Mrs. Carter produced from her pocket a bottle of whisky.

Upon that it followed that, since her reformation, Mrs. Carter had come to loathe the very
smell of whisky, and as for the taste of it! But rather than be driven by flaming agony down
the long stony passages of a sleepless night--anything.

It was here, of course, that Mrs. Slater should have protested, but, in her heart, she was
afraid of her friend, and afraid of herself. Mrs. Carter's company had, of late, been pleasant
to her. She had been strengthened in her own resolves towards a fine life by the sight of Mrs.
Carter's struggle in that direction, and that good woman's genial amiability (when it was so
obvious from her appearance that she could be far otherwise) flattered Mrs. Slater's sense
of power. No, she could not now bear to let Mrs. Carter go.

She said, therefore, nothing to her friend about the whisky, and on that evening Mrs. Carter
did take the "veriest sip." But the cold continued--it continued in a marvellous and terrible
manner. It seemed "to 'ave taken right 'old of 'er system."

After a few evenings it was part of the ceremonies that the bottle should be produced; the
kettle was boiling happily on the fire, there was lemon, there was a lump of sugar.... On a
certain wet and depressing evening Mrs. Slater herself had a glass "just to see that she didn't
get a cold like Mrs. Carter's."

IV

Henry's bed-time was somewhere between the hours of eight and nine, but his mother did not
care to leave Mrs. Carter (dear friend, though she was) quite alone downstairs with the bottom
half of the house unguarded (although, of course, the doors were locked), therefore, Mrs. Carter
came upstairs with her friend to see the little fellow put to bed; "and a hangel he looks,
if ever I see one," declared the lady enthusiastically.

When the two were gone and the house was still, Henry would sit up in bed and listen; then,
moving quietly, he would creep out and listen again.

There, in the passage, it seemed to him that he could hear the whole house talking--first one
sound and then another would come, the wheeze of some straining floor, the creak of some whispering
board, the shudder of a door. "Look out! Look out! Look out!" and then, above that murmur,
some louder voice: "Watch! there's danger in the place!" Then, shivering with cold and his
sense of evil, he would creep down into a lower passage and stand listening again; now the
voices of the house were deafening, rising on every side of him, like the running of little
streams suddenly heard on the turning of the corner of a hill. The dim light shrouded with
fantasy the walls; along the wide passage and cabinets, high china jars, the hollow scoop of
the window at the far-distant end, were all alive and moving. And, in strange contradiction
to the moving voices within the house, came the blurred echo of the London life, whirring,
buzzing, like a cloud of gnats at the window-pane. "Look out! Look out! Look out!" the house
cried, and Henry, with chattering teeth, was on guard.

There came an evening when standing thus, shivering in his little shirt, he was aware that
the terror, so long anticipated, was upon him. It seemed to him, on this evening, that the
house was suddenly still; it was as though all the sounds, as of running water, that passed
up and down the rooms and passages, were, in a flashing second, frozen. The house was holding
its breath.

He had to wait for a breathless, agonising interval before he heard the next sound, very faint
and stifled breathing coming up to him out of the darkness in little uncertain gusts. He heard
the breathings pause, then recommence again in quicker and louder succession. Henry, stirred
simply, perhaps, by the terror of his anticipation, moved back into the darker shadows in the
nook of the cabinet, and stayed there with his shirt pressed against his little trembling knees.

Then followed, after a long time, a half yellow circle of light that touched the top steps
of the stairs and a square of the wall; behind the light was the stealthy figure of Mrs. Carter.
She stood there for a moment, one hand with a candle raised, the other pressed against her
breast; from one finger of this hand a bunch of heavy keys dangled. She stood there, with her
wide, staring eyes, like glass in the candle-light, staring about her, her red cheeks rising
and falling with her agitation, her body seeming enormous, her shadow on the wall huge in the
flickering light. At the sight of his enemy Henry's terror was so frantic that his hands beat
with little spasmodic movements against the wall.

He did not see Mrs. Carter at all, but he saw rather the movement through the air and darkness
of the house of something that would bring down upon him the full naked force of the Terror
that he had all his life anticipated. He had always known that the awful hour would arrive
when the Terror would grip him; again and again he had seen its eyes, felt its breath, heard
its movements, and these movements had been forewarnings of some future day. That day had arrived.

There was only one thing that he could do; his Friend alone in all the world could help him.
With his soul dizzy and faint from fear, he prayed for his Friend; had he been less frightened
he would have screamed aloud for him to come and help him.

The boy's breath came hot into his throat and stuck there, and his heart beat like a high,
unresting hammer.

Mrs. Carter, with the candle raised to throw light in front of her, moved forward very cautiously
and softly. She passed down the passage, and then paused very near to the boy. She looked at
the keys, and stole like some heavy, stealthy animal to the door of the long drawing-room.
He watched her as she tried one key after another, making little dissatisfied noises as they
refused to fit; then at last one turned the lock and she pushed back the door.

It was certainly impossible for him, in the dim world of his mind, to realise what it was that
she intended to do, but he knew, through some strange channel of knowledge, that his mother
was concerned in this, and that something more than the immediate peril of himself was involved.
He had also, lost in the dim mazes of his mind, a consciousness that there were treasures in
the house, and that his mother was placed there to guard them, and even that he himself shared
her duty.

It did not come to him that Mrs. Carter was in pursuit of these treasures, but he did realise
that her presence there amongst them brought peril to his mother. Moved then by some desperate
urgency which had at its heart his sense that to be left alone in the black passage was worse
than the actual lighted vision of his Terror, he crept with trembling knees across the passage
and through the door.

Inside the room he saw that she had laid the candle upon the piano, and was bending over a
drawer, trying again to fit a key. He stood in the doorway, a tiny figure, very, very cold,
all his soul in his silent appeal for some help. His Friend must come. He was somewhere there
in the house. "Come! Help me!" The candle suddenly flared into a finger of light that flung
the room into vision. Mrs. Carter, startled, raised herself, and at that same moment Henry
gave a cry, a weak little trembling sound.

She turned and saw the boy; as their eyes met he felt the Terror rushing upon him. He flung
a last desperate appeal for help, staring at her as though his eyes would never let her go,
and she, finding him so unexpectedly, could only gape. In their silent gaze at one another,
in the glassy stare of Mrs. Carter and the trembling, flickering one of Henry there was more
than any ordinary challenge could have conveyed. Mrs. Carter must have felt at the first immediate
confrontation of the strange little figure that her feet were on the very edge of some most
desperate precipice. The long room and the passages beyond must have quivered. At that very
first moment, with some stir, some hinted approach, Henry called, with the desperate summoning
of all his ghostly world, upon his gods. They came....

In her eyes he saw suddenly something else than vague terror. He saw recognition. He felt himself
a rushing, heartening comfort; he knew that his Friend had somehow come, that he was no longer
alone.

But Mrs. Carter's eyes were staring beyond him, over him, into the black passage. Her eyes
seemed to grow as though the terror in them was pushing them out beyond their lids; her breath,
came in sharp, tearing gasps. The keys with a clang dropped from her hand.

"Oh, God! Oh, God!" she whispered. He did not turn his head to grasp what it was that she saw
in the passage. The terror had been transferred from himself to her.

The colour in her cheeks went out, leaving her as though her face were suddenly shadowed by
some overhanging shape.

Her eyes never moved nor faltered from the dark into whose heart she gazed. Then, there was
a strangled, gasping cry, and she sank down, first onto her knees, then in a white faint, her
eyes still staring, lay huddled on the floor.

Henry felt his Friend's hand on his shoulder.

Meanwhile, down in the kitchen, the fire had sunk into grey ashes, and Mrs. Slater was lying
back in her chair, her head back, snoring thickly; an empty glass had tumbled across the table,
and a few drops from it had dribbled over on to the tablecloth.

CHAPTER VII

BARBARA FLINT

I

Barbara Flint was a little girl, aged seven, who lived with her parents at No. 36 March Square.
Her brother and sister, Master Anthony and Miss Misabel Flint, were years and years older,
so you must understand that she led rather a solitary life. She was a child with very pale
flaxen hair, very pale blue eyes, very pale cheeks--she looked like a china doll who had been
left by a careless mistress out in the rain. She was a very sensitive child, cried at the least
provocation, very affectionate, too, and ready to imagine that people didn't like her.

Mr. Flint was a stout, elderly gentleman, whose favourite pursuit was to read the newspapers
in his club, and to inveigh against the Liberals. He was pale and pasty, and suffered from
indigestion. Mrs. Flint was tall, thin and severe, and a great helper at St. Matthew's, the
church round the corner. She gave up all her time to church work and the care of the poor,
and it wasn't her fault that the poor hated her. Between the Scylla of politics and the Charybdis
of religion there was very little left for poor Barbara; she faded away under the care of an
elderly governess who suffered from a perfect cascade of ill-fated love affairs; it seemed
that gentlemen were always "playing with her feelings." But in all probability a too vivid
imagination led her astray in this matter; at any rate, she cried so often during Barbara's
lessons that the title of the lesson-book, "Reading without Tears," was sadly belied. It might
be expected that, under these unfavourable circumstances, Barbara was growing into a depressed
and melancholy childhood.

Barbara, happily, was saved by her imagination. Surely nothing quite like Barbara's imagination
had ever been seen before, because it came to her, outside inheritance, outside environment,
outside observation. She had it altogether, in spite of Flints past and present. But, perhaps,
not altogether in spite of March Square. It would be difficult to say how deeply the fountain,
the almond tree, the green, flat shining grass had stung her intuition; but stung it only,
not created it--the thing was there from the beginning of all time. She talked, at first to
nurses, servants, her mother, about the things that she knew; about her Friend who often came
to see her, who was there so many times--there in the room with her when they couldn't catch
a glimpse of him; about the days and nights when she was away anywhere, up in the sky, out
on the air, deep in the sea, about all the other experiences that she remembered but was now
rapidly losing consciousness of. She talked, at first easily, naturally, and inviting, as it
were, return confidences. Then, quite suddenly, she realised that she simply wasn't believed,
that she was considered a wicked little girl "for making things up so," that there was no hope
at all for her unless she abandoned her "lying ways."

The shock of this discovery flung her straight back upon herself; if they refused to believe
these things, then there was nothing to be done. But for herself their incredulity should not
stop her. She became a very quiet little girl--what her nurse called "brooding." This incredulity
of theirs drove them all instantly into a hostile camp, and the affection that she had been
longing to lavish upon them must now be reserved for other, and, she could not help feeling,
wiser persons. This division of herself from the immediate world hurt her very much. From a
very early age, indeed, we need reassurance as to the necessity for our existence. Barbara
simply did not seem to be wanted.

But still worse: now that her belief in certain things had been challenged, she herself began
to question them. Was it true, possibly, when a flaming sunset struck a sword across the Square
and caught the fountain, slashing it into a million glittering fragments, that that was all
that occurred? Such a thing had been for Barbara simply a door into her earlier world. See
the fountain--well, you have been tested; you are still simple enough to go back into the real
world. But was Barbara simple enough? She was seven; it is just about then that we begin, under
the guard of nurses carefully chosen for us by our parents, to drop our simplicity. It must,
of course, be so, or the world would be all dreamers, and then there would be no commerce.

Barbara knew nothing of commerce, but she did know that she was unhappy, that her dolls gave
her no happiness, and that her Friend did not come now so often to see her. She was, I am afraid,
in character a "Hopper." She must be affectionate, she must demand affection of others, and
will they not give it her, then must they simulate it. The tragedy of it all was perhaps, that
Barbara had not herself that coloured vitality in her that would prepare other people to be
fond of her. The world is divided between those who place affection about, now here, now there,
and those whose souls lie, like drawers, unawares, but ready for the affection to be laid there.

Barbara could not "place" it about; she had neither optimism nor a sense of humour sufficient.
But she wanted it--wanted it terribly. If she were not to be allowed to indulge her imagination,
then must she, all the more, love some one with fervour: the two things were interdependent.
She surveyed her world with an eye to this possible loving. There was her governess, who had
been with her for a year now, tearful, bony, using Barbara as a means and never as an end.
Barbara did not love her--how could she? Moreover, there were other physical things: the lean,
shining marble of Miss Letts's long fingers, the dry thinness of her hair, the way that the
tip of her nose would be suddenly red, and then, like a blown-out candle, dull white again.
Fingers and noses are not the only agents in the human affections, but they have most certainly
something to do with them. Moreover, Miss Letts was too busily engaged with the survey of her
relations, with now this gentleman, now that, to pay much attention to Barbara. She dismissed
her as "a queer little thing." There were in Miss Letts's world "queer things" and "things
not queer." The division was patent to anybody.

Barbara's father and mother were also surveyed. Here Barbara was baffled by the determination
on the part of both of them that she should talk, should think, should dream about all the
things concerning which she could not talk, think nor dream. "How to grow up into a nice little
girl," "How to pray to God," "How never to tell lies," "How to keep one's clothes clean,"--these
things did not interest Barbara in the least; but had she been given love with them she might
have paid some attention. But a too rigidly defined politics, a too rigidly defined religion
find love a poor, loose, sentimental thing--very rightly so, perhaps. Mrs. Flint was afraid
that Barbara was a "silly little girl."

"I hope, Miss Letts, that she no longer talks about her silly fancies."

"She has said nothing to me in that respect for a considerable period, Mrs. Flint."

"All very young children have fancies, but such things are dangerous when they grow older."

"I agree with you."

Nevertheless the fountain continued to flash in the sun, and births, deaths, weddings, love
and hate continued to play their part in March Square.

II

Barbara, groping about in the desolation of having no one to grope with her, discovered that
her Friend came now less frequently to see her. She was even beginning to wonder whether he
had ever really come at all. She had perhaps imagined him just as on occasion she would imagine
her doll, Jane, the Queen of England, or her afternoon tea the most wonderful meal, with sausages,
blackberry jam and chocolates. Young though, she was, she was able to realise that this imagination
of hers was capable de tout, and that every one older than herself said that it was wicked;
therefore was her Friend, perhaps, wicked also.

And yet, if the dark curtains that veiled the nursery windows at night, if the glimmering shape
of the picture-frames, if the square black sides of the dolls' house were real, real also was
the figure of her Friend, real his arousal in her of all the memories of the old days before
she was Barbara Flint at all--real, too, his love, his care, his protection; as real, yes,
as Miss Letts's bony figure. It was all very puzzling. But he did not come now as in the old days.

Barbara played very often in the gardens in the middle of the Square, but because she was a
timid little girl she did not make many friends. She knew many of the other children who played
there, and sometimes she shared in their games; but her sensitive feelings were so easily hurt,
she frequently retired in tears. Every day on going into the garden she looked about her, hoping
that she would find before she left it again some one whom it would be possible to worship.
She tried on several occasions to erect altars, but our English temperament is against public
display, and she was misunderstood.

Then, quite suddenly, as though she had sprung out of the fountain, Mary Adams was there. Mary
Adams was aged nine, and her difference from Barbara Flint was that, whereas Barbara craved
for affection, she craved for attention: the two demands can be easily confused. Mary Adams
was the only child of an aged philosopher, Mr. Adams, who, contrary to all that philosophy
teaches, had married a young wife. The young wife, pleased that Mary was so unlike her father,
made much of her, and Mary was delighted to be made much of. She was a little girl with flaxen
hair, blue eyes, and a fine pink-and-white colouring. In a few years' time she will be so sure
of the attention that her appearance is winning for her that she will make no effort to secure
adherents, but just now she is not sufficiently confident--she must take trouble. She took
trouble with Barbara.

Sitting neatly upon a seat, Mary watched rude little boys throw sidelong glances in her direction.
Her long black legs were quivering with the perception of their interest, even though her eyes
were haughtily indifferent. It was then that Barbara, with Miss Letts, an absent-minded companion,
came and sat by her side. Barbara and Mary had met at a party--not quite on equal terms, because
nine to seven is as sixty to thirty--but they had played hide-and-seek together, and had, by
chance, hidden in the same cupboard.

The little boys had moved away, and Mary Adams's legs dropped, suddenly, their tension.

"I'm going to a party to-night," Mary said, with a studied indifference.

Miss Letts knew of Mary's parents, and that, socially, they were "all right"--a little more
"all right," were we to be honest, than Mr. and Mrs. Flint. She said, therefore:

"Are you, dear? That will be nice for you."

Instantly Barbara was trembling with excitement. She knew that the remark had been made to
her and not at all to Miss Letts. Barbara entered once again, and instantly, upon the field
of the passions. Here she was fated by her temperament to be in all cases a miserable victim,
because panic, whether she were accepted or rejected by the object of her devotion, reduced
her to incoherent foolishness; she could only be foolish now, and, although her heart beat
like a leaping animal inside her, allowed Miss Letts to carry on the conversation.

But Miss Letts's wandering eye hurt Mary's pride. She was not really interested in her, and
once Mary had come to that conclusion about any one, complete, utter oblivion enveloped them.
She perceived, however, Barbara's agitation, and at that, flattered and appeased, she was amiable
again. There followed between the two a strangled and disconnected conversation.

Mary began:

"I've got four dolls at home."

"Have you?" breathlessly from Barbara. By such slow accuracies as these are we conveyed, all
our poor mortal days, from realism to romance, and with a shocking precipitance are we afterwards
flung back, out of romance into realism, our natural home, again.

"Yes--four dolls I have. My mother will give me another if I ask her. Would your mother?"

"Yes," said Barbara, untruthfully.

"That's my governess, Miss Marsh, there, with the green hat, that is. I've had her two months."

"Yes," said Barbara, gazing with adoring eyes.

"She's going away next week. There's another coming. I can do sums, can you?"

"Yes," again from Barbara.

"I can do up to twice-sixty-three. I'm nine. Miss Marsh says I'm clever."

"I'm seven," said Barbara.

"I could read when I was seven--long, long words. Can you read?"

At this moment there arrived the green-hatted Miss Marsh, a plump, optimistic person, to whom
Miss Letts was gloomily patronising. Miss Letts always distrusted stoutness in another; it
looked like deliberate insult. Mary Adams was conveyed away; Barbara was bereft of her glory.

But, rather, on that instant that Mary Adams vanished did she become glorified. Barbara had
been too absurdly agitated to transform on to the mirror of her brain Mary's appearance. In
all the dim-coloured splendour of flame and mist was Mary now enwrapped, with every step that
Barbara took towards her home did the splendour grow.

III

Then followed an invitation to tea from Mary's mother. Barbara, preparing for the event, suffered
her hair to be brushed, choked with strange half-sweet, half-terrible suffocation that comes
from anticipated glories: half-sweet because things will, at their worst, be wonderful; half-terrible
because we know that they will not be so good as we hope.

Barbara, washed paler than ever, in a white frock with pink bows, was conducted by Miss Letts.
She choked with terror in the strange hall, where she was received with great splendour by
Mary. The schoolroom was large and fine and bright, finer far than Barbara's room, swamped
by the waters of religion and politics. Barbara could only gulp and gulp, and feel still at
her throat that half-sweet, half-terrible suffocation. Within her little body her heart, so
huge and violent, was pounding.

"A very nice room indeed," said Miss Letts, more friendly now to the optimist because she was
leaving in a day or two, and could not, therefore, at the moment be considered a success. Her
failure balanced her plumpness.

Here, at any rate, was the beginning of a great friendship between Barbara Flint and Mary Adams.
The character of Mary Adams was admittedly a difficult one to explore; her mother, a cloud
of nurses and a company of governesses had been baffled completely by its dark caverns and
recesses. One clue, beyond question, was selfishness; but this quality, by the very obviousness
of it, may tempt us to believe that that is all. These are sometimes priests and persons of station,
but more commonly peasants whose friends or relatives are brigands. During the French-republican
rule of Naples, when Manhès was at the head of the troops assigned the duty of extirpating
brigandage, the robbers were for once destroyed by the terrible measures taken against their
accomplices. No one suspected of communicating with them in any way was spared. Men were shot for
selling them food. Women and children taking food into the fields to eat while at work were shot,
under an order forbidding this custom lest the provisions should fall into the hands of the robbers.
For once, the authorities outbid the brigands for the terror of the wretched inhabitants, and annihilated
them.

But it was natural, in a country where every peasant is a possible brigand, and only waits for
a lawless impulse or lawless deed to make him an actual brigand, that brigandage should flourish
again as soon as the rigid procedure against it was relaxed. The returning Bourbons found it on
every hill; and though they combated it with fitful severity and unremitting treachery, they left
it essentially unimpaired to the Italian government in 1860. It is by no means true--as Mr. Moens
asserts upon the authority of Murray's Guide-Book--that the late Bourbon government did anything
towards effectually suppressing brigandage. The brigands were put down in one place to spring up in
another, and they swarmed everywhere after a lean harvest.

They never were effectually suppressed, except by Manhès; and, as the Italian government has
mercifully refused to adopt his course for their destruction, it is probable that they will exist
until the country is generally opened with roads, and the people educated, and, above all, Protestantized.
For it must never be forgotten that, since the union of Naples with Italy, brigandage has been
fostered by the Bourbons and the Papists, and that the Italians have had to fight, not only the
robbers in Naples, but Francis II. and Pius IX. at Rome.

To the readers of the newspapers, the name of Mr. Moens is known as that of the English gentleman
who was taken by brigands in May of last year, on his return from a little pleasure excursion
to Pæstum. He and his party--consisting of his wife and the Rev. Mr. Aynsley and wife--had
trusted too implicitly in the notice given by their landlord that the road from Salerno to
the famous temples was free from brigands, and guarded by troops. Near a little town called
Battipaglia, the military having been withdrawn temporarily to permit
the families of some captives to negotiate their ransom with the band
of Giardullo, the band of Manzo swooped down upon the unhappy tourists,
and carried off both the gentlemen of the party.

 He'd be there just where you wanted him--when the light was
out or anything. And he was nice." Barbara sighed.

Mary stared at her, seeming in the first full sweep of confidence, to be almost alarmed.

"You don't mean----?" She stopped, then cried, "Why, you silly, you believe in ghosts!"

"No, I don't," said Barbara, not far from tears.

"Yes, you do."

"No, I don't."

"Of course you do, you silly."

"No, I don't. He--he's real."

"Well," Mary said, with a final toss of the head, "if you go seeing ghosts like that you can't
have me for your friend, Barbara Flint--you can choose, that's all."

Barbara was aghast. Such a catastrophe had never been contemplated. Lose Mary? Sooner life
itself. She resolved, sorrowfully, to say no more about her Friend. But here occurred a strange
thing. It was as though Mary felt that over this one matter Barbara had eluded her; she returned
to it again and again, always with contemptuous but inquisitive allusion.

"Did he come last night, Barbara?"

"No."

"P'r'aps he did, only you were asleep."

"No, he didn't."

"You don't believe he'll come ever any more, do you? Now that I've said he isn't there really?"

"Yes, I do."

"Very well, then, I won't see you to-morrow--not at all--not all day--I won't."

These crises tore Barbara's spirit. Seven is not an age that can reason with life's difficulties,
and Barbara had, in this business, no reasoning powers at all. She would die for Mary; she
could not deny her Friend. What was she to do? And yet--just at this moment when, of all others,
it was important that he should come to her and confirm his reality--he made no sign. Not only
did he make no sign, but he seemed to withdraw, silently and surely, all his supports. Barbara
discovered that the company of Mary Adams did in very truth make everything that was not sure
and certain absurd and impossible. There was visible no longer, as there had been before, that
country wherein anything was possible, where wonderful things had occurred and where wonderful
things would surely occur again.

"You're pretending," said Mary Adams sharply when Barbara ventured some possibly extravagant
version of some ordinary occurrence, or suggested that events, rich and wonderful, had occurred
during the night. "Nonsense," said Mary sharply.

She said "nonsense" as though it were the very foundation of her creed of life--as, indeed,
to the end of her days, it was. What, then, was Barbara to do? Her friend would not come, although
passionately she begged and begged and begged that he would. Mary Adams was there every day,
sharp, and shining, and resolved, demanding the whole of Barbara Flint, body and soul--nothing
was to be kept from her, nothing. What was Barbara Flint to do?

She denied her Friend, denied that earlier world, denied her dreams and her hopes. She cried
a good deal, was very lonely in the dark. Mary Adams, as was her way, having won her victory,
passed on to win another.

IV

Mary began, now, to find Barbara rather tiresome. Having forced her to renounce her gods, she
now despised her for so easy a renunciation. Every day did she force Barbara through her act
of denial, and the Inquisition of Spain held, in all its records, nothing more cruel.

"Did he come last night?"

"No."

"He'll never come again, will he?"

"No."

"Wasn't it silly of you to make up stories like that?"

"Oh, Mary--yes."

"There aren't ghosts, nor fairies, nor giants, nor wizards, nor Santa Claus?"

"No; but, Mary, p'r'aps----"

"No; there aren't. Say there aren't."

"There isn't."

Poor Barbara, even as she concluded this ceremony, clutching her doll close to her to give
her comfort, could not refrain from a hurried glance over her shoulder. He might be---- But
upon Mary this all began soon enough to pall. She liked some opposition. She liked to defeat
people and trample on them and then be gracious. Barbara was a poor little thing. Moreover,
Barbara's standard of morality and righteousness annoyed her. Barbara seemed to have no idea
that there was anything in this confused world of ours except wrong and right. No dialectician,
argue he ever so stoutly, could have persuaded Barbara that there was such a colour in the
world's paint-box as grey. "It's bad to tell lies. It's bad to steal. It's bad to put your
tongue out. It's good to be kind to poor people. It's good to say 'No' when you want more pudding
but mustn't have it." Barbara was no prig. She did not care the least little thing about these
things, nor did she ever mention them, but let a question of conduct arise, then was Barbara's
way plain and clear. She did not always take it, but there it was. With Mary, how very different!
She had, I am afraid, no sense of right and wrong at all, but only a coolly ironical perception
of the things that her elders disliked and permitted. Very foolish and absurd, these elders.
We have always before our eyes some generation that provokes our irony, the one before us,
the one behind us, our own perhaps; for Mary Adams it would always be any generation that was
not her own. Her business in life was to avoid unpleasantness, to extract the honey from every
flower, but above all to be admired, praised, preferred.

At first with her pleasure at Barbara's adoration she had found, within herself, a truly alarming
desire to be "good." It might, after all, be rather amusing to be, in strict reality, all the
fine things that Barbara considered her. She endeavoured for a week or two to adjust herself
to this point of view, to consider, however slightly, whether it were right or wrong to do
something that she particularly wished to do.

But she found it very tiresome. The effort spoilt her temper, and no one seemed to notice any
change. She might as well be bad as good were there no one present to perceive the difference.
She gave it up, and, from that moment found that she suffered Barbara less gladly than before.
Meanwhile, in Barbara also strange forces had been at work. She found that her imagination
(making up stories) simply, in spite of all the Mary Adamses in the world, refused to stop.
Still would the almond tree and the fountain, the gold dust on the roofs of the houses when
the sun was setting, the racing hurry of rain drops down the window-pane, the funny old woman
with the red shawl who brought plants round in a wheelbarrow, start her story telling.

Still could she not hold herself from fancying, at times, that her doll Jane was a queen, and
that Miss Letts could make "spells" by the mere crook of her bony fingers. Worst of all, still
she must think of her Friend, tell herself with an ache that he would never come back again,
feel, sometimes, that she would give up Mary and all the rest of the world if he would only
be beside her bed, as he used to be, talking to her, holding her hand. During these days, had
there been any one to observe her, she was a pathetic little figure, with her thin legs like
black sticks, her saucer eyes that so readily filled with tears, her eager, half-apprehensive
expression, the passionate clutch of the doll to her heart, and it is, after all, a painful
business, this adoration--no human soul can live up to the heights of it, and, what is more,
no human soul ought to.

As Mary grew tired of Barbara she allowed to slip from her many of the virtuous graces that
had hitherto, for Barbara's benefit, adorned her. She lost her temper, was cruel simply for
the pleasure that Barbara's ill-restrained agitation yielded her, but, even beyond this, squandered
recklessly her reputation for virtue. Twice, before Barbara's very eyes, she told lies, and
told them, too, with a real mastery of the craft--long practice and a natural disposition had
brought her very near perfection. Barbara, her heart beating wildly, refused to understand;
Mary could not be so. She held Jane to her breast more tightly than before. And the denials
continued; twice a day now they were extorted from her--with every denial the ghost of her
Friend stole more deeply into the mist. He was gone; he was gone; and what was left?

Very soon, and with unexpected suddenness, the crisis came.

V

Upon a day Barbara accompanied her mother to tea with Mrs. Adams. The ladies remained downstairs
in the dull splendour of the drawing-room; Mary and Barbara were delivered to Miss Fortescue,
the most recent guardian of Mary's life and prospects.

"She's simply awful. You needn't mind a word she says," Mary instructed her friend, and prepared
then to behave accordingly. They had tea, and Mary did as she pleased. Miss Fortescue protested,
scolded, was weak when she should have been strong, and said often, "Now, Mary, there's a dear."

Barbara, the faint colour coming and going in her cheeks, watched. She watched Mary now with
quite a fresh intention. She had begun her voyage of discovery: what was in Mary's head, what
would she do next? What Mary did next was to propose, after tea, that they should travel through
other parts of the house.

"We'll be back in a moment," Mary flung over her head to Miss Fortescue. They proceeded then
through passages, peering into dark rooms, looking behind curtains, Barbara following behind
her friend, who seemed to be moved by a rather aimless intention of finding something to do
that she shouldn't. They finally arrived at Mrs. Adams's private and particular sitting-room,
a place that may be said, in the main, to stand as a protest against the rule of the ancient
philosopher, being all pink and flimsy and fragile with precious vases and two post-impressionist
pictures (a green apple tree one, the other a brown woman), and lace cushions and blue bowls
with rose leaves in them. Barbara had never been into this room before, nor had she ever in
all her seven years seen anything so lovely.

"Mother says I'm never to come in here," announced Mary. "But I do--lots. Isn't it pretty?"

"P'r'aps we oughtn't----" began Barbara.

"Oh, yes, we ought," answered Mary scornfully. "Always you and your 'oughtn't.'"

She turned, and her shoulders brushed a low bracket that was close to the door. A large Nankin
vase was at her feet, scattered into a thousand pieces. Even Mary's proud indifference was
stirred by this catastrophe, and she was down on her knees in an instant, trying to pick up
the pieces. Barbara stared, her eyes wide with horror.

"Oh, Mary," she gasped.

"You might help instead of just standing there!"

Then the door opened and, like the avenging gods from Olympus, in came the two ladies, eagerly,
with smiles.

"Now I must just show you," began Mrs. Adams. Then the catastrophe was discovered--a moment's
silence, then a cry from the poor lady: "Oh, my vase! It was priceless!" (It was not, but no
matter.)

About Barbara the air clung so thick with catastrophe that it was from a very long way indeed
that she heard Mary's voice:

"Barbara didn't mean-----"

"Did you do this, Barbara?" her mother turned round upon her.

"You know, Mary, I've told you a thousand times that you're not to come in here!" this from
Mrs. Adams, who was obviously very angry indeed.

Mary was on her feet now and, as she looked across at Barbara, there was in her glance a strange
look, ironical, amused, inquisitive, even affectionate. "Well, mother, I knew we mustn't. But
Barbara wanted to look so I said we'd just peep, but that we weren't to touch anything, and
then Barbara couldn't help it, really; her shoulder just brushed the shelf----" and still as
she looked there was in her eyes that strange irony: "Well, now you see me as I am--I'm bored
by all this pretending. It's gone on long enough. Are you going to give me away?"

But Barbara could do nothing. Her whole world was there, like the Nankin vase, smashed about
her feet, as it never, never would be again.

"So you did this, Barbara?" Mrs. Flint said.

"Yes," said Barbara. Then she began to cry.

VI

At home she was sent to bed. Her mother read her a chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew,
and then left her; she lay there, sick with crying, her eyes stiff and red, wondering how she
would ever get through the weeks and weeks of life that remained to her. She thought: "I'll
never love any one again. Mary took my Friend away--and then she wasn't there herself. There
isn't anybody."

Then it suddenly occurred to her that she need never be put through the agony of her denials
again, that she could believe what she liked, make up stories.

Her Friend would, of course, never come to see her any more, but at least now she would be
able to think about him. She would be allowed to remember. Her brain was drowsy, her eyes half
closed. Through the humming air something was coming; the dark curtains were parted, the light
of the late afternoon sun was faint yellow upon the opposite wall--there was a little breeze.
Drowsily, drowsily, her drooping eyes felt the light, the stir of the air, the sense that some
one was in the room.

She looked up; she gave a cry! He had come back! He had come back after all!

CHAPTER VIII

SARAH TREFUSIS

I

Sarah Trefusis lived, with her mother, in the smallest house in March Square, a really tiny
house, like a box, squeezed breathlessly between two fat buildings, but looking, with its white
paint and green doors, smarter than either of them. Lady Charlotte Trefusis, Sarah's mother,
was elegant, penniless and a widow; Captain B. Trefusis, her husband, had led the merriest
of lives until a game of polo carried him reluctantly from a delightful world and forced Lady
Charlotte to consider the problem of having a good time alone on nothing at all. But it may
be said that, on the whole, she succeeded. She was the best-dressed widow in London, and went
everywhere, but the little house in March Square was the scene of a most strenuous campaign,
every day presenting its defeat or victory, and every minute of the day threatening overwhelming
disaster if something were not done immediately. Lady Charlotte had the smallest feet and hands
outside China, a pile of golden hair above the face of a pink-and-white doll. Staring from
this face, however, were two of the loveliest, most unscrupulous of eyes, and those eyes did
more for Lady Charlotte's precarious income than any other of her resources. She wore her expensive
clothes quite beautifully, and gave lovely little lunches and dinners; no really merry house-party
was complete without her.

Sarah was her only child, and, although at the time of which I am writing she was not yet nine
years of age, there was no one in London better suited to the adventurous and perilous existence
that Fate had selected for her. Sarah was black as ink--that is, she had coal black hair, coal
black eyes, and wonderful black eyelashes. Her eyelashes were her only beautiful feature, but
she was, nevertheless, a most remarkable looking child. "If ever a child's possessed of the
devil, my dear Charlotte," said Captain James Trent to her mother, "it's your precious daughter--she
is the devil, I believe."

"Well, she needs to be," said her mother, "considering the life that's in store for her. We're
very good friends, she and I, thank you."

They were. They understood one another to perfection. Lady Charlotte was as hard as nails,
and Sarah was harder. Sarah had never been known to cry. She had bitten the fingers of one
of her nurses through to the bone, and had stuck a needle into the cheek of another whilst
she slept, and had watched, with a curious abstracted gaze, the punishment dealt out to her,
as though it had nothing to do with her at all. She never lost her temper, and one of the most
terrible things about her was her absolute calm. She was utterly fearless, went to the dentist
without a tremor, and, at the age of six, fell downstairs, broke her leg, and so lay until
help arrived without a cry. She bullied and hurt anything or anybody that came her way, but
carried out her plans always with the same deliberate abstraction as though she were obeying
somebody's orders. She never nourished revenge or resentment, and it seemed to be her sense
of humour (rather than any fierce or hostile feeling) that was tickled when she hurt any one.

She was a child, apparently without imagination, but displayed, at a very early period, a strangely
sharpened perception of what her nurse called "the uncanny." She frightened even her mother
by the expression that her face often wore of attention to something or somebody outside her
companion's perception.

"A broomstick is what she'll be flying away on one of these nights, you mark my word," a nurse
declared. "Little devil, she is, neither more nor less. It isn't decent the way she sits on
the floor looking right through the wall into the next room, as you might say. Yes, and knows
who's coming up the stairs long before she's seen 'em. No place for a decent Christian woman,
and so I told her mother this very morning." It was, of course, quite impossible to find a
nurse to stay with Sarah, and, when she arrived at the age of seven, nurses were dismissed,
and she either looked after herself or was tended by an abandoned French maid of her mother's,
who stayed with Lady Charlotte, like a wicked, familiar spirit, for a great number of years
on a strange basis of confidante, fellow-plunderer, and sympathetic adventurer. This French
maid, whose name was, appropriately enough, Hortense, had a real affection for Sarah "because
she was the weeckedest child of 'er age she ever see." There was nothing of which Sarah, from
the very earliest age, did not seem aware. Her mother's gentlemen friends she valued according
to their status in the house, and, as they "fell off" or "came on," so was her manner indifferent
or pleasant. For Hortense, she had a real respect, but even that improper and brazen spirit
quailed at times before her cynical and elfish regard. To say of a child that there is something
"unearthly" about it is, as a rule, to pay a compliment to ethereal blue and gold. There was
nothing ethereal about Sarah, and yet she was unearthly enough. Squatting on the floor, her
legs tucked under her, her head thrust forward, her large black eyes staring at the wall, her
black hair almost alive in the shining intensity of its colours, she had in her attitude the
lithe poise of some animal ready to spring, waiting for its exact opportunity.

When her mother, in a temper, struck her, she would push her hair back from her face with a
sharp movement of her hand and then would watch broodingly and cynically for the next move.
"You hit me again," she seemed to say, "and you will make a fool of yourself."

She was aware, of course, of a thousand influences in the house of which her mother and Hortense
had never the slightest conception. From the cosy security of her cradle she had watched the
friendly spirit who had accompanied (with hostile irritation) her entrance into this world.
His shadow had, for a long period, darkened her nursery, but she repelled, with absolute assurance,
His kindly advances.

"I'm not frightened. I don't, in the least, want things made comfortable for me. I can get
along very nicely, indeed, without you. You're full of sentiment and gush--things that I detest--and
it won't be the least use in the world for you to ask me to be good, and tender, and all the
rest of it. I'm not like your other babies."

He must have known, of course, that she was not, but, nevertheless, He stayed. "I understand
perfectly," He assured her. "But, nevertheless, I don't give you up. You may be, for all you
know, more interesting to me than all the others put together. And remember this--every time
you do anything at all kind or thoughtful, every time you think of any one or care for them,
every time you use your influence for good in any way, my power over you is a little stronger,
I shall be a little closer to you, your escape will be a little harder."

"Oh, you needn't flatter yourself," she answered Him. "There's precious little danger of my
self-sacrifice or love for others. That's not going to be my attitude to life at all. You'd
better not waste your time over me."

She had not, she might triumphantly reflect, during these eight years, given Him many chances,
and yet He was still there. She hated the thought of His patience, and somewhere deep within
herself she dreaded the faint, dim beat of some response that, like a warning bell across a
misty sea, cautioned her. "You may think you're safe from Him, but He'll catch you yet."

"He shan't," she replied. "I'm stronger than He is."

II

This must sound, in so prosaic a summary of it, fantastic, but nothing could be said to be
fantastic about Sarah. She was, for one thing, quite the least troublesome of children. She
could be relied upon, at any time, to find amusement for herself. She was full of resources,
but what these resources exactly were it would be difficult to say. She would sit for hours
alone, staring in front of her. She never played with toys--she did not draw or read--but she
was never dull, and always had the most perfect of appetites. She had never, from the day of
her birth, known an hour's illness.

It was, however, in the company of other children that she was most characteristic. The nurses
in the Square quite frankly hated her, but most of the mothers had a very real regard for Lady
Charlotte's smart little lunches; moreover, it was impossible to detect Sarah's guilt in any
positive fashion. It was not enough for the nurses to assure their mistresses that from the
instant that the child entered the gardens all the other children were out of temper, rebellious,
and finally unmanageable.

"Nonsense, Janet, you imagine things. She seems a very nice little girl."

"Well, ma'am, all I can say is, I won't care to be answerable for Master Ronald's behaviour
when she does come along, that's all. It's beyond belief the effect she 'as upon 'im."

The strangest thing of all was that Sarah herself liked the company of other children. She
went every morning into the gardens (with Hortense) and watched them at their play. She would
sit, with her hands folded quietly on her lap, her large black eyes watching, watching, watching.
It was odd, indeed, how, instantly, all the children in the garden were aware of her entrance.
She, on her part, would appear to regard none of them, and yet would see them all. Perched
on her seat she surveyed the gardens always with the same gaze of abstracted interest, watching
the clear, decent paths across whose grey background at the period of this episode, the October
leaves, golden, flaming, dun, gorgeous and shrivelled, fell through the still air, whirled,
and with a little sigh of regret, one might fancy, sank and lay dead. The October colours,
a faint haze of smoky mist, the pale blue of the distant sky, the brown moist earth, were gentle,
mild, washed with the fading year's regretful tears; the cries of the children, the rhythmic
splash of the fountain throbbed behind the colours like some hidden orchestra behind the curtain
at the play; the statues in the garden, like fragments of the white bolster clouds that swung
so lazily from tree to tree; had no meaning in that misty air beyond the background that they
helped to fill. The year, thus idly, with so pleasant a melancholy, was slipping into decay.

Sarah would watch. Then, without a word, she would slip from her seat, and, walking solemnly,
rather haughtily, would join some group of children. Day after day the same children came to
the gardens, and they all of them knew Sarah by now. Hortense, in her turn also, sitting, stiff
and superior, would watch. She would see Sarah's pleasant approach, her smile, her amiability.
Very soon, however, there would be trouble--some child would cry out; there would be blows;
nurses would run forward, scoldings, protests, captives led away weeping ... and then Sarah
would return slowly to her seat, her gaze aloof, cynical, remote. She would carefully explain
to Hortense the reason of the uproar. She had done nothing--her conscience was clear. These
silly little idiots. She would break into French, culled elaborately from Hortense, would end
disdainfully--"mais, voilà,"--very old for her age.

Hortense was vicious, selfish, crude in her pursuit of pleasure, entirely unscrupulous, but,
as the days passed, she was, in spite of herself, conscious of some half-acknowledged, half-decided
terror of Sarah's possibilities.

The child was eight years old. She was capable of anything; in her remote avoidance of any
passion, any regret, any anticipated pleasure, any spontaneity, she was inhuman. Hortense thought
that she detected in the chit's mother something of her own fear.

III

There used to come to the gardens a little fat red-faced girl called Mary Kitson, the child
of simple and ingenuous parents (her father was a writer of stories of adventure for boys'
papers); she was herself simple-minded, lethargic, unadventurous, and happily stupid. Walking
one day slowly with Hortense down one of the garden paths, Sarah saw Mary Kitson engaged in
talking to two dolls, seated on a bench with them, patting their clothes, very happy, her nurse
busy over a novelette.

Sarah stopped.

"I'll sit here," she said, walked across to the bench and sat down. Mary looked up from her
dolls, and then, nervously and self-consciously, went back to her play. Sarah stared straight
before her.

Hortense amiably endeavoured to draw the nurse into conversation.

"You 'ave 'ere ze fine gardens," she said. "It calls to mind my own Paris. Ah, the gardens
in Paris!"

But the nurse had been taught to distrust all foreigners, and her views of Paris were coloured
by her reading. She admired Hortense's clothes, but distrusted her advances.

She buried herself even more deeply in the paper. Poor Mary Kitson, alas! found that, in some
undefinable manner, the glory had departed from her dolls. Adrian and Emily were, of a sudden,
glassy and lumpy abstractions of sawdust and china. Very timidly she raised her large, stupid
eyes and regarded Sarah. Sarah returned the glance and smiled. Then she came close to Mary.

"It's better under there," she said, pointing to the shade of a friendly tree.

"May I?" Mary said to her nurse with a frightened gasp.

"Well, now, don't you go far," said the nurse, with a fierce look at Hortense.

"You like where you are?" asked Hortense, smiling more than ever. "You 'ave a good place?"
Slowly the nurse yielded. The novelette was laid aside.

Impossible to say what occurred under the tree. Now and again a rustle of wind would send the
colours from the trees to short branches loaded with leaves of red gold, shivering through
the air; a chequered, blazing canopy covered the ground.

Mary Kitson had, it appeared, very little to say. She sat some way from Sarah, clutching Adrian
and Emily tightly to her breast, and always her large, startled eyes were on Sarah's face.
She did not move to drive the leaves from her dress; her heart beat very fast, her cheeks were
very red.

Sarah talked a little, but not very much. She asked questions about Mary's home and her parents,
and Mary answered these interrogations in monosyllabic gasps. It appeared that Mary had a kitten,
and that this kitten was a central fact of Mary's existence. The kitten was called Alice.

"Alice is a silly name for a kitten. I shouldn't call a kitten Alice," said Sarah, and Mary
started as though in some strange, sinister fashion she were instantly aware that Alice's life
and safety were threatened.

From that morning began a strange acquaintance that certainly could not be called a friendship.
There could be no question at all that Mary was terrified of Sarah; there could also be no
question that Mary was Sarah's obedient slave. The cynical Hortense, prepared as she was for
anything strange and unexpected in Sarah's actions, was, nevertheless, puzzled now.

One afternoon, wet and dismal, the two of them sitting in a little box of a room in the little
box of a house, Sarah huddled in a chair, her eyes staring in front of her, Hortense sewing,
her white, bony fingers moving sharply like knives, the maid asked a question:

"What do you see--Sar-ah--in that infant?"

"What infant?" asked Sarah, without moving her eyes.

"That Mary with whom now you always are."

"We play games together," said Sarah.

"You do not. You may be playing a game--she does nothing. She is terrified--out of her life."

"She is very silly. It's funny how silly she is. I like her to be frightened."

Mary's nurse told Mary's mother that, in her opinion, Sarah was not a nice child. But Sarah
had been invited to tea at the confused, simple abode of the Kitson family, and had behaved
perfectly.

"I think you must be wrong, nurse," said Mrs. Kitson. "She seems a very nice little girl. Mary
needs companions. It's good for her to be taken out of herself."

Had Mrs. Kitson been of a less confused mind, however, had she had more time for the proper
observation of her daughter, she would have noticed her daughter's pale cheeks, her daughter's
fits of crying, her daughter's silences. Even as the bird is fascinated by the snake, so was
Mary Kitson fascinated by Sarah Trefusis.

"You are torturing that infant," said Hortense, and Sarah smiled.

IV

Mary was by no means the first of Sarah's victim's. There had been many others. Utterly aloof,
herself, from all emotions of panic or terror, it had, from the very earliest age, interested
her to see those passions at work in others. Cruelty for cruelty's sake had no interest for
her at all; to pull the wings from flies, to tie kettles to the tails of agitated puppies,
to throw stones at cats, did not, in the least, amuse her. She had once put a cat in the fire,
but only because she had seen it play with a terrified mouse. That had affronted her sense
of justice. But she was gravely and quite dispassionately interested in the terror of Mary
Kitson. In later life a bull fight was to appear to her a tiresome affair, but the domination
of one human being over another, absorbing. She had, too, at the very earliest age, that conviction
that it was pleasant to combat all sentiment, all appeals to be "good," all soft emotions of
pity, anything that could suggest that Right was of more power than Might.

It was as though she said, "You may think that even now you will get me. I tell you I'm a rebel
from the beginning; you'll never catch me showing affection or sympathy. If you do you may
do your worst."

Beyond all things, her anxiety was that, suddenly, in spite of herself, she would do something
"soft," some weak kindness. Her power over Mary Kitson reassured her.

The fascination of this power very soon became to her an overwhelming interest. Playing with
Mary Kitson's mind was as absorbing to Sarah, as chess to an older enthusiast; her discoveries
promised her a life full of entertainment, if, with her fellow-mortals, she was able, so easily,
"to do things," what a time she would always have. She discovered, very soon, that Mary Kitson
was, by nature, truthful and obedient, that she had a great fear of God, and that she loved
her parents. Here was fine material to work upon. She began by insisting on little lies.

"Say our clocks were all wrong, and you couldn't know what the time was."

"Oh, but----"

"Yes, say it."

"Please, Sarah."

"Say it. Otherwise I'll be punished too. Mind, if you don't say it, I shall know."

There was the horrible threat that effected so much. Mary began soon to believe that Sarah
was never absent from her, that she attended her, invisibly, her little dark face peering over
Mary's shoulder, and when Mary was in bed at night, the lights out, and only shadows on the
walls, Sarah was certainly there, her mocking eyes on Mary's face, her voice whispering things
in Mary's ears.

Sarah, Mary very soon discovered, believed in nothing, and knew everything. This horrible combination,
naturally, affected Mary, who believed in everything and knew nothing.

"Why should we obey our mothers?" said Sarah. "We're as good as they are."

"Oh, no," said Mary, in a voice shocked to a strangled whisper. Nevertheless, she began, a
little, to despise her confused parents. There came a day when Mary told a very large lie indeed;
she said that she had brushed her teeth when she had not, and she told this lie quite unprompted
by Sarah. She was more and more miserable as the days passed.

No one knew exactly the things that the two little girls did when they were alone on an afternoon
in Sarah's room. Sarah sent Hortense about her business, and then set herself to the subdual
of Mary's mind and character. There would be moments like this, Sarah would turn off the electric
light, and the room would be lit only by the dim shining of the evening sky.

"Now, Mary, you go over to that corner--that dark one--and wait there till I tell you to come
out. I'll go outside the room, and then you'll see what will happen."

"Oh, no, Sarah, I don't want to."

"Why not, you silly baby?"

"I--I don't want to."

"Well, it will be much worse for you if you don't."

"I want to go home."

"You can after you have done that."

"I want to go home now."

"Go into the corner first."

Sarah would leave the room and Mary would stand with her face to the wall, a trembling prey
to a thousand terrors. The light would quiver and shake, steps would tread the floor and cease,
there would be a breath in her ears, a wind above her head. She would try to pray, but could
remember no words. Sarah would lead her forth, shaking from head to foot.

"You little silly. I was only playing."

Once, and this hurried the climax of the episode, Mary attempted rebellion.

"I want to go home, Sarah."

"Well, you can't. You've got to hear the end of the story first."

"I don't like the story. It's a horrid story. I'm going home."

"You'd better not."

"Yes, I will, and I won't come again, and I won't see you again. I hate you. I won't. I won't."

Mary, as she very often did, began to cry. Sarah's lips curled with scorn.

"All right, you can. You'll never see Alice again if you do."

"Alice?"

"Yes, she'll be drowned, and you'll have the toothache, and I'll come in the middle of the
night and wake you."

"I--I don't care. I'm go-going home. I'll t-t-ell m-other."

"Tell her. But look out afterwards, that's all."

Mary remained, but Sarah regarded the rebellion as ominous. She thought that the time had come
to put Mary's submission really to the test.

V

The climax of the affair was in this manner. Upon an afternoon when the rain was beating furiously
upon the window-panes and the wind struggling up and down the chimney, Sarah and Mary played
together in Sarah's room; the play consisted of Mary shutting her eyes and pretending she was
in a dark wood, whilst Sarah was the tiger who might at any moment spring upon her and devour
her, who would, in any case, pinch her legs with a sudden thrust which would drive all the
blood out of Mary's face and make her "as white as the moon."

This game ended, Sarah's black eyes moved about for a fresh diversion; her gaze rested upon
Mary, and Mary whispered that she would like to go home.

"Yes. You can," said Sarah, staring at her, "if you will do something when you get there."

"What?" said Mary, her heart beating like a heavy and jumping hammer.

"There's something I want. You've got to bring it me."

Mary said nothing, only her wide eyes filled with tears.

"There's something in your mother's drawing-room. You know in that little table with the glass
top where there are the little gold boxes with the silver crosses and things. There's a ring
there--a gold one with a red stone--very pretty. I want it."

Mary drew a long, deep breath. Her fat legs in the tight, black stockings were shaking.

"You can go in when no one sees. The table isn't locked, I know, because I opened it once.
You can get and bring it to me to-morrow in the garden."

"Oh," Mary whispered, "that would be stealing."

"Of course it wouldn't. Nobody wants the old ring. No one ever looks at it. It's just for fun."

"No," said Mary, "I mustn't."

"Oh, yes, you must. You'll be very sorry if you don't. Dreadful things will happen. Alice----"

Mary cried softly, choking and spluttering and rubbing her eyes with the back of her hand.

"Well, you'd better go now. I'll be in the garden with Hortense to-morrow. You know, the same
place. You'd better have it, that's all. And don't go on crying, or your mother will think
I made you. What's there to cry about? No one will eat you."

"It's stealing."

"I dare say it belongs to you, and, anyway, it will when your mother dies, so what does it
matter? You are a baby!"

After Mary's departure Sarah sat for a long while alone in her nursery. She thought to herself:
"Mary will be going home now and she'll be snuffling to herself all the way back, and she won't
tell the nurse anything, I know that. Now she's in the hall. She's upstairs now, having her
things taken off. She's stopped crying, but her eyes and nose are red. She looks very ugly.
She's gone to find Alice. She thinks something has happened to her. She begins to cry again
when she sees her, and she begins to talk to her about it. Fancy talking to a cat...."

The room was swallowed in darkness, and when Hortense came in and found Sarah sitting alone
there, she thought to herself that, in spite of the profits that she secured from her mistress
she would find another situation. She did not speak to Sarah, and Sarah did not speak to her.

Once, during the night, Sarah woke up; she sat up in bed and stared into the darkness. Then
she smiled to herself. As she lay down again she thought:

"Now I know that she will bring it."

The next day was very fine, and in the glittering garden by the fountain, Sarah sat with Hortense,
and waited. Soon Mary and her nurse appeared. Sarah took Mary by the hand and they went away
down the leaf-strewn path.

"Well!" said Sarah.

Mary quite silently felt in her pocket at the back of her short, green frock, produced the
ring, gave it to Sarah, and, still without a word, turned back down the path and walked to
her nurse. She stood there, clutching a doll in her hand, stared in front of her, and said
nothing. Sarah looked at the ring, smiled, and put it into her pocket.

At that instant the climax of the whole affair struck, like a blow from some one unseen, upon
Sarah's consciousness. She should have been triumphant. She was not. Her one thought as she
looked at the ring was that she wished Mary had not taken it. She had a strange feeling as
though Mary, soft and heavy and fat, were hanging round her neck. She had "got" Mary for ever.
She was suddenly conscious that she despised Mary, and had lost all interest in her. She didn't
want the ring, nor did she ever wish to see Mary again.

She gazed about the garden, shrugged her thin, little, bony shoulders as though she were fifty
at least, and felt tired and dull, as on the day after a party. She stood and looked at Mary
and her nurse; when she saw them walk away she did not move, but stayed there, staring after
them. She was greatly disappointed; she did not feel any pleasure at having forced Mary to
obey her, but would have liked to have smacked and bitten her, could these violent actions
have driven her into speech. In some undetermined way Mary's silence had beaten Sarah. Mary
was a stupid, silly little girl, and Sarah despised and scorned her, but, somehow, that was
not enough; from all of this, it simply remained that Sarah would like now to forget her, and
could not. What did the silly little thing mean by looking like that? "She'll go and hug her
Alice and cry over it." If only she had cried in front of Sarah that would have been something.

Two days later Lady Charlotte was explaining to Sarah that so acute a financial crisis had
arrived "as likely as not we shan't have a roof over our heads in a day or two."

"We'll take an organ and a monkey," said Sarah.

"At any rate," Lady Charlotte said, "when you grow up you'll be used to anything."

Mrs. Kitson, untidy, in dishevelled clothing, and great distress, was shown in.

"Dear Lady Charlotte, I must apologise--this absurd hour--but I--we--very unhappy about poor
Mary. We can't think what's the matter with her. She's not slept for two nights--in a high
fever, and cries and cries. The Doctor--Dr. Williamson--really clever--says she's unhappy about
something. We thought--scarlet fever--no spots--can't think--perhaps your little girl."

"Poor Mrs. Kitson. How tiresome for you. Do sit down. Perhaps Sarah----"

Sarah shook her head.

"She didn't say she'd a headache in the garden the other day."

Mrs. Kitson gazed appealingly at the little black figure in front of her.

"Do try and remember, dear. Perhaps she told you something."

"Nothing" said Sarah.

"She cries and cries," said Mrs. Kitson, about whose person little white strings and tapes
seemed to be continually appearing and disappearing.

"Perhaps she's eaten something?" suggested Lady Charlotte.

When Mrs. Kitson had departed, Lady Charlotte turned to Sarah.

"What have you done to the poor child?" she said.

"Nothing," said Sarah. "I never want to see her again."

"Then you have done something?" said Lady Charlotte.

"She's always crying," said Sarah, "and she calls her kitten Alice," as though that were explanation
sufficient.

The strange truth remains, however, that the night that followed this conversation was the
first unpleasant one that Sarah had ever spent; she remained awake during a great part of it.
It was as though the hours that she had spent on that other afternoon, compelling, from her
own dark room, Mary's will, had attached Mary to her. Mary was there with her now, in her bedroom.
Mary, red-nosed, sniffing, her eyes wide and staring.

"I want to go home."

"Silly little thing," thought Sarah. "I wish I'd never played with her."

In the morning Sarah was tired and white-faced. She would speak to no one. After luncheon she
found her hat and coat for herself, let herself out of the house, and walked to Mrs. Kitson's,
and was shown into the wide, untidy drawing-room, where books and flowers and papers had a
lost and strayed air as though a violent wind had blown through the place and disturbed everything.

Mrs. Kitson came in.

"You, dear?" she said.

Sarah looked at the room and then at Mrs. Kitson. Her eyes said: "What a place! What a woman!
What a fool!"

"Yes, I've come to explain about Mary."

"About Mary?"

"Yes. It's my fault that she's ill. I took a ring out of that little table there--the gold
ring with the red stone--and I made her promise not to tell. It's because she thinks she ought
to tell that she's ill."

"You took it? You stole it?" Before Mrs. Kitson's simple mind an awful picture was now revealed.
Here, in this little girl, whom she had preferred as a companion for her beloved Mary, was
a thief, a liar, and one, as she could instantly perceive, without shame.

"You stole it!"

"Yes; here it is." Sarah laid the ring on the table.

Mrs. Kitson gazed at her with horror, dismay, and even fear.

"Why? Why? Don't you know how wrong it is to take things that don't belong to you?"

"Oh, all that!" said Sarah, waving her hand scornfully. '"I don't want the silly thing, and
I don't suppose I'd have kept it, anyhow. I don't know why I've told you," she added. "But
I just don't want to be bothered with Mary any more."

"Indeed, you won't be, you wicked girl," said Mrs. Kitson. "To think that I--my grand-father's--I'd
never missed it. And you haven't even said you're sorry."

"I'm not," said Sarah quietly. "If Mary wasn't so tiresome and silly those sort of things wouldn't
happen. She makes me----"

Mrs. Kitson's horror deprived her of all speech, so Sarah, after one more glance of amused
cynicism about the room, retired.

As she crossed the Square she knew, with happy relief, that she was free of Mary, that she
need never bother about her again. Would all the people whom she compelled to obey her hang
round her with all their stupidities afterwards? If so, life was not going to be so entertaining
as she had hoped. In her dark little brain already was the perception of the trouble that good
and stupid souls can cause to bold and reckless ones. She would never bother with any one so
feeble as Mary again, but, unless she did, how was she ever to have any fun again?

Then as she climbed the stairs to her room, she was aware of something else.

"I've caught you, after all. You have been soft. You've yielded to your better nature. Try
as you may you can't get right away from it. Now you'll have to reckon with me more than ever.
You see you're not stronger than I am."

Before she opened the door of her room she knew that she would find Him there, triumphant.

With a gesture of impatient irritation she pushed the door open.

CHAPTER IX

YOUNG JOHN SCARLETT

I

That fatal September--the September that was to see young John take his adventurous way to
his first private school--surely, steadily approached.

Mrs. Scarlett, an emotional and sentimental little woman, vibrating and taut like a telegraph
wire, told herself repeatedly that she would make no sign. The preparations proceeded, the
date--September 23rd--was constantly evoked, a dreadful ghost, by the careless, light-hearted
family. Mr. Scarlett made no sign.

From the hour of John's birth--nearly ten years ago--Mrs. Scarlett had never known a day when
she had not been compelled to control her sentimental affections. From the first John had been
an adorable baby, from the first he had followed his father in the rejection of all sentiment
as un-English, and even if larger questions are involved, unpatriotic, but also from the first
he had hinted, in surprising, furtive, agitating moments, at poetry, imagination, hidden, romantic
secrets. Tom, May, Clare, the older children, had never been known to hint at anything--hints
were not at all in their line, and of imagination they had not, between them, enough to fill
a silver thimble--they were good, sturdy, honest children, with healthy stomachs and an excellent
determination to do exactly the things that their class and generation were bent upon doing.
Mrs. Scarlett was fond of them, of course, and because she was a sentimental woman she was
sometimes quite needlessly emotional about them, but John--no. John was of another world.

The other children felt, beyond question, this difference. They deferred to John about everything
and regarded him as leader of the family, and in their deference there was more than simply
a recognition of his sturdy independence. Even John's father, Mr. Reginald Scarlett, a K.C.,
and a man of a most decisive and emphatic bearing, felt John's difference.

John's appearance was unengaging rather than handsome--a snub nose, grey eyes, rather large
ears, a square, stocky body and short, stout legs. He was certainly the most independent small
boy in England, and very obstinate; when any proposal that seemed on the face of it absurd
was made to him, he shut up like a box. His mouth would close, his eyes disappear, all light
and colour would die from his face, and it was as though he said: "Well, if you are stupid
enough to persist in this thing you can compel me, of course--you are physically stronger than
I--but you will only get me like this quite dead and useless, and a lot of good may it do you!"

There were times, of course, when he could be most engagingly pleasant. He was courteous, on
occasion, with all the beautiful manners that, we are told, are yielding so sadly before the
spread of education and the speed of motor-cars--you never could foretell the guest that he
would prefer, and it was nothing to him that here was an aunt, an uncle, or a grandfather who
must be placated, and there an uninvited, undesired caller who mattered nothing at all. Mr.
Scarlett's father he offended mortally by expressing, in front of him, dislike for hair that
grew in bushy profusion out of that old gentleman's ears.

"But you could cut it off," he argued, in a voice thick with surprised disgust. His grandfather,
who was a baronet, and very wealthy, predicted a dismal career for his grandchild.

All the family realised quite definitely that nothing could be done with John. It was fortunate,
indeed, that he was, on the whole, of a happy and friendly disposition. He liked the world
and things that he found in it. He liked games, and food, and adventure--he liked quite tolerably
his family--he liked immensely the prospect of going to school.

There were other things--strange, uncertain things--that lay like the dim, uncertain pattern
of some tapestry in the back of his mind. He gave them, as the months passed, less and less
heed. Only sometimes when he was asleep....

Meanwhile, his mother, with the heroism worthy of Boadicea, that great and savage warrior,
kept his impulses of devotion, of sacrifice, of adoration, in her heart. John had no need of
them; very long ago, Reginald Scarlett, then no K.C., with all the K.C. manner, had told her
that he did not need them either. She gave her dinner parties, her receptions, her political
gatherings--tremulous and smiling she faced a world that thought her a wise, capable little
woman, who would see her husband a judge and peer one of these days.

"Mrs. Scarlett--a woman of great social ambition," was their definition of her.

"Mrs. Scarlett--the mother of John," was her own.

II

On a certain night, early in the month of September, young John dreamt again--but for the first
time for many months--the dream that had, in the old days, come to him so often. In those days,
perhaps, he had not called it a dream. He had not given it a name, and in the quiet early days
he had simply greeted, first a protector, then a friend. But that was all very long ago, when
one was a baby and allowed oneself to imagine anything. He had, of course, grown ashamed of
such confiding fancies, and as he had become more confident had shoved away, with stout, determined
fingers, those dim memories, poignancies, regrets. How childish one had been at four, and five,
and six! How independent and strong now, on the very edge of the world of school! It perturbed
him, therefore, that at this moment of crisis this old dream should recur, and it perturbed
him the more, as he lay in bed next morning and thought it over, that it should have seemed
to him at the time no dream at all, but simply a natural and actual occurrence.

He had been asleep, and then he had been awake. He had seen, sitting on his bed and looking
at him with mild, kind eyes his old Friend. His Friend was always the same, conveying so absolutely
kindness and protection, and his beard, his hands, the appealing humour of his gaze, recalled
to John the early years, with a swift, imperative urgency. John, so independent and assured,
felt, nevertheless, again that old alarm of a strange, unreal world, and the necessity of an
appeal for protection from the only one of them all who understood.

"Hallo!" said John.

"Well?" said his Friend. "It's many months since I've been to see you, isn't it?"

"That's not my fault," said John.

"In a way, it is. You haven't wanted me, have you? Haven't given me a thought."

"There's been so much to do. I'm going to school, you know."

"Of course. That's why I have come now."

Beside the window a dark curtain blew forward a little, bulged as though some one were behind
it, thinned again in the pale dim shadows of a moon that, beyond the window, fought with driving
clouds. That curtain would--how many ages ago!--have tightened young John's heart with terror,
and the contrast made by his present slim indifference drew him, in some warm, confiding fashion,
closer to his visitor.

"Anyway, I'm jolly glad you've come now. I haven't really forgotten you, ever. Only in the
day-time----"

"Oh, yes, you have," his Friend said, smiling. "It's natural enough and right that you should.
But if only you will believe always that I once was here, if only you'll not be persuaded into
thinking me impossible, silly, absurd, sentimental--with ever so many other things--that's
all I've come now to ask you."

"Why, how should I ever?" John demanded indignantly.

"After all, I was a help--for a long time when things were difficult and you had so much to
learn--all that time you wanted me, and I was here."

"Of course," said John politely, but feeling within him that warning of approaching sentiment
that he had learnt by now so fundamentally to dread.

Very well his friend understood his apprehension.

"That's all. I've only come to you now to ask you to make me a promise--a very easy one."

"Yes?" said John.

"It's only that when you go off to school--before you leave this house--you will just, for
a moment, remember me just then, and say good-bye to me. We've been a lot here in these rooms,
in these passages, up and down together, and if only, as you go, you'll think of me, I'll be
there.... Every year you've thought of me less--that doesn't matter--but it matters more than
you know that you should remember me just for an instant, just to say good-bye. Will you promise
me?"

"Why, of course," said John.

"Don't forget! Don't forget! Don't forget!" And the kindly shadow had faded, the voice lingering
about the room, mingling with the faint silver moonlight, passing out into the wider spaciousness
of the rolling clouds.

III

With the clear light of morning came the confident certainty that it had all been the merest
dream, and yet that certainty did not sweep the affair, as it should have done, from young
John's brain and heart. He was puzzled, perplexed, disturbed, unhappy. The "twenty-third" was
approaching with terrible rapidity, and it was essential now that he should summon to aid all
the forces of manly self-control and common-sense. And yet, just at this time, of all others,
came that disturbing dream, and, in its train, absurd memories and fancies, burdened, too,
with an urgent prompting of gratitude to some one or something. He shook it off, he obstinately
rebelled, but he dreaded the night, and, with a sigh of relief, hailed the morning that followed
a dreamless sleep.

Worst of all, he caught himself yielding to thoughts like these: "But he was kind to me--awfully
decent" (a phrase caught from his elder brother). "I remember how He ..." And then he would
shake himself. "It was only a silly old dream. He wasn't real a bit. I'm not a rotten kid now
that thinks fairies and all that true."

He was bothered, too, by the affectionate sentiment (still disguised, but ever, as the days
proceeded, more thinly) of his mother and sisters. The girls, May and Clare, adored young John.
His elder brother was away with a school friend. John, therefore, was left to feminine attention,
and very tiresome he found it. May and Clare, girls of no imagination, saw only the drama that
they might extract for themselves out of the affair. They knew what school was like, especially
at first--John was going to be utterly wretched, miserably homesick, bullied, kept in over
horrible sums and impossible Latin exercises, ill-fed, and trodden upon at games. They did
not really believe these things--they knew that their brother, Tom, had always had a most pleasant
time, and John was precisely the type of boy who would prosper at school, but they indulged,
just for this fortnight, their romantic sentiment, never alluded in speech to school and its
terrors, but by their pitying avoidance of the subject filled the atmosphere with their agitation. One,
in particular, we were told, obtained amongst them, namely, that the mastodon still exists
in the fastnesses of the Upper Mackenzie. They describe it as a monster many times larger than
the buffalo, and they dread going into the parts it is supposed to haunt. This singular opinion
may be the survival of a very old tradition regarding that animal,
but is more likely due to the presence of its remains in the shape
of tusks and bones found here and there throughout the Mackenzie River
district and the Yukon.

[A similar belief, it is said, exists amongst the Indians of the Yukon. The remains of the primeval
elephant are exceedingly abundant in the tundras of Siberia, and a considerable trade in mammoth
ivory has been carried on between that region and England for many years. It is supposed that
the Asian elephant advanced far to the North during the interglacial period and perished in the
recurrent glacial epoch. Its American congener, the mastodon, found its way from Asia to this
continent during the Drift period, when, it is believed, land communication existed in what is
now Bering's Strait, and perished in a like manner.

It was not a sudden but a gradual extinction in their native habitats, due to natural causes,
such as encroaching ice and other material changes in the animals' environment. This, I believe,
is the accepted scientific opinion of to-day. But the fact that these animals are at times exposed
entire by the falling away of ice-cliffs or ledges, their flesh being
quite fresh and fit food for dogs, and even men, opens up a very interesting
field of inquiry and conjecture.

In the bowels of a mammoth recently revealed in North-Eastern Siberia vegetable food was found,
probably tropical, at all events unknown to the botany of to-day. The foregoing facts seem to
be at variance with the doctrine of Uniformity, or with anything like a slow process. The entombment
of these animals must have been very sudden, and due, one would naturally think, to a tremendous
cataclysm followed by immediate freezing, else their flesh would have become tainted. A recent
English writer predicts another deluge owing to the constant accumulation of ice at the Antarctic
Pole, which for untold ages has been attracting and freezing the waters of the Northern Hemisphere.
A lowering process, he says, has thus been going on in the ocean levels to the north through
immeasurable time, its record being the ancient water-marks now high up on the mountain sides
of British Columbia and elsewhere.

It is certainly not unthinkable that, if subject to such a displacement of its centre of gravity,
our planet at some inconceivably remote period capsized, so that what were before the Tropics became
the Poles, and that such a catastrophe is not only possible but is certain to happen again.
As a conjecture it may be unscientific; but how many of the accepted
theories of science have ceased to be!

As a matter of fact, she has been very busy burying her dead, particularly of late years, and her
theory of the extinction of the primeval elephant may yet prove to be one of them.]

On the 9th the steamer Grahame arrived from Smith's Landing, bringing
with her about 120 baffled Klondikers, returning to the United States,
there being still some sixty more, they said, down the Mackenzie River,
who intended to make their way out, if possible, before winter.

They had a solitary woman with them who had discarded a duffer husband, and who looked very self-reliant,
indeed, being girt about with bowie-knife and revolver, but otherwise not alarming.

It was certainly a motley crowd, and some of its members by no means
honest.

Chief-factor Camsell, who had just come from Fort Simpson, told me they had stolen from every
house where they had a chance, and mentioned, amongst other things, a particularly ungrateful
theft of a whip-saw from a native's cabin shortly after an Indian had, with much pains, overtaken
them with a similar one, which they had lost on the trail. Their departure, therefore, was
not lamented, and the natives were glad to get rid of them.

We ourselves boarded the steamer for Fort McMurray on the 11th, but, owing to bad weather, did
not get off till midday, and even then the lake was so rough that
we had to anchor for a while in the lee of an island.

Colin Fraser had started ahead of us with his big scow and cargo of furs, valued at $15,000,
and kept ahead with his fine crew of ten expert trackers. When the weather calmed we steamed
across to the entrance of one of the various channels connecting the Athabasca River with the
lake, and soon found ourselves skirting the most extensive marshes and feeding-grounds for game
in all Canada; a delta renowned throughout the North for its abundance of waterfowl, far surpassing
the St. Clair flats, or any other region in the East.

Next morning, upon rounding a point, three full-grown moose were seen ahead, swimming across the
river. An exciting, and even hazardous, scene ensued on board, the
whole Klondike crowd firing, almost at random, hundreds of shots without
effect.

Two of the noble brutes kept on, and reached the shore, disappearing in the woods; but the third,
a three year-old bull moose, foolishly turned, and lost its life in consequence. It was hauled
on deck, bled and flayed, and was a welcome addition to the steamer's
table.

That night a concert was improvised on deck, in which the music-hall element came to the front.
But one speedily tired of the "Banks of the Wabash," and other ditties; in fact, we were burning
to get to Fort McMurray, where we expected letters and papers from the outer world and home,
and nothing else could satisfy us. By evening we had passed Burnt Point, also Poplar Point, where
the body of an unfortunate, called Patterson, who had been drowned
in one of the rapids above, was recovered in spring by some Indians,
the body being completely enclosed in a transparent coffin of ice.

On the following day we passed Little Red River, and next morning
reached the fort, where, to our infinite joy, we received the longed-for
letters and papers--our first correspondence from the far East.

Fort McMurray consisted of a tumble-down cabin and trading-store on
the top of a high and steep bank, which had yet been flooded at times,
the people seeking shelter on an immense hill which overlooked it.

Above an island close by is the discharge of the Clearwater River, the old canoe route by which
the supplies for the district used to come, via Isle a la Crosse.

At McMurray we left the steamer and took to our own boats, our Commission occupying one, and
Mr. Laird and party the other.

The trackers got into harness at once, and made very good time for some miles, the current not
being too swift just here for fast traveling.

Chapter IX

The Athabasca River Region.

We were now traversing perhaps the most interesting region in all the North. In the neighbourhood
of McMurray there are several tar-wells, so called, and there, if a hole is scraped in the bank,
it slowly fills in with tar mingled with sand. This is separated by boiling, and is used, in
its native state, for gumming canoes and boats.

Farther up are immense towering banks, the tar oozing at every pore,
and underlaid by great overlapping dykes of disintegrated limestone,
alternating with lofty clay exposures, crowned with poplar, spruce
and pine.

On the 15th we were still following the right bank, and, anon, past giant clay escarpments along
it, everywhere streaked with oozing tar, and smelling like an old ship.

These tar cliffs are here hundreds of feet high, of a bold and impressive
grandeur, and crowned with firs which seem dwarfed to the passer-by.

The impregnated clay appears to be constantly falling off the almost sheer face of the slate-brown
cliffs, in great sheets, which plunge into the river's edge in broken masses. The opposite river
bank is much more depressed, and is clothed with dense forest.

The tar, whatever it may be otherwise, is a fuel, and burned in our camp-fires like coal. That
this region is stored with a substance of great economic value is
beyond all doubt, and, when the hour of development comes, it will,
I believe, prove to be one of the wonders of Northern Canada.

We were all deeply impressed by this scene of Nature's chemistry, and realized what a vast
storehouse of not only hidden but exposed resources we possess in this enormous country. What is
unseen can only be conjectured; but what is seen would make any region famous. We now came
once more to outcrops of limestone in regular layers, with disintegrated masses overlying
them, or sandwiched between their solid courses.

A lovely niche, at one point, was scooped out of the rock, over the
coping of which poured a thin sheet of water, evidently impregnated
with mineral, and staining the rock down which it poured with variegated
tints of bronze, beautified by the morning sun.

With characteristic grandeur the bends of the river "shouldered" into each other, giving the expanses
the appearance of lakelets; and after a succession of these we came to the first rapid, "The
Mountain"--Watchíkwe Powistic--so called from a peak at its head,
which towered to a great height above the neighbouring banks.

The rapid extends diagonally across the river in a low cascade, with
a curve inward towards the left shore.

It was decided to unload and make the portage, and a very ticklish
one it was.

The boats, of course, had to be hauled up stream by the trackers,
and grasping their line I got safely over, and was thankful.

How the trackers managed to hold on was to me a mystery; but the steep and slippery bank was
mere child's play to them. The right bank, from its break and downward, bears a very thick growth
of alders, and here we found the wild onion, and a plant resembling spearmint.

In the evening we reached the next rapid, called the Cascades--Nepe
Kabátekik--"Where the water falls," and camping there, we had a symposium
in our tent, which I could not enjoy, having headache and heartburn,
a nasty combination.

The 16th was the hottest day of the season--a hard one on the trackers, who now pulled along
walls of solid limestone, perpendicular or stepped, or wrought into elaborate cornices, as if by
the art of some giant stonecutter. At one place we came to a lovely little rideau, and on the
opposite shore were two curious caves, scooped out of the rock, and supported by Egyptian-like
columns wrought by the age-action of water.

Towards evening we reached the Crooked Rapid--Kah́wakak o Poẃestik--and here the portage path
followed on the summit of the limestone rampart, which the viscous gumbo-slides made almost
impassable in rainy weather, and indeed very dangerous, forming, at the time we passed, pits
of mud and broken masses of half-hard clay, along the very verge of the wall of rock, likely
at any moment to give way and precipitate one into the raging torrent below. At other parts the
path was jammed out to the wall-edge, to be stepped round with a gulp in the throat. But these
and other features of a like interesting character, though a lively experience to the tenderfoot,
were of no account whatever to those wonderful trackers. At one of the worst spots I was hesitating
as to how and where I should step next, when a carrier, returning for his load, seeing my
fix, humped his back with a laugh and gave me a lift over.

We camped for the night below a point where the river makes a sharp bend, parallel with its course.
This we surmounted in the morning, following a rounded wall of limestone, for all the world
like a decayed rampart of some ancient city. A wide floor of rock at its base made beautiful walking
to a place where the lofty escarpment showed exposures of limestone
underlying an enormous mass of dark sandstone, topped by tar-clay.

It is a portentous cliff, bearing a curiously Eastern look, as if some great pyramid had been riven
vertically, and the exposed surface scarred and scooped by the weather into a multitude of
antic hollows, grotesque projections, and unimaginable shapes. Here, also, the knives of passers-by
had carved numerous autographs, marring the majestic cliff with their ludicrous incongruity.
Are we not all sinners in this way? "John Jones," cut into a fantastic buttress which would fittingly
adorn a wizard's temple, may be a poor exhibit of human vanity; but,
after all, the real John Jones is more imperishable than the rock,
which seems scaling, anyway, from the top, and may, by and by, carry
the inscriptions with it.

It was hard to tear one's self away from such a wonderful structure
as this, the most striking feature of its kind on the whole river.

Farther on, escarped banks, consisting of boulders and pebbles imbedded in tenacious clay, rose
to a great height, their tops clothed with rich moss, and wooded with a close growth of pine,
the hollows being full of delicious raspberries, now dead ripe.

By and by we encountered the Long Rapids--Kaúkinwauk Powestik--and,
some hours afterwards, entered the Middle Rapid--Tuwáo Powestik--the
worst we had yet come to, full of boulders and sharp rocks, with a
strong current.

Very dexterous management was required here on the part of steersman
and bowman; a snapt line or a moment's neglect, and a swing to broadside
would have followed, and spelled ruin.

It was evening before this rapid was surmounted, and all hands, dog-tired with the long day's pull,
were glad to camp at the foot of the Boiler Rapid, the next in our
ascent, and so called from the wrecking of a scow containing a boiler
for one of the Hudson's Bay Company's steamers.

It was the most uncomfortable of camps, the night being close, and filled with the small and
bloodthirsty Athabasca mosquito, by all odds the most vicious of
its kind.

This rapid is strewn with boulders which show above water, making
it a very "nice" and toilsome thing to steer and track a boat safely
over it, but the tracking path itself is stony and firm, a fortunate
thing at such a place.

There are no exposures of rock at the foot of this rapid; but along its upper part runs a ledge
of asphalt-like rock as smooth as a street pavement, with an outer edge as neatly rounded as
if done with a chisel. This was the finest bit of tracking path on the river, excepting, perhaps,
the great pavement beneath the cliff at the Long Rapids.

In this region the river scenery changes to a succession of cut-banks, exposed in all directions,
and in almost all situations. Immense towering hills of sand, or clay, are cut down vertically,
some facing the river, others at right angles to it, and others inland, and almost inclosed by
projecting shoulders of the wooded heights. These cut-banks carry layers of stone here and
there, and are specked with boulders, and in some places massed into projecting crests, which
threaten destruction to the passer-by.

Otherwise the scenery is desolate, mountainous always, and wooded, but with much burnt timber,
which gives a dreary look to the region.

The cut-banks are unique, however, and would make the fortune of an Eastern river, though here
little noticed on account of their number.

It was now the 18th, and the weather was intensely hot, foreboding change and the August freshet.
We had camped about eight miles below the Burnt Rapid, and the men
were very tired, having been in the water pretty much since morning.

Directly opposite our camp was a colossal cliff of clay, around which,
looking upward, the river bent sharply to the south-west, very striking
as seen beneath an almost full moon breaking from a pile of snowy
clouds, whilst dark and threatening masses gathered to the north.

The early, foggy morning revealed the freshet.

The river, which had risen during the night, and had forced the trackers from their beds to
higher ground, was littered from bank to bank with floating trees,
logs and stumps, lifted from many a drift up stream, and borne down
by the furious current.

At one of the short breathing spells the water rose two inches in twenty minutes, and the
tracking became exceedingly bad, the men floundering to their waists in water, or footing it insecurely
on steep and slippery ledges along the water's marge. About mid-day the anticipated change took
place in the weather. Thick clouds closed in with a driving rain and a high raw wind, presaging
the end of summer.

It was now, of course, very bad going, and camp was made, in the heavy rain, on a high flat about
two miles below the Burnt Rapid. Though a tough spot to get up to, the flat proved to be a prime
place for our camp, with plenty of dead fallen and standing timber, and soon four or five "long
fires" were blazing, a substantial supper discussed, and comfort succeeded misery. The next day
(Sunday) was much enjoyed as a day of rest, the half-breeds at their beloved games, the officials
writing letters. The weather was variable; the clouds broke and gathered by turns, with slight
rain towards evening, and then it cleared. As a night camp it was picturesque, the full moon
in the south gleaming over the turbid water, and the boatmen lounging around the files like
so many brigands.

Next morning we surmounted the Brulé Rapid--Pusitáo Poẃestik--short but powerful, with a sharp
pointed rock at its head, very troublesome to get around. Above this rapid the bank consists
of a solid, vertical rampart of red sandstone, its base and top and
every crack and crevice clothed with a rich vegetation--a most beautiful
and striking scene, forming a gigantic amphitheatre, concentred by
the seeming closing-in of the left bank at Point Brulé upon the long
straight line of sandstone wall on the right.

Nothing finer, indeed, could be imagined in all this remarkable river's remarkable scenery
than this impressive view, not from jutting peaks, for the sky-line
of the banks runs parallel with the water, but from the antique grandeur
of their sweep and apparent junction.

That afternoon we rounded Point Brulé, a high, bold cliff of sandstone with three "lop-sticks"
upon its top. The Indian's lop-stick, called by the Cree piskoot́enusk, is a sort of living
talisman which he connects in some mysterious way with his own fate, and which he will often
go many miles out of his direct course to visit.

Even white men fall in with the fetish, and one of the three we saw was called "Lambert's lop-stick."
I myself had one made for me by Gros Oreilles, the Saulteau Chief, nearly forty years ago, in the
forest east of Pointe du Chene, in what is now Manitoba. They are made by stripping a tall spruce
tree of a deep ring of branches, leaving the top and bottom ones intact. The tree seems to
thrive all the same, and is a very noticeable, and not infrequent, object throughout the whole
Thickwood Indian country.

Just opposite the cliff referred to, the Little Buffalo, a swift creek, enters between two bold shoulders
of hills, and on its western side are the wonderful gas springs.

He came out on to the common and saw the village, the long straggling street with the white-washed
cottages and the hideous grey-slate roofs; the church tower, rising out of the elms, and the
pond, running to the common's edge, its water chequered with the reflection of the white clouds
above it.

The main street of Clinton is not a lovely street; the inland villages and towns of Glebeshire
are, unless you love them, amongst the ugliest things in England, but every step caught at
Seymour's heart.

There was Mr. Roscoe's shop which was also the post-office, and in its window was the same
collection of liquorice sticks, saffron buns, reels of cotton, a coloured picture of the royal
family, views of Trezent Head, Borhaze Beach, St. Arthe Church, cotton blouses made apparently
for dolls, so minute were they, three books, "Ben Hur," "The Wide, Wide World," and "St. Elmo,"
two bottles of sweets, some eau-de-Cologne, and a large white card with bone buttons on it.
So moving was this collection to Seymour that he stared at the window as though he were in
a trance.

The arrangement of the articles was exactly the same as it had been in the earlier days--the
royal family in the middle, supported by the jars of sweets; the three books, very dusty and
faded, in the very front; and the bootlaces and liquorice sticks all mixed together as though
Mr. Roscoe had forgotten which was which.

"Look here, Bim," he said aloud, "I've left you up--I really am going off my head!" he thought.
He hurried away. "If I am mad I'm awfully happy," he said.

III

The white vicarage gate closed behind him with precisely the old-remembered sound--the whiz,
the sudden startled pause, the satisfied click. Seymour stood on the sun-bathed lawn, glittering
now like green glass, and stared at the house. Its square front of faded red brick preserved
a tranquil silence; the only sound in the place was the movement of some birds, his old friend
the robin perhaps in the laurel bushes behind him.

Although the sun was so warm there was in the air a foreshadowing of a frosty night; and some
Christmas roses, smiling at him from the flower beds to right and left of the hall door, seemed
to him that they remembered him; but, indeed, the whole house seemed to tell him that. There
it waited for him, so silent, laid ready for his acceptance under the blue sky and with no
breath of wind stirring. So beautiful was the silence, that he made a movement with his hand
as though to tell his companion to be quiet. He felt that they were crowded in an interested,
amused group behind him waiting to see what he would do. Then a little bell rang somewhere
in the house, a voice cried "Martha!"

He moved forward and pulled the wire of the bell; there was a wheezy jangle, a pause, and then
a sharp irritated sound far away in the heart of the house, as though he had hit it in the
wind and it protested. An old woman, very neat (she was certainly a Glebeshire woman), told
him that Mr. Trenchard was at home. She took him through the dark passages into the study that
he knew so well, and said that Mr. Trenchard would be with him in a moment.

It was the same study, and yet how different! Many of the old pieces of furniture were there--the
deep, worn leather arm-chair in which Mr. Lasher had been sitting when he had his famous discussion
with Mr. Pidgen, the same bookshelves, the same tiles in the fireplace with Bible pictures
painted on them, the same huge black coal-scuttle, the same long, dark writing-table. But instead
of the old order and discipline there was now a confusion that gave the room the air of a waste-paper
basket. Books were piled, up and down, in the shelves, they dribbled on to the floor and lay
in little trickling streams across the carpet; old bundles of papers, yellow with age, tied
with string and faded blue tape, were in heaps upon the window-sill, and in tumbling cascades
in the very middle of the floor; the writing-table itself was so hopelessly littered with books,
sermon papers, old letters and new letters, bottles of ink, bottles of glue, three huge volumes
of a Bible Concordance, photographs, and sticks of sealing-wax, that the man who could be happy
amid such confusion must surely be a kindly and benevolent creature. How orderly had been Mr.
Lasher's table, with all the pens in rows, and little sharp drawers that clicked, marked A,
B, and C, to put papers into.

Mr. Trenchard entered.

He was what the room had prophesied--fat, red-faced, bald, extremely untidy, with stains on
his coat and tobacco on his coat, that was turning a little green, and chalk on his trousers.
His eyes shone with pleased friendliness, but there was a little pucker in his forehead, as
though his life had not always been pleasant. He rubbed his nose, as he talked, with the back
of his hand, and made sudden little darts at the chalk on his trousers, as though he would
brush it off. He had the face of an innocent baby, and when he spoke he looked at his companion
with exactly the gaze of trusting confidence that a child bestows upon its elders.

"I hope you will forgive me," said Seymour, smiling; "I've come, too, at such an awkward time,
but the truth is I simply couldn't help myself. I ought, besides, to catch the four o'clock
train back to Polchester."

"Yes, indeed," said Mr. Trenchard, smiling, rubbing his hands together, and altogether in the
dark as to what his visitor might be wanting.

"Ah, but I haven't explained; how stupid of me! My name is Seymour. I was here during several
years, as a small boy, with Canon Lasher--in my holidays, you know. It's years ago, and I've
never been back. I was at Polchester this morning and suddenly felt that I must come over.
I wondered whether you'd be so good as to let me look a little at the house and garden."

There was nothing that Mr. Trenchard would like better. How was Canon Lasher? Well? Good. They
met sometimes at meetings at Polchester. Canon Lasher, Mr. Trenchard believed, liked it better
at Polchester than at Clinton. Honestly, it would break Mr. Trenchard's heart if he had to
leave the place. But there was no danger of that now. Would Mr. Seymour--his wife would be
delighted--would he stay to luncheon?

"Why, that is too kind of you," said Seymour, hesitating, "but there are so many of us, such
a lot--I mean," he said hurriedly, at Mr. Trenchard's innocent stare of surprise, "that it's
too hard on Mrs. Trenchard, with so little notice."

He broke off confusedly.

"We shall only be too delighted," said Mr. Trenchard. "And if you have friends ..."

"No, no," said Seymour, "I'm quite alone."

When, afterwards, he was introduced to Mrs. Trenchard in the drawing-room, he liked her at
once. She was a little woman, very neat, with grey hair brushed back from her forehead. She
was like some fresh, mild-coloured fruit, and an old-fashioned dress of rather faded green
silk, and a large locket that she wore gave her a settled, tranquil air as though she had always
been the same, and would continue so for many years. She had a high, fresh colour, a beautiful
complexion and her hands had the delicacy of fragile egg-shell china. She was cheerful and
friendly, but was, nevertheless, a sad woman; her eyes were dark and her voice was a little
forced as though she had accustomed herself to be in good spirits. The love between herself
and her husband was very pleasant to see.

Like all simple people, they immediately trusted Seymour with their confidence. During luncheon
they told him many things, of Rasselas, where Mr. Trenchard had been a curate, at their joy
at getting the Clinton living, and of their happiness at being there, of the kindness of the
people, of the beauty of the country, of their neighbours, of their relations, the George Trenchards,
at Garth of Glebeshire generally, and what it meant to be a Trenchard.

"There've been Trenchards in Glebeshire," said the Vicar, greatly excited, "since the beginning
of time. If Adam and Eve were here, and Glebeshire was the Garden of Eden, as I daresay it
was, why, then Adam was a Trenchard."

Afterwards when they were smoking in the confused study, Seymour learnt why Mrs. Trenchard
was a sad woman.

"We've had one trial, under God's grace," said Mr. Trenchard. "There was a boy and a girl--Francis
and Jessamy. They died, both, in a bad epidemic of typhoid here, five years ago. Francis was
five, Jessamy four. 'The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away.' It was hard losing both of
them. They got ill together and died on the same day."

He puffed furiously at his pipe. "Mrs. Trenchard keeps the nursery just the same as it used
to be. She'll show it to you, I daresay."

Later, when Mrs. Trenchard took him over the house, his sight of the nursery was more moving
to him than any of his old memories. She unlocked the door with a sharp turn of the wrist and
showed him the wide sun-lit room, still with fresh curtains, with a wall-paper of robins and
cherries, with the toys--dolls, soldiers, a big dolls'-house, a rocking-horse, boxes of bricks.

"Our two children, who died five years ago," she said in her quiet, calm voice, "this was their
room. These were their things. I haven't been able to change it as yet. Mr. Lasher," she said,
smiling up at him, "had no children, and you were too old for a nursery, I suppose."

It was then, as he stood in the doorway, bathed in a shaft of sunlight, that he was again,
with absolute physical consciousness, aware of the children's presence. He could tell that
they were pressing behind him, staring past him into the room, he could almost hear their whispered
exclamations of delight.

He turned to Mrs. Trenchard as though she must have perceived that he was not alone. But she
had noticed nothing; with another sharp turn of the wrist she had locked the door.

IV

To-morrow was Christmas Eve: he had promised to spend Christmas with friends in Somerset. Now
he went to the little village post-office and telegraphed that he was detained; he felt at
that moment as though he would never like to leave Clinton again.

The inn, the "Hearty Cow," was kept by people who were new to him--"foreigners, from up-country."
The fat landlord complained to Seymour of the slowness of the Clinton people, that they never
could be induced to see things to their own proper advantage. "A dead-alive place I call it,"
he said; "but still, mind you," he added, "it's got a sort of a 'old on one." 

Two of the most admirable of Mr. Dana's notes are those on the "relations of the United States
judiciary to the Constitution and statutes," and on "the United States a supreme government"; and
they deserve careful perusal from all desirous of fully understanding our system of government.
From the first we cannot refrain from making one extract, which may help to explain to our non-professional
readers a difficult principle of law which we have never before seen so concisely and at the same time
so clearly stated.

"In cases before it, the Supreme Court has no other jurisdiction over constitutional questions
than is possessed by the humblest judicial tribunal, State or national,
in the land.

The only distinction is, that it is the court of final resort, from whose decision there is no
appeal. The relations of all courts to the Constitution arise simply from the fact that, being
courts of law, they must give to litigants before them the law; and the Constitution of the
United States is law, and not, like most European political constitutions, a collection of rules and
principles having only a moral obligation upon the legislative and
executive departments of the government.

Accordingly, each litigant, having the right to the highest law, may appeal from a statute of
Congress, or any other act of any officer or department, State or national, and invoke the Constitution
as the highest law. The court does not formally set aside or declare void any statute or ordinance
inconsistent with the Constitution.

It simply decides the case before it according to law; and if laws are in conflict, according
to that law which has the highest authority, that is, the Constitution. The effect of the
decree of the final court on the status of the parties or property in that suit is of course
absolute, and binds all departments of the government.

The constitutional principle involved in the decision, being ascertained from the opinion,--if
the court sees fit to deliver a full opinion,--has in all future
cases in courts of law simply the effect of a judicial precedent,
whatever that may be.

Upon the political department of the government and upon citizens the principle decided has,
in future cases, not the binding force of a portion of the Constitution, but the moral effect
due to its intrinsic weight and to the character of the tribunal,
and the practical authority derived from the consideration that all
acts inconsistent with it will be inoperative, by reason of the judicial
power which any citizen may invoke against their operation."

Our space will not allow us to make further quotations. Among those notes which are especially
interesting to the non-professional reader we may mention those on the much misunderstood Monroe
doctrine; on naturalization; on the effect of belligerent occupation on slavery, and the President's Proclamation
of Emancipation,--in which Mr. Dana maintains the same position that he has heretofore taken
in his political speeches, and of the correctness of which there can be no doubt; the very excellent
examination of the neutrality statutes and decisions, and the note on the case of the Trent,--a
model of calm, judicial dissertation. The recent agitation of the subjects of all of these makes
them matters of general interest, and we cannot but think that the
timely publication of this edition of Mr. Wheaton's work will aid
efficiently in the satisfactory settlement of some of them.

 I always waited. It must have been they. Only Francis
ever built the bricks like that, with the red ones in the middle. He always said they must be...."

She broke off and then, with her hands pressed to her face, cried, so softly and so gently
that she made scarcely any sound.

Seymour left her.

V

He passed through the house without any one seeing him, crossed the common, and went up to
his bedroom at the inn. He sat down before his window with his back to the room. He flung the
rattling panes wide.

The room looked out across on to the moor, and he could see, in the moonlight, the faint thread
of the beginning of the Borhaze Road. To the left of this there was some sharp point of light,
some cottage perhaps. It flashed at him as though it were trying to attract his attention.
The night was so magical, the world so wonderful, so without bound or limit, that he was prepared
now to wait, passively, for his experience. That point of light was where the Scarecrow used
to be, just where the brown fields rise up against the horizon. In all his walks to-day he
had deliberately avoided that direction. The Scarecrow would not be there now; he had always
in his heart fancied it there, and he would not change that picture that he had of it. But
now the light flashed at him. As he stared at it he knew that to-day he had completed that
adventure that had begun for him many years ago, on that Christmas Eve when he had met Mr. Pidgen.

They were whispering in his ear, "We've had a lovely day. It was the most beautiful nursery....
Two other children came too. They wore their things...."

"What, after all," said his Friend's voice, "does it mean but that if you love enough we are
with you everywhere--for ever?"

And then the children's voices again:

"She thought they'd come back, but they'd never gone away--really, you know."

He gazed once more at the point of light, and then turned round and faced the dark room....

THE END

