And Wes Thompson was one of these. Deep in him his emotions were stirring. The old tribal instinct--which
sent a man forth to fight for the tribe no matter the cause--was functioning under the layer
of stuff that civilization imposes on every man. His reason gainsaid these stirrings, those
instinctive urgings, but there was a stirring and it troubled him. He did not desire to die
in a trench, nor vanish in fragments before a bursting shell, nor lie face to the stars in
No Man's Land with a bayonet hole in his middle. He would not risk these fatalities for any
such academic idea as saving the world for democracy.

Always when that queer, semi-dormant tribe instinct suggested that he go fight with the tribe
against the tribal enemy his reason swiftly choked the impulse. He would not fight for a political
abstraction. He had read history. It is littered with broken treaties. If he fought it would
be because he felt there was need to strike a blow for something righteous. And his faith in
the righteousness of the Allied cause was still unfired. He saw no mission to compel justice,
to exact retribution, only a clash of Great Powers, in which the common man was fed to the
roaring guns.

But he was not so obtuse as to fail of seeing the near future. The Germans were proving a right
hard nut to crack. It might be--remotely--that a man would have no choice in the matter of
fighting. He saw that cloud on the horizon. Sometimes he wished that he could muster up a genuine
enthusiasm for this business of war. He saw men who had it and wondered privately how they
came by it.

If he could have felt it an imperative duty laid upon him, that would have settled certain
matters out of hand. Chief among these would have been the problem of Sophie Carr.

Sophie eluded and mystified him. Not wholly in a physical sense--although, to be exact, she
did become less accessible in a purely physical sense. But it went deeper than that. During
the eighteen months following Thompson's motor-sales début he never succeeded in establishing
between them the same sense of spiritual communion that he had briefly glimpsed those few minutes
in Carr's home on the way he opened his salesroom.

There was Tommy, for instance. Tommy was far closer to Sophie Carr than he, Thompson, could
manage to come, no matter how he tried. He and Tommy were friends. They had apartments in the
same house. They saw each other constantly. The matter of competition in business was purely
nominal. They were both too successful in business to be envious of each other in that respect.
But where Sophie Carr was concerned it was a conflict, no less existent because neither man
ever betrayed his consciousness of such a conflict. Indeed Thompson sometimes wondered uneasily
if Ashe's serenity came from an understanding with her. But he doubted that. Tommy had not
won--yet. That intangible yet impenetrable wall which was rising about Sophie was built of
other, sterner stuff.

She seldom touched on the war, never more than a casual sentence or two. Perhaps a phrase would
flash like a sword, and then her lips would close. Carr would discuss the war from any angle
whatsoever, at any time. It became an engrossing topic with him, as if there were phases that
puzzled him, upon which he desired light. He ceased to be positive. But his daughter shunned
war talk.

Yet the war levied high toll on her waking hours, and for that reason Thompson seldom saw her
save in company. His vision of little dinners, of drives together, of impromptu luncheons,
of a steady siege in which the sheer warmth of that passion in him should force capitulation
to his love--all those pleasant dreams went a-glimmering. Sophie was always on some committee,
directing some activity growing out of the war, Red Cross work, Patriotic Fund, all those manifold
avenues through which the women fought their share of Canada's fight. For a pleasure-loving
creature Sophie Carr seemed to have undergone an astonishing metamorphosis. She spent on these
things, quietly, without parade or press-agenting, all the energy in her, and she had no reserve
left for play. War work seemed to mean something to Sophie besides write-ups in the society
column and pictures of her in sundry poses. These things besides, surrounded her with all sorts
of fussy people, both male and female, and through this cordon Thompson seldom broke for confidential
talk with her. When he did Sophie baffled him with her calm detachment, a profound and ever-increasing
reserve--as if she had ceased to be a woman and become a mere, coldly beautiful mechanism for
seeing about shipments of bandage stuff, for collecting funds, and devising practical methods
of raising more funds and creating more supplies.

Thompson said as much to her one day. She looked at him unmoved, unsmiling. And something that
lurked in her clear gray eyes made him uncomfortable, sent him away wondering. It was as if
somehow she disapproved. A shadowy impression at best. He wondered if Tommy fared any better,
and he was constrained to think Tommy did because Tommy went in for patriotic work a good deal,
activities that threw him in pretty close contact with Sophie.

"I can spare the time," he confided to Thompson one day. "And it's good business. I meet some
pretty influential people. Why don't you spread yourself a little more, Wes? They'll be saying
you're a slacker if you don't make a noise."

"I don't fight the Germans with my mouth," Thompson responded shortly. And Tommy laughed.

"That's a popular weapon these days," he returned lightly. "It does no harm to go armed with it."

Thompson refrained from further speech. That very morning in the lobby of the Granada Thompson
had heard one man sneer at another for a slacker--and get knocked down for his pains. He did
not want to inflict that indignity on Tommy, and he felt that he would if Tommy made any more
cynical reflections.

Of course, that was a mere flaring-up of resentment at the fact that, to save his soul, he
could not get off the fence. He could not view the war as a matter vital to himself; nor could
he do like Tommy Ashe, play patriotic tunes with one hand while the other reached slyly forth
to grasp power and privilege of whatever degree came within reach.

And in the meantime both men, and other men likewise, went about their daily affairs. Vancouver
grew and prospered, and the growth of Summit sales left an increasing balance on the profit
side of Thompson's ledger. Moreover the rapid and steady growth of his business kept his mind
on the business. It worked out--his business preoccupation--much in the manner of the old story
of fleas and dogs, to wit: a certain number of fleas is good for a dog. They keep him from
brooding over the fact that he is a dog.

So, save for the fact that he continued to make money and was busy and realized now and then
that he had come to a disheartening impasse with Sophie, the late spring of 1916 found Thompson
mentally, morally and spiritually holding fast by certain props.

He had come a long way, and he had yet a long way to go. He had come to Lone Moose very much
after the fashion of St. Simeon Stylites all prepared to mount a spiritual pillar and make
a bid for sainthood. But pillar hermits, he discovered, when harsh, material facts tore the
evangelistic blinkers off his eyes, were neither useful in the world nor acceptable on high.
He had been in a very bad way for awhile. When a man loses his own self-respect and the faith
of his fathers at one stroke he is apt to suffer intensely. Thompson had not quite reached
that pass, when he came down to Wrangel by the sea, but he was not far off. When he looked
back, he could scarcely trace by what successive steps he had traveled. But he had got up out
of that puddle into which a harsh environment and wounded egotism had cast him. He was in a
way to be what the world called a success.

He was not so sure of that himself. But he stayed himself with certain props, as before mentioned.
The base of more than one of these useful supports had been undermined some time before by
a sequence of events which presented the paradox of being familiar to him and still beyond
his comprehension.

He was a long way from being aware, in those early summer days of 1916, that before long some
of the aforementioned props were to buckle under him with strange and disturbing circumstance.

CHAPTER XXIII

THE FUSE--

It was in this period that certain phases of the war began to shake the foundation of things.
I do not recall who said that an army marches on its stomach, but it is true, and it is no
less a verity that nations function primarily on food. The submarine was waxing to its zenith
now, and Europe saw the gaunt wolf at its door. Men cried for more ships. Cost became secondary.
A vessel paid for herself if she landed but two cargoes in an Allied port.

Every demand in the economic field produces a supply. On this side of the Atlantic great shipbuilding
plants arose by some superior magic of construction in ports where the building of ships had
been a minor industry. In this Vancouver did not lag. Wooden ships could be built quickly.
Virgin forests of fir and cedar stood at Vancouver's very door. Wherefore yards, capable of
turning out a three-thousand-ton wooden steamer in ninety days, rose on tidewater, and an army
of labor sawed and hammered and shaped to the ultimate confusion of the Hun.

Thompson had seen these yards in the distance. He read newspapers and he knew that local shipbuilding
was playing the dual purpose of confounding the enemy and adding a huge pay-roll to Vancouver's
other material advantages. Both of which were highly desirable.

But few details of this came personally to his attention until an evening when he happened
to foregather with Tommy Ashe and two or three others at Carr's home--upon one of those rare
evenings when Sophie was free of her self-imposed duties and in a mood to play the hostess.

They had dined, and were gathered upon a wide verandah watching the sun sink behind the rampart
of Vancouver Island in a futurist riot of yellow and red that died at last to an afterglow
which lingered on the mountain tops like a benediction. A bit of the Gulf opened to them, steel-gray,
mirror-smooth, more like a placid, hill-ringed lake than the troubled sea.

But there was more in the eye's cast than beauty of sea and sky and setting sun. From their
seats they could look down on the curious jumble of long sheds and giant scaffolding that was
the great Coughlan steel shipyard in False Creek. Farther distant, on the North Shore, there
was the yellowish smudge of what a keen vision discerned to be six wooden schooners in a row,
sister ships in varying stages of construction.

Some one said something about wooden shipbuilding.

"There's another big yard starting on the North Shore," Sophie said. "One of our committee
was telling me to-day. Her husband has something to do with it."

"Yes. I can verify that," Tommy Ashe smiled. "That's my contribution--the Vancouver Construction
Company. I organized it. We have contracted to supply the Imperial Munitions Board with ten
auxiliary schooners, three thousand tons burden each."

The fourth man of the party, the lean, suave, enterprising head of a local trust company, nodded
approval, eyeing Tommy with new interest.

"Good business," he commented. "We've got to beat those U-boats."

"Yes," Tommy agreed, "and until the Admiralty devises some effectual method of coping with
them, the only way we can beat the subs is to build ships faster than they can sink them. It's
quite some undertaking, but it has to be done. If we fail to keep supplies pouring into England
and France. Well--"

He spread his hands in an expressive gesture. Tommy was that type of Englishman in which rugged
health and some generations of breeding and education have combined to produce what Europe
calls a "gentleman." He was above middle height, very stoutly and squarely built, ruddy faced--the
sort of man one may safely prophesy will acquire a paunch and double chin with middle age.
But Tommy was young and vigorous yet. He looked very capable, almost aggressive, as he sat
there speaking with the surety of patriotic conviction.

"We're all in it now," he said simply. "It's no longer our army and navy against their army
and navy and the rest of us looking on from the side lines. It's our complete material resources
and man power against their complete resources and man power. If they win, the world won't
be worth living in, for the Anglo-Saxon. So we've got to beat them. Every man's job from now
on is going to be either fighting or working. We've got to have ships. I'm organizing that
yard to work top-speed. I'm trying to set a pace. Watch us on the North Shore. The man in the
trenches won't say we didn't back him up."

It sounded well. To Thompson it gave a feeling of dissatisfaction which was nowise lessened
by the momentary gleam in Sophie's eyes as they rested briefly on Tommy and passed casually
to him--and beyond.

He was growing slowly to understand that the war had somehow--in a fashion beyond his comprehension--bitten
deep into Sophie Carr's soul. She thought about it, if she seldom talked. What was perhaps
more vital, she felt about it with an intensity Thompson could not fathom, because he had not
experienced such feeling himself. He only divined this. Sophie never paraded either her thoughts
or her feelings. And divining this uneasily he foresaw a shortening of his stature in her eyes
by comparison with Tommy Ashe--who had become a doer, a creator in the common need, while he
remained a gleaner in the field of self-interest. Thompson rather resented that imputation.
Privately he considered Tommy's speech a trifle grandiloquent. He began to think he had underestimated
Tommy, in more ways than one.

Nor did he fail to wonder at the dry smile that hovered about Sam Carr's lips until that worthy
old gentleman put his hand over his mouth to hide it, while his shrewd old eyes twinkled with
inner amusement. There was something more than amusement, too. If Wes Thompson had not known
that Sam Carr liked Tommy, rather admired his push and ability to hold his own in the general
scramble, he would have said Carr's smile and eyes tinged the amusement with something like
contempt.

That puzzled Thompson. The Dominion, as well as the Empire, was slowly formulating the war-doctrine
that men must either fight or work. Tommy, with his executive ability, his enthusiasm, was
plunging into a needed work. Tommy had a right to feel that he was doing a big thing. Thompson
granted him that. Why, then, should Carr look at him like that?

He was still recurring to that when he drove down town with Tommy later in the evening. He
was not surprised that Tommy sauntered into his rooms after putting up his machine. He had
been in the habit of doing that until lately, and Thompson knew now that Tommy must have been
very busy on that shipyard organization. It had been easy for them to drop into the old intimacy
which had grown up between them on that hard, long trail between Lone Moose and the Stikine.
They had a lot of common ground to meet on besides that.

This night Tommy had something on his mind besides casual conversation. He wasted little time
in preliminaries.

"Would you be interested in taking over my car agencies on a percentage basis, Wes?" he asked
point-blank, when he had settled himself in a chair with a cigar in his mouth. "I have worked
up a good business with the Standard and the Petit Six. I don't like to let it go altogether.
I shall have to devote all my time to the ship plant. That looms biggest on the horizon. But
I want to hold these agencies as an anchor to windward. You could run both places without either
suffering, I'm confident. Ill make you a good proposition."

Thompson reflected a minute.

"What is your proposition?" he asked at length. "I daresay I could handle it. But I can't commit
myself offhand."

"Of course not," Tommy agreed. "You can go over my books from the beginning, and see for yourself
what the business amounts to. I'd be willing to allow you seventy-five per cent. of the net.
Based on last year's business you should clear twelve thousand per annum. Sales are on the
up. You might double that. I would hold an option of taking over the business on ninety days'
notice."

"It sounds all right," Thompson admitted. "I'll look into it."

"I want quick action," Tommy declared. "Say, to-morrow you arrange for some certified accountant
to go over my books and make out a balance sheet. I'll pay his fee. I'm anxious to be free
to work on the ship end."

"All right. I'll do that. We can arrange the details later if I decide to take you up," Thompson
said.

Tommy stretched his arms and yawned.

"By jove," said he, "I'm going to be the busiest thing on wheels for awhile. It's no joke running
a big show."

"I didn't know you were a shipbuilder," Thompson commented.

"I'm not," Tommy admitted, stifling another yawn. "But I can hire 'em--both brains and labor.
The main thing is I've got the contracts. That's the chief item in this war business. The rest
is chiefly a matter of business judgment. It's something of a jump, I'll admit, but I can negotiate
it, all right."

"As a matter of fact," he continued presently, and with a highly self-satisfied note in his
voice, "apart from the executive work it's what the Americans call a lead-pipe cinch. We can't
lose. I've been fishing for this quite a while, and I put it over by getting in touch with
the right people. It's wonderful what you can do in the proper quarter. The Vancouver Construction
Company consists of Joe Hedley and myself. Joe is a very clever chap. Has influential people,
too. We have contracts with the I.M.B. calling for ten schooners estimated to cost three hundred
thousand dollars per. We finance the construction, but we don't really risk a penny. The contracts
are on a basis of cost, plus ten per cent. You see? If we go above or under the estimate it
doesn't matter much. Our profit is fixed. The main consideration is speed. The only thing we
can be penalized for is failure to launch and deliver within specified dates."

Thompson did a rough bit of mental figuring.

"I should say it was a cinch," he said dryly. "Nobody can accuse you of profiteering. Yet your
undertaking is both patriotic and profitable. I suppose you had no trouble financing a thing
like that?"

"I should say not. The banks," Tommy replied with cynical emphasis, "would fall over themselves
to get their finger in our pie. But they won't. Hedley and I have some money. Sam Carr is letting
us have fifty thousand dollars at seven per cent. No bank is going to charge like the Old Guard
at Waterloo on overdrafts and advances--and dictate to us besides. I'm too wise for that. I'm
not in the game for my health. I see a big lump of money, and I'm after it."

"I suppose we all are," Thompson reflected absently.

"Certainly," Tommy responded promptly. "And we'd be suckers if we weren't."

He took a puff or two at his cigar and rose.

"Run over to the plant on the North Shore with me to-morrow if you have the time. We'll give
it the once over, and take a look at the Wallace yard too. They're starting on steel tramps
there now. I'm going over about two o'clock. Will you?"

"Sure. I'll take time," Thompson agreed.

"Come down to MacFee's wharf and go over with me on the Alert," Tommy went on. "That's the
quickest and easiest way to cross the Inlet. Two o'clock. Well, I'm off to bed. Good night,
old man."

"Good night."

The hall door clicked behind Ashe. Thompson sat deep in thought for a long time. Then he fished
a note pad out of a drawer and began pencilling figures.

Ten times three hundred thousand was three million. Ten per cent. on three million was three
hundred thousand dollars. And no chance to lose. The ten per cent. on construction cost was
guaranteed by the Imperial Munitions Board, behind which stood the British Empire.

Didn't Tommy say the ten schooners were to be completed in eight months? Then in eight months
Tommy Ashe was going to be approximately one hundred and fifty thousand dollars richer.

Thompson wondered if that was why Sam Carr looked at Tommy with that ambiguous expression when
Tommy was chanting his work or fight philosophy. Carr knew the ins and outs of the deal if
he were loaning money on it.

And Thompson did not like to think he had read Carr's look aright, because he was uncomfortably
aware that he, Wes Thompson, was following pretty much in Ashe's footsteps, only on a smaller
scale.

He tore the figured sheet into little strips, and went to bed.

CHAPTER XXIV

--AND THE MATCH THAT LIT THE FUSE--

At a minute or two of ten the next morning Thompson stopped his car before the Canadian Bank
of Commerce. The bolt-studded doors were still closed, and so he kept his seat behind the steering
column, glancing idly along Hastings at the traffic that flowed about the gray stone pile of
the post-office, while he waited the bank's opening for business.

A tall young man, a bit paler-faced perhaps than a normal young fellow should be, but otherwise
a fine-looking specimen of manhood, sauntered slowly around the corner of the bank, and came
to a stop on the curb just abreast the fore end of Thompson's motor. He took out a cigarette
and lighted it with slow, deliberate motions. And as he stood there, gazing with a detached
impersonal air at the front of the Summit roadster, there approached him a recruiting sergeant.

"How about joining up this morning?" he inquired briskly.

"Oh, I don't know," the young man responded casually. "I hadn't thought about it."

"Every man should be thinking about it," the sergeant declared. "The army needs men. Now a
well-set-up young fellow like you would get on capitally at soldiering. It's a great life.
When we get the Germans whipped every man will be proud to say he had a hand in it. If a man
struck you you wouldn't stand back and let some other fellow do your fighting for you, now
would you? More than that, between you and me, it won't be long before an able-bodied man can't
walk these streets in civvies, without the girls hooting him. It's a man's duty to get into
this war. Better walk along with me to headquarters and sign on."

The young man gazed across the street with the same immobility of expression.

"What's the inducement?" he asked presently.

The sergeant, taking his cue from this, launched forth upon a glowing description of army life,
the pay, the glory, the manifold advantages that would certainly accrue. He painted a rosy
picture, a gallant picture. One gathered from his talk that a private in khaki was greater
than a captain of industry in civilian clothes. He dwelt upon the brotherhood, the democracy
of arms. He spilled forth a lot of the buncombe that is swallowed by those who do not know
from bitter experience that war, at best, is a ghastly job in its modern phases, a thing that
the common man may be constrained to undertake if need arises, but which brings him little
pleasure and less glory--beyond the consciousness that he has played his part as a man should.

The young man heard the recruiting sergeant to an end. And when that worthy had finished he
found fixed steadily upon him a pair of coldly speculative gray-green eyes.

"How long have you been in the army?" he asked.

"About eighteen months," the sergeant stated.

"Have you been over there?"

"No," the sergeant admitted. "I expect to go soon, but for the present I'm detailed to recruiting."

The young man had a flower in the lapel of his coat. He removed it, the flower, and thrust
the lapel in the sergeant's face. The flower had concealed a bronze button.

"I've been over there," the young man said calmly. "There's my button, and my discharge is
in my pocket--with the names of places on it that you'll likely never see. I was in the Princess
Pats--you know what happened to the Pats. You have hinted I was a slacker, that every man not
in uniform is a slacker. Let me tell you something. I know your gabby kind. The country's full
of such as you. So's England. The war's gone two years and you're still here, going around
telling other men to go to the front. Go there yourself, and get a taste of it. When you've
put in fourteen months in hell like I did, you won't go around peddling the brand of hot air
you've shot into me, just now."

"I didn't know you were a returned man," the sergeant said placatingly. A pointed barb of resentment
had crept into the other's tone as he spoke.

"Well, I am," the other snapped. "And I'd advise you to get a new line of talk. Don't talk
to me, anyway. Beat it. I've done my bit."

The sergeant moved on without another word, and the other man likewise went his way, with just
the merest suggestion of a limp. And simultaneously the great doors of the bank swung open.
Thompson looked first after one man then after the other, and passed into the bank with a thoughtful
look on his face.

He finished his business there. Other things occupied his attention until noon. He lunched.
After that he drove to Coal Harbor where the yachts lie and motor boats find mooring, and having
a little time to spare before Tommy's arrival, walked about the slips looking over the pleasure
craft berthed thereat. Boats appealed to Thompson. He had taken some pleasant cruises with
friends along the coast. Some day he intended to have a cruising launch. Tommy had already
attained that distinction. He owned a trim forty-footer, the Alert. Thompson's wanderings presently
brought him to this packet.

A man sat under the awning over the after deck. Thompson recognized in him the same individual
upon whom the recruiting sergeant's eloquence had been wasted that morning. He was in clean
overalls, a seaman's peaked cap on his head. Thompson had felt an impulse to speak to the man
that morning. If any legitimate excuse had offered he would have done so. To find the man apparently
at home on the boat in which he himself was taking brief passage was a coincidence of which
Thompson proceeded to take immediate advantage. He climbed into the cockpit. The man looked
at him questioningly.

"I'm going across the Inlet with Mr. Ashe," Thompson explained. "Are you on the Alert?"

"Engineer, skipper, and bo'sun too," the man responded whimsically. "Cook, captain, and the
whole damn crew."

They fell into talk. The man was intelligent, but there was a queer abstraction sometimes in
his manner. Once the motor of a near-by craft fired with a staccato roar, and he jumped violently.
He looked at Thompson unsmiling.

"I'm pretty jumpy yet," he said--but he did not explain why. He did not say he had been overseas.
He did not mention the war. He talked of the coast, and timber, and fishing, and the adjacent
islands, with all of which he seemed to be fairly familiar.

"I heard that recruiting sergeant tackle you this morning," Thompson said at last. "You were
standing almost beside my machine. What was it like over there?"

"What was it like?" the man repeated. He shook his head. "That's a big order. I couldn't tell
you in six months. It wasn't nice."

He seemed to reflect a second or two.

"I suppose some one has to do it. It has to be done. But it's a tough game. You don't know
where you're going nor what you're up against most of the time. The racket gets a man, as well
as seeing fellows you know getting bumped off now and then. Some of the boys get hardened to
it. I never did. I try to forget it now, mostly. But I dream things sometimes, and any sudden
noise makes me jump. A fellow had better finish over there than come home crippled. I'm lucky
to hold down a job like this, lucky that I happen to know gas engines and boats. I look all
right, but I'm not much good. All chewed up with shrapnel. And my nerve's gone. I wouldn't
have got my discharge if they could have used me any more. Aw, hell, if you haven't been in
it you can't imagine what it's like. I couldn't tell you."

"Tell me one thing," Thompson asked quickly, spurred by an impulse for light upon certain matters
which had troubled him. He wanted the word of an eye-witness. "Did you ever see, personally,
any of those atrocities that have been laid to the Germans in Belgium?"

"Well, I don't know," the man replied. "The papers have printed a lot of stuff. Mind you, over
there you hear about a lot of things you never see. The only thing I saw was children with
their hands hacked off at the wrist."

"Good God," Thompson uttered. "You actually saw that with your own eyes."

"Sure," the man responded. "Nine of 'em in one village.

"Why, in the name of God, would men do such a thing?" Thompson demanded. "Was any reason ever
given?"

"No. I suppose they were drunk or something. Fritz was pretty bad in spots, all right. Maybe
they just wanted to put the fear of God in their hearts. A pal of mine in Flanders told me
of a woman--in a place they took by a night raid--she had her breast slashed open. She said
a Boche officer did it with his sword."

The man spoke of these things in a detached, impersonal manner, as one who states commonplace
facts. He had not particularly desired to speak of them. For him those gruesome incidents of
war and invasion held no special horror. They might have rested heavily enough on his mind
once. But he had come apparently to accept them as the grim collateral of war, without reacting
emotionally to their terrible significance. And when Thompson ceased to question him he ceased
to talk.

But in Thompson these calmly recounted horrors worked profound distress. His imagination became
immediately shot with sinister pictures. All these things which he had read and doubted, which
had left him unmoved, now took on a terrible reality. He could see these things about which
the returned soldier spoke, and seeing them believed. Believing, there rose within him a protest
that choked him with its force as he sat in the cockpit beside this veteran of Flanders.

The man had fallen silent, staring into the green depths overside. Thompson sat silent beside
him. But there was in Thompson none of the other's passivity. Unlike the returned soldier,
who had seen blood and death until he was surfeited with it, until he wanted nothing but peace
and quietness, and a chance to rest his shrapnel-torn body and shell-shocked nerves, Thompson
quivered with a swift, hot desire to kill and destroy, to inflict vengeance. He burned for
reprisal. For a passionate moment he felt as if he could rend with his bare hands a man or
men who could wantonly mutilate women and children. He could find no fit name for such deeds.

And, responding so surely to that unexpected stimulus, he had no stomach for crossing the Inlet
as Tommy's guest, to view the scene of Tommy's industrial triumph-to-be. He wasn't interested
in that now.

Sitting under the awning, brooding over these things, he remembered how Sophie Carr had reacted
to the story of the Belgian refugee that afternoon a year and a half ago. He understood at
last. He divined how Sophie felt that day. And he had blandly discounted those things. He had
gone about his individual concerns insulated against any call to right wrongs, to fight oppression,
to abolish that terror which loomed over Europe--and which might very well lay its sinister
hand on America, if the Germans were capable of these things, and if the German's military
power prevailed over France and England. When he envisaged Canada as another Belgium his teeth
came together with a little click.

He clambered out of the Alert's cockpit to the float.

"Tell Mr. Ashe I changed my mind about going over with him," he said abruptly, and walked off
the float, up the sloping bank to the street, got in his car and drove away.

As he drove he felt that he had failed to keep faith with something or other. He felt bewildered.
Those little children, shorn of their hands--so that they could never lift a sword against
Germany--cried aloud to him. They held up their bloody stumps for him to see.

CHAPTER XXV

--AND THE BOMB THE FUSE FIRED

It took Thompson approximately forty-eight hours to arrange his affairs. He managed things
with a precipitancy that would have shocked a sound, practical business man, for he put out
no anchors to windward nor troubled himself about the future. He paid his bills, transferred
the Summit agency to his head salesman--who had amassed sufficient capital to purchase the
stock of cars and parts at cost. Thus, having deliberately sacrificed a number of sound assets
for the sake of being free of them without delay, Thompson found himself upon the morning of
the third day without a tie to bind him to Vancouver, and a cash balance of twenty thousand
dollars to his credit in the bank.

He did not know how, or in what capacity he was going to the front, but he was going, and the
manner of his going did not concern him greatly. It mattered little how he went, so long as
he went in the service of his country. A little of his haste was born of the sudden realization
that he had a country which needed his services--and that he desired to serve. It had passed
an emotional phase with him. He saw it very clearly as a duty. He did not foresee or anticipate
either pleasure or glory in the undertaking. He had no illusions about war. It was quite on
the cards that he might never come back. But he had to go.

So then he had only to determine how he should go.

That problem, which was less a problem than a matter of making choice, was solved that very
day at luncheon. As he sat at a table in a downtown café there came to him a figure in khaki,
wearing a short, close-fitting jacket with an odd emblem on the left sleeve--a young fellow
who hailed Thompson with a hearty grip and a friendly grin. He sat himself in a chair vis-à-vis,
laying his funny, wedge-shaped cap on the table.

"I've been wondering what had become of you, Jimmie," Thompson said. "I see now. Where have
you been keeping yourself?"

"East," the other returned tersely. "Training. Got my wings. Off to England day after to-morrow.
How's everything with you, these days?"

Thompson looked his man over thoroughly. Jimmie Wells was the youngest of the four sons of
a wealthy man. The other three were at the front, one of them already taking his long rest
under a white, wooden cross somewhere in France. Jimmie looked brown and fit. A momentary pang
of regret stung Thompson. He wished he too were standing in uniform, ready for overseas.

"I've just wound up my business," he said. "I'm going to the front myself, Jimmie."

"Good," Wells approved. "What branch?"

"I don't know yet," Thompson replied. "I made up my mind in a hurry. I'm just setting out to
find where I'll fit in best."

"Why don't you try aviation?" Jimmie Wells suggested. "You ought to make good in that. There
are a lot of good fellows flying. If you want action, the R.F.C. is the sportiest lot of all."

"I might. I didn't think of that," Thompson returned slowly. "Yes, I believe I could fly."

"If you can fly like you drive, you'll be the goods," Jimmie asserted cheerfully. "Tell you
what, Thompson. Come on around to the Flying Corps headquarters with me. I know a fellow there
rather well, and I'll introduce you. Not that that will get you anything, only Holmes will
give you a lot of unofficial information."

Thompson rose from the table.

"Lead me to it," said he. "I'm your man."

Getting accepted as a cadet in the Royal Flying Corps was not so simple a matter as enlisting
in the infantry. The requirements were infinitely more rigid. The R.F.C. took only the cream
of the country's manhood. They told Thompson his age was against him--and he was only twenty-eight.
It was true. Ninety per cent. of the winged men were five years younger. But he passed all
their tests by grace of a magnificent body that housed an active brain and steady nerves.

All this did not transpire overnight. It took days. He told no one of his plans in the meantime,
no one but Tommy Ashe, who was a trifle disappointed when Thompson declined to handle Tommy's
exceedingly profitable motor business. Tommy seemed hurt. To make it clear that he had a vital
reason, Thompson explained tersely.

"I can't do it because I'm going to the front."

"Eh? What the devil!"

Tommy looked all the astonishment his tone expressed.

"Well, what the devil?" Thompson returned tartly. "Is there anything strange about that? A
good many men have gone. A good many more will have to go before this thing is settled. Why not?"

"Oh, if a man feels that he should," Tommy began. He seemed at a loss for words, and ended
lamely: "There's plenty of cannon-fodder in the country without men of your caliber wasting
themselves in the trenches. You haven't the military training nor the pull to get a commission."

Thompson's lips opened to retort with a sentence he knew would sting like a whiplash. But he
thought better of it. He would not try plucking the mote out of another man's eye, when he
had so recently got clear of the beam in his own.

Tommy did not tarry long after that. He wished Thompson good luck, but he left behind him the
impression that he privately considered it a poor move. Thompson was willing to concede that
from a purely material standpoint it was a poor move. But he could no longer adopt the purely
materialistic view. It had suddenly become clear to him that he must go--and why he must go.
Just as the citizen whose house gets on fire knows beyond peradventure that he must quench
the flames if it lies in his power.

The Royal Flying Corps arrives at its ends slowly. Perhaps not too slowly for the niceness
of choice that must be made. Presently there came to Wesley Thompson a brief order to report
at a training camp in Eastern Canada.

When he held this paper in his hand and knew himself committed irrevocably to the greatest
game of all, he felt a queer, inner glow, a quiet satisfaction such as must come to a man who
succeeds in some high enterprise. Thompson felt this in spite of desperate facts. He had no
illusions as to what he had set about. He knew very well that in the R.F.C. it was a short
life and not always a merry one. Of course a man might be lucky. He might survive by superior
skill. In any case it had to be done.

But he was moved likewise by a strange loneliness, and with his orders in his hand he understood
at last the source of that peculiar regret which latterly had assailed him in stray moments.
There were a few friends to bid good-by. And chief, if she came last on his round of calls
that last day, was Sophie Carr.

He found Sophie at home about four in the afternoon, sitting in the big living room, making
Red Cross bandages. She did not stop her work when he was ushered in. Beside her on a table
stood a flat box and in this from time to time she put a finished roll. It occurred to Thompson
that sometime one of those white bandages fabricated by her hands might be used on him.

He smiled a bit sardonically, for the thought arose also that in the Flying Corps the man who
lost in aërial combat needed little besides a coffin--and sometimes not even that.

Sophie looked at him almost somberly.

"I'm working, don't you see?" she said curtly.

He had never seen her in quite that unapproachable mood. He wanted her to forget the Red Cross
and the war for a little while, to look and speak with the old lightness. He wasn't a sentimental
man, but he did want to go away with a picture of her smiling. He had not told her he was going.
He did not mean to tell her till he was leaving, and then only to say casually: "Well, good-by.
I'm off for a training-camp to-night." He had always suspected there was something of the Spartan
in Sophie Carr's make-up. Even if he had not divined that, he had no intention of making a
fuss about his going, of trying to pose as a hero. But he was a normal man, and he wanted his
last recollection of her--if it should be his last--to be a pleasant one.

And Sophie was looking at him now, fixedly, a frosty gleam in her gray eyes. She looked a moment,
and her breast heaved. She swept the work off her lap with a sudden, swift gesture.

"What is the matter with you--and dozens of men like you that I know?" she demanded in a choked
voice. "You stay at home living easy and getting rich in the security that other men are buying
with their blood and their lives, over there. Fighting against odds and dying like dogs in
a ditch so that we can live here in peace and comfort. You don't even do anything useful here.
There doesn't seem to be anything that can make you work or fight. They can sink passenger
ships and bomb undefended towns and shell hospitals, and you don't seem to resent it. I've
heard you prate about service--when you thought you walked with God and had a mission from
God to show other men the way. Why don't you serve now? What is the matter with you? Is your
skin so precious? If you can't fight, can't you make ammunition or help to build ships? Are
you a man, or just a rabbit? I wish to God I were a man."

Thompson rose to his feet. The lash of her tongue had not lost its power to sting since those
far-off Lone Moose days. Yet, though it stabbed like a spear, he was more conscious of a passionate
craving to gather her into his arms than of anger and resentment. There were tears in Sophie's
eyes--but there was no softness in her tone. Her red lips curled as Thompson looked at her
in dazed silence. There did not seem to be anything he could say--not with Sophie looking at
him like that.

"If you feel that way about it--"

He broke off in the middle of the muttered sentence, turned on his heel, walked out of the
room. And he went down the street suffering from a species of shock, saying desperately to
himself that it did not matter, nothing mattered.

But he knew that was a lie, a lie he told himself to keep his soul from growing sick.

He went back to his rooms for the last time, and tried with pen and paper to set down some
justification of himself for Sophie's eyes. But he could not satisfy himself with that. His
pride revolted against it. Why should he plead? Or rather, what was the use of pleading? Why
should he explain? He had a case for the defence, but defence avails nothing after sentence
has been pronounced. He had waited too long. He had been tried and found wanting.

He tore the letter into strips, and having sent his things to the station long before, put
on his hat now and walked slowly there himself, for it lacked but an hour of train-time.

At the corner of Pender and Hastings he met Sam Carr.

"Welcome, youthful stranger," Carr greeted heartily. "I haven't seen you for a long time. Walk
down to the Strand with me and have a drink. I've been looking over the Vancouver Construction
Company's yard, and it's a very dry place."

Thompson assented. He had time and it was on his way. He reacted willingly to the suggestion.
He needed something to revive his spirit, but he had not thought of the stimulus of John Barleycorn
until Carr spoke.

In the Strand bar he poured himself half a glass of Scotch whisky. Carr regarded him meditatively
over port wine.

"That's the first time I ever saw you touch the hard stuff," he observed.

"It will probably be the last," Thompson replied.

"Why?"

"I'm off," Thompson explained. "I have sold out my business and have been accepted for the
Royal Flying Corps. I'm taking the train at six to report at Eastern headquarters."

Carr fingered the stem of his empty glass a second. "I hate to see you go, and still I'm glad
you're going," he said with an odd, wistful note in his voice. "I'd go too, Thompson, if I
weren't too old to be any use over there."

"Eh?" Thompson looked at him keenly. "Have you been revising your philosophy of life?"

"No. Merely bringing it up to date," Carr replied soberly. "We have what we have in the way
of government, economic practice, principles of justice, morality--so forth and so on. I'm
opposed to a lot of it. Too much that's obsolete. A lot that's downright bad. But bad as it
is in spots, it is not a circumstance to what we should have to endure if the Germans win this
war. I believe in my people and my country. I don't believe in the German system of dominating
by sheer force and planned terror. The militarists and the market hunters have brought us to
this. But we have to destroy the bogey they have raised before we can deal with them. And a
man can't escape nationalism. It's bred in us. What the tribe thinks, the individual thinks.
This thing is in the air. We are getting unanimous. Whether or not we approve the cause, we
are too proud to consider getting whipped in a war that was forced on us. One way and another,
no matter what we privately think of our politicians and industrial barons and our institutions
generally, it is becoming unthinkable to the Anglo-Saxon that the German shall stalk rough-shod
over us. We are beginning--we common people--to hate him and his works. Look at you and me.
We were aloof at first. We are intelligent. We have learned to saddle feeling with logic. We
have not been stampeded by military bands and oratory. Yet there is something in the air. I
wish I could fight. You are going to fight. Not because you like fighting, but because you
see something to fight for. And before long those who cannot see will be very few. Isn't that
about right?"

"I think so," Thompson replied.

"There you are," Carr went on. "Myself, I have put philosophic consideration in abeyance for
the time. I've got primitive again. Damn the Central Powers! If I had seven sons I'd send them
all to the front."

They had another drink.

"Did you go and say good-by to Sophie?" Carr demanded suddenly.

"I saw her, but I don't think I said good-by," Thompson said absently. He was thinking about
Carr's surprising outburst. He agreed precisely with what the old man said. But he had not
suspected the old radical of such intensity. "I didn't tell her I was going."

"You didn't tell her," Carr persisted. "Why not?"

"For a variety of reasons." He found it hard to assume lightness with those shrewd old eyes
searchingly upon him. "You can tell her good-by for me. Well, let's have a last one. It'll
be a good many moons before you and I look over a glass at each other again. If I don't come
back I'll be in honorable company. And I'll give them hell while I last."

Carr walked with him down to the train.

"When the war broke out," he said to Thompson at the coach steps, "if you had proposed to go
I should privately have considered you a damned idealistic fool. Now I envy you. You will never
have to make apologies to yourself for yourself, nor to your fellows. If I strike a blow that
a free people may remain free to work out their destiny in their own fashion, I must do it
by proxy. I wish you all the luck there is, Wes Thompson. I hope you come back safe to us again."

They shook hands. A voice warned all and sundry that the train was about to leave, and over
the voice rose the strident notes of a gong. Thompson climbed the steps, passed within, thrust
his head through an open window as the Imperial Limited gathered way. His last glimpse of a
familiar face was of Carr standing bareheaded, looking wistfully after the gliding coaches.

       *       *       *       *       *

The grandfather clock in the hall was striking nine when Sam Carr came home. He hung his hat
on the hall-tree and passed with rather unsteady steps into the living room. He moved circumspectly,
with the peculiar caution of the man who knows that he is intoxicated and governs his movements
accordingly. Carr's legs were very drunk and he was aware of this, but his head was perfectly
clear. He managed to negotiate passage to a seat near his daughter.

Sophie was sitting in a big chair, engulfed therein, one might say. A reading lamp stood on
the table at her elbow. A book lay in her lap. But she was staring at the wall absently, and
beyond a casual glance at her father she neither moved nor spoke, nor gave any sign of being
stirred out of this profound abstraction.

Carr sank into his chair with a sigh of relief.

"I am just about pickled, I do believe," he observed to the room at large.

"So I see," Sophie commented impersonally. "Is there anything uncommon about that? I am beginning
to think prohibition will be rather a blessing to you, Dad, when it comes."

"Huh!" Carr grunted. "I suppose one drink does lead to another. But I don't need to be legally
safe-guarded yet, thank you. My bibulosity is occasional. When it becomes chronic I shall take
to the woods."

"Sometimes I find myself wishing we had never come out of the woods," Sophie murmured.

"What?" Carr exclaimed. Then: "That's rich. You with a sure income beyond your needs, in your
own right, with youth and health and beauty, with all your life before you, wishing to revert
to what you used to say was a living burial? That's equivalent to holding that the ostrich
philosophy is the true one--what you cannot see does not exist. That ignorance is better than
knowledge--that--that--Hang it, my dear, are you going to turn reactionary? But that's a woman.
Now why should--"

"Oh, don't begin one of your interminable, hair-splitting elucidations," Sophie protested.
"I know it's showing weakness to desire to run away from trouble. I don't know that I have
any trouble to run from. I'm not sure I should dodge trouble if I could. I was just voicing
a stray thought. We were happy at Lone Moose, weren't we, Dad?"

"After a fashion," Carr replied promptly. "As the animal is happy with a full belly and a comfortable
place to sleep. But we both craved a great deal more than that of life."

"And we are not getting more," Sophie retorted. "When you come right down to fundamentals we
eat a greater variety of food, wear better clothes, live on a scale that by our former standards
is the height of luxury. But not one of my dreams has come true. And you find solace in a wine
glass where you used to find it in books. Over in Europe men are destroying each other like
mad beasts. At home, while part of the nation plays the game square, there's another part that
grafts and corrupts and profiteers and slacks to no end. It's a rotten world."

"By gad, you have got the blue glasses on to-night, and no mistake," Carr mused. "That's unmitigated
pessimism, Sophie. What you need is a vacation. Let somebody else run this women's win-the-war
show for awhile, and you take a rest. That's nerves."

"I can't. There is too much to do," Sophie said shortly. "I don't want to. If I sat down and
folded my hands these days I'd go crazy."

Carr grunted. For a minute neither spoke. Sophie lay back in her chair, eyes half closed, fingers
beating a slow rat-a-tat on the chair-arm.

"Have you seen Wes Thompson lately?" Carr inquired at last.

"I saw him this afternoon," Sophie replied.

"Did he tell you he was going overseas?"

"No." Sophie's interest seemed languid, judged by her tone.

"You saw him this afternoon, eh?" Carr drawled. "That's queer."

"What's queer?" Sophie demanded.

"That he would see you and not tell you where he was off to," Carr went on. "I saw him away
on the Limited at six-o'clock. He told me to tell you good-by. He's gone to the front."

Sophie sat upright.

"How could he do that?" she said impatiently. "A man can't get into uniform and leave for France
on two hours' notice. He called here about four. Don't be absurd."

"I don't see anything absurd except your incredulous way of taking it," Carr defended stoutly.
"I tell you he's gone. I saw him take the train. Who said anything about two hours' notice?
I should imagine he has been getting ready for some time. You know Wes Thompson well enough
to know that he doesn't chatter about what he's going to do. He sold out his business two weeks
ago, and has been waiting to be passed in his tests. He has finally been accepted and ordered
to report East for training in aviation. He joined the Royal Flying Corps."

Carr did not know that in the circle of war workers where Sophie moved so much the R.F.C. was
spoken of as the "Legion of Death." No one knew the percentage of casualties in that gallant
service. Such figures were never published. All that these women knew was that their sons and
brothers and lovers, clean-limbed children of the well-to-do, joined the Flying Corps, and
that their lives, if glorious, were all too brief once they reached the Western front. Only
the supermen, the favored of God, survived a dozen aërial combats. To have a son or a brother
flying in France meant mourning soon or late. So they spoke sometimes, in bitter pride, of
their birdmen as the "Legion of Death", a gruesome phrase and apt.

Carr knew the heavy casualties of aërial fighting. But he had never seen a proud woman break
down before the ominous cablegram, he had never seen a girl sit dry-eyed and ashy-white, staring
dumbly at a slip of yellow paper. And Sophie had--many a time. To her, a commission in the
Royal Flying Corps had come to mean little short of a death warrant.

She sat now staring blankly at her father.

"He closed up his business and joined the Flying Corps two weeks ago."

She repeated this stupidly, as if she found it almost impossible to comprehend.

"That's what I said," Carr replied testily. "What the devil did you do to him that he didn't
tell you, if he was here only two hours before he left? Why, he must have come to say good-by."

"What did I do?" Sophie whispered. "My God, how was I to know what I was doing?"

She sat staring at her father. But she was not seeing him, and Carr knew she did not see him.
Some other vision filled those wide-pupiled eyes. Something that she saw or felt sent a shudder
through her. Her mouth quivered. And suddenly she gave a little, stifled gasp, and covered
her face with her hands.

CHAPTER XXVI

THE LAST BRIDGE

Thompson received his preliminary training in a camp not greatly distant from his birthplace
and the suburban Toronto home where the spinster aunts still lived. He did not go to see them
at first, for two reasons. Primarily, because he had written them a full and frank account
of himself when he got out of the ruck and achieved success in San Francisco. Their reply had
breathed an open disappointment, almost hostility, at his departure from the chosen path. They
made it clear that in their eyes he was a prodigal son for whom there would never be any fatted
calf. Secondly, he did not go because there was seldom anything but short leave for a promising
aviator.

Thompson speedily proved himself to belong in that category. There resided in him those peculiar,
indefinable qualities imperative for mastery of the air. Under able instruction he got on fast,
just as he had got on fast in the Henderson shops. And by the time the first fall snows whitened
the ground, he was ready for England and the finishing stages of aërial work antecedent to
piloting a fighting plane. He had practically won his official wings.

With his orders to report overseas he received ten days' final leave. And a sense of duty spurred
him to look up the maiden aunts, to brave their displeasure for the sake of knowing how they
fared. There was little other use to make of his time. The Pacific Coast was too far away.
The only person he cared to see there had no wish to see him, he was bitterly aware. And nearer
at hand circumstances had shot him clear out of the orbit of all those he had known as he grew
to manhood. Recalling them, he had no more in common with them now than any forthright man
of action has in common with narrow visionaries. It was not their fault, he knew. They were
creatures of their environment, just as he had been. But he had outgrown all faith in creeds
and forms before a quickening sympathy with man, a clearer understanding of human complexities.
And as he recalled them his associates had been slaves to creed and form, worshippers of the
letter of Christianity while unconsciously they violated the spirit of Christ. Thompson had
no wish to renew those old friendships, not even any curiosity about them. So he passed them
by and went to see his aunts, who had fed and clothed him, to whom he felt a vague sort of
allegiance if no particular affection.

It seemed to Thompson like reliving a very vivid sort of dream to get off a street car at a
certain corner, to walk four blocks south and turn into the yard before a small brick cottage
with a leafless birch rising out of the tiny grass plot and the bleached vines of sweet peas
draping the fence palings.

The woman who opened the door at his knock stood before him a living link with that dreamlike
past, unchanged except in minor details, a little more spare perhaps and grayer for the years
he had been gone, but dressed in the same dull black, with the same spotless apron, the same
bit of a white lace cap over her thin hair, the same pince-nez astride a high bony nose.

Aunt Lavina did not know him in his uniform. He made himself known. The old lady gazed at him
searchingly. Her lips worked. She threw her arms about his neck, laughing and sobbing in the
same breath.

"Surely, it's myself," Thompson patted her shoulder. "I'm off to the front in a few days and
I thought I'd better look you up. How's Aunt Hattie?"

Aunt Lavina disengaged herself from his arms, her glasses askew, her faded old eyes wet, yet
smiling as Thompson could not recall ever seeing her smile.

"What a spectacle for the neighbors," she said breathlessly. "Me, at my time of life, hugging
and kissing a soldier on the front step. Do come in, Wesley. Harriet will be so pleased. My
dear boy, you don't know how we have worried about you. How well you look."

She drew him into the parlor. A minute later Aunt Harriet, with less fervor than her sister
perhaps, made it clear that she was unequivocally glad to see him, that any past rancor for
his departure from grace was dead and buried.

They were beyond the sweeping current of everyday life, living their days in a back eddy, so
to speak. But they were aware of events, of the common enemy, of the straining effort of war,
and they were proud of their nephew in the King's uniform. They twittered over him like fond
birds. He must stay his leave out with them.

At this pronunciamento of Aunt Lavina's a swift glance passed between the two old women. Thompson
caught it, measured the doubt and uneasiness of the mutual look, and was puzzled thereby.

But he did not fathom its source for a day or two, and only then by a process of deduction.
They treated him handsomely, they demonstrated an affection which moved him deeply because
he had never suspected its existence. (They had always been so precise, almost harsh with him
as a youngster.) But their living was intolerably meager. Disguise it with every artifice,
a paucity of resource--or plain niggardliness--betrayed itself at every meal. Thompson discarded
the theory of niggardliness. And proceeding thence on the first conclusion stood his two aunts
in a corner--figuratively, of course--and wrung from them a statement of their financial status.

They were proud and reluctant. But Thompson had not moved among and dealt with men of the world
to be baffled by two old women, so presently he was in possession of certain facts.

They had not been able to support themselves, to rear and educate him, on their income alone,
and gradually their small capital had been consumed. They were about to negotiate the sale
of their home, the proceeds of which would keep them from want--if they did not live too long.
They tried to make light of it, but Thompson grasped the tragedy. They had been born in that
brick cottage with the silver birch before the door.

"Well," he said at length, "I don't want to preëmpt the Lord's prerogative of providing. But
I can't permit this state of affairs. I wish you had taken me into your confidence, aunties,
when I was a youngster. However, that doesn't matter now. Can you live comfortably on eleven
hundred dollars a year?"

Aunt Harriet held up her hands.

"My dear boy," she said, "such a sum would give us luxuries, us two old women. But that is
out of the question. If we get five thousand for the place we shall have to live on a great
deal less than that."

"Forget that nonsense about selling this place," Thompson said roughly. That grated on him.
He felt a sense of guilt, of responsibility too long neglected. "Where I'm going I shall be
supplied by the government with all I need. I've made some money. I own war-bonds sufficient
to give you eleven hundred a year in interest. I'll turn them over to you. If I come back with
a whole skin when the war's over, I'll be able to use the capital in a way to provide for all
of us. If I don't come back, you'll be secure against want as long as you live."

He made good his word before his leave was up. He had very nearly lost faith in the value of
money, of any material thing. He had struggled for money and power for a purpose, to demonstrate
that he was a man equal to any man's struggle. He had signally failed in his purpose, for reasons
that were still a little obscure to him. Failure had made him a little bitter, bred a pessimism
it took the plight of his aunts to cure. Even if he had failed to achieve his heart's desire
he had acquired power to make two lives content. Save that it ministered to his self-respect
to know that he could win in that fierce struggle of the marketplace, money had lost its high
value for him. Money was only a means, not an end. But to have it, to be able to bestow it
where it was sadly needed, was worth while, after all. If he "crashed" over there, it was something
to have banished the grim spectre of want from these two who were old and helpless.

He was thinking of this along with a jumble of other thoughts as he leaned on the rail of a
transport slipping with lights doused out of the port of Halifax. There was a lump in his throat
because of those two old women who had cried over him and clung to him when he left them. There
was another woman on the other side of the continent to whom his going meant nothing, he supposed,
save a duty laggardly performed. And he would have sold his soul to feel her arms around his
neck and her lips on his before he went.

"Oh, well," he muttered to himself as he watched the few harbor lights falling astern, yellow
pin-points on the velvety black of the shore," this is likely to be the finish of that. I think
I've burned my last bridge. And I have learned to stand on my own feet, whether she believes
so or not."

CHAPTER XXVII

THOMPSON'S RETURN

"Anon we return, being gathered again Across the sad valleys all drabbled with rain."

On an evening near the first of September, 1918, a Canadian Pacific train rumbled into Vancouver
over tracks flanked on one side by wharves and on the other by rows of drab warehouses. It
rolled, bell clanging imperiously, with decreasing momentum until it came to a shuddering halt
beside the depot that rises like a great, brown mausoleum at the foot of a hill on which the
city sits looking on the harbor waters below.

Upon the long, shed-roofed platform were gathered the fortunate few whose men were on that
train. Behind these waited committees of welcome for stray dogs of war who had no kin. The
environs of the depot proper and a great overhead bridge, which led traffic of foot and wheel
from the streets to the docks, high over the railway yards, were cluttered with humanity that
cheered loudly at the first dribble of khaki from the train below.

It was not a troop train, merely the regular express from the East. But it bore a hundred returned
men, and news of their coming had been widely heralded. So the wives and sweethearts, the committees,
and the curious, facile-minded crowd, were there to greet these veterans who were mostly the
unfortunates of war, armless, legless men, halt and lame, gassed and shrapnel-scarred--and
some who bore no visible sign only the white face and burning eyes of men who had met horror
and walked with it and suffered yet from the sight. All the wounds of the war are not solely
of the flesh, as many a man can testify.

From one coach there alighted a youngish man in the uniform of the Royal Flying Corps. He carried
a black bag. He walked a little stiffly. Beyond that he bore no outward trace of disablement.
His step and manner suggested no weakness. One had to look close to discern pallor and a peculiar
roving habit of the eyes, a queer tensity of the body. A neurologist, versed in the by-products
of war, could have made a fair guess at this man's medical-history sheet. But the folk on the
platform that night were not specialists in subtle diagnosis of the nervous system. Nor were
the committees. They were male and female of those who had done their bit at home, were doing
it now, welcoming their broken heroes. The sight of a man with a scarred face, a mutilated
limb, elicited their superficial sympathy, while the hidden sickness of racked nerves in an
unmaimed body they simply could not grasp.

So this man with the black bag and the wings on his left arm walked the length of the platform,
gained the steel stairway which led to the main floor of the depot, and when he had climbed
half-way stopped to rest and to look down over the rail.

Below, the mass of humanity was gravitating into little groups here and there about a khaki
center. There was laughter, and shrill voices, with an occasional hysterical note. There were
men surrounded by women and children, and there were others by twos and threes and singly who
looked enviously at these little groups of the reunited, men who moved haltingly on their way
to the city above, perfunctorily greeted, perfunctorily handshaken, and perfunctorily smiled
upon by the official welcomers.

He looked at this awhile, with a speculative, pitying air, and continued his climb, passing
at last through great doors into a waiting-room, a place of high, vaulted ceilings, marble
pillars, beautiful tiled floors. He evaded welcoming matrons on the watch for unattached officers,
to hale them into an anteroom reserved for such, to feed them sandwiches and doubtful coffee,
and to elicit tales of their part in the grim business overseas. This man avoided the cordial
clutches of the socially elect by the simple expedient of saying that his people expected him.
He uttered this polite fiction in self-defense. He did not want to talk or be fed. He was sick
of noise, weary of voices, irritated by raucous sounds. All he desired was a quiet place away
from the confusion of which he had been a part for many days, to get speedily beyond range
of the medley of voices and people that reminded him of nothing so much as a great flock of
seagulls swooping and crying over a school of herring.

He passed on to the outer door which gave on the street where taxi drivers and hotel runners
bawled their wares, and here in the entrance met the first face he knew. A man about his own
age, somewhat shorter, a great deal thicker through the waist, impeccably dressed, shouldered
his way through a group at the exit.

Their eyes met. Into the faces of both leaped instant recognition. The soldier pressed forward
eagerly. The other stood his ground. There was a look which approached unbelief on his round,
rather florid features. But he grasped the extended hand readily enough.

"By jove, it is you, Wes," he said. "I couldn't believe my eyes. So you're back alive, eh?
You were reported killed, you know. Shot down behind the German lines. You made quite a record,
didn't you? How's everything over there?"

There was a peculiar quality in Tommy Ashe's tone, a something that was neither aloofness nor
friendliness, nor anything that Wes Thompson could immediately classify. But it was there,
a something Tommy tried to suppress and still failed to suppress. His words were hearty, but
his manner was not. And this he confirmed by his actions. Thompson said that things over there
were going well, and let it go at that. He was more vitally concerned just then with over here.
But before he could fairly ask a question Tommy seized his hand and wrung it in farewell.

"Pardon my rush, old man," he said. "I've got an appointment I can't afford to pass up, and
I'm late already. Look me up to-morrow, will you?"

Two years is long for some things, over-brief for others. In Thompson those twenty-four months
had softened certain perspectives. He had quickened at sight of Tommy's familiar face, albeit
that face was a trifle grosser, more smugly complacent than he had ever expected to behold
it. He could mark the change more surely for the gap in time. But Tommy had not been glad to
see him. Thompson felt that under the outward cordiality.

He took up his bag and went out on the street, hailed the least vociferous of the taxi pirates
and had himself driven to the Granada Hotel. His brows were still knitting in abstracted thought
when a bell-boy had transported the black bag and himself to a room on the sixth floor, received
his gratuity and departed. Thompson was high above the rumble of street cars, facing a thoroughfare
given largely to motor traffic, with a window which overlooked the lower town and harbor, and
the great hills across the Inlet looming duskily massive against the paler sky.

He stood by the window looking over roofs and traffic and the glow-worm light of shipping in
the stream. He could smell the sea, the brown kelp bared on rocky beaches by a falling tide.
And he fancied that even at that distance he could get a whiff of the fir and cedar that clothed
the mountain flank.

"By God," he whispered. "It's good to be back."

He said it much as a man might breathe a prayer. All this that he saw now had lingered in his
memory, had risen up to confront him as something beautiful and desirable, many times when
he never expected to see it again. For it was not logical, he held, that he should survive
where so many others had perished. It was just a whimsey of Fate. And he was duly and honestly
grateful that it had been permitted him to outlive many gallant comrades in the perilous service
of the air.

Three days and nights on a train close upon long months in hospital had left him very tired.
Rest both his body and uneasy nerves craved insistently. Although it lacked some minutes of
eight, he threw off his clothes and went to bed.

In the morning he rose refreshed, eager to be about, to look up men he knew, to talk of things
beyond the scope of war.

But when he went out into Vancouver's highways and met people, his uniform gave them a conversational
cue. And he found that here, six thousand miles from the guns, even less than among his fellows
in the hangars behind the fighting line could he escape that topic. He did not want to talk
about fighting and killing. He had lived those things and that was enough. So he came back
to the Granada and read the papers and had his lunch and decided to look up Tommy Ashe.

He had learned casually that morning that Tommy's company had more than made good Tommy's prophecy
of swift work. Tommy Ashe and Joe Hedley were rising young men.

"Oh, yes, they've got a mint," a broker he knew said to Thompson, with an unconcealed note
of envy. "By gad, it's a marvel how a pair of young cubs like that can start on a shoestring
and make half a million apiece in two years."

"How did they both manage to escape the draft?" Thompson asked. "I'm sure Ashe is a Class A man."

"Huh!" the broker snorted. "Necessary government undertakings. Necessary hell! All they had
to do with the shipbuilding was to bank their rake-off. I tell you, Thompson, this country
has supported the war in great style--but there's been a lot of raw stuff in places where you
wouldn't suspect it. I'm not knocking, y' understand. This is no time to knock. But when the
war's over, we've got to do some house-cleaning."

Thompson called the shipyard first. In the glow of a sunny September morning he felt that he
must have imagined Tommy's attitude. He was a fair-minded man, and he gave Tommy the benefit
of the doubt.

But he failed to get in touch with Tommy. A voice informed him politely that Mr. Ashe had left
town that morning and would be gone several days.

Thompson hung up the receiver. For at least five minutes he sat debating with himself. Then
he took it down again.

"Give me Seymour 365L," he said to Central.

"Hello."

"Is Mr. Carr at home?"

"You have the wrong number," he was answered, and he heard the connection break.

He tried again, and once more the same voice, this time impatiently, said, "Wrong number."

"Wait," Thompson said quickly. "Is this Seymour 365L, corner of Larch and First?"

"Yes."

"I beg pardon for bothering you. I'm just back from overseas and I'm rather anxious to locate
Mr. Carr--Samuel A. Carr. This was his home two years ago."

"Just a minute," the feminine voice had recovered its original sweetness. "Perhaps I can help
you. Hold the line."

Thompson waited. Presently he was being addressed again.

"My husband believes Mr. Carr still owns this place. We lease through an agent, however, Lyng
and Salmon, Credit Foncier Building. Probably they will be able to give you the required information."

"Thanks," Thompson said.

He found Lyng and Salmon's number in the telephone book. But the lady was mistaken. Carr had
sold the place. Nor did Lyng and Salmon know his whereabouts.

Tommy would know. But Tommy was out of town. Still there were other sources of information.
A man like Carr could not make his home in a place no larger than Vancouver and drop out of
sight without a ripple. Thompson stuck doggedly to the telephone, sought out numbers and called
them up. In the course of an hour he was in possession of several facts. Sam Carr was up the
coast, operating a timber and land undertaking for returned soldiers. The precise location
he could not discover, beyond the general one of Toba Inlet.

They still maintained a residence in town, an apartment suite. From the caretaker of that he
learned that Sophie spent most of her time with her father, and that their coming and going
was uncertain and unheralded.

The latter facts were purely incidental, save one. Tommy Ashe had that morning cleared the
Alert for a coastwise voyage.

Sam Carr and Sophie were up the coast. Tommy was up the coast. Thompson sat for a time in deep
study. Very well, then. He, too, would journey up the coast. He had not come six thousand miles
to loaf in a hotel lobby and wear out shoe leather on concrete walks.

CHAPTER XXVIII

FAIR WINDS

Within a gunshot of the heart of Vancouver lies a snug tidal basin where yachts swing to their
moorings, where a mosquito fleet of motor craft lies along narrow slips, with the green woods
of Stanley Park for a background. Thompson knew Coal Harbor well. He knew the slips and the
boats and many of the men who owned them. He had gone on many a week-end cruise out of that
basin with young fellows who looked their last on the sea when they crossed the English Channel.
So he had picked up a working fund of nautical practice, a first-hand knowledge of the sea
and the manner of handling small sail.

From the Granada he went straight to Coal Harbor. While the afternoon was yet young he had
chartered a yawl, a true one-man craft, carrying plenty of canvas for her inches, but not too
much. She had a small, snug cabin, was well-found as to gear, and was equipped with a sturdy
single-cylinder gas engine to kick her along through calm and tideway.

Before six he had her ready for sea, his dunnage bag aboard, grub in the lockers, gas in the
tanks, clearance from the customhouse. He slept aboard in a bunk softer than many a sleeping
place that had fallen to his lot in France. And at sunrise the outgoing tide bore him swiftly
through the Narrows and spewed him out on the broad bosom of the Gulf of Georgia, all ruffled
by a stiff breeze that heeled the little yawl and sent her scudding like a gray gull when Thompson
laid her west, a half north, to clear Roger Curtis Point.

He blew through Welcome Pass at noon on the forefront of a rising gale, with the sun peeping
furtively through cracks in a gathering cloudbank. As the wind freshened, the manes of the
white horses curled higher and whiter. Thompson tied in his last reef in the lee of a point
midway of the Pass. Once clear of it the marching surges lifted the yawl and bore her racing
forward, and when the crest passed she would drop into a green hollow like a bird to its nest,
to lift and race and sink deep in the trough again.

But she made merry weather of it. And Thompson rode the tiller, an eye to his sheets, glorying
in his mastery of the sea. It was good to be there with a clean wind whistling through taut
stays, no sound but the ripple of water streaming under his lee, and the swoosh of breaking
seas that had no power to harm him. Peace rode with him. His body rested, and the tension left
his nerves which for months had been strung like the gut on a violin.

Between Welcome Pass and Cape Coburn the southeaster loosed its full fury on him. The seas
rose steeper at the turn of the tide, broke with a wicked curl. He put the Cape on his lee
after a wild fifteen minutes among dangerous tiderips, and then prudence drove him to shelter.

He put into a bottle-necked cove gained by a passage scarce twenty feet wide which opened to
a quiet lagoon where no wind could come and where the swell was broken into a foamy jumble
at the narrow entrance.

He cooked his supper, ate, watched the sun drop behind the encircling rim of firs. Then he
lay on a cushion in the cockpit until dark came and the green shore of the little bay grew
dim and then black and the dusky water under the yawl's counter was split with the phosphorescent
flashes of darting fish.

Across a peninsula, on the weather side of the Cape, he could hear the seas thud and the surf
growl like the distant booming of heavy batteries. Over his head the wind whistled and whined
in the firs with a whistle and a whine like machine-gun bullets that have missed their mark.
But neither of these sounds held the menace of the sounds of which they reminded him. He listened
to those diapasons and thin trebles and was strangely soothed. And at last he grew sleepy and
turned in to his bunk.

Some time in the night he had a weird sort of dream. He was falling, falling swiftly from a
great height in the air. On the tail of his plane rode a German, with a face like those newspaper
caricatures of the Kaiser, who shot at him with a trench mortar--boom--boom--boom--boom!

Thompson found himself sitting up in his bunk. The queer dream had given place to reality,
in which the staccato explosions continued. As he put his face to an open porthole a narrow,
searching ray of uncommon brilliance flashed over his yawl and picked up the shore beyond.
Back of the searchlight lifted the red, green, and white triangle of running lights laid dead
for him. It sheered a little. The brilliant ray blinked out. He saw a dim bulk, a pale glimmer
through cabin windows, heard the murmur of voices and the rattle of anchor chain running through
hawse pipe. Then he closed his eyes and slept again.

He rose with the sun. Beside him lay a sturdily built motor tug. A man leaned on the towing
bitts aft, smoking a pipe, gazing at the yawl. Twenty feet would have spanned the distance
between them.

Thompson emerged into the cockpit. The air was cool and he was fully dressed. At sight of the
uniform with the insignia on sleeve and collar the man straightened up, came to attention,
lifted his hand smartly in the military salute--the formality tempered by a friendly grin.
Thompson saw then that the man had a steel hook where his left hand should have been. Also
a livid scar across his cheek where a bullet or shrapnel had plowed.

"It's a fine morning after a wild night," Thompson broke the conversational ice.

"It was a wild night outside and no mistake," the man replied. "We took cover about midnight--got
tired of plowing into it, and wasn't too keen for wallowing through them rips off the Cape.
Say, are you back long from over there?"

"Not long," Thompson replied. "I left England two weeks ago."

"How's it going?"

"We're over the hump," Thompson told him. "They're outgunned now. The Americans are there in
force. And we have them beaten in the air at last. You know what that means if you've been across."

"Don't I know it," the man responded feelingly. "By the Lord, it's me that does know it. I
was there when the shoe was on the other foot. I was a gunner in the Sixty-eighth Battery,
and you can believe me there was times when it made us sick to see German planes overhead.
Well, I hope they give Fritz hell. He gave it to us."

"They will," Thompson answered simply, and on that word their talk of the war ended. They spoke
of Vancouver, and of the coast generally.

"By the way, do you happen to know whereabouts in Toba Inlet a man named Carr is located?"
Thompson bethought him of his quest. "Sam Carr. He is operating some sort of settlement for
returned men, I've been told."

"Sam Carr? Sure. The Squalla here belongs to him--or to the Company--and Carr is just about
the Company himself."

A voice from the interior abaft the wheelhouse bellowed "Grub-pi-l-e."

"That's breakfast," the man said. "I see you ain't lighted your fire yet. Come and have a bite
with us. Here, make this line fast and lay alongside."

The wind had died with the dawn, and the sea was abating. The Squalla went her way within the
hour, and so did Thompson. There was still a small air out of the southeast, sufficient to
give him steerageway in the swell that ran for hours after the storm. Between sail and power
he made the Redonda Islands and passed between them far up the narrow gut of Waddington Channel,
lying in a nook near the northern end of that deep pass when night came on. And by late afternoon
the following day he had traversed the mountain-walled length of Toba Inlet and moored his
yawl beside a great boom of new-cut logs at the mouth of Toba River.

Thanks to meeting the Squalla he knew his ground. Also he knew something of Sam Carr's undertaking.
The main camp was four miles up the stream. The deep fin-keel of the yawl barred him from crossing
the shoals at the river mouth except on a twelve-foot tide. So he lay at the boom, planning
to go up the river next morning in the canoe he towed astern in lieu of a dinghy.

He sat on his cushions in the cockpit that evening looking up at a calm, star-speckled sky.
On either side of him mountain ranges lifted like quiescent saurians, heads resting on the
summit of the Coast Range, tails sweeping away in a fifty-mile curve to a lesser elevation
and the open waters of the Gulf. The watery floor of Toba Inlet lay hushed between, silvered
by a moon-path, shimmering under the same pale rays that struck bluish-white reflections from
a glacier high on the northern side. It was ghostly still at the mouth of the valley whence
the Toba River stole down to salt water, with somber forests lining the beach and clinging
darkly on the steep slopes. A lone light peeped from the window of a cabin on shore. The silence
was thick, uncanny. But it was a comforting silence to Thompson. He felt no loneliness, he
whom the lonely places had once appalled. But that was a long time ago. Sitting there thinking
of that, he smiled.

No man lives by, for, or because of love alone. Nor does a woman, although the poets and romancers
have very nearly led us to believe a woman does. Yet it is a vital factor upon some occasions,
in many natures. There had been times in Thompson's life when the passion Sophie Carr kindled
in him seemed a conflagration that must either transfigure or destroy him. It was like a volcano
that slept, and woke betimes.

The last two years had rather blotted out those periods of eruption. He had given her up, and
in giving up all hope of her, Sophie and everything that linked her with him from Lone Moose
to the last time he saw her had grown dim, like a book read long ago and put by on the shelf.
In the fierce usages of aërial warfare distracted thought, any relaxing from an eagle-like
alertness upon the business in hand, meant death swift and certain. And no man, even a man
whose heart is sore, wishes to die. The will-to-live is too strong in him. Pride spurs him.
To come off victorious over a concrete enemy, to uphold the traditions of his race, to be of
service--these things will carry any man over desperate places without faltering, if he feels them.

And Wes Thompson had experienced that sort of vision rather keenly. It had driven him, a man
of peaceful tendency, to blood-drenched fields. For two years he had been in another world,
in a service that demanded of a man all that was in him. He was just beginning to be conscious
that for so long he had been detached from life that flowed in natural, normal channels.

He was conscious too, of a queer, impersonal manner of thinking about things and people, now
that he was back. He wondered about himself. What particular motive, for instance, had driven
him up here? To be sure there was the very plausible one of obeying a physician's order about
living in the open, of keeping decent hours, of avoiding crowds and excitement until he was
quite himself again. But he could have done that without coming to Toba Inlet.

Of course he wanted to see Sam Carr again. Also he wanted to see Sophie. Why he wished to see
her was not so readily answered. He wanted to see her again, that was all--just as he had wanted
to see Canada and his aunts, and the green slopes of the Pacific again. Because all these things
and people were links with a past that was good and kindly by comparison with the too-vivid
recent days. Yes, surely, he would be glad to see Sam Carr--and Sophie. When he recalled the
last time he spoke with her he could smile a little wryly. It had been almost a tragedy then.
It did not seem much now. The man who had piloted a battle-plane over swaying armies in France
could smile reminiscently at being called a rabbit by an angry girl.

It was queer Sophie had never married. His thought took that turn presently. She was--he checked
the years on his fingers--oh, well, she was only twenty-four. Still, she was no frail, bloodless
creature, but a woman destined by nature for mating, a beautiful woman well fit to mother beautiful
daughters and strong sons, to fill a lover with joy and a husband with pride.

A queer warmth flushed Thompson's cheek when he thought of Sophie this wise. A jealous feeling
stabbed at him. The virus was still in his blood, he became suddenly aware. And then he laughed
out loud, at his own camouflaging. He had known it all the time. And this trip it would be
kill or cure, he said to himself whimsically.

Still it was odd, now he came to think of it, that Sophie had never in those years found a
man quite to her liking. She had had choice enough, Thompson knew. But it was no more strange,
after all, than for himself never to have looked with tender eyes on any one of the women he
had known. He had liked them, but he hadn't ever got past the stage of comparing them with
Sophie Carr. She had always been the standard he set to judge the others. Thompson realized
that he was quite a hopeless case in this respect.

"I must be a sort of a freak," he muttered to himself when he was stowed away in his blankets.
"I wonder if I could like another woman, as well, if I tried? Well, we'll see, we'll see."

CHAPTER XXIX

TWO MEN AND A WOMAN

Thompson drove his canoe around a jutting point and came upon a white cruiser swinging at anchor
in an eddy. Her lines were familiar though he had not seen her in two years. In any case the
name Alert in gold leaf on her bows would have enlightened him. He was not particularly surprised
to find Tommy's motor boat there. He had half-expected to find Tommy Ashe hereabouts.

A man's head rose above the after companion-hatch as the canoe glided abreast.

"Is Mr. Ashe aboard?" Thompson asked.

The man shook his head.

"Went up to Carr's camp a while ago."

"When did you get in?" Thompson inquired further.

"Last night. Lost a day laying up at Blind Bay for a southeaster. Gee, she did blow."

Thompson smiled and passed on. Blind Bay was only two miles from Cape Coburn. Just a narrow
neck of land had separated them that blustery night. It was almost like a race. Tommy would
not be pleased to see him treading so close on his heels. Thompson felt that intuitively. All
was fair in love and war. Still, even in aërial warfare, ruthless and desperate as it was,
there were certain courtesies, a certain element of punctilio. Thompson had an intuition that
Ashe would not subscribe to even that simple code. In fact he began to have a premonition of
impending conflict as he thrust stoutly on his paddle blade. Tommy had changed. He was no longer
the simple, straightforward soul with whom Thompson had fought man-fashion on the bank of Lone
Moose, and with whom he had afterward achieved friendship on a long and bitter trail.

Three hundred yards past the Alert he came to a landing stage which fitted the description
given by the skipper of the Squalla. Thompson hauled his canoe out on the float, gained the
shore, and found a path bordering the bank. He followed this. Not greatly distant he could
hear the blows of chopping, the shrill blasts of a donkey-engine whistle and the whirr of the
engine itself as it shuddered and strained on its anchored skids, reeling up half a mile, more
or less, of inch and a quarter steel cable, snaking a forty-foot log out of the woods as a
child would haul a toothpick on the end of a string.

Before long the brush-floored forest opened on a small area of parked wood. In this pleasant
place stood a square block of a house. From a tall staff fluttered the Union Jack. As Thompson
came near this the door opened and a group of youngsters tumbled out pell-mell and began to
frolic. Thompson looked at his watch. He had stumbled on a school in the hour of morning recess.

"Where does Mr. Carr live?" he asked one of these urchins when he got near enough to have speech
with him.

The youngster pointed upstream.

"First house you come to," he said. "White house with shingles painted green. Say, mister,
have you just come from the war? My dad was over there. Do you know my dad, mister?"

The boy stood gazing at him, apparently hopeful of paternal acquaintance, until he discovered
that Thompson did not know his "dad." Then he darted back to join his fellows at their game.

Thompson walked on. The white house with green shingles loomed up near at hand, with a clump
of flaming maples beside it. Past that stood other houses in an orderly row facing the river,
and back of them were sheds and barns, and beyond the group of buildings spread a wide area
of cleared land with charred stumps still dotting many an acre.

He had to enter the place he took to be Sam Carr's by the back yard, so to speak. That is,
he came up from the rear, passed alongside the house--and halted abruptly, with his foot on
the first of three steps rising to a roomy verandah.

He had not meant to eavesdrop, to listen to words not meant for his hearing. But he had worn
the common footgear of yachtsmen, a pair of rubber-soled canvas shoes, and so had come to the
verandah end unseen and noiselessly. He was arrested there by the sight of two people and the
mention of his own name by one of them.

Sophie was sitting on the rail, looking soberly down on the glacial gray of Toba River. There
was a queer expression on her face, a mixture of protest and resignation. Tommy Ashe stood
beside her. He had imprisoned one of her hands between his own and he was speaking rapidly,
eagerly, passionately.

Thompson had heard without meaning to hear. And what he heard, just a detached sentence or
two, shot him through with a sudden blaze of anger. He stepped up on the floor, took quickly
the three strides that separated him from Tommy.

"You are nothing but a common liar," he challenged bluntly. "You know you are, when you speak
of me as being dead. Is that why you scuttled out of Vancouver and hurried on here, as soon
as you saw me back?"

Ashe shrank back a step. His naturally florid face grew purple. Thompson matched him glance
for glance, wondering as the moments ticked off why Tommy glared and did not strike.

"Your heart has grown as flabby as your principles," he said at last contemptuously.

For the instant, in anger at a lie, in that fighting mood which puts other considerations into
abeyance when it grips a man, Thompson gave no heed to Sophie--until he felt her hand on his
arm and looked down into her upturned face, white and troubled, into gray eyes that glowed
with some peculiar fire.

"It is really, truly you?" she said in a choked voice.

"Of course," he answered--and he could not help a little fling. "You see I am no longer a rabbit.
I don't like your friend here. He has tried to sneak a march on me, and I suspect it is not
the first. I feel like hurting him."

She paid not the least heed to that.

"You were officially reported dead," she went on. "Reported shot down behind the German lines
a year ago."

"I know I was reported dead, and so have many other men who still live," he said gently. "I
was shot down, but I escaped and flew again, and was shot down a second time and still am here
not so much the worse."

Sophie slipped her hand into his and turned on Tommy Ashe.

"And you knew this?" she said slowly. "Yet you came here to me this morning--and--and--"

She stopped with a break in her voice.

"I didn't believe you were capable of a thing like that, Tommy," she continued sadly. "I'm
ashamed of you. You'd better go away at once."

Ashe looked at her and then at Thompson, and his face fell. Thompson, watching him as a man
watches his antagonist, saw Tommy's lips tremble, a suspicious blur creep into his eyes. Even
in his anger he felt sorry for Tommy.

The next instant the two of them stood alone, Sophie's hand caught fast in his. She tried to
withdraw it. The red leaped into her cheeks. But there was still that queer glow in her eyes.

Thompson looked down at the imprisoned hand.

"You'll never get that away from me again," he said whimsically. "You see, I am not a rabbit,
but a man, no matter what you thought once. And when a man really wants a thing, he takes it
if he can. And I want you--so--you see?"

For answer Sophie hid her hot face against his breast.

"Ah, I'm ashamed of myself too," he heard a muffled whisper. "I sent you away into that hell
over there with a sneer instead of a blessing. And I was too ashamed, and a little afraid,
to write and tell you what a fool I was, that I'd made a mistake and was sorry. I couldn't
do anything only wait, and hope you'd come back. Didn't you hate me for my miserable holier-than-thou
preachment that day, Wes?"

"Why, no," he said honestly. "It hurt like the devil, of course. You see it was partly true.
I was going along, making money, playing my own little hand for all it was worth. I couldn't
rush off to the front just to demonstrate to all and sundry--even to you--that I was a brave
man and a patriot. You understand, don't you? It took me quite a while to feel, to really and
truly feel, that I ought to go--which I suppose you felt right at the beginning. When I did
see it that way--well, I didn't advertise. I just got ready and went. If you had not been out
of sorts that day, I might have gone away with a kiss instead of your contempt. But I didn't
blame you. Besides, that's neither here nor there, now. You're a prisoner. You can only be
paroled on condition."

Sophie smiled up at him, and was kissed for her pains.

"Name the condition."

"That you love me. I've waited a long time for it."

"I've always loved you," she said gravely. "Sometimes more, sometimes less. I haven't always
believed we could be happy together. Sometimes I have been positive we couldn't. But I've always
measured other men by you, and none of them quite measured up. That was why it stung me so
to see you so indifferent about the war. Probably if you had talked about it to me, if I had
known you were thinking of going, I should have been afraid you would go, I should have been
afraid for you. But you seemed always so unconcerned. It maddened me to think I cared so much
for a man who cared nothing about wrongs and injustices, who could sit contentedly at home
while other men sacrificed themselves. My dear, I'm afraid I'm an erratic person, a woman whose
heart and head are nearly always at odds."

Thompson laughed, looking down at her with an air of pride.

"That is to say you would always rather be sure than sorry," he remarked. "Well, you can be
sure of one thing, Sophie. You can't admit that you really do care for me and then run away,
as you did at Lone Moose. I have managed to stand on my own feet at last, and your penalty
for liking me and managing to conceal the fact these many moons is that you must stand with me."

She drew his face down to her and kissed it. Thompson held her fast.

"I can stand a lot of that," he said happily.

"You may have to," she murmured. "I am a woman, not a bisque doll. And I've waited a long time
for the right man."

CHAPTER XXX

A MARK TO SHOOT AT

An hour or so later Sam Carr came trudging home with a rod in his hand and a creel slung from
his shoulder, in which creel reposed a half dozen silver-sided trout on a bed of grass.

"Well, well, well," he said, at sight of Thompson, and looked earnestly at the two of them,
until at last a slow smile began to play about his thin lips. "Now, like the ancient Roman,
I can wrap my toga about me and die in peace."

"Oh, Dad, what a thing to say," Sophie protested.

"Figuratively, my dear, figuratively," he assured her. "Merely my way of saying that I am glad
your man has come home from the war, and that you can smile again."

He tweaked her ear playfully, when Sophie blushed. They went into the house, and the trout
disappeared kitchenward in charge of a bland Chinaman, to reappear later on the luncheon table
in a state of delicious brown crispness. After that Carr smoked a cigar and Thompson a cigarette,
and Sophie sat between them with the old, quizzical twinkle in her eyes and a smile hovering
about the corners of her mouth.

"Come out and let's make the round of the works, you two," Carr suggested at last.

"You go, Wes," Sophie said. "I have promised to help a struggling young housewife with some
sewing this afternoon."

So they set forth, Carr and Thompson, on a path through the woods toward where the donkey engines
filled the valley with their shrill tootings and the shudder of their mighty labor. And as
they went, Carr talked.

"All this was virgin forest when you went away," said he. "The first axe was laid to the timber
a year ago last spring. I want you to take particular notice of this timber. Isn't it magnificent
stuff? We are sending out a little aëroplane spruce, too. Not a great deal, but every little
helps."

It was a splendid forest that they traversed, a level area clothed with cedar and spruce and
fir, lifting brown trunks of six and seven-foot girth to a great height. And in a few minutes
they came upon a falling gang at work. Two men on their springboards, six feet above the ground,
plying an eight-foot saw. They stood to watch. Presently the saw ate through to the undercut,
a deep notch on the leaning side, and the top swayed, moved slowly earthward. The sawyers leaped
from their narrow footing. One cried "Tim-b-r-r-r." And the tree swept in a great arc, smiting
the earth with a crash of breaking boughs and the thud of an arrested landslide.

Beyond that there was a logged space, littered with broken branches, stumps, tops, cut with
troughs plowed deep in the soil, where the donkey had skidded out the logs. And there was the
engine puffing and straining, and the steel cables running away among the trees, spooling up
on the drums, whining and whistling in the iron sheaves. It was like war, Thompson thought,
that purposeful activity, the tremendous forces harnessed and obedient to man--only these were
forces yoked to man's needs, not to his destruction.

They lingered awhile watching the crew work, chatted with them in spare moments. Then Carr
led Thompson away through the woods again, and presently took him across another stretch of
stumps where men were drilling and blasting out the roots of the ravished trees, on to fields
where grain and grass and root crops were ripening in the September sun, and at last by another
cluster of houses to the bank of the river again. Here Carr sat down on a log, and began to
fill a pipe.

"Well," he said, "what do you think of it?"

"For eighteen months' work you have made an astonishing amount of headway," Thompson observed.
"This is hard land to clear."

"Yes," Carr admitted. "But it's rich land--all alluvial, this whole valley. Anything that can
be grown in this latitude will grow like a village scandal here."

He lighted his pipe.

"I tried high living and it didn't agree with me," Carr said abruptly. "I have tried a variety
of things since I left the North, and none of them has seemed worth while. I'm not a philanthropist.
I hate charitable projects. They're so damned unscientific--don't you think so?"

Thompson nodded.

"You know that about the time you left, discharged soldiers were beginning to drift back,"
Carr continued. "Drift is about the word. The cripples of war will be taken care of. Their
case is obvious, too obvious to be overlooked or evaded. But there are returned men who are
not cripples, and still are unfit for military duty. They came back to civilian existence,
and a lot of them didn't fit in. The jobs they could get were not the jobs they could do. As
more and more of them came home the problem grew more and more acute. It is still acute, and
I rather think it will grow more acute until the crisis comes with the end of the war and God
knows how many thousands of men will be chucked into civil life, which cannot possibly absorb
them again as things are going at present. It's a problem. Public-spirited men have taken it
up. The government took the problem of the returned soldier into consideration. So far as I
know they are still considering it. The Provincial Legislature talked--and has done nothing.
The Dominion Government has talked a lot, but nothing more than temporary measures has come
out of it. Nothing practical. You can't feed men with promises of after-the-war reconstruction.

"All this was apparent to me. So I talked it over with Sophie and one or two other men who
wanted to do something, and we talked to returned soldiers. We couldn't do what it's the business
of the country to do--and may perhaps do when the red tape is finally untangled. But we could
do something, with a little brains and money and initiative. So we went at it.

"I formed a joint stock company. We secured all the timber limits in this valley. We got together
a little group for a start. They were returned men, some physically handicapped, but eager
to do something for themselves. A man with that spirit always makes good if he gets a chance.
We put in machinery and gear, put up a small sawmill for ourselves, tore into the logging business,
cleared land, built houses. You see we are quite a community. And we are a self-supporting
community. Some of these men own stock in the company. Any returned men can find a place for
himself here. There is room and work and security and ultimate independence here for any man
willing to cooperate for the common welfare. This valley runs for miles. As fast as the land
is logged off it is open for soldier entry. There is room here for five hundred families. So
you see there is a lot of scope.

"It was in the nature of an experiment. There were people who sneered. And it is working out
well. There is not the slightest taint of charity in it. If I used a lot of money that may
be a long time coming back to me that is my own business. Everybody here pays his own way.
All these men needed was backing and direction."

Carr looked away across the clearing. His glance swept the houses, and fields, and the distant
woods where the logging crews labored.

"And there are valleys and valleys," he said thoughtfully; "when they are cleared and cultivated
there is endless room in them for people who want elbow-room, who want to live without riding
on the other fellow's back.

"Better get in with us, Wes," he said abruptly. "I'm getting old. It won't be long before I
have to quit. This thing will need a pilot for a long time yet. Men will always have to have
a leader. You can do good here. Big oaks, you know, from little acorns. I mean, if this project
continues to achieve success, it might blaze the way for a national undertaking. We said that
a country that was worth living in was worth fighting for. We are liars and cheats if we do
not make it so for those who did our fighting."

"I wouldn't mind taking a hand in this game," Thompson said. "But the war is still on. If that
were over--well, yes, Toba Valley looks good to me."

"You aren't out of it for good, then?"

Thompson shook his head.

Carr put his hand on Thompson's shoulder. "Ah, well," he said. "It won't be long now. You'll
be back. You can put on an aërial mail service for us, as your first undertaking."

He chuckled, and they left their log and strolled back toward the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Come and I'll show you what the valley looks like, Wes," Sophie said to him, when they had
finished dinner, and Carr had his nose buried in mail just that evening arrived.

She led him a hundred yards upstream to where a footbridge slung upon steel cables spanned
the Toba, crossed that and a little flat on the north side, and climbed up the flank of a slide-scarred
hill until she came out on a little plateau.

"Look," she waved her hand, panting a little from the steepness of the climb.

Five hundred feet below, the valley of the Toba spread its timbered greenness, through which
looped in sweeping curves the steel-gray of the river. In a great bend immediately beneath
them lay the houses of the settlement, facing upon the stream. Farther along were isolated
homesteads which he had not seen. Back of these spread little gardens, and the green square
of cultivated fields, and beyond in greater expanse the stump-dotted land that was still in
the making.

The smoke of the donkey-engines was vanished, fires grown cold with the end of the day's work.
But upriver and down the spoil of axe and saw lay in red booms along the bunk. He could mark
the place where he had stood that afternoon and watched a puffing yarder bunt a string of forty-foot
logs into the booming-ground. He could see figures about in the gardens, and the shrill voices
and laughter of children echoed up to them on the hill.

"It is a great view, and there is more in it than meets the eye," Thompson said. "Eh, little
woman? The greatest war of all, the biggest struggle. One that never ends. Man struggling to
subdue his environment to his needs."

Sophie smiled understandingly. She looked over the valley with a wistful air.

"Did you ever read 'The Sons of Martha'?" she asked.

"It is a noble mark to shoot at," Thompson said.

He fell silent. Sophie went on after a minute.

"Dad said he was going back to first principles when he began this. There are men here who
have found economic salvation and self-respect, who think he is greater than any general. I'm
proud of dad. He wanted to do something. What he has accomplished makes all my puttering about
at what, after all, was pure charity, a puerile sort of service. I gave that up after you went
away." She snuggled one hand into his. "It didn't seem worth while--nothing seemed worth while
until dad evolved this."

She waved her hand again over the valley. Thompson's eyes gleamed. It was good to look at,
good to think of. It was good to be there. He remembered, with uncanny, disturbing clearness
of vision, things he had looked down upon from a greater height over bloody stretches in France.
And he shuddered a little.

Sophie felt the small tremor run through him.

"What is it?" she whispered anxiously.

"It is beautiful, and I can appreciate its beauty all the more from seeing it with you. I'd
like to take a hand in this," he said quietly. "I was just comparing it with other things--and
wondering."

"Wondering what?"

"If I'll get back to this--and you," he said, with his arms around her. "Oh, well, I've got
three months' leave. That's a lot."

Sophie looked at him out of troubled eyes. Her voice shook.

"You will be ordered to the front again?"

He nodded. "Very likely."

"I don't want you to go," she broke out passionately. "You mustn't. Oh, Wes, Wes!"

"Do you think I like the prospect any better?" he said tenderly. "But I am an officer in the
Royal Flying Corps, and the war is not over yet. Buck up, sweetheart. I had six months' training,
a year in fighting planes, six months in hospital, and barring an occasional spell of uncertain
nerves, I am still as good as ever. Don't worry. I was silly to say what I thought, I suppose."

"Nevertheless, it is true," she said. "You may go again and never come back. But I suppose
one must face that. Thousands of women have had to face it. Why should I be exempt?"

She wiped her eyes and smiled uncertainly.

"We shall simply have to keep that in the background. I want to forget everything but that
you are here and that I'm happy," she whispered, with her arms about his neck. "I want to forget
everything else--until it's time for you to go."

"Amen," Thompson replied, and kissed her, and then they went silently, hand in hand down to
the swinging bridge with the sun gone to rest below the western sky-line, and dusk creeping
softly up over the valley floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

There will be those who, having followed so far, will desire further light. They will ask naïvely:
Did Wes Thompson go back to the front and get killed? Did they marry and find lasting happiness?

To these curious folk who seek explicit detail, I can only point out that Wes Thompson had
three months' leave which ran into November, and that to Sophie that ninety days loomed like
a stay of execution. I would ask them further to recall the eleventh of November, 1918--and
so the first question is duly answered.

As for the second--I am no soothsayer. I cannot foretell the future. Most certainly they married.
At once--with a haste prudery and lovers of formalism might term indecent.

Whether they live happily who can say? Somewhere between the day he first looked on Sophie
Carr at Lone Moose and the day he fell five thousand feet to earth in a flaming battle-plane,
keeping his life by one of war's miracles, Wes Thompson lived and loved and suffered perhaps
a little more than falls to the common lot. He sloughed off prejudices and cant and ignorance
and narrowness in those six years as a tree sheds its foliage in autumn.

A man may come to doubt the omnipotence of God without denying his Maker. He may scorn churchly
creeds and cleave to the Golden Rule. He may hate greed and oppression, and injustice and intolerance,
and ruthless exploitation of man by man--and still hold firm faith in humanity, still yearn
to love his neighbor as himself.

To do good, to fight hard and play fair, to love faithfully and to desire love, to go out of
the world when his time should come with the knowledge of having at least tried to make it
a little better for those who were in it, and for those who should come after. That was Wes
Thompson's working philosophy of life--if he might be said to have a philosophy--although he
certainly never formulated it in words.

He married a woman whom he loved dearly, who loved him, was proud of him, who saw life as he
did--through tolerant, comprehending eyes. So if you ask whether they found real and lasting
happiness I can only cite you bald facts. I cannot prophesy. But I wish my chances were as good.