The Works of E. P. Roe

VOLUME TEN

WHAT CAN SHE DO?

ILLUSTRATED

DEDICATION

                  IF I WERE
               TO DEDICATE THIS
           BOOK IT WOULD BE TO THOSE
      GIRLS WHO RESOLVE THAT THEY WILL NOT
PLAY THE POOR ROLE OF MICAWBER, THEIR ONLY CHANCE FOR
     LIFE BEING THAT SOME ONE WILL "TURN UP"
           WHOM THEY MAY BURDEN WITH
                THEIR HELPLESS
                    WEIGHT

PREFACE

This book was not written to amuse, to create purposeless excitement, or to secure a little
praise as a bit of artistic work. It would probably fail in all these things. It was written
with a definite, earnest purpose, which I trust will be apparent to the reader.

As society in our land grows older, and departs from primitive simplicity, as many are becoming
rich, but more poor, the changes that I have sought to warn against become more threatening.
The ordinary avenues of industry are growing thronged, and it daily involves a more fearful
risk for a woman to be thrown out upon the world with unskilled hands, an untrained mind, and
an unbraced moral nature. Impressed with this danger by some considerable observation, by a
multitude of facts that might wring tears from stony eyes, I have tried to write earnestly
if not wisely.

Of necessity, it touches somewhat on a subject delicate and difficult to treat--the "skeleton
in the closet" of society. But the evil exists on every side, and at some time or other threatens
every home and life. It is my belief that Christian teachers should not timidly or loftily
ignore it, for, mark it well, the evil does not let us or ours alone. It is my belief that
it should be dealt with in a plain, fearless, manly manner. Those who differ with me have a
right to their opinion.

There is one other thought that I wish to suggest. Much of the fiction of our day, otherwise
strong and admirable, is discouraging in this respect. In the delineation of character, some
are good, some are bad, and some indifferent. We have a lovely heroine, a noble hero, developing
seemingly in harmony with the inevitable laws of their natures. Associated with them are those
of the commoner or baser sort, also developing in accordance with the innate principles of
their natures. The first are presented as if created of finer clay than the others. The first
are the flowers in the garden of society, the latter the weeds. According to this theory of
character, the heroine must grow as a moss-rose and the weed remain a weed. Credit is not due
to one; blame should not be visited on the other. Is this true? Is not the choice between good
and evil placed before every human soul, save where ignorance and mental feebleness destroy
free agency? In the field of the world which the angels of God are to reap, is it not even
possible for the tares to become wheat? And cannot the sweetest and most beautiful natural
flowers of character borrow from the skies a fragrance and bloom not of earth? So God's inspired
Word teaches me.

I have turned away from many an exquisite and artistic delineation of human life, sighing,
God might as well never have spoken words of hope, warning, and strength for all there is in
this book. The Divine and human Friend might have remained in the Heavens, and never come to
earth in human guise, that He might press His great heart of world- wide sympathy against the
burdened, suffering heart of humanity. He need not have died to open a way of life for all.
There is nothing here but human motive, human strength, and earthly destiny. We protest against
this narrowing down of life, though it be done with the faultless skill and taste of the most
cultured genius. The children of men are not orphaned. Our Creator is still "Emmanuel--God
with us." Earthly existence is but the prelude of our life, and even from this the Divine artist
can take much of the discord, and give an earnest of the eternal harmonies.

We all are honored with the privilege of "co-working with Him."

If I in my little sphere can by this book lead one father to train his children to be more
strong and self-reliant, one mother to teach her daughters a purer, more patient, more heroic
womanhood--if I have placed one more barrier in the tempter's way, and inspired one more wholesome
fear and principle in the heart of the tempted--if, by lifting the dark curtain a moment, I
can reveal enough to keep one country girl from leaving her safe native village for unprotected
life in some great city--if I can add one iota toward a public opinion that will honor useful
labor, however humble, and condemn and render disgraceful idleness and helplessness, however
gilded--if, chief of all, I lead one heavy-laden heart to the only source of rest, I shall
be well rewarded, whatever is said of this volume.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I THREE GIRLS

CHAPTER II A FUTURE OP HUMAN DESIGNING

CHAPTER III THREE MEN

CHAPTER IV THE SKIES DARKENING

CHAPTER V THE STORM THREATENING

CHAPTER VI THE WRECK

CHAPTER VII AMONG THE BREAKERS

CHAPTER VIII WARPED

CHAPTER IX A DESERT ISLAND

CHAPTER X EDITH BECOMES A "DIVINITY"

CHAPTER XI MRS. ALLEN'S POLICY

CHAPTER XII WAITING FOR SOME ONE TO TURN UP

CHAPTER XIII THEY TURN UP

CHAPTER XIV WE CAN'T WORK

CHAPTER XV THE TEMPTATION

CHAPTER XVI BLACK HANNIBAL'S WHITE HEART

CHAPTER XVII THE CHANGES OF TWO SHORT MONTHS

CHAPTER XVIII IGNORANCE LOOKING FOR WORK

CHAPTER XIX A FALLING STAR

CHAPTER XX DESOLATION

CHAPTER XXI EDITH'S TRUE KNIGHT

CHAPTER XXII A MYSTERY

CHAPTER XXIII A DANGEROUS STEP

CHAPTER XXIV SCORN AND KINDNESS

CHAPTER XXV A HORROR OF GREAT DARKNESS

CHAPTER XXVI FRIEND AND SAVIOUR

CHAPTER XXVII THE MYSTERY SOLVED

CHAPTER XXVIII EDITH TELLS THE OLD, OLD STORY

CHAPTER XXIX HANNIBAL LEARNS HOW HIS HEART CAN BE WHITE

CHAPTER XXX EDITH'S AND ARDEN'S FRIENDSHIP

CHAPTER XXXI ZELL

CHAPTER XXXII EDITH BRINGS THE WANDERER HOME

CHAPTER XXXIII EDITH'S GREAT TEMPTATION

CHAPTER XXXIV SAVED

CHAPTER XXXV CLOSING SCENES

CHAPTER XXXVI LAST WORDS

CHAPTER I

THREE GIRLS

It was a very cold blustering day in early January, and even brilliant thronged Broadway felt
the influence of winter's harshest frown. There had been a heavy fall of snow which, though
in the main cleared from the sidewalks, lay in the streets comparatively unsullied and unpacked.
Fitful gusts of the passing gale caught it up and whirled it in every direction. From roof,
ledges, and window-sills, miniature avalanches suddenly descended on the startled pedestrians,
and the air was here and there loaded with falling flakes from wild hurrying masses of clouds,
the rear-guard of the storm that the biting northwest wind was driving seaward.

It was early in the afternoon, and the great thoroughfare was almost deserted. Few indeed would
be abroad for pleasure in such weather, and the great tide of humanity that must flow up and
down this channel every working day of the year under all skies had not yet turned northward.

But surely this graceful figure coming up the street with quick, elastic steps has not the
aspect of one driven forth by grave business cares, nor in the natural course of things would
one expect so young a lady to know much of life's burdens and responsibilities. As she passes
I am sure the reader would not turn away from so pleasant a vision, even if Broadway were presenting
all its numberless attractions, but at such a time would make the most of the occasion, assured
that nothing so agreeable would greet his eyes again that sombre day.

The fierce gusts make little impression on her heavy, close-fitting velvet dress, and in her
progress against the wind she appears so trim and taut that a sailor's eye would be captivated.
She bends her little turbaned head to the blast, and her foot strikes the pavement with a decision
that suggests a naturally brave, resolute nature, and gives abundant proof of vigor and health.
A trimming of silver fox fur caught and contrasted the snow crystals against the black velvet
of her dress, in which the flakes catch and mingle, increasing the sense of lightness and airiness
which her movements awaken, and were you seeking a fanciful embodiment of the spirit of the
snow, you might rest satisfied with the first character that appears upon the scene of my story.

But on nearer view there was nothing spirit-like or even spirituelle in her aspect, save that
an extremely transparent complexion was rendered positively dazzling by the keen air and the
glow of exercise; and the face was much too full and blooming to suggest the shadowy and ethereal.

When near Twenty-first Street she entered a fruit store and seemed in search of some delicacy
for an invalid. As her eye glanced around among the fragrant tropical fruits that suggested
lands in wide contrast to the wintry scene without, she suddenly uttered a low exclamation
of delight, as she turned from them to old friends, all the more welcome because so unexpected
at that season. These were nothing less than a dozen strawberries, in dainty baskets, decked
out, or more truly eked out, with a few green leaves. Three or four baskets constituted the
fruiterer's entire stock, and probably the entire supply for the metropolis of America that day.

She had scarcely time to lift a basket and inhale its delicious aroma, before the proprietor
of the store was in bowing attendance, quite as openly admiring her carnation cheeks as she
the ruby fruit The man's tongue was, however, more decorous than his eyes, and to her question
as to price he replied:

"Only two dollars a basket, miss, and certainly they are beauties for this season of the year.
They are all I could get, and I don't believe there is another strawberry in New York."

"I will take them all," was the brief, decisive answer, and from a costly portemonnaie she
threw down the price, a proceeding which the man noted in agreeable surprise, again curiously
scanning the fair face as he made up the parcel with ostentatious zeal. But his customer was
unconscious, or, more truly, indifferent to his admiration, and seemed much more interested
in the samples of choice fruit arranged on every side. From one to another of these she flitted
with the delicate sensuousness of a butterfly, smelling them and touching them lightly with
the hand she had ungloved (which was as white as the snow without), as if they had for her
a peculiar fascination.

"You seem very fond of fruit," said the merchant, his amour propre pleased by her evident interest
in his stock.

"I have ever had a passion for fine fruits and flowers," was the reply, spoken with that perfect
frankness characteristic of American girls. "No, you need not send it; I prefer to take it
with me."

And with a slight smile, she passed out, leaving the fruiterer chuckling over the thought that
he had probably had the pleasantest bit of trade on Broadway that dull day.

Plunging through the drifts, our nymph of the snow resolutely crossed the street and passed
down to a flower store, but, instead of buying a bouquet, ordered several pots of budding and
blooming plants to be sent to her address. She then made her way to Fifth Avenue and soon mounted
a broad flight of steps to one of its most stately houses. The door yielded to her key, her
thick walking boots clattered for a moment on the marble floor, but could not disguise the
lightness of her step as she tripped up the winding stair and pushed open a rosewood door leading
into the upper hall.

"Mother, mother," she exclaimed, "here is a treat for you that will banish nerves, headache,
and horrors generally. See what I have found for you out in the wintry snows. Now am I not
a good fairy for once?"

"Oh, Edith, child, not so boisterous, please," responded a querulous voice from a great easy-chair
by the glowing grate, and a middle-aged lady turned a white, faded face toward her daughter.

"Forgive me, mother, but my tramp in the January storm has made me feel rampantly well. I wish
you could go out and take a run every day as I do. You would then look younger and prettier
than your daughters, as you used to."

The invalid shivered and drew her shawl closer around her, complaining:

"I think you have brought the whole month of January in with you. You really must show more
consideration, my dear, for if I should take cold--" and the lady ended with a weary, suggestive
sigh.

In fact, Edith had entered the dim heavily-perfumed room like a gust of wholesome air, her
young blood tingling and electric with exercise, and her heart buoyant with the thought of
the surprise and pleasure she had in store for her mother. But the manner in which she had
been received had already chilled her more than the biting blasts on Broadway. She therefore
opened her bundle and set out the little baskets before her mother very quietly. The lady glanced
at them for a moment and then said, indifferently:

"It is very good of you to think of me, my dear; they look very pretty. I am sorry I cannot
eat them, but their acid would only increase my dyspepsia. Those raised in winter must be very
sour. Ugh! the thought of it sets my teeth on edge," and the poor, nervous creature shrank
deeper into her wrappings.

"I am very sorry, mother, I thought they would be a great treat for you," said Edith, quite
crestfallen. "Never mind; I got some flowers, and they will be here soon."

"Thank you, dear, but the doctor says they are not healthy in a room-- Oh, dear--that child!
what shall I do!"

The front door banged, there was a step on the stairs, but not so light as Edith's had been,
and a moment later the door burst open, and "the child" rushed in like a mild whirlwind, exclaiming:

"Hurrah! hurrah! school to the shades. No more teachers and tyrants for me," and down went
an armful of books with a bang on the table.

"Oh, Zell!" cried Edith, "please be quiet; mother has a headache."

"There, there, your baby will kiss it all away," and the irrepressible young creature threw
her arms around the bundle that Mrs. Allen had made herself into by her many wrappings, and
before she ceased, the red pouting lips left the faintest tinge of their own color on the faded
cheeks of the mother.

The lady endured the boisterous embrace with a martyr-like expression. Zell was evidently a
privileged character, the spoiled pet of the household. But a new voice was now heard that
was sharper than the "pet" was accustomed to.

"Zell, you are a perfect bear. One would think you had learned your manners at a boys' boarding
school."

Zell's great black eyes blazed for a moment toward the speaker, who was a young lady reclining
on a lounge near the window, and who in appearance must have been the counterpart of Mrs. Allen
herself as she had looked twenty-three years before. In contrast with her sharp, annoyed tone,
her cheeks and eyes were wet with tears.

"What are you crying about?" was Zell's brusque response. "Oh, I see; a novel. What a ridiculous
old thing you are. I never saw you shed a tear over real trouble, and yet every few days you
are dissolved in brine over Adolph Moonshine's agonies, and Seraphina's sentiment, which any
sensible person can see is caused by dyspepsia. No such whipped syllabub for me, but real life."

"And what does 'real life' mean for you, I would like to know, but eating, dressing, and flirting?"
was the acid retort.

"Though you call me 'child,' I have lived long enough to learn that eating, dressing, and flirting,
and while you are about it you might as well add drinking, is the 'real life' of most of the
ladies of our set. Indeed, if my poor memory does not fail me, I have seen you myself take
a turn at these things sufficiently often to make the sublime scorn of your tone a little inconsistent."

As these barbed arrows flew, the tears rapidly exhaled from the hot cheeks of the young lady
on the sofa. Her elegant languor vanished, and she started up; but Mrs. Allen now interfered,
and in tones harsh and high, very different from the previous delicate murmurs, exclaimed:

"Children, you drive me wild. Zell, leave the room, and don't show yourself again till you
can behave yourself."

Zell was now sobbing, partly in sorrow and partly in anger, but she let fly a few more Parthian
arrows over her shoulder as she passed out.

"This is a pretty way to treat one on their birthday. I came home with heart as light as the
snowflakes around me, and now you have spoiled everything. I don't know how it is, but I always
have a good time everywhere else, but there is something in this house that often sets one's
teeth on edge," and the door banged appropriately with a spiteful emphasis as the last word
was spoken.

"Poor child," said Edith, "it is too bad that she should be so dashed with cold water on her
birthday."

"She isn't a child," said the eldest sister, rising from the sofa and sweeping from the room,
"though she often acts like one, and a very bad one too. Her birthday should remind her that
if she is ever to be a woman, it is time to commence," and the stately young lady passed coldly
away. Edith, went to the window and looked dejectedly out into the early gloom of the declining
winter day. Mrs. Allen sighed and looked more nervous and uncomfortable than usual.

The upholsterer had done his part in that elegant home, The feet sank into the carpets as in
moss. Luxurious chairs seemed to embrace the form that sank into them. Everything, was padded,
rounded, and softened, except tongues and tempers. If wealth could remove the asperities from
these as from material things, it might well be coveted. But this is beyond the upholsterer's
art, and Mrs. Allen knew little of the Divine art that can wrap up words and deeds with a kindness
softer than eider-down.

"Mother's room," instead of being a refuge and a favorite haunt of these three girls, was a
place where, as we have seen, their "teeth were set on edge."

Naturally they shunned the place, visiting the invalid rather than living with her; their reluctant
feet impelled across the threshold by a sense of duty rather than drawn by the cords of love.
The mother felt this in a vague, uncomfortable way, for mother love was there, only it had
seemingly turned sour, and instead of attracting her children by sweetness and sympathy, she
querulously complained to them and to her husband of their neglect. He would sometimes laugh
it off, sometimes shrug his shoulders indifferently, and again harshly chide the girls, according
to his mood, for he varied much in this respect. After being cool and wary all day in Wall
Street, he took off the curb at home; therefore the variations that never could be counted
on. How he would be at dinner did not depend on himself or any principle, but on circumstances.
In the main he was indulgent and kind, though quick and passionate, brooking no opposition;
and the girls were really more attached to him and found more pleasure in his society than
in their mother's. Zelica, the youngest, was his special favorite, and he humored and petted
her at a ruinous rate, though often storming at some of her follies.

Mrs. Allen saw this preference of her husband, and was weak enough to feel and show jealousy.
But her complainings were ineffectual, for we can no more scold people into loving us than
nature could make buds blossom by daily nipping them with frost. And yet she made her children
uncomfortable by causing them to feel that it was unnatural and wrong that they did not care
more for their mother. This was especially true of Edith, who tried to satisfy her conscience,
as we have seen, by bringing costly presents and delicacies that were seldom needed or appreciated.

Edith soon became so oppressed by her mother's sighs and silence and the heavy perfumed air,
that she sprang up, and pressing a remorseful kiss on the white thin face, said:

"I must dress for dinner, mamma: I will send your maid," and vanished also.

CHAPTER II

A FUTURE OF HUMAN DESIGNING

The dining-room at six o'clock wore a far more cheerful aspect than the invalid's room upstairs.
It was furnished in a costly manner, but more ostentatiously than good taste would dictate.
You instinctively felt that it was a sacred place to the master of the house, in which he daily
sacrificed to one of his chosen deities.

The portly colored waiter, in dress coat and white vest, has just placed the soup on the table,
and Mr. Allen enters, supporting his wife. He had sort of manly toleration for all her whims
and weaknesses. He had never indulged in any lofty ideas of womanhood, nor had any special
longings for her sympathy and companionship. Business was the one engrossing thing of his life,
and this he honestly believed woman incapable of, from her very nature. It was true of his
wife, but due to a false education rather than to any innate difficulties, and he no more expected
her to comprehend and sympathize intelligently with his business operations, than to see her
go down to Wall Street with him wearing his hat and coat.

She had been the leading belle in his set years ago. He had admired her immensely as a stylish,
beautiful woman, and carried her off from dozens of competitors, who were fortunate in their
failure. He always maintained a show of gallantry and deference; which, though but veneer,
was certainly better than open disregard and brutal neglect.

So now, with a good-natured tolerance and politeness, he seated the feeble creature in a cushioned
chair at the table, treating her more like a spoiled child than as a friend and companion.
The girls immediately appeared also, for they knew their father's weakness too well to keep
him waiting for his dinner.

Zell bounded into his arms in her usual impulsive style, and the father caressed her in a way
that showed that his heart was very tender toward his youngest child.

"And so my baby is seventeen to-day," he said. "Well, well, how fast we are growing old."

The girl laughed; the man sighed. The one was on the threshold of what she deemed the richest
pleasures of life; the other had well-nigh exhausted them, and for a moment realized it.

Still he was in excellent spirits, for he had been unusually fortunate that day, and had seen
his way to an "operation" that promised a golden future. He sat down therefore to the good
cheer with not a little of the spirit of the man in the parable, whose complacent exhortation
to his soul has ever been the language of false security and prosperity.

The father's open favoritism for Zell was another source of jealousy, her sisters naturally
feeling injured by it. Thus in this household even human love was discordant and perverted,
and the Divine love unknown. What chance had character, that thing of slow growth, in such
an atmosphere?

The popping of a champagne cork took the place of grace at the opening of the meal, and the
glasses were filled all around. In honor of Zell's birthday they drank to her health and happiness.
By no better form or more suggestive ceremony could this Christian (?) family wish their youngest
member "God-speed" on entering the vicissitudes of a new year of life. But what they did was
done heartily, and every glass was drained. To them it seemed very appropriate and her father
said, glancing admiringly at her flaming cheeks and dancing eyes--

"This is just the thing to drink Zell's health in, for she is as full of sparkle and effervescence
as the champagne itself."

Had he been a wiser and more thoughtful man, he would have carried the simile further and remembered
the fate of champagne when exposed. However piquant and pleasing Zell's sparkle might be, it
would hardly secure success and safety for life. But in his creed a girl's first duty was to
be pretty and fascinating, and he was extremely proud of the beauty of his daughters. It was
his plan to marry them to rich men who would maintain them in the irresponsible luxury that
their mother had enjoyed.

Circumstances seemed to justify his security. The son of a rich man, he had also inherited
a taste for business and the art of making money. Years of prosperity had confirmed his confidence,
and he looked complacently around upon his family and talked of the future in sanguine tones.

He was a man considerably past his prime, and his florid face and portly form indicated that
he was in the habit of doing ample justice to the good cheer before him. Intense application
to business in early years and indulgence of appetite in later life had seriously impaired
a constitution naturally good. He reminded you of a flower fully blown or of fruit overripe.

"Since you have permitted Zell to leave school, I suppose she must make her debut soon," said
Mrs. Allen with more animation than usual in her tone.

"Oh, certainly," cried Zell, "on Edith's birthday, in February. We have arranged it all, haven't
we, Edith?"

"Heigho! then I am to have no part in the matter," said her father.

"Yes, indeed, papa," cried the saucy girl, "you are to have no end of kisses, and a very long
bill."

This sally pleased him immensely, for it expressed his ideal of womanly return for masculine
affection, at least the bills had never been wanting in his experience. But, mellowed by wine
and elated by the success of the day, he now prepared to give the coup that would make a far
greater sensation in the family circle than even a debut or a birthday party. So, glancing
from one eager face to another (for between the wine and the excitement even Mrs. Allen was
no longer a colorless, languid creature, ready to faint at the embrace of her child), he said
with a twinkle in his eye--

"Well, go to your mother about the party. She is a veteran in such matters. But let there be
some limit to the length of the bill, or I can't carry out another plan I have in view for you."

Chorus--"What is that?"

Coolly filling his glass, he commenced leisurely sipping, while glancing humorously from one
to another, enjoying their impatient expectancy.

"If you don't tell us right away," cried Zell, bouncing up, "I'll pull your whiskers without
mercy."

"Papa, you will throw mother into a fever. See how flushed her face is!" said Laura, the eldest
daughter, speaking at the same time two words for herself.

The face of Edith, with dazzling complexion all aglow, and large dark eyes lustrous with excitement,
was more eloquent than words could have been, and the bon vivant drank in her expression with
as much zest as he sipped his wine. Perhaps it was well for him to make the most of that little
keen-edged moment of bright anticipation and bewildering hope, for what he was about to propose
would cost him many thousands, and exile him from business, which to him was the very breath
of life.

But Mrs. Allen's matter-of-fact voice brought things to a crisis, for with an injured air she said:

"How can you, George, when you know the state of my nerves?"

"What I propose, mamma, will cure your nerves and everything else, for it is nothing less than
a tour through Europe."

There was a shriek of delight from the girls, in which even the exquisite Laura joined, and
Mrs. Allen trembled with excitement. Apart from the trip itself, they considered it a sort
of disgrace that a family of their social position and wealth had never been abroad. Therefore
the announcement was doubly welcome. Hitherto Mr. Allen's devotion to business had made it
impossible, and he had given them no hints of the near consummation of their wishes. But he
had begun to feel the need of change and rest himself, and this weighed more with him than
all their entreaties.

In a moment Zell had her arms about his neck, and her sisters were throwing him kisses across
the table. His wife, looking unusually gratified, said:

"You are a sensible man at last," which was a great deal for Mrs. Allen to say.

"Why, mamma," exclaimed her husband, elevating his eyebrows in comic surprise, "that I should
live to hear you say that!"

"Now don't be silly," she replied, joining slightly in the laugh at her expense, "or we shall
think that you have taken too much champagne, and that this Europe business is all a hoax."

"Wait till you have been outside of Sandy Hook an hour, and you will find everything real enough
then. I think I see the elegant ladies of my household about that time."

"For shame, papa! what an uncomfortable suggestion over a dinner table!" said the fastidious
Laura. "Picture the ladies of your household in the salons of Paris. I promise we will do you
credit there."

"I hope so, for I fear I shall have need of credit when you all reach that Mecca of women."

"It's no more the Mecca of women than Wall Street is the Jerusalem of men. What you are all
going to do in Heaven without Wall Street, I don't see."

Mr. Allen gave his significant shrug and said, "I don't meet notes till they are due," which
was his way of saying: "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof."

"The salons of Paris!" said Edith, with some disdain. "Think of the scenery, the orange-groves,
and vineyards that we shall see, the Alpine flowers--"

"I declare," interrupted Zell, "I believe that Edith would rather see a grape-vine and orange-tree
than all the toilets of Paris."

"I shall enjoy seeing both," was the reply, "and so have the advantage of you in having two
strings to my bow."

"By the way, that reminds me to ask how many beaux you now have on the string," said the father.

Edith tossed her head with a pretty blush and said: "Pity me, my father; you know I am always
poor at arithmetic."

"You will take up with a crooked stick after all. Now Laura is a sensible girl, like her mother,
and has picked out one of the richest, longest-headed fellows on the street."

"Indeed!" said his wife. "I do not see but you are paying yourself a greater compliment than
either Laura or me."

"Oh, no, a mere business statement. Laura means business, and so does Mr. Goulden."

Laura looked annoyed and said:

"Pa, I thought you never talked business at home."

"Oh, this is a feminine phase that women understand. I want your sisters to profit by your
good example."

"I shall marry an Italian count," cried Zell.

"Who will turn out a fourth-rate Italian barber, and I shall have to support you both. But
I won't do it. You would have to help him shave."

"No, I should transform him into a leader of banditti, and we would live in princely state
in the Apennines. Then we would capture you, papa, and carry you off to the mountains, and
I would be your jailer, and give you nothing but turtle-soup, champagne, and kisses till you
paid a ransom that would break Wall Street."

"I would not pay a cent, but stay and eat you out of house and home."

"I never expect to marry," said Edith, "but some day I am going to commence saving my money--now
don't laugh, papa, for I could be economical if I once made up my mind"--and the pretty head
gave a decisive little nod.

"I am going to save my money and buy a beautiful place in the country and make it as near like
the garden of Eden as possible."

"Snakes will get into it as of old," was Mrs. Allen's cynical remark.

"Yes, that is woman's experience with a garden," said her husband with a mock sigh.

Popping off the cork of another bottle, he added, "I have got ahead of you, Edith. I own a
place in the country, much as I dislike that kind of property. I had to take it to-day in a
trade, and so am a landholder in Pushton--prospect, you see, of my becoming a rural gentleman
(Squire is the title, I believe), and of exchanging stock in Wall Street for the stock of a
farm. Here's to my estate of three acres with a story and a half mansion upon it! Perhaps you
would rather go up there this summer than to Paris, my dear?" to his wife.

Mrs. Allen gave a contemptuous shrug as if the jest were too preposterous to be answered, but
Edith cried:

"Fill my glass; I will drink to your country place. I know the cottage is a sweet rustic little
box, all smothered with vines and roses like one I saw last June." Then she added in sport,
"I wish you would give it to me for my birthday present. It would make such a nice porter's
lodge at the entrance to my future Eden."

"Are you in earnest?" asked the father suddenly.

Both were excited by the wine they had drunk. She glanced at her father, and saw that he was
in a mood to say yes to anything, and, quick as thought, she determined to get the place if
possible.

"Of course I am. I would rather have it than all the jewelry in New York." She was over-supplied
with that style of gift.

"You shall have it then, for I am sure I don't want it, and am devoutly thankful to be rid of it."

Edith clapped her hands with a delight scarcely less demonstrative than that of Zell in her
wildest moods.

"Nonsense!" said Mrs. Allen; "the idea of giving a young lady such an elephant!"

"Bat remember," continued her father, "you must manage it yourself, pay the taxes, keep it
repaired, insured, etc. There is a first-class summer hotel near it. Next year, after we get
back from Europe, we will go up there and stay awhile. You shall then take possession, employ
an agent to take care of it, who by the way will cheat you to your heart's content. I will
wager you a box of gloves that, before a year passes, you will try to sell the ivy-twined cottage
for anything you can get, and will be thoroughly cured of your mania for country life."

"I'll take you up," said Edith, in great excitement, "but remember, I want my deed on my birthday."

"All right," said Mr. Allen, laughing. "I will transfer it to you to- morrow, while I think
of it. But don't try to trade it off to me before next month for a new dress."

Edith was half wild over her present. Many and varied were her questions, but her father only said:

"I don't know much about it. I did not listen to half the man said, but I remember he stated
there was a good deal of fruit on the place, for it made me think of you at the time. Bless
you, I could not stop for such small game. I am negotiating a large and promising operation
which you understand about as well as farming. It will take some time to carry it through,
but when finished we will start for the 'salons of Paris.'"

"I half believe," said Laura, with a covert sneer, "that Edith would rather go up to her farm
of three acres."

"I am well satisfied as papa has arranged it," said the practical girl. "Everything in its
place, and get all out of life you can, is my creed."

"That means, get all out of me you can, don't it, sly puss?" laughed the father, well pleased,
though, with the worldly wisdom of the speech.

"Kisses, kisses, unlimited kisses, and consider yourself well repaid," was the arch rejoinder;
and not a few, looking at her as she then appeared, would have coveted such bargains. So her
father seemed to think as he gazed admiringly at her.

But something in Zell's pouting lips and vexed expression caught his eye, and he said good-naturedly:

"Heigho, youngster, what has brought a thunder-cloud across your saucy face?"

"In providing for birthdays to come, I guess you have forgotten your baby's birthday present."

"Come here, you envious elf," said her father, taking something from his pocket. Like light
she flashed out from under the cloud and was at his side in an instant, dimpling, smiling,
and twinkling with expectation, her black eyes as quick and restless as her father was deliberate
and slow in undoing a dainty parcel.

"Oh, George, do be quick about it, or Zell will explode. You both make me nervous," said Mrs.
Allen fretfully.

Suddenly pressing open a velvet casket, Mr. Allen hung a jewelled watch with a long gold chain
about his favorite's neck, while she improvised a hornpipe around his chair.

"There," said he, "is something that is worth more than Edith's farm, tumble-down cottage,
roses, and all. So remember that those lips were made to kiss, not to pout with."

Zell put her lips to proper uses to that extent that Mrs. Allen began to grow jealous, nervous,
and out of sorts generally, and having finished her chocolate, rose feebly from the table.
Her husband offered his arm and the family dinner party broke up.

And yet, take it altogether, each one was in higher spirits than usual, and Zell and Edith
were in a state of positive delight. They had received costly gifts that specially gratified
their peculiar tastes, and these, with the promise of a grand party and a trip to Europe, youthful
buoyancy, and champagne, so dilated their little feminine souls that Mrs. Allen's fears of
an explosion of some kind were scarcely groundless. They dragged their stately sister Laura,
now unwontedly bland and affable, to the piano, and called for the quickest and most brilliant
of waltzes, and a moment later their lithe figures flowed away in a rhythm of motion, that
from their exuberance of feeling, was as fantastic as it was graceful.

Mr. Allen assisted his wife to her room and soon left her in an unusually contented frame of
mind to develop strategy for the coming party. Mrs. Allen's nerves utterly incapacitated her
for the care of her household, attendance upon church, and such humdrum matters, but in view
of a great occasion like a "grand crush ball," where among the luminaries of fashion she could
become the refulgent centre of a constellation which her fair daughters would make around her,
her spirit rose to the emergency. When it came to dress and dressmakers and all the complications
of the campaign now opening, notwithstanding her nerves, she could be quite Napoleonic.

Her husband retired to the library, lighted a choice Havana, skimmed his evening papers, and
then as usual went to his club.

This, as a general thing, was the extent of the library's literary uses. The best authors in
gold and Russia smiled down from the black walnut shelves, but the books were present rather
as furniture than from any intrinsic value in themselves to the family. They were given prominence
on the same principle that led Mrs. Allen to give a certain tone to her entertainments by inviting
many literary and scientific men. She might be unable to appreciate the works of the savants,
but as they appreciated the labors of her masterly French cook, many compromised the matter
by eating the petits soupers and shrugging their shoulders over the entertainers.

And yet the Allens were anything but vulgar upstarts. Both husband and wife were descended
from old and wealthy New York families. They had all the polish which life-long association
with the fashionable world bestows. What was more, they were highly intelligent, and, in their
own sphere, gifted people. Mr. Allen was a leader in business in one of the chief commercial
centres, and to lead in legitimate business in our day requires as much ability, indeed we
may say genius, as to lead in any order department of life. He would have shown no more ignorance
in the study, studio, and laboratory, than their occupants would have shown in the counting-room.
That to which he devoted his energies he had become a master in. It is true he had narrowed
down his life to little else than business. He had never acquired a taste for art and literature,
nor had he given himself time for broad culture. But we meet narrow artists, narrow clergymen,
narrow scientists just as truly. If you do not get on their hobby and ride with them, they
seem disposed to ride over you. Indeed, in our brief life with its fierce competitions, few
other than what are known as "one idea" men have time to succeed. Even genius must drive with
tremendous and concentrated energy, to distance competitors. Mr. Allen was quite as great in
his department as any of the lions that his wife lured into her parlors were in theirs.

Mrs. Allen was also a leader in her own chosen sphere, or rather in the one to which she had
been educated. Given carte-blanche in the way of expense, she would produce a brilliant entertainment
which few could surpass. The coloring and decorations of her rooms would not be more rich,
varied, or in better taste, than the diversity, and yet harmony of the people she would bring
together by her adroit selections. She had studied society, and for it she lived, not to make
it better, not to elevate its character, and tone down its extravagances, but simply to shine
in it, to be talked about and envied.

Both husband and wife had achieved no small success, and to succeed in such a city as New York
in their chosen departments required a certain amount of genius. The savants had a general
admiration for Mrs. Allen's style and taste, but found that she had nothing to offer on the
social exchange of her parlors but fashion's smallest chit-chat. They had a certain respect
for Mr. Allen's wealth and business power, but, having discussed the news of the day, they
would pass on, and the people during the intervals of dancing drifted into congenial schools
and shoals, like fish in a lake. Mr. and Mrs. Allen had a vague admiration for the learning
of the scholars and the culture of the artists, but would infinitely prefer marrying their
daughters to downtown merchant princes.

Take the world over, perhaps all classes of people are despising others quite as much as they
are despised themselves.

But when the French cook appeared upon the scene, then was produced your true democracy. Then
was shown a phase of life into which all entered with a zest that proved the common tie of
humanity.

CHAPTER III

THREE MEN

While Mrs. Allen was planning the social pyrotechnics that should dazzle the fashionable world,
Edith and Zell were working off their exuberant spirits in the manner described in the last
chapter, which was as natural to their city-bred feet as a wild romp is to a country girl.

The brilliant notes of the piano and the rustle of their silks had rendered them oblivious
to the fact that the door-bell had rung twice, and that three gentlemen were peering curiously
through the half-open door. They were evidently frequent and favored visitors, and had motioned
the old colored waiter not to announce them, and he reluctantly obeyed.

For a moment they feasted their eyes on the scene, as the two girls, with twining arms and
many innovations on the regular step, whirled through the rooms, and then Zell's quick eye
detected them.

Pouncing upon the eldest gentleman of the party, she dragged him from his ambush, while the
others also entered. The youngest approached the blushing, panting Edith with an almost boyish
confidence of manner, as if assured of a welcome, while the remaining gentleman, who was verging
toward middle age, quietly glided to the piano and gave his hand to Laura, who greeted him
with a cordiality scarcely to be expected from so stately a young lady.

The laws of affinity and selection were evidently in force here, and as the reader must surmise,
long acquaintance had led to the present easy and intimate relations.

"What do you mean," cried Zell, dragging under the gaslight her cavalier, who assumed much
penitence and fear, "by thus rudely and abruptly breaking in upon the retirement of three secluded
young ladies?"

"At their devotions," added the cynical voice of the gentleman at the piano, who was no other
than Mr. Goulden, Laura's admirer.

Zell's attendant threw himself in the attitude of a suppliant and said deprecatingly:

"Nay, but we are astronomers."

"That's a fib, and not a very white one either," she retorted. "I don't believe you ever look
toward heaven for anything."

"What need of looking thither for heavenly bodies?" he replied in a low, meaning tone, regarding
with undisguised admiration her glowing cheeks. "Moreover, I don't like telescopic distances,"
he continued, with a half-made motion to put his arm around her waist.

"Come," she said, pirouetting out of his reach, "remember I am no longer a child, I am seventeen
to-day."

"Would that you might never be a day older in appearance and feelings!"

"Are you willing to leave me so far behind?" she asked with some maliciousness.

"No, but you would make me a boy again. If old Ponce de Leon had met a Miss Zell, he would
soon have forsaken the swamps and alligators of Florida." "Oh, what a watery, scaly compliment!
Preferred to swamps and alligators! Who would have believed it?"

"I am not blind to your pretty, wilful blindness. You know I likened you to something too divine
and precious to be found on earth."

"Which is still true in the carrying out of your marvellously mixed metaphors. I must lend
you my rhetoric book. But as your meaning dawns on me, I see that you are symbolized by old
Ponce. I shall look in the history for the age of the ancient Spaniard to-morrow, and then
I shall know how old you are, a thing I could never find out."

As with little jets of silvery laughter and with butterfly motion she hovered round him, the
very embodiment of life and beautiful youth, she would have made, to an artist's eye, a very
true realization of the far-famed mythical fountain.

And yet, as a moment later she confidingly took his arm and strolled toward the library, it
was evident that all her flutter and hesitancy, her seeming freedom and mimic show of war,
were like those of some bright tropical bird fascinated by a remorseless serpent whose intent
eyes and deadly purpose are creating a spell that cannot be resisted.

Mr. Van Dam, upon whose arm she was leaning, was one of the worst products of artificial metropolitan
life. He had inherited a name which ancestry had rendered honorable, but which he to the utmost
dishonored, and yet so adroitly, so shrewdly respecting fashion's code, though shunning nothing
wrong, that he did not lose the entree of the gilded homes of those who called themselves "the
best society."

True, it was whispered that he was rather fast, that he played heavily and a trifle too successfully,
and that he lived the life of anything but a saint at his luxurious rooms. "But then," continued
society, openly and complacently, "he is so fine-looking, so courtly and polished, so well
connected, and what is still more to the point, my dear, he is reputed to be immensely wealthy,
so we must not heed these rumors. After all, it is the way of these young men of the world."

Thus "the best society" that would have politely frozen out of its parlors the Chevalier Bayard,
sans peur et sans reproche, had he not appeared in the latest style, with golden fame rather
than golden spurs, welcomed Mr. Van Dam. Indeed, not a few forced exotic belles, who had prematurely
developed in the hothouse atmosphere of wealth and extravagance, regarded him as a sort of
social lion; and his reticence, with a certain mystery in which he shrouded his evil life,
made him all the more fascinating. He was past the prime of life, though exceedingly well preserved,
for he was one of those cool, deliberate votaries of pleasure that reduce amusement to a science,
and carefully shun all injurious excess. While exceedingly deferential toward the sex in general,
and bestowing compliments and attentions as adroitly as a financier would place his money,
he at the same time permitted the impression to grow that he was extremely fastidious in his
taste, and had never married because it had never been his fortune to meet the faultless being
who could satisfy his exacting eyes. Any special and continued admiration on his part therefore
made its recipient an object of distinction and envy to very many in the unreal world in which
he glided serpent-like, rather than moved as a man. To morbid minds his rumored evil deeds
became piquant eccentricities, and the whispers of the oriental orgies that were said to take
place in his bachelor apartments made him an object of a curious interest, and many sighed
for the opportunity of reforming so distinguished a sybarite.

On Edith's entrance into society he had been much impressed by her beauty, and had gradually
grown quite attentive, equally attracted by her father's wealth. But she, though with no clear
perception of his character, and with no higher moral standard than that of her set, instinctively
shrank from the man. Indeed, in some respects, they were too much alike for that mysterious
attraction that so often occurs between opposites. Not that she had his unnatural depravity,
but like him she was shrewd, practical, resolute, and was controlled by her judgment rather
than by her impulses. Her vanity, of which she had no little share, led her to accept his attentions
to a certain point, but the keen man of the world soon saw that his "little game," as in his
own vernacular he styled it, would not be successful, and he was the last one to sigh in vain
or mope an hour in lovelorn melancholy. While ceasing to press his suit, he continued to be
a frequent and familiar visitor at the house, and thus his attention was drawn to Zell, who,
though young, had developed early in the stimulating atmosphere in which she lived. At first
he petted and played with ner as a child, as she wilfully flitted in and out of the parlors,
whether her sisters wanted her or not. He continually brought her bon-bons and like fanciful
trifles, till at last, in jest, the family called him Zell's "ancient beau."

But during the past year it had dawned on him that the child he petted on account of her beauty
and sprightliness, was rapidly becoming a brilliant woman, who would make a wife far more to
his taste than her equally beautiful but matter-of-fact sister. Therefore he warily, so as
not to alarm the jealous father, but with all the subtle skill of which he was master, sought
to win her affections, knowing that she would have her own way when she knew what way she wanted.

For Zell this unscrupulous man had a peculiar fascination. He petted and flattered her to her
heart's content, and thus made her the envy of her young acquaintances, which was incense indeed
to her vain little soul. He never lectured or preached to her on account of her follies and
nonsense, as her elderly friends usually did, but gave to her wild, impulsive moods free rein.
Where a true friend would have cautioned and curbed, he applauded and incited, causing Zell
to mistake extravagance in language and boldness in manner for spirit and brilliancy. Laura
and Edith often remonstrated with her, but she did not heed them. Indeed, she feared no one
save her father, and Mr. Van Dam was propriety itself when he was present, which was but seldom.
What with his business, and club, and Mrs. Allen's nerves, the girls were left mainly to themselves.

What wonder that there are so many shipwrecks, when young, heedless, inexperienced hands must
steer, unguided, through the most perilous and treacherous of seas?

Mr. Allen's elegant, costly home was literally an unguarded fold, many a laborer, living in
a tenement house, doing more to shield his daughters from the evil of the world.

To Mr. Van Dam, Zell was a perfect prize. Though he had sipped at the cup of pleasure so leisurely
and systematically, he was getting down to the dregs. His taste was becoming palled, and satiety
was burdening him with its leaden weight. But as the child he petted developed daily toward
womanhood, he became interested, then fascinated by the process. Her beauty was so brilliant,
her excessive sprightliness so contagious, that he felt his sluggish pulses stir and tingle
with excitement the moment he came into her presence. Her wild, varying moods kept him constantly
on the qui vive, and he would say in confidence to one of his intimate cronies:

"The point is, Hal, she is such a spicy, piquant contrast to the insipid society girls, who
have no more individuality than fashion blocks in Broadway windows."

He liked the kittenish young creature all the more because her repartee was often a little
cutting. If she had always struck him with a velvet paw, the thing would have grown monotonous,
but he occasionally got a scratch that made him wince, cool and brazen as he was. But, after
all, he daily saw that he was gaining power over her, and the manner in which the frank-hearted
girl took his arm and leaned upon it spoke volumes to the experienced man. While he habitually
wore a mask, Zell could conceal nothing, and across her April face flitted her innermost thoughts.

If she had had a mother, she might, even in the wilderness of earth, have become a blossom
fit for heavenly gardens, but as it was, her wayward nature, so full of dangerous beauty, was
left to run wild.

Edith was beginning to be troubled at Zell's intimacy with Mr. Van Dam, and to conceive a growing
dislike for him mingled with suspicion. As for Laura, the eldest, she was like her mother,
too much wrapped up in herself to have many thoughts for any one else, and they all regarded
Zell as a mere child still. Mr. Allen, who would have been very anxious had Zell been receiving
the attentions of some penniless young clerk or artist, laughed at her "flirtation with old
Van Dam" as an eminently safe proceeding.

But on the present evening her sisters were too much occupied with their own friends to give
Zell or her dangerous admirer much attention. As yet no formal engagement had bound any of
them, but an intimacy and mutual liking, tending to such a result, was rapidly growing.

In Edith's case the attraction of contrasts was again shown. Augustus Elliot, the youth who
had approached her with such confidence and grace, was quite as stylish a personage as herself,
and that was saying a great deal. But every line of his full handsome face, as well as the
expression of his light blue eyes, showed that he had less decision in the whole of his luxurious
nature than she in her little finger. Self-indulgence and good-natured vanity were unmistakably
his characteristics. To yield, not for the good of others, but because not strong enough to
stand sturdily alone, was the law of his being. If he could ever have been kept under the influence
of good and stronger natures, who would have developed his naturally kind heart and good impulses
into something like principle, he might have had a safe and creditable career. But he was the
idol of a foolish, fashionable mother, and the pet of two or three sisters who were empty-brained
enough to think their handsome brother the perfection of mankind; and by eye, manner, and often
the plainest words, they told him as much, and he had at last come to believe them. Why should
they not? He was faultless in his own dress, faultless in his criticism of a lady's dress,
taking the prevailing fashion as the standard. He was perfectly versed in the polite slang
of the day. He scented afar off and announced the slightest change in the mode, so that his
elegant sisters could appear on the avenue in advance of the other fashion- plates. As they
sailed away on a sunny afternoon in their gorgeous plumage, the envy of many a competing belle,
they would say:

"Isn't he a duck of a brother to give us a hint of a change so early? After all there is no
eye or taste like that of man when once perfected."

And then they knew him to be equally au fait on the flavor of wines, the points of horses,
the merits of every watering-place, and all the other lore which in their world gave pre-eminence.
They had been educated to have no other ideal of manhood, and if an earnest, straight forward
man, with a purpose, had spoken out before them, they would have regarded him as an uncouth
monster.

Notwithstanding all his vanity, "Gus," as he was familiarly called, was a very weak man, and
though he would not acknowledge it, even to himself, instinctively recognized the fact. He
continually attached himself to strong, resolute natures, by whom, if they were adroit, he
could easily be made a tool of. He took a great fancy to Edith from the first hour of their
acquaintance, and she soon obtained a strong influence over him. She instinctively detected
his yielding disposition, and liked him the better for it, while his good-nature and abundant
supply of society talk made him a general favorite.

When every one whispered, "What a handsome couple they would make!" and she found him so looked
up to and quoted in the fashionable world, she began to entertain quite an admiration as well
as liking for him, though she saw more and more clearly that there was nothing in him that
she could lean upon.

Gus's parents, who knew that the Allens were immensely wealthy, urged on the match, but Mr.
Allen, aware that the Elliots were living to the extent of their means, discouraged it, plainly
telling Edith his reasons.

"But," said Edith, at the same time showing her heart in the practical suggestion, "could not
Gus go into business himself?"

"The worst thing he could do," said the keen Mr. Allen. "He has tried it a few times, I have
learned, but has not one business qualification. He could not keep himself in toothpicks. His
mother and sisters have spoiled him. He is nothing but a society man. Mr. Elliot has not a
word to say at home. His business is to make money for them to spend, and a tough time he has
to keep up with them. You girls must marry men who can take care of you, unless you wish to
support your husbands."

Mr. Allen's verdict was true, and Edith felt that it was. When a boy, Gus could get out of
lessons by running to his mother with a plea of headache or any trifle, and in youth he had
escaped business in like manner. His father had tried him a few times in his office, but was
soon glad to fall in with his wife's opinion, that her son "had too much spirit and refinement
for plodding humdrum business, that he was a born gentleman and suited only to elegant leisure,"
and as his gentleman son only did mischief downtown, the poor over-worked father was glad to
have him out of the way, for he with difficulty made both ends meet, as it was. Hoping he would
do better with strangers, he had, by personal influence, procured him situations elsewhere,
but between the mother's weakness and the young man's confirmed habits of idleness, it always
ended by Gus saying to his employers:

"I'm going of on a little trip--by-by," at which they gave a sigh of relief. It had at last
become a recognized fact that Gus must marry an heiress, this being about the only way for
so fine a gentleman to achieve the fortune that he could not stoop to toil for. As he admired
himself complacently in the gilded mirror that ornamented his dressing-room, he felt that a
wise selection would be his only difficulty, and though an heiress is something of a rara avis,
he sternly resolved to cage one with such heavy golden plumage that even his mother, whom no
one satisfied save himself, would give a sigh of perfect content. When at last he met Edith
Allen, it seemed as if inclination might happily blend with his lofty sense of duty, and he
soon became Edith's devoted and favored attendant. And yet, as we have seen, our heroine was
not the sentimental style of girl that falls hopelessly and helplessly in love with a man for
some occult reason, not even known to herself, and who mopes and pines till she is permitted
to marry him, be he fool, villain, or saint. Edith was fully capable of appreciating and weighing
her father's words, and under their influence nearly decided to chill her handsome but helpless
admirer into a mere passing acquaintance; but when he next appeared before her in his uniform,
as an officer in one of the "crack" city regiments, her eyes, taste, and vanity, and somehow
her heart, so pleaded for him that, so far from being an icicle, she smiled on him like a July sun.

But whenever he sought to press his suit into something definite, she evaded and shunned the
point, as only a feminine diplomatist can. In fact, Gus, on account of his vanity, was not
a very urgent suitor, as the idea of final refusal was preposterous. He regarded himself as
virtually accepted already. Meanwhile Edith for once in her life was playing the role of Micawber,
and "waiting for something to turn up." And something had, for this trip to Europe would put
time and space between them, and gently cure both of their folly, as she deemed it. Folly!
She did not realize that Gus regarded himself as acting on sound business principles and a
strong sense of duty, as well as obeying the impulses of what heart he had. The sweet approval
of conscience and judgment attended his action, while both condemned her.

As Gus approached this evening, she felt a pang of commiseration that not only were they separated
by her father's and her own disapproval, but that soon the briny ocean would also be between
them, and she was unusually kind. She decided to play with her poor little mouse till the last,
and then let absence remedy all. Her mind was quick, if not very profound.

As Mr. Goulden leaned across the corner of the piano, and paid the blushing Laura some delicate
compliments, one could not but think of an adroit financier, skilfully placing some money.
There was nothing ardent, nothing incoherent and lover-like, in his carefully modulated tones,
and nicely selected words that meant much or little, as he might afterward decide. Mr. Goulden
always knew what he was about, as truly in a lady's boudoir as in Wall Street. The stately,
elegant Laura suited his tastes; her father's financial status had suited him also. But he,
who through his agents knew all that was going on in Wall Street, was aware that Mr. Allen
had engaged in a very heavy speculation, which, though promising well at the time, might, by
some unexpected turn of the wheel, wear a very different aspect. He would see the game through
before proceeding with his own, and in the meantime, by judicious attention, hold Laura well
in hand.

In that brilliantly lighted parlor none of these currents and counter currents were apparent
on the surface. That was like the ripple and sparkle of a summer sea in the sunlight. Every
year teaches us something of what is hidden under the fair but treacherous seeming of life.

The young ladies were now satisfied with the company they had, and the gentlemen, as can well
be understood, wished no further additions. Therefore they agreed to retire to the library
for a game of cards.

