I turn first to Mr. Huyshe's second letter, and the drawing that accompanies it; but before
entering into any examination of the theory contained in each, I think I should state at once
that I have absolutely no idea whether this gentleman wears his hair long or short, or his
cuffs back or forward, or indeed what he is like at all.  I hope he consults his own comfort
and wishes in everything which has to do with his dress, and is allowed to enjoy that individualism
in apparel which he so eloquently claims for himself, and so foolishly tries to deny to others;
but I really could not take Mr. Wentworth Huyshe's personal appearance as any intellectual
basis for an investigation of the principles which should guide the costume of a nation.  I
am not denying the force, or even the popularity, of the "'Eave arf a brick" school of criticism,
but I acknowledge it does not interest me.  The gamin in the gutter may be a necessity, but
the gamin in discussion is a nuisance.  So I will proceed at once to the real point at issue,
the value of the late eighteenth-century costume over that worn in the second quarter of the
seventeenth:  the relative merits, that is, of the principles contained in each.  Now, as regards
the eighteenth-century costume, Mr. Wentworth Huyshe acknowledges that he has had no practical
experience of it at all; in fact he makes a pathetic appeal to his friends to corroborate him
in his assertion, which I do not question for a moment, that he has never been "guilty of the
eccentricity" of wearing himself the dress which he proposes for general adoption by others.
There is something so naive and so amusing about this last passage in Mr. Huyshe's letter that
I am really in doubt whether I am not doing him a wrong in regarding him as having any serious,
or sincere, views on the question of a possible reform in dress; still, as irrespective of
any attitude of Mr. Huyshe's in the matter, the subject is in itself an interesting one, I
think it is worth continuing, particularly as I have myself worn this late eighteenth-century
dress many times, both in public and in private, and so may claim to have a very positive right
to speak on its comfort and suitability.  The particular form of the dress I wore was very
similar to that given in Mr. Godwin's handbook, from a print of Northcote's, and had a certain
elegance and grace about it which was very charming; still, I gave it up for these reasons:-
After a further consideration of the laws of dress I saw that a doublet is a far simpler and
easier garment than a coat and waistcoat, and, if buttoned from the shoulder, far warmer also,
and that tails have no place in costume, except on some Darwinian theory of heredity; from
absolute experience in the matter I found that the excessive tightness of knee-breeches is
not really comfortable if one wears them constantly; and, in fact, I satisfied myself that
the dress is not one founded on any real principles.  The broad-brimmed hat and loose cloak,
which, as my object was not, of course, historical accuracy but modern ease, I had always worn
with the costume in question, I have still retained, and find them most comfortable.

Well, although Mr. Huyshe has no real experience of the dress he proposes, he gives us a drawing
of it, which he labels, somewhat prematurely, "An ideal dress."  An ideal dress of course it
is not; "passably picturesque," he says I may possibly think it; well, passably picturesque
it may be, but not beautiful, certainly, simply because it is not founded on right principles,
or, indeed, on any principles at all.  Picturesqueness one may get in a variety of ways; ugly
things that are strange, or unfamiliar to us, for instance, may be picturesque, such as a late
sixteenth-century costume, or a Georgian house.  Ruins, again, may be picturesque, but beautiful
they never can be, because their lines are meaningless.  Beauty, in fact, is to be got only
from the perfection of principles; and in "the ideal dress" of Mr. Huyshe there are no ideas
or principles at all, much less the perfection of either.  Let us examine it, and see its faults;
they are obvious to any one who desires more than a "Fancy-dress ball" basis for costume. 
To begin with, the hat and boots are all wrong.  Whatever one wears on the extremities, such
as the feet and head, should, for the sake of comfort, be made of a soft material, and for
the sake of freedom should take its shape from the way one chooses to wear it, and not from
any stiff, stereotyped design of hat or boot maker.  In a hat made on right principles one
should be able to turn the brim up or down according as the day is dark or fair, dry or wet;
but the hat brim of Mr. Huyshe's drawing is perfectly stiff, and does not give much protection
to the face, or the possibility of any at all to the back of the head or the ears, in case
of a cold east wind; whereas the bycocket, a hat made in accordance with the right laws, can
be turned down behind and at the sides, and so give the same warmth as a hood.  The crown,
again, of Mr. Huyshe's hat is far too high; a high crown diminishes the stature of a small
person, and in the case of any one who is tall is a great inconvenience when one is getting
in and out of hansoms and railway carriages, or passing under a street awning: in no case is
it of any value whatsoever, and being useless it is of course against the principles of dress.

As regards the boots, they are not quite so ugly or so uncomfortable as the hat; still they
are evidently made of stiff leather, as otherwise they would fall down to the ankle, whereas
the boot should be made of soft leather always, and if worn high at all must be either laced
up the front or carried well over the knee:  in the latter case one combines perfect freedom
for walking together with perfect protection against rain, neither of which advantages a short
stiff boot will ever give one, and when one is resting in the house the long soft boot can
be turned down as the boot of 1640 was.  Then there is the overcoat:  now, what are the right
principles of an overcoat?  To begin with, it should be capable of being easily put on or off,
and worn over any kind of dress; consequently it should never have narrow sleeves, such as
are shown in Mr. Huyshe's drawing.  If an opening or slit for the arm is required it should
be made quite wide, and may be protected by a flap, as in that excellent overall the modern
Inverness cape; secondly, it should not be too tight, as otherwise all freedom of walking is
impeded.  If the young gentleman in the drawing buttons his overcoat he may succeed in being
statuesque, though that I doubt very strongly, but he will never succeed in being swift; his
super-totus is made for him on no principle whatsoever; a super- totus, or overall, should
be capable of being worn long or short, quite loose or moderately tight, just as the wearer
wishes; he should be able to have one arm free and one arm covered or both arms free or both
arms covered, just as he chooses for his convenience in riding, walking, or driving; an overall
again should never be heavy, and should always be warm:  lastly, it should be capable of being
easily carried if one wants to take it off; in fact, its principles are those of freedom and
comfort, and a cloak realizes them all, just as much as an overcoat of the pattern suggested
by Mr. Huyshe violates them.

The knee-breeches are of course far too tight; any one who has worn them for any length of
time--any one, in fact, whose views on the subject are not purely theoretical--will agree with
me there; like everything else in the dress, they are a great mistake.  The substitution of
the jacket for the coat and waistcoat of the period is a step in the right direction, which
I am glad to see; it is, however, far too tight over the hips for any possible comfort. Whenever
a jacket or doublet comes below the waist it should be slit at each side.  In the seventeenth
century the skirt of the jacket was sometimes laced on by points and tags, so that it could
be removed at will, sometimes it was merely left open at the sides: in each case it exemplified
what are always the true principles of dress, I mean freedom and adaptability to circumstances.

Finally, as regards drawings of this kind, I would point out that there is absolutely no limit
at all to the amount of "passably picturesque" costumes which can be either revived or invented
for us; but that unless a costume is founded on principles and exemplified laws, it never can
be of any real value to us in the reform of dress.  This particular drawing of Mr. Huyshe's,
for instance, proves absolutely nothing, except that our grandfathers did not understand the
proper laws of dress.  There is not a single rule of right costume which is not violated in
it, for it gives us stiffness, tightness and discomfort instead of comfort, freedom and ease.

