The mother has ever occupied the central position in the home. Under modern conditions, as
a result of her education and broader knowledge of life, through her more frequent contacts
with town and city and through her wider reading, many a farm mother is coming to feel that
her position is an anomalous one. In some cases she may be able to solve her own problems,
but only a general change in public opinion concerning their position will bring a more acceptable
status to farm women as a class.

Some of the farm woman's problems arise from the increasing division of labor between her husband
and herself and from the marketing of the farm products; these are the problems of her economic
status. The peasant woman of medieval Europe or the wife of the American pioneer never worried
that she did not receive a monthly allowance or a certain share of the farm income. She worked
with her husband and family in raising the farm products and she shared in their consumption,
for but relatively little was sold off the place. To-day, the wife of the farm owner does little
work on the farm; its products are sold and much of the food and practically all of the clothing
is purchased. She and her children contribute a considerable amount of the labor of the farm
enterprise, and do all of the housework; but the husband does the selling and most of the buying,
she often has but little share in the management of the family's finances, and rarely knows
what she may count on for household expenses. She comes to feel that she is no longer a real
partner, but a sort of housekeeper, though without salary or assured income. In over nine thousand
farm homes studied in the northern and western states,[5] one-fourth of the women helped with
the livestock, and one-fourth worked in the field an equivalent of 6.7 weeks a year, over half
of them cared for the home gardens, and one-third of them kept the farm accounts. Over a third
of them helped to milk, two-thirds washed the separators, and 88 percent washed the milk pails,
60 percent made the butter and one-third sold the butter, but only 11 percent had the spending
of the money from its sale. Likewise 81 percent cared for the poultry, but only 22 percent
had the poultry money for their own use and but 16 percent had the egg money. These figures
do not give us a complete analysis of the household finances in relation to the amount contributed
by farm women, but they are indicative of the general situation.

It is because of these facts that farm women feel that a larger portion of the farm income
should be spent in giving them better household conveniences, somewhat commensurate with the
amount that is spent for improved farm machinery and barn conveniences. Only one-third of these
farm homes had running water; and but one-fifth had a bath-tub with water and sewer connections;
85 percent had outdoor toilets. Improvement is in evidence, however, for two-thirds had water
in the kitchen, 60 percent had sink and drain, 57 percent had washing machines, and 95 percent
had sewing machines. It is not that she is merely seeking less work so that she may attend
her club or go to the movies, that the farm mother desires better conveniences and shorter
hours--her average working day is now 11.3 hours--but because she has new ideals of the nurture
which she wishes to give her family and of what she might do for them had she the time and
physical strength.

As a result of the coöperative survey of 10,000 representative farm homes in 241 counties in
the 33 northern and western states made by home demonstration agents and farm women, Miss Ward[6]
gives some interesting "side-lights," which are as illuminating as the statistics:

      "Women realize that no amount of scientific arrangement or
      labor-saving appliances will of themselves make a home. It
      is the woman's personal presence, influence, and care that
      make the home. Housekeeping is a business as practical as
      farming and with no romance in it; home making is a sacred
      trust. A woman wants time salvaged from housekeeping to
      create the right home atmosphere for her children and to so
      enrich their home surroundings that they may gain their
      ideals of beauty and their tastes for books and music not
      from the shop windows, the movies, the billboards, or the
      jazz band, but from the home environment.

      "The farm woman knows that there is no one who can take her
      place as teacher and companion of her children during their
      early impressionable years and she craves more time for
      their care. She feels the need of making the farm home an
      inviting place for the young people of the family and their
      friends and of promoting the recreational and educational
      advantages of the neighborhood in order to cope with the
      various forms of city allurements. She realizes that modern
      conditions call for an even deeper realization and closer
      contact between mother and child. The familiar term, 'God
      could not be everywhere so He made mothers' has its modern
      scientific application, as no amount of education and care
      given to children in school or elsewhere outside the home
      can take the place of mothering in the home. 'The home
      exists for the child, hence the child's development should
      have first consideration.'

      "Farm women want to broaden their outlook and keep with the
      advancement of their children 'not by courses of study but
      by bringing progressive ideas, methods, and facilities into
      the every day work and recreation of the home environment.'"

"True enough," you say, "but these are problems of the individual home. What have they to do
with the community?" Just this: The status of the farm woman is a matter determined more by
custom than by individual achievement. It is difficult for any one woman, no matter how able
or strong-minded, to maintain a status much in advance of that of her neighbors; but let the
women of a community get together and discuss their problems and ideals and the group spirit
strengthens each of them in the pursuit of the common ideals. It is such a desire for mutual
support--even though they are not conscious of it--which has drawn farm women together into
clubs and which has given such an impetus to the Home Bureaus, or women's departments of the
county Farm Bureaus. Not only in women's organizations, but finally in community organizations
of men and women, such as the Grange and the church, the social standards of the community
receive the sanction of public opinion, than which there is no more powerful means of influencing
family usages. The community as such, must give recognition to a new and better status of its
farm women.

If the rural home remains the primary social institution, it will be due to its intelligent
effort at self-defense, and not to any inherent right which it has to such a position. Originally
the family was but a biological group. Until modern times the agricultural family was chiefly
an economic unit. Only with the isolation of the American farm, did the individual family assume
the primary social position known to our fathers and grandfathers. Physical isolation and large
families made the farm home the only possible social center. Isolation is largely passing,
families are smaller, and organizations of all sorts and commercial amusements compete with
the family. It is the use of leisure time which reveals the true loyalty of the family group.
If there be nothing to attract them to the fireside, they will inevitably go elsewhere whenever
possible. Hence, if it would have its foundations strong, the community must encourage the
enrichment of home life, particularly, in the hours of leisure when life is most real. The
family games after supper, the group around the piano singing old and modern songs, the reading
aloud by one member of the circle, the cracking of nuts and the popping of corn, the picnic
supper on the lawn, the tennis court or croquet ground, the home parties, the guests ever-welcome
at meals, these are but items in a possible scorecard of the sociability of the home. We are
giving much thought to all sorts of group activities, but how much attention have we given
to systematically encouraging the social unit which has the largest possibilities, the family?
Last summer my friend, Professor E. C. Lindeman, of the North Carolina College for Women, spent
several weeks in becoming acquainted with rural Denmark under peculiarly favorable conditions.
A statement in a letter from him regarding Danish home life is apropos in this connection:

      "I observed that the country people find a great deal of
      social expression within their own homes. The home life is
      organized on a much higher plane than is common in America.
      In addition, there is a larger content of cultural and
      educational material within the family circle."

In the same way the economic position, health, education, and all other phases of life of the
family are the most potent influences both in the life of its members and of the community.

The question arises, therefore, what is the community doing to strengthen the home? In recent
years the new discipline of Home Economics has vigorously attacked the problems of diet, clothing,
and household management, and has accomplished much. It is now concerning itself with health,
child welfare, and even with child psychology and the family as an institution. Yet the home
economics point of view is necessarily restricted to that of the institution which it serves,
i.e., the home; it has the same limitations, when pursued solely from the home standpoint,
that farm management has as an interpretation of farming if not related to agricultural and
general economics. We need a consideration of the problems of the home from the standpoint
of other social institutions and with regard to its function in social organization. We need
a clearer concept of the relation of the home to the community and to community associations
and activities.

The community institutions, the school, the church, and various organizations, have had too
much of a tendency to compete with the home rather than to support and strengthen it. Thus
the tendency of the school has been to demand a larger and larger portion of the child's time
and to assume that because certain phases of education can be more economically given in the
school, that, therefore, it should take over as much of the educational function of the home
as is possible; a conclusion which is by no means valid. In the home project a new educational
principle has been discovered, which has far-reaching significance: for in it the school and
the home coöperate, the school outlining, standardizing, and interpreting, while the home furnishes
supervision, advice, and encouragement. Thus, the home is stimulated to perform those educational
functions in which it is superior, through a definite effort upon the part of the school to
strengthen them. The same principle is being applied to education in hygiene. Why should not
the church and Sunday school adopt similar methods and undertake a definite system of encouraging
the home to give moral and religious education in an adequate fashion, rather than attempt
to give homeopathic doses to children en masse? Why should not the church, or the school, or
both, give parents instruction and inspiration as to how to educate their children in matters
of sex, about which they are in the best position to gain their confidence? Should not our
clubs and social organizations, for men and women, boys and girls, face the question, as to
whether their aggregate activities are unduly competing with the home, and should they not
give definite thought as to how they may assist and strengthen the basic institution of our
social organization? If the home is the essential primary social institution, then its well-being
should command the consideration of every institution of the community; for the function and
objectives of the home cannot be determined solely by either its own ideals and purposes, or
by the values established by the various special interest groups. The home and the community
institutions are constantly in a process of adapting themselves to each other, and to the extent
that each recognizes the function of the other and is willing to coöperate rather than to compete,
is the highest success of each made possible.

This problem of the relation of the home to the community is a relatively new one, and is largely
the result of better means of communication which have enlarged the horizon of every farm home.
When the life of the child was almost wholly within the home and the neighborhood, the parents
gave themselves little concern about the influence or conditions of the larger community. But
when her children go to a consolidated school and their school associates are unknown to her,
when they attend the movies in the village, and when they read the local weekly or the city
daily newspaper and the monthly magazines, so that they know what is going on throughout the
world, then, if she be wise, a mother commences to realize that the community is having a growing
influence in shaping their character and that however ideal the home may be, it is but a part
of their lives. She commences to appreciate that she must have an understanding of the life
and forces of the community so that she may use her influence toward making their social environment
what it should be and so that she may be able to make the home so attractive that it will hold
their primary interest and loyalty. Thus community problems of health, of education, of recreation
and social life, and of religion become inter-related with those of the home. The successful
homemaker can no longer concern herself solely with home-management, but must assume her share
of responsibility in community-management, or "community housekeeping."

With the new responsibilities of suffrage rural women are following the example of their city
sisters in taking a larger interest in civic affairs and social legislation, and with a most
wholesome influence on community life. There is, however, some danger that while the men are
engaged with their business problems, these social problems will be too largely left to the
women;[7] for without the sympathetic understanding and hearty coöperation of their husbands,
rural women will find that their new social ideals will materialize but slowly. Here again,
such family organizations as the Grange, the Church, and Farm and Home Bureau, in which community
activities engage both men and women are peculiarly serviceable.

An interesting example of how the family may function in community life is found in a small
town in southern Michigan (Centerville) where the people have established a coöperative motion
picture theater, to which the families buy season tickets, and where one may find whole families
together enjoying the best pictures to the accompaniment of a community orchestra. This is
also being accomplished in many community buildings.

On the other hand the home need not abdicate all of its old-time functions as a social center.
A few years ago in attending a rural community conference at the University of Illinois I was
interested to hear a farm woman, a graduate of that university, tell how she and her neighbors
had held amateur dramatic entertainments on their front verandas during the summer. The young
people took the parts and the audience sat on the lawn, and thus many families were brought
under the influence of the better homes who would not have thought of visiting them. When winter
came on, these entertainments were continued in a slightly different manner, so that neighboring
families were brought into contact without any tendency toward undue intimacy between families
which would not associate otherwise. Family parties for young and old, should by no means be
abandoned in favor of community parties, however satisfactory and attractive the latter may be.

The social responsibility of the rural home must receive new recognition, for the day when
we can live to ourselves in the enjoyment of a select group of personal friends is rapidly
passing, if we are to have satisfactory social conditions. It is one of the bad effects of
the increasing amount of tenancy in our best farming sections, and of the frequent changing
of farm ownership, that the shifting of residence makes it difficult for the family to secure
a satisfactory social position in the community life.

In the last analysis, however, the largest contribution of the home to the community and the
best means of solving the problem of its relation to community life, is in the development
of the best social attitudes among its members toward each other and toward the life of the
community; for all sound social organization is but an application of the relations of the
family to the affairs of larger social groups, and unless attitudes of mutual aid, common responsibility,
and voluntary loyalty, are maintained in the home, so that its relations form a norm for all
other human groups, rural society will have lost the chief dynamic of social progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] From "The Farm Woman's Problems," Florence E. Ward. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Circular
148 (1920).

[6] Ibid., pp. 14, 15.

[7] Benjamin Kidd claims that this superior interest of women in race welfare is due to woman's
cultural inheritance and that from the very nature of the division of labor between man and
woman, man is less capable than woman of devoting himself to human welfare. "But the fact of
the age which goes deeper than any other is that the male mind of the race as the result of
the conditions out of which it has come, is by itself incapable of rendering this service to
civilization. It is in the mind of woman that the winning peoples of the world will find the
psychic center of Power in the future."--"The Science of Power," p. 241.

CHAPTER III

THE COMMUNITY'S PEOPLE AND HISTORY

The community is composed of people in a certain area, but the community may be dead or it
may be alive. The life of the community is determined by the degree to which its people are
able to act together for the best promotion of their common welfare. This ability to act together
will obviously depend upon the extent to which the people have common aims and purposes. If
the people of a community form distinct groups with diverse ideals and purposes, it will be
much more difficult to secure that sympathy, tolerance, and understanding which are necessary
for united action, than if they are more alike. Yet it is just such diversity of interests
of different elements in the community which gives rise to community problems and which brings
about an appreciation of the need of developing community life.

It is necessary, therefore, to have some appreciation of how the characteristics of its population
influence community life.

In the first place, a community of people of different nationalities or races, or sometimes
even of people from different states, find it much more difficult to secure a common loyalty
than if they were of one stock. It is, of course, quite true that many an old community of
a single stock is divided by family, religious or political feuds; yet usually there is more
solidarity between people of common traditions and culture. The largest problem in the so-called
"Americanization" of foreigners in rural communities is to get the natives to understand and
appreciate the newcomers and to realize that the future of the community depends upon mutual
respect and good will. Had we a little more of an historical perspective, we would remember
that all of our ancestors were "foreigners" but a few generations back. In almost every part
of the United States are communities in which alien groups form one of the chief obstacles
to a better community life. Throughout the South, the most fundamental problem is that of a
better understanding between the two races, and until some means of amicable adjustment is
attempted, there is little prospect for the development of community life. In some of our best
agricultural sections there have been successive waves of immigration of different nationalities.
Thus in Dane County, Wisconsin, of which Madison--the state capital--is the county seat, Dr.
J. H. Kolb[8] describes communities in which Germans, Norwegians, and Swiss have largely supplanted
the original settlers from New England. In an interesting study of Americanization in a community
in the Connecticut Valley of Massachusetts, John Daniels[9] has described how the French Canadians
and Irish and then the Poles have taken up the land, and how good feeling between them and
the native Yankees was gradually established. On the other hand, a nearby community in southern
New York comes to mind, in which there is a colony of Bohemians, and another of Finns, which
have been fairly successful in building up hill farms deserted by the descendants of the original
settlers, and yet the community as a whole has done little toward making these people feel
that they are a part of its life, although their industry is one of its largest economic assets.
"America is the home of the free" and most of our people do desire a real democracy, but we
seem to have assumed that it will develop spontaneously, and we have not appreciated that good
will and common understanding require some means of acquaintance and exchange of ideas, and
that the interests and desires of all the people in a community, young and old, must receive
recognition. Unless we can establish democracy in our own local community, how can we expect
it in the state or nation?

A second factor in community life is the age of its people. How often do you find a community
composed chiefly of elderly people which is progressive? In the more progressive communities
are not the middle-aged and young married people in control? The younger people desire better
advantages for themselves and particularly for their children, and so they stand for better
schools, better churches, and better facilities for all phases of community life. It is largely
for this reason, it seems to me, that older communities seem to have cycles of relative decline
and progress, according to the proportion of older and younger people. It is to be hoped that
in future generations the ability to "keep young" may become more common; indeed, this is one
of the chief objectives of modern education.

The density of population is also a determining factor with regard to many phases of community
life, for it is obviously much easier to carry on many community activities where the people
live fairly close together and not very far from the community center, than where the country
is but sparsely settled. Even with automobiles and telephones, the distance between homes will
have a large influence in determining the nature of community activities. One of the most difficult
of our rural problems is how to bring to the people in sparsely settled regions the advantages
which they rightly crave. It will be physically and economically impossible for them to have
as good opportunities as sections which are more densely settled, but ways must be found whereby
a larger degree of equality of opportunity is available to more thinly inhabited communities.

Changes in population immediately affect community needs. Where immigration is increasing rapidly,
institutions such as schools, churches, and stores are often inadequate, and there is every
incentive toward the development of community spirit and united effort to meet the common needs.
On the other hand, in the older sections decreasing populations make it impossible to maintain
as many institutions as formerly. Many an eastern community has inherited two or three churches,
which were once well filled, but which now merely serve to divide the community as none of
them are able to operate successfully, though it is obvious that unless the people are more
loyal to their common needs than to their differences that the community will be unable to survive.

In relatively new communities, and often for several generations, the influence of the original
settlement of the community may have a strong effect on its life. Thus where a new section
is settled by acquaintances from an older community, by relatives, or those of one church,
there is a bond between them from the beginning, but where land is settled by homesteaders
from different sections, the process of establishing common ideals and purposes is a gradual
one. Many a community in the middle west still bears the stamp of its original settlers. About
in the center of West Virginia is the little community of French Creek which was settled by
a few New England families a little over a hundred years ago. A recent study[10] of this community
shows that it has had a powerful influence in the educational life of the whole state, and
that its progressive spirit is largely traceable to "an ancestry of energetic people with high
ideals which have been passed on by each generation." On the other hand, in many cases this
influence is soon lost, due to some radical change in local conditions and the influx of new
elements.

Its history plays an exceedingly large rôle in advancing or retarding community development.
History and tradition are the memory of the community; they bring to mind its past experiences.
Common ancestors and common participation in important events in the past give a sense of identity
and heighten community consciousness. Pride in the history of the community is like pride in
a good family, and is a strong factor in maintaining the standards of its people. Of course
the past may be one of which no one is proud and which they may prefer to forget, but this
is a spur to new endeavor as it is to a family to attain a new status.

Community life is likely to be at a low ebb where there is but little knowledge of, or interest
in, the history of its past. I was recently impressed with this in visiting a small inland
community, which was not without many events of interest in its earlier development. I failed,
however, to find any connected records of the community's past or any of its people who know
much of its history. So far as I could learn there had been few celebrations or community activities
for many years and there was a general feeling that the community had been on the down grade
and needed redirection. It seemed to me that one of the things which might arouse community
loyalty in this instance would be for its people to clean up some of the old neighborhood cemeteries
where many of the early pioneers lie buried, and which are now grown up and unkept.

Then I think of another community where every few years on important anniversary events the
history of an organization or of the community as a whole is related and often published in
the local press. Its past has no more striking events than that of the locality last mentioned,
but these people have pride in their community and their loyalty is renewed on these anniversary
occasions.

Miss Emily F. Hoag[11] has recently given a good picture of how the history of their community
has been made to live in the hearts of the people of Belleville, New York, through their loyalty
to the old Union Academy, and she has given a fine example of how a community may be brought
to a realization of the contribution which it has made to the life of the state and nation.

Only by a knowledge of the community's history can the nature and origin of the attitudes of
its people be understood. A generation or two ago, perchance, there was a quarrel between two
families which was carried into the school meeting, and to this day two factions have persisted.
The attitudes of the people in many a progressive town may be directly traced to the influence
of some outstanding leaders--a teacher, minister, or doctor, perhaps--long since gone to their
reward. A village fire, the coming of a railroad or its deflection to a nearby town, a bank
failure, a prohibition crusade, the establishment of a library are but a few examples of events
which form crises in the life of every community and which have a far-reaching and subtle effect
in moulding its character.

The cultivation of a knowledge of its own history is, therefore, one of the first duties of
a community which seeks to understand itself so that it may better direct its life. Every community
should maintain a record of its history, and have some means of preserving important historical
material. The New York legislature has recently passed an act authorizing any township or village
board to appoint a local historian, without salary, and to furnish safe storage for historical
records. One of the most progressive rural communities in the country is the Quaker settlement
at Sandy Spring, Maryland,[12] whose first historian was appointed in 1863 and whose historian
reads the record of the year at each annual meeting. These "Annals" form a most intimate account
of the community's progress. The custom of some rural newspapers of publishing local history
of the past year on New Year's Day serves much the same purpose.

One of the best means of encouraging historical appreciation, and one which is very generally
neglected, is the teaching of local history in the schools. Educators have learned that it
is more pedagogical to commence instruction in geography with the local environment of the
child, which it can know and understand, than to begin--as formerly--with the nebular hypothesis;
but they are only commencing to appreciate that the same principle applies to the teaching
of history. Is it not true that most children can glibly recite dates and events in the history
of their own and foreign countries, of whose significance they have only a vague appreciation,
but who never secure any real historical point of view or an appreciation of the importance
of history because it has not been made concrete and intimate, as must be the case in considering
local events? If national history is taught to develop patriotism, why should not local history
be taught to inspire civic loyalty? Such a study of the efforts and sacrifices of former citizens
would bring a new sense of obligation to be worthy of the heritage they have bequeathed, and
would gradually establish an attitude of loyalty to the community which would be considered
as essential to respectability as devotion to one's country. Indeed, how can one be truly loyal
to a great country which is mostly unknown to him if he is not loyal to the people with whom
he lives day by day in his home community?

One of the best means of reviving interest in the community's past is through the production
of an historical pageant, which is discussed on page 161; for as the people act together the
events of the past, they gain a new realization of what they owe to the life of the community
in bygone days, and come to appreciate that men come and men go but the community continues
and perpetuates their influence for better or for worse.

Socrates' injunction to "know thyself" is the epitome of wisdom for the community as it is
for the individual. The first step in this process of self-acquaintance is to secure an accurate
knowledge of the kinds of people which compose the community, and how its past is influencing
its present.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] "Rural Primary Groups," a study of agricultural neighborhoods. Research Bulletin 51, Agr.
Exp. Station of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1921.

[9] "America via the Neighborhood," p. 419, D. Appleton & Co., 1920.

[10] A. J. Dadisman, "French Creek as a Rural Community," Bulletin 176, Agricultural Experiment
Station, West Virginia University, June, 1921.

[11] "The National Influence of a Single Farm Community," Bulletin 984, United States Department
of Agriculture, Dec., 1921.

CHAPTER IV

COMMUNICATION THE MEANS OF COMMUNITY LIFE

We have seen that the real life of the community depends on common interests and the ability
of its people to act together. This having things in common is the basis of all community and
is achieved only through the exchange of ideas by various means of communication. Without communication
there would be no community and no civilization. It is man's ability to communicate through
spoken and written language that has made him human. Man is more than animal because he can
exchange ideas with his fellows, and can profit by the experience of the race. This power of
communication creates a new world for him in which he lives on a different plane from all other
living things. The very words community and communication, both derived from communis--common,
indicate their relation to each other; community--the having in common, communication--the
making common.[13]

Until modern times practically all communication between the masses of the people was by word
of mouth. The people of the old world lived together in villages which were largely self-dependent,
and only the higher classes were educated to read and write. There was little opportunity for
contact with the outside world, and the people felt little need of better means of communication.
It has been frequently asserted that isolation has been the chief rural problem in America.
The reason for the dissatisfaction with life on isolated farms is better appreciated when we
remember that during all previous history men have lived together in close association and
their whole mode of thought, customs, attitudes, and desires have been formed in the intimate
life of compact groups. It is but natural, therefore, that life on the isolated farm with but
few contacts with others than immediate neighbors should become irksome and that town and city
have had a peculiar attraction for farm people.

We cannot here examine the causes and history of the development of our modern means of communication,
but we must recognize that it is due to them that rural community life as we are coming to
know it in the United States is made possible. Without these newer facilities for more frequent
association and exchange of ideas, rural life would still be confined to the small local neighborhood.

At the same time, the railroad and trolley have abolished the isolation of the rural community
and have made possible the diversion of local interests and loyalties to larger centers. Thus
while communication aids the integration of the community it affords equal facilities for its
disruption. Doubtless some of the smaller community centers will be unable to compete with
the attraction of nearby larger centers, but there seems no good reason to believe that better
communication will injure the best life of communities which are of sufficient size to support
the institutions which will command local loyalty. This dual influence of means of communication
on the internal and external relations of rural communities creates some of the chief problems
of rural social organization, for the increase of means of communication in the past two or
three generations has been more momentous and has had a more far-reaching effect on human relations
than in all the previous centuries since the invention of writing.

A brief survey of the more important of these new agencies will indicate how they affect the
relations of the farmer to his community and to other communities. These may be considered
under the two general heads of means of transportation, and means for the exchange of ideas.

As long as transportation was by wagon and by boat, commerce was slow and expensive; each community
was compelled to be largely self-dependent, and life was isolated to an extent that it is difficult
for us to conceive. Anderson has well stated the situation when he says:

      "Merchandise and produce that could not stand a freight of
      fifteen dollars per ton could not be carried overland to a
      consumer one hundred and fifty miles from the point of
      production; as roads were, a distance of fifty miles from
      the market often made industrial independence
      expedient."[14]

It was the steam railroad which made larger markets available, made possible the growth of
our large cities and the opening up of new lands distant from markets. The railroad and manufacturing
by power machinery put an end to the "age of homespun," and made it more profitable for the
farmer to sell his products and to purchase his manufactured goods in exchange. The railroad,
and the markets which it made available, changed the village center from a place of local barter
to a shipping point and so tended to center the economic life of larger areas in the villages
with railroad stations. Better local roads were necessary and business tended to become centralized
in the village. The numerous wayside taverns along the main highways disappeared, as did the
neighborhood mill and blacksmith shop. The railroad, more than any other one factor, has determined
the location of our rural community centers.

The electric railroad made the village centers more available to farm people and gave transportation
facilities to many villages without railroads, but it also made it possible for the people
of smaller communities to go to the larger centers for trading and other advantages. Trolleys
have made it possible for many farm children to get to high school who could not otherwise
have attended and have enabled those living near them to more easily get back and forth from
the village centers for all phases of community life. On the whole, however, they have probably
carried more traffic between communities, and it seems strange that they have not more generally
been able to find a profit in hauling produce from the farms to the nearest markets or shipping
stations.

Of more importance to community life has been the development of good roads, a movement which
did not get under way until the present century and which was chiefly due to the rural free
mail delivery and the automobile. The change in rural life due to automotive vehicles can hardly
be exaggerated. In our best agricultural states practically every farmer has his automobile.
He can get to the community center as quickly as the business man or laborer gets to his work
in the average city, and can go to the county seat or neighboring city as quickly as one can
drive to the business section from the more distant parts of New York or Chicago. Auto-bus
lines radiate from most of our small cities, and auto trucks not only bring freight from nearby
wholesale centers, but are rapidly supplanting horses for hauling farm produce to the shipping
station or market.

As good roads have been due chiefly to state and county, and more recently to national aid,
it is but natural that they should have been constructed where the traffic is heaviest connecting
the main centers. What is now most needed to build up the local communities is a systematic
development of the principal local roads radiating from the community centers.

Good roads and automobiles have made possible a new sort of a local community, which could
never have existed without them. Consider the present possibility of consolidated schools with
auto-busses to haul the children; the numbers of automobiles which come in from the farms to
every village center where there is a band concert or movie show; the ability to get in the
"flivver" after supper and ride to a relative's or friend's on the other side of the town and
be back for early bedtime; and one can perceive how the people in a community area are bound
together and develop common interests in new advantages made possible by their ability to get
together easily and quickly. How could the county agricultural agent or the visiting nurse
cover a county as effectively as they now do without the automobile? The rural community can
now enjoy the services of expert paid executives in many fields of work as diverse as a county
commercial club secretary, a Boy Scout leader, a Sunday school executive, or county health
officer, because the county has become a unit which can be covered as easily as a city and
is large enough to support such a division of labor as no one community could enjoy. We shall
have occasion to refer to many county organizations and agencies which not only build up the
county and the county seat, but which strengthen the life of every community which they serve,
and whose work is very largely possible because of good roads and automobiles. Where bad roads
still exist many of these services must wait and less community life is possible.

Nor does the home lose with the community advancement due to better transportation. Surely
it is better to have the children living at home than boarding in the village while they attend
high school; the doctor is secured more quickly and the visiting nurse is available; and the
family can come and go as a family because less time is required and there is no waiting for
the horses to feed, or to get rested.

It is true of course that the automobile makes it possible for people to go to the larger towns
and other village centers, and to visit their particular friends and relatives in neighboring
communities, and thus seems to furnish means for breaking down and stratifying community life.
These tendencies exist, but they will not seriously injure the community which has anything
worth while for its people. Better transportation simply makes possible a more highly organized
community life, and any complex organization is the more easily deranged; a complex machine
or a high-bred animal is more susceptible to injury than a simple tool or scrub. Many ministers
have railed against the automobile, while others have used it to fill their pews. We cannot
get away from that oldest of paradoxes, first learned by Father Adam, that every new good has
possibilities of evil. A certain type of mind has always enjoyed condemning every new invention
as "of the Devil," and yet the world wags on and no one who knows them would go back to "the
good old days."

The automobile has brought new ideas both to the community and to the farm and home. Farmers
and their wives are traveling by auto much more than they ever did by train, and it is impossible
not to pick up new ideas. One of the most effective educational devices is the farm tour in
which a group of Farm Bureau members travel from one farm to another studying the methods of
farming, and the women have adopted the idea for an inspection of farm homes.

To discuss all the effects of automotive vehicles--cycle, car, truck, bus, and tractor--on
farm life would fill a book in itself: space forbids except for incidental mention in the following
chapters.

Turning to the mechanisms for the transmission of ideas, we appreciate the even more wonderful
inventions which have brought the whole world to the farmer's door.

A generation ago farmers went several miles to the nearest postoffice for their mail, and usually
got it but two or three times a week. To-day over the greater part of the country it is delivered
to them daily, and they can ship small packages by parcels post from their doors. This daily
delivery has greatly widened the circulation of the daily newspapers and magazines of all sorts,
and has given farm people a new knowledge and a livelier interest in city and world-wide affairs.
The parcel post has made the mail-order business, but it is even more beneficial to the local
merchant who can fill a telephone order and mail it to a customer for less expense than delivery
costs in the city. Correspondence and advertising by farm people have greatly increased. It
is true that the abolition of many rural postoffices has destroyed an old-time rendezvous,
but farmers probably go to the community center more frequently than formerly. A more unfortunate
feature of the rural delivery service is that it often gives the farmer a mail address at a
postoffice of a community where he rarely goes, and fails to indicate the community in which
he is located to one unacquainted with the local geography (see page 232).

Even more important as an aid to community activities is the telephone. Visiting is now done
more over the phone than in person, but conversation can be had with any one in the community
at any time, and isolation is banished. The telephone has brought a larger protection to the
farm home in calling the doctor, police, or fire assistance. The economic value of the phone
soon became apparent for the distribution of market reports and weather forecasts or for ordering
goods or repairs from town, and the marvelous wireless telephone will greatly extend these
services. The Extension Service of the Kansas Agricultural College is installing a wireless
outfit which will receive market and weather reports and will transmit them to the farm bureau
offices at the county seats, where they may be relayed through the local telephones to every
farmer. Thus world-wide conditions may be flashed to the farmer's fireside. Within the community
the telephone has made possible a degree of organization hitherto impossible. Meetings are
called, committees are assembled, or their business is done over the phone, so that both social
and economic life are greatly stimulated.

The farmer is sometimes chided for not having organized rural life more effectively. The simple
reason is that he has not had the mechanisms whereby he could do so. With only mud roads and
horses people could get together but infrequently, and arrangements had to be made when they
were together. City life was better organized because people could get together more easily.
To-day both time and space have been so largely overcome that communication in the country
is almost as rapid as in the city and more effective organization is possible.

Better transportation, mail, and telephone service have made available agencies for the communication
of ideas, previously accessible only to the few or patronized so infrequently by those further
away as to furnish too small a constituency for their successful maintenance. The free public
library is a powerful educational agency, but many a community has been too small for its support.
Now county library systems are being organized--thanks to automobiles--which give branch stations
to every community (see p. 102). Lyceum courses of lectures and entertainments, chautauqua
courses, public forums for the discussion of current problems, and last, but not least, the
moving picture shows with their pictures of important events from all parts of the world and
showing life from Central Africa to the Antipodes, all of these are agencies for bringing new
ideas to the rural community, and are becoming increasingly common as better transportation
makes it possible for the people to utilize them. The fact that these agencies must be located
where they can serve the largest number of people, determines their location at the community
centers and they are thus a large factor in unifying the community.

Modern transportation has abolished the isolation of the farm and new means of communication
have freed the spirit of the farmer and brought the world to his doors. Together they make
possible so many satisfactions heretofore only available to the cities, as to quite revolutionize
the whole aspect of rural life. They give a new position to the rural community and to the
farmer's status in it.

FOOTNOTES:

[13] Community is derived from the Old English word commonty which came to mean "the body of
the common people, commons." Communication is from the Latin communicare, also derived from
communis--common, and ic (the formative of factitive verbs)--to make, or to make common.

[14] "The Country Town," p. 20.

CHAPTER V

THE FARM AND THE VILLAGE

We have seen that an active community must focus its life at some center, and that this center
is usually a village which has been established primarily for business purposes. The relation
of the American village to the surrounding farms is historically unique and is largely due
to the rapidity and ease with which large areas of the United States were settled after the
advent of railroads. In the colonial period and the early days of the New West, every settlement
was so isolated that it was obliged to be largely self-sufficient. Transportation was slow
and uncertain and prohibitive for other than the necessities which could not be locally produced.
Under these conditions the farmer and village business man were so inter-dependent that they
were forced to consider each other's interests. But when settlement became safer and transportation
easier the homesteaders took up their claims without relation to village connections; they
traded where it was most convenient, and their social life centered largely in the immediate
neighborhood and in the district school and country church. On the other hand the village was
settled by men who came primarily for business. The spirit of the age was that of competition
and they came primarily for profits. Their business came from the farms, but they felt little
sense of obligation to them. Every village was a potential city in their eyes and its growth
and the rise of real estate values was of more concern to them than the development of the
community's basic industry of agriculture. The village craftsman and business man gets most
of his living from the farms and it should be to his interest to give them the best of service,
but more and more he has become primarily a business man or craftsman, coming to the village
to "make money" and moving on when he sees better opportunities elsewhere. His business and
craft affiliations link him to the centers of commercial and industrial life in the cities,
and he is strongly inclined to take the city's point of view. Particularly has this been the
case with the country banker who has so largely controlled the economic life of the village
and countryside. Too often he has inevitably been more largely influenced by the interests
of eastern capital and the mortgage owners than by the real needs of his local constituency.

The result has been an increasing friction between the villages and the farms, and we have
come to think of them as two separate groups or interests rather than as essential and inter-dependent
parts of a social area--the community. The literature of country life and of rural sociology
has very rightly recognized the existing situation, but many writers seem to accept the division
between village and farm as inevitable, and even question whether there can be a rural community
of the type herein described, rather than to recognize that this is but a necessary stage in
the beginning of community life, due to the mode of settlement and temporary conditions.

This friction between farmer and villager has been most acute in the Middle West and has found
its extreme expression in the Non-partisan League Movement, which has engendered a degree of
bitterness between the two factions which cannot be permanently maintained without serious
injury to their common interests. This, however, is only an attempt of the farmers to secure
redress through political control, and is but the political form of expression of a protest
which is being more effectively made as an economic movement through coöperative buying and
selling agencies, particularly strong in Kansas and Nebraska, but rapidly spreading throughout
the country.

Some rural leaders would have us believe that the interests of the village and the farm are
fundamentally antagonistic and irreconcilable. They advocate that the consolidated school or
high school be placed in the open country where it will be uncontaminated by the urban-mindedness
of the village; that the grange is the farmers' organization and is sufficient for him and
has no need of affiliating itself with the affairs of the village; that the farmers should
develop their own coöperative stores and selling agencies so that they can be economically
independent of the "parasitic" trader of the village. Such a naïve point of view has a certain
logical simplicity which is based on the presupposition that conflict is inevitable and that
justice and equity can be secured only through dominance. The same line of reasoning finds
no solution of the problem of capital and labor, or of the interests of producer as over against
consumer, except in strong organization and eternal economic conflict. It is apparent that
there is much justification for this view and that it seems in many cases to be a necessary
stage in the adjustment of interests, but that it is either inevitable or a permanent necessity
is controverted both by experience and by a more thorough analysis of the relationships involved.

There is no gainsaying the fact that conflict has been one of the chief agencies of human progress
in the past; but neither can it be disputed that coöperation, or mutual aid, has been of equal
importance. Neither attitude can be conceived as primary or dominant; they have interacted
throughout the history of mankind. Fundamentally, the problem of the relationship of these
two phases of life is much the same as that of the nature and function of good and evil. The
one cannot exist without the other, and both are relative terms. Our present thought on these
problems has been too largely dominated by a wrong interpretation of the theory of the survival
of the fittest as the primary force in human evolution. We have assumed, and the German militarists
carried the doctrine to a logical conclusion, that this hypothesis gave the sanction of a biological
law to a competitive struggle between men. But such an inference was explicitly denied by Charles
Darwin,[15] and has no biological foundation. The struggle he described is between species
and not between members of the same species. On the other hand, we find throughout nature that
those species have been most successful which have developed the most effective means of mutual
aid.[16] Thus our economic and political thought has been dominated for the past two or three
generations with a blind worship of the dogma of unrestrained competition, which has no basis
of proof either in biological or social science.

When we examine what has gone on in the older sections of our country and project the present
tendencies into the future, we get a different point of view, and come to see that only by
an adjustment of the relations of the village and the farm to each other can the best life
of both be secured. We shall have occasion in subsequent chapters to consider the social and
political problems involved, but let us here discuss merely the economic relations, which have
been the chief source of discord.

In the first place if we examine the situation in the older parts of the country we find a
much more cordial relation between village and country than farther west, and a greater sense
of belonging to a community. The reasons for this cannot be discussed in detail, but a large
factor is the increasing tendency to centralize institutions; school, church, grange, lodge,
stores, etc.; in the village as the country becomes older, roads are better, and higher standards
develop. Furthermore, the relative status of the farmer changes the situation. In the older
parts of the country most of the capital needed to supply credit to farmers and their business
organizations comes from within the locality, whereas in the newer sections they are dependent
upon outside capital. In the older sections where land has become more valuable and wealth
has accumulated, the farmer as well as the villager is a bank director, and the amount of capital
which the farmer has invested in his business is often much greater than that of the village
business man. When the farmer comes into town in his first-class automobile as frequently as
he desires, he has a very different status from former days. The "banker-farmer" movement,
which started as an effort of the banker to assist the farmer in better methods of production
and marketing, has now become a "farmer-banker" movement in which the country banker has been
forced to give new thought to the credit facilities of his patrons, and is already challenging
the justice of the country's credit facilities being dominated by the large city banks which
are chiefly interested in financing industry and commerce.

There is no question that in many a rural town there are too many stores, as there are in the
cities, that in many cases their service is very inefficient, and occasionally their prices
are exorbitant, but several forces are already tending to remedy these evils where they occur,
and improvement may be hastened by intelligent and constructive discussion. Thus exorbitant
prices or poor service has made possible the large sales of the mail-order houses, but the
total volume of their business in most localities is relatively small and their competition
has probably been beneficial to the wide-awake merchant. For first-class merchants have been
able to show that they can meet the mail-order prices if the customer is willing to pay cash,
and the advertising of the mail-order houses has undoubtedly increased the wants of the average
farm household. In a recent address Dr. C. J. Galpin has pointed out that one of the shortcomings
of the average country merchant is that he has not studied the needs of his patrons and brought
to their attention new inventions and the better grades of goods. He holds that the higher
standard of living of city people is largely due to the fact that attractive goods and better
equipment are constantly brought to their attention in the shop windows and by salesmen.

The coöperative buying of farm supplies and machinery, which is now assuming such large proportions,
is due not merely to an effort to secure lower prices, but to secure better goods. It is a
notorious fact that for many years the farmer has had to buy inferior fertilizers and feeds
from local dealers because they were all he could get. Both mixed feeds and fertilizers have
been sold under certain brands on much the same principle as patent medicines, until the farmer
has organized his own agencies to secure their manufacture in accordance with the best scientific
formulas. This has been primarily due to a short-sighted policy on the part of manufacturers,
but it has done greater injury to the retailer who, in general, has made little effort to learn
the real needs of his trade and supply it with the best goods. The same has been true of seeds
and agricultural machinery. As a result of this one of the chief claims of such a coöperative
agency as the New York Grange-League-Federation Exchange is that it is able not only to sell
at a lower price but to furnish the best quality. The wide-awake country merchant has been
keen to appreciate these facts and wherever he has studied his trade and devoted himself to
its interests he has built up a successful business. The "Country Gentleman" has done a real
service in recently publishing a series of articles by A. B. MacDonald which have described
the successes of a few of the outstanding "Big Country Merchants."

The "chain store" has not as yet invaded the village, but it is rapidly gaining a foothold
in the smaller cities and village merchants may as well prepare for its competition, for there
seems no good reason why its greater buying power and superior organization should not enable
it to undersell the local merchant if the customer is willing to pay cash. As yet all chain
stores are on a cash basis and this would seem to prevent their gaining much of the business
of the farmer who has depended on long time credit. But the coöperative stores, which do business
only for cash, have solved the credit problem by establishing credit facilities whereby short-time
loans may be made and a credit established against which purchases are charged. There is no
question that both farmer and merchant would be better off if credit were carried by a financial
institution. The farmer is being rapidly educated in business practices, and it will be surprising
if some enterprising corporation does not establish a chain of village stores which will do
a cash business, but which will arrange for separate credit on a strictly business basis. If
one looks at the trend of business in the cities and towns during recent years, he cannot but
come to the conviction that either country merchants will have to get together so as to pool
their purchasing power and get the advantages of expert assistance in advertising, accounting,
store arrangement, and other technical services which the chain store enjoys, or they will
be forced to content themselves with the poorer and less profitable class of trade. I have
seen no studies of the matter, but it would be interesting to know how large an amount of farmer
trade is now enjoyed by the chain groceries in our larger towns. My own impression is that
they are a much more serious competitor of the small country merchant than is the mail-order
house. These are but a few of the forces which will bring better service from the village merchant.

There are also ways in which farmers may secure better service without attempting to operate
a coöperative store of their own or deserting the local merchants. Farm Bureau associations
have in numerous cases made arrangements with a local dealer whereby he would handle their
seeds, fertilizers, or spraying materials at a specified rate of profit, upon condition that
they give him all their trade in these articles and place their orders in advance. This principle
of collective buying through an established merchant at an agreed rate of profit has much to
commend it, and is being utilized by the Grange-League-Federation Exchange in New York state
to take care of its local business as far as possible. The fact is that the profits of a strictly
coöperative store, after paying the salary of a competent manager and other costs of operation,
which would make a very attractive income for a single merchant, do not make a dividend to
each of its many patrons much more than a good rate of interest on the total cost of purchases.
It may as well be recognized that unless there be a strong loyalty to the coöperative principle
by a considerable group of patrons and unless there be peculiar need of a coöperative store
that it is not a mechanism which will automatically secure much lower prices or superior service,
for the success of the enterprise depends primarily on the manager and if he be competent,
he must be paid sufficient to command not only his services but his loyalty and initiative.
The coöperative store will find it good business to have a profit-sharing arrangement with
its manager and employees, if it expects to secure the same service from them that may be secured
from the better merchants. On the other hand, if by pooling their buying power a group of farmers
can throw their business to one merchant in consideration of his selling at a specified profit,
even if only for a particular line of goods, they get the advantage of their collective purchasing
power and have none of the responsibility for maintaining the business. Although it is my belief
that the coöperative principle is essentially sound and must ultimately dominate our business
life, yet it will need to find means of giving larger incentive to its managers if it is to
compete with the best individual business men. After all, what is wanted is to get business
on a functional basis, and if this can be accomplished by means of collective buying through
an established business which furnishes its own capital and management, the farmer is the gainer.
The essential thing is that business be put on the basis of public service rather than private
profit. When that principle is recognized as being the only sound basis of our economic system,
then the methods of business organization will be determined by what experience shows to be
most advantageous to the community, and it may well be that true "coöperative competition"
between individual merchants and coöperative stores may exist side by side with advantage to
all concerned.

Another factor in rural community life is the increase of industrial establishments in villages
and small towns. There can be no question that the centralization of industry in our large
cities, which has proceeded so rapidly since the development of steam power, has now passed
its maximum and that there will be a considerable decentralization of certain industries which
can be operated profitably in small units. The metropolitan city has passed its maximum of
economic efficiency for many phases of manufacturing, if economic efficiency is judged by its
power to produce "well-being," rather than mere wealth. We have been obsessed with the glamour
of the bigness of the modern city and we are but beginning to seriously question its real efficiency.
The possibility of superior living conditions in a small town are now being recognized both
by employer and laborer, and better transportation and the development of electric power lines
make possible the organization of certain of our large industries in small units. As this process
proceeds the business of the village and small town will no longer be chiefly dependent on
agriculture and there will be a further need for accommodation of the different interests of
the community. Here again, some see only loss to rural life; but if one examines the situation
more thoroughly, mutual advantages are equally apparent. If the farmers are organized for coöperative
selling, they will be benefited by the better local markets, which are the backbone of the
agricultural economy of so prosperous a country as France. Certain local industries, whose
production is of a seasonal nature, might so arrange their operation that some of their labor
might be available to work on the neighboring farms during the rush season. Even more important
would be the increased purchasing power of the community, making possible better stores and
business and professional services of all sorts, and the increase of wealth which would make
possible the support of better schools, churches, and social advantages of all sorts. It is,
of course, true that the introduction of industry in not a few cases seems to have lowered
the standards of community life, but this is by no means universal or inevitable.

One of the unfortunate phases of the efforts of small communities to secure industrial plants
is that they often secure establishments which are not adapted to local conditions or whose
financial status is insecure, and the enterprise inevitably results in failure, with discouragement
to all concerned. There is great need for county chambers of commerce or commercial clubs with
skilled commercial executives as secretaries who can give the same expert service to the business
life of the small rural communities that the cities now have. The business life of the community
might profit as much from such a service as the farms have from the expert assistance afforded
through the Farm Bureaus.[17]

We have been considering the economic relations of the farm and the village as affecting community
life, for they are at present the chief factor in creating community interest, as well as the
leading cause of group friction. The rural community of to-day is primarily an economic unit,
but in the future it seems probable that business will occupy a relatively less important place
than the social activities of the community center. Not that there will necessarily be less
business, although the widening of markets constantly tends to take business from the local
centers, but that business will be more efficient and less competitive; business will not occupy
so large a share of attention, but will take its rightful place as a means to an end, while
the community will take more interest in those institutions which actively promote all phases
of its higher life, of health, education, art, sociability, and religion.

These social institutions will increase in relative importance and they must be located at
the community center if they are to have a sufficient constituency to be efficient in their
work and command the loyalty of rural people. Inasmuch as both farmer and villager are necessary
for the adequate support of church, lodge, school, and other community organizations, they
cannot be expected to work together in these activities if one is antagonistic to the other,
or if the one is helping to put the other out of business. The farmer has had many grievances
against the townsman, but the fault has not been entirely on one side, and only by mutual support
and the recognition of their dependent interests can a satisfactory community life be maintained.
The root of the whole trouble lies in the imaginary division of the community into town and
country. With the realization that their common interests are essential and that their differences
are due to lack of proper adjustment, many of these difficulties will be alleviated. It is
my experience that in the most successful communities, the farmers speak of "our" town, they
are proud of "our" bank, and "our" stores, school, and churches are the best in the region.
Such loyalty is the best of evidence that the business men of the town have devoted themselves
to supplying the farmers' needs, and that there is mutual understanding between them. Only
by a common loyalty to mutual service can the true community exist.

Farmers need the village and it should be to them "our town," of whose successes and improvements
they are proud. As the villagers cannot exist without the farmers they should be interested
in supporting every movement for the farmers' weal. As they have more frequent contacts with
other centers and with cities, they will be the first to bring many new ideas and suggestions
to the community, but they must realize that only as all elements of the community are agreed
will any new movement be permanently successful. There must be loyalty to farm leaders as well
as to those of the village. Indeed, the most successful rural communities are those in which
all are one big community family whose institutional interests center in the village.

FOOTNOTES:

[15] See George Nasmyth, "Social Progress and the Darwinian Theory."

[16] See P. Kropotkin, "Mutual Aid."

[17] See L. H. Bailey, "The Place of the Village in the Country-Life Movement," York State
Rural Problems, II, 148. Albany, N. Y., 1915.

CHAPTER VI

COMMUNITY ASPECTS OF THE FARM BUSINESS

In the days of the pioneer the farm business was hardly affected by community conditions. A
general store where necessities could be purchased, a mill where grain could be ground, and
a blacksmith shop were about the only necessary business agencies. The farm was largely self-sufficient
and there was but little real community life. Nor was there much change in the next generation
or two among the farmers who built substantial homes, supported their neighborhood churches
and schools, and with the free labor of a good-sized family made a comfortable living. Their
interests were chiefly in their families and neighbors, and questions of local government were
about the only community bond. When new sections of the country were opened up by railroads
and with the growth of cities farm lands increased rapidly in value, there was an era of speculative
farming, which Dr. Warren H. Wilson has called the era of the "exploiter."[18] A farm was bought
with an idea of its improvement and resale at a good profit, and many farmers moved from one
section to another in search of new land which was both fertile and cheap.[19] The era of land
speculation has by no means passed, as has been learned to their sorrow by many who bought
farms at inflated prices during the World War, and whenever there is a sudden rise in land
values, speculation will doubtless recur. On the other hand, as cheap lands become scarce,
as the better lands become more valuable and the amount of capital required to equip and operate
a farm in the better agricultural sections increases, there will be less tendency to be on
the lookout for a profitable sale and the farm business will become more permanent because
of the large effort and capital expended in the enterprise and the consequent attachment of
the owner. A man with a considerable investment does not care to move frequently. Thus higher
land values--inevitable with an increasing population--will favor a more permanent type of
farming, conducted on scientific and business principles, of what Dr. Wilson calls the "husbandman"
type. This type of farmer not only desires but requires better institutions of all sorts, which
can only be maintained at a community center. Thus permanency of ownership of farm operators
conduces to community development.

Unfortunately, however, the rise of values of the best land seems to encourage tenancy rather
than ownership, for tenancy is greatest and increases most on the best farm lands. The general
economic aspects and the ultimate solution of the tenancy problem are national rather than
local problems. The effect of tenancy as it now exists, with a frequent shifting from one community
to another, is, however, a very serious community problem, for all observers agree that the
maintenance of a satisfactory standard of community life is much more difficult where tenancy
predominates.

One important economic aspect of tenancy is that tenants, who are frequently moving, will less
readily and effectively affiliate in coöperative enterprises, and we shall see that coöperative
organizations have a large influence in promoting the solidarity of the rural community. This
has been well brought out by one of our best students of the tenancy problem, Dr. C. L. Stewart,
who says:

      "Farming efficiency in the future, however, will probably
      consist to a greater extent in the ability to increase net
      profits through coöperative dealing with the market. The
      efficiency test must, therefore, rule more strongly against
      operators of the tenures, whose characteristics are opposed
      to successful coöperative effort on their part.

      "That tenants," he continues, "changing from farm to farm at
      more or less short intervals, should generally be more
      active and successful than owners in building up coöperative
      organizations is hardly in the line of reason.... If in the
      future, coöperation assumes forms requiring greater
      permanency of membership in the societies, greater intimacy
      of acquaintance among the members, or greater investment per
      member, the tenants will doubtless find themselves
      handicapped in their relation thereto."[20]

The effect of a large percentage of tenants is even more serious upon the social side of community
life. Those who have studied the problem are agreed that both schools and churches tend to
be inferior in tenant communities. There is little "chance of development of deep friendships
and associations which give vitality to church life" where a large proportion of the tenants
are frequently moving, nor can they give as good financial support to the church as landowners.
The frequent shifting of the tenant population creates a difficult problem for all the social
life of the community, for it is impossible for a community to assimilate a considerable percentage
of its population every year and to develop those strong ties of loyalty which are essential
to real community life.

Thus a reasonable permanency of residence of its population is essential to successful community
life and this is largely determined by the economic situation of the farm business. And the
importance of the effect of tenancy, or any other economic aspect of agriculture on the life
of its people must be recognized as a fundamental consideration in determining rural policies.
Well being on the land and not wealth from the land is the final goal of agriculture.

Community life is also affected by the type of farming which is prevalent among its people.
Modern agriculture is becoming specialized, and the crops grown are determined both by soil
and climate and by the markets available. Fruit sections are due primarily to the former, while
the regions producing market milk are determined chiefly by the latter factor. Now various
types of farming make distinctly different demands upon the time of the farmer and so to a
considerable extent they condition his social life. Dairying is probably the most confining
sort of farming, and on the one-man farm there is little opportunity for getting away. "Haven't
missed milking morning or night for six years," one dairyman replied to me when asked if he
ever had a vacation. The fruit grower, on the other hand, during the winter can take a few
weeks to go South or visit relatives without injury to his business. In the South after the
crops are "laid by" in midsummer is the season for camp-meetings, picnics, and "frolicking"
in general. Not only does the fruit grower have more leisure than the dairyman, but population
is denser in a fruit-growing or trucking community and hence the communities are smaller and
more compact. Just what characteristics of community life may be attributed to these differences
in vocation it would be difficult to say, for so far as I am aware no exact studies have compared
several communities of each type, but that they exercise a large influence on community customs
and the social attitudes of the people is patent to even a casual observer who passes from
a dairy section to a fruit region, or from the northwestern grain belt to a region of general
farming.[21]

Specialization in agricultural production also affects community life in that its economic
interests are unified both as regards production and marketing and as the income of most of
its people comes from one or two products, their attention is focused upon them and a greater
degree of solidarity results than where farming is more diversified and farmers are not so
dependent on the sale of one or two crops. Specialization is chiefly due to advantages which
it ensures in marketing, as will be indicated in the next chapter, and it is because there
is less economic pressure to compel general farmers to market together and that they lack the
solidarity developed by specialization, that coöperative selling associations have not generally
succeeded in a general farming region when they have attempted to handle various farm products.

Specialization in agriculture encourages further division of labor because there is a sufficient
volume of work to pay for expert services. Thus dairy communities have developed cow-test associations,
which employ one man to test the percent of butter-fat for each cow, to interpret their milk
production records, and sometimes to advise them with regard to feeding. In fruit regions a
considerable business is done in contract spraying. Threshing crews and threshing-rings have
long been common. Custom plowing by tractor, and hauling of farm produce by motor truck are
becoming common. It seems probable that such division of labor will increase as much as is
practicable, but it finds very definite limitations in the agricultural industry, due to the
very short season in which many operations can be performed and which thus gives short employment
for any of the seasonal operations.

Division of labor also involves increasing the manufacture or "processing" of agricultural
products which is an asset to the community if performed locally as far as possible. Butter
is no longer made in the home but at the creamery, and milk is prepared for the city market
at the shipping station, or is sold to a local condensary, all of which employ more or less
skilled labor. With crops which are perishable or bulky, "processing" must be performed locally.
Thus canneries are located where the vegetables or fruits are grown. Although the selling of
equipment for coöperative canning plants has been almost as much of a swindle as promoting
coöperative creameries, yet large numbers of coöperative creameries exist where conditions
for them are suitable, and there seems no inherent reason why coöperative canneries cannot
be made successful when farmers have learned how to organize and to employ expert help.[22]
In his delightful vision of the possibilities of a new Ireland, entitled "The National Being,"
George William Russell ("A. E."), holds out the hope that the increase of such local coöperative
manufacture of agricultural products may be the means of furnishing an opportunity for the
rural laborer to better his status.

      "But what I hope for most," he says, "is first that the
      natural evolution of the rural community, and the
      concentration of individual manufacture, purchase, and sale
      into communal enterprises, will lead to a very large
      coöperative ownership of expensive machinery, which will
      necessitate the communal employment of labor. If this takes
      place, as I hope it will, the rural laborer, instead of
      being a manual worker using primitive implements, will have
      the status of a skilled mechanic employed permanently by a
      coöperative community. He should be a member of the society
      which employs him, and in the division of the profits
      receive in proportion to his wage, as the farmers in
      proportion to their trade."[23]

To the extent that "processing" farm products is taken from the farm and performed at the community
center, or that there is a division of labor, the local community is thereby strengthened,
for its life is more highly organized; it is more inter-dependent.

An interesting phase of the relation of the community to the farm business is in the protection
of crops and animals from insect pests and diseases. If one man plants his wheat late enough
to escape the Hessian fly his crop is benefited, but if all in a community do so the subsequent
infection is greatly reduced with consequent advantage to all. The chief obstacle preventing
the successful combating of the cotton boll weevil in the South has been the difficulty of
securing united action in the necessary cultural measures for its control. Most striking results
have been secured in the eradication of the Texas Fever Tick from large areas of the South,
although this has been carried on using the county as a unit; for many purposes in the South
the county is practically a community. Some of the best community work in this field has been
in the West in poisoning ground squirrels and other injurious rodents and in rabbit drives.
Although the poisoning campaigns are conducted over whole counties or several counties, they
are organized by communities and their success is possible only because every one in the community
does his part. Whenever the farmers of a community become convinced that they are unable to
fight a pest or disease individually, but can do so if they act collectively so that a sufficiently
large area is treated as to prevent immediate re-infection, a new community bond has been established.
Whether these activities are carried on by communities of the exact nature previously defined
(page 10) is immaterial. The significant fact is that their people are learning how to act
together in the common defense, for it was the common defense which first compelled mankind
to live in communities, and it is defense for one purpose or another which is ever compelling
the people of a locality to act together.

Farm management experts point out the practical value to the farmer of community experience
with regard to methods of farm practice peculiarly adapted to local climate, soils, and markets.
If one is going into dairying he can learn little from his neighbors if he locates in a fruit
section, but in a dairy section he may constantly learn from the common experience. Dr. G.
F. Warren says:

      "There is so much to learn about farming in any community
      that one man cannot hope to learn it alone. The experience
      of the community is of the utmost value to every farmer.
      Different men try out new varieties of crops, new machines,
      different breeds of animals, different methods of raising
      crops, different methods of building construction, different
      ways of saving labor. Each man gets the experiences of all;
      if a man is following a type of farming different from his
      neighbors, he cannot hope to try all these things. He is not
      likely to progress very rapidly."[24]

These advantages occur if there be a true community; i.e., if through communication one may
learn the experience of others, but in some cases the experience is of little value because
it is not available.

Finally farmers are coming to find it profitable to establish the reputation of a community
for advertising purposes. So at the railroad station we are faced with the sign, "Kalamazoo,
the home of celery." We know of "Kalamazoo, direct to you" stoves, but we had forgotten that
it is one of the oldest and best celery-growing communities in the country. Thus increased
specialization gives very real advertising values to a community which builds up a reputation
for its products. But such a reputation is simply the recognition by the outside world of the
character of the community. Thus ability to advertise itself is a very real index of its solidarity,
and the desire to be able to gain advantage from advertising may become a real motive for activities
of a community, as it does with many an individual. The ability to advertise but shows the
economic value of the creation of a real community.

Common interests in the farm business form the primary bond for the establishment of true rural
communities, and the strongest of these common interests are those involved in the problems
of marketing.

FOOTNOTES:

[18] See "The Evolution of the Country Community."

[19] See Hamlin Garland, "A Son of the Middle Border."

[20] Land Tenure in the United States with special reference to Illinois, University of Illinois,
"Studies in the Social Sciences," Vol. V, No. 3, Sept., 1916, p. 124.

[21] See John M. Gillette, "Constructive Rural Sociology" (1st Ed.), Chapter III.

[22] For an excellent discussion of "Processing Farm Products," see Theodore Macklin, "Efficient
Marketing for Agriculture," Macmillan, New York, 1921, Chap. VI.

[23] "The National Being, Some Thoughts on Irish Polity," p. 57, Maunsel & Co., Dublin and
London, 1916.

[24] "Farm Management," p. 98, Macmillan & Co., New York, 1913.

CHAPTER VII

HOW MARKETS AFFECT RURAL COMMUNITIES

We have already observed the influence of transportation and the growth of markets in revolutionizing
the self-sufficient farming of the pioneer and the industrial self-dependency of the isolated
community, but we must give further consideration to the influence of markets on rural community
life, for the world is now facing problems of the readjustment of its whole economic system
which necessitate a better understanding by the farmer of his dependence on markets and by
urban populations of their dependence upon the raw materials produced by the farm, if the mechanism
of our complex modern civilization is to be maintained. These relations involve the largest
questions of the interdependence of industries and of national and international policy in
relation thereto, and we can but call attention to some of the more fundamental principles
involved. An understanding of some of the elementary principles of agricultural economy in
relation to national and international economy by the masses of our farmers, but particularly
by their local leaders, is essential to any permanent progress not only of agriculture, but
of industry and commerce.

Before the time of railroads when rural communities were isolated from the few cities situated
on the seaboard and along the larger waterways, there was little incentive for the inland farmer
to raise more than he needed for the use of his own family. As a result there was inefficient
farming and a low standard of living.[25] Railroad transportation made it possible for the
farmer to send his products to the existing markets and so made it an object for him to produce
a surplus, but, more important, it also made possible the rapid growth of numerous industrial
and commercial centers and so was directly responsible for the creation of new and growing
markets. Steam power, the use of coal, and the economies of the factory system made it possible
to manufacture in large city factories many articles previously produced in the farmer's home
or in the village centers. Thus a division of labor was effected which was profitable to all
parties; the growth of industrial populations gave the farmer a market for his produce, and
in turn he was able to purchase from the city many goods previously unknown to the farm--fertilizers,
agricultural machinery, factory-made clothing, furniture, and other factory products too numerous
to mention. Furthermore, transportation and reasonably stable government made possible the
growth of international commerce so that the markets of many staple farm products became practically
world-wide and a division of labor arose between certain nations. England and Germany are dependent
on other countries for a considerable part of their food supplies and raw materials, while
certain agricultural countries depend on them for manufactured goods.

The point which must ever be borne in mind in considering the relation of rural and urban communities
is their interdependence; that the development both of modern industrial centers and of modern
agriculture and the higher standards of living on American farms, have been due to an exchange
of commodities and services which was mutually advantageous. Without the growth of markets
our farms would still be self-sufficing, but they would lack the many comforts and cultural
advantages which they now enjoy, and this rise in the farmer's standard of living has stimulated
further growth of industry and so made better markets.

These considerations are particularly pertinent at the present time of agricultural and business
depression. The present position of American agriculture, and its lack of buying power in our
markets, has been largely due to the fact that Europe has heretofore furnished an open market
for our surplus agricultural products. To-day Europe is unable to purchase this surplus. The
cause seems to be chiefly an economic paralysis resulting from the political interference by
the tariff walls of newly-created states with the established economic relations of agricultural
areas and manufacturing centers, and an unwillingness of the farmer to do business with a currency
so debased that its value is highly problematical. So we see the great city of Vienna,[26]
once one of the gayest and most brilliant capitals of Europe, now reduced to destitution, and
the cities not only of Russia but of Germany being forced to revert to the ancient system of
barter in order to secure adequate food.

The ultimate dependence of all cities upon the farms and mines is to-day exemplified in Europe
with such appalling tragedy, that even the smug isolation of the American farmer and the American
business man is broken down, not only by human sympathy but by the necessity of a better adjustment
of their own economic system to the world crisis from which they are unable to escape.

This shift of control from the city to the country has been powerfully portrayed by Norman Angell:

      "Moreover, the problem (of feeding Great Britain) is
      affected by what is perhaps the most important economic
      change in the world since the industrial revolution, namely
      the alteration in the ratio of the exchange value of
      manufacture and food--the shift over of advantage in
      exchange from the side of the industrialist and manufacturer
      to the side of the producer of food."[27]

      "Before the War the towns of Europe were the luxurious and
      opulent centers; the rural districts were comparatively
      poor. To-day it is the cities of the continent that are
      half-starved or famine-stricken, while the farms are
      well-fed and relatively opulent. In Russia, Poland, Hungary,
      Germany, Austria; the cities perish but the peasants for the
      most part have a sufficiency. The cities are finding that
      with the breakdown of the old stability--of the transport
      and credit systems particularly--they cannot obtain food
      from the farmers. This process which we now see at work on
      the continent is in fact the reverse of our historical
      development."[28]

But although the farmer may have sufficient food for the time--though in Russia millions are
starving, due in considerable measure to the economic and political chaos of the nation--yet
if this reverse process should go on, rural civilization would be reduced to that of former
generations, and its advance would be possible only when the industries which furnish its material
basis were revived and confidence in the medium of exchange were again established. The city
owes its existence to the farm, but without the city the farm would go back to the hoe and
the sickle and the "age of homespun."

I am not seeking to justify the modern city, for its economic and social weaknesses are ever
increasingly apparent, but it is important that we fully realize the fact that rural progress
has been chiefly due to the goods and services received in exchange from urban markets. We
have already noted the tendency toward specialization in agriculture and its effect on the
rural community, and that specialization has been chiefly due to markets. One of the chief
factors in encouraging specialization in the growth of certain products by whole communities
and sections is the fact that a larger volume of a given product ensures better marketing facilities
and a better price to the producer as long as the supply is not in excess of the demand. Where
there is a considerable volume of a certain product, buyers can meet their demands more easily
and are attracted to it, whereas a small lot of howsoever good a product must seek a buyer.
Freight rates are reduced, damage in transit is reduced, and better transportation is secured
in carload and trainload than in small shipments. The middleman's charges are less if he is
assured a considerable volume of business. Thus specialization makes possible a more effective
system of marketing than is possible with indiscriminate production.

Not only must there be sufficient volume of a given product, but it must be so standardized
with regard to varieties, grade and quantities or packages that the reputation of the goods
may be established in the market. In order to secure uniformity it has been found necessary
to standardize varieties and to grow a few well-known varieties of a given product which are
best adapted to local conditions and to the market, rather than a number of varieties, as might
be feasible if they were all sold directly on the local market.

Uniformity of grading and packing is also essential to establish a reputation on the market.
A concern like the California Fruit Growers' Exchange cannot afford to spend half a million
dollars a year in advertising unless it knows that its product will be as advertised, for advertising
an unreliable product may secure temporary sales, but will hardly be a profitable investment,
for the value of advertising an honest product is cumulative. To secure necessary uniformity
of grading and packing it has been found necessary with almost all agricultural products to
have the grading and packing done at a central establishment rather than on the farm. For even
assuming the honesty and good intent of the farmer, the standards and skill of different farmers
will vary to such an extent that uniformity is impossible. Uniformity of grade and package
must be secured at some stage of the process of marketing before the goods are bought by the
retailer. Until recently much of this service has been performed by the commission men at the
central markets, who have taken what was shipped to them or what their agents purchased and
graded it to meet the demands of the trade, and who, of course, had to charge for their services.
It has been found more profitable with most products to have the grading and packing done as
near to the farm as is possible to secure a sufficient volume of business for the enterprise.
Thus we have local packing houses for fruits, potatoes, poultry products, grain elevators,
etc., usually located at the point of primary shipment. These local plants, as well as local
creameries, canneries, and other agricultural factories and storage plants, become community
institutions as they meet the needs of the farmers within the areas tributary to the centers
where they are located. It is true, of course, that many of these plants are located in the
open country or at mere railroad stations, and that many of them draw their patronage from
several communities; yet more commonly than otherwise they are located at village centers and
serve the areas tributary to them. With the advent of good roads and motor trucks, the areas
served by such establishments will tend to become larger, but there are many local circumstances
which will tend to limit the process of centralization. Whether these plants are operated by
private individuals, by stock companies, or by coöperative associations of the producers, they
are essential to an effective marketing system and may greatly strengthen community life. If,
however, there be two or three elevators in a little village, each operated for profit by a
private owner, where all the business could be more economically handled by one concern and
where the competition creates friction and suspicion, then like the rivalry between an excessive
number of churches, they tend to divide the community.

Students of marketing problems seem agreed that better marketing systems will benefit the farmer
through greater efficiency which will reduce the costs of the process rather than through greater
profits from higher prices, and that in many lines the largest improvement is possible in the
grading, packing, and shipping from the local station. This being the case, it seems obvious
that the solution of the marketing problem will increasingly depend upon community action.

Better transportation and storage facilities tend to stabilize prices over large areas and
to give the larger markets increasing advantage in bargaining for the farmer's products. Not
that there is any concerted action upon the part of the buyers to take an undue advantage of
the farmer, for there is usually keen competition between them, but inevitably the "centralization"
of the buying power of the larger markets makes it possible for them to very largely determine
the price, just as the large employers of labor can to a considerable extent determine the
wages they will pay if labor is unorganized; for whenever there is a surplus the individual
farmer must sell, while the buyer can, within limits, purchase where or from whom he chooses.
Thus for the same reason that labor is forced to organize trade unions to maintain its wages
and working conditions, farmers are forced to organize to market their products together and
to bargain collectively for their price. This is the outstanding agricultural movement of the
past decade and at the present time is so successfully challenging the established system of
marketing as to command national attention. The success of such a movement depends primarily
upon the solidarity and efficiency of the local units, so that collective bargaining requires
the organization of the agricultural community into selling associations for its various products.
The whole process encourages the economic organization of the rural community and heightens
community consciousness through the effort of its members to defend their common economic interests.

The method of collective selling may vary, but in practice the coöperative selling association
has proven the most satisfactory and will be discussed in the following chapter.

When the most successful farmers on the best land in Illinois lose twenty-five cents on every
bushel of corn they raised, as was the case in 1921, and when it is easier for isolated farmers
in Kansas to burn corn than to buy coal at the prices current, while at the same time millions
of innocent women and children are starving in Europe, it seems evident that the complex system
of marketing upon which modern industry and civilization has depended, is pretty well out of
gear and that national and international questions must be wisely solved before it can again
function. Yet in last analysis the solution of the complex problems of marketing rests not
alone with international treaties, but with the farmers' selling associations of the rural
communities. If we are to have a marketing system which is truly functional, which is built
on the principle of the greatest service at the lowest cost, rather than on the principle now
implicit in business of sufficient service to secure the maximum of profit which the traffic
will bear, then it must be a coöperative system, the primary unit of which is the local coöperative
association, whose success depends upon the loyalty of its members to the coöperative principle.
So coöperation is a community problem.

Nor can we expect marked progress in other phases of rural life as long as the economic question
is acute. It is not true that economic prosperity in agriculture will of itself ensure the
higher culture of the countryside; but it is true that so long as the farmer is compelled to
devote all of his strength and time to making a competence for his family, that his attention
must necessarily be fixed on economic ends and that he will have neither the means nor the
time for those satisfactions of life which are possible to one with some leisure. Says "A.E.":
"I believe the fading hold the heavens have over the world is due to the neglect of the economic
basis of spiritual life. What profound spiritual life can there be when the social order almost
forces men to battle with each other for the means of existence?"[29] For weal or woe the material
existence of both farmer and townman throughout the civilized world is inextricably inter-dependent.
If a better economic system is to arise it must come through the general understanding of these
relations by the education of all parties and by a willingness to find satisfaction in the
well-being of all rather than in the largest individual profit. Unless these attitudes can
be established in the local community, how can we expect to secure harmony of interests among
larger groups? Loyalty to the common good must first be developed in the local community among
neighbors.

In subsequent chapters we shall have occasion to consider various forces and methods for creating
this spirit of community, and we shall see that whereas the higher culture of rural life awaits
a better economic system, this spirit of loyalty which is essential for coöperative organizations
may be developed through various forms of community activity.

FOOTNOTES:

[25] See Percy Wells Bidwell, "Rural Economy in New England at the Beginning of the Nineteenth
Century." Trans. Comm. Acad. Arts and Sci., Vol. 20, p. 253, 1916; and E. G. Nourse, "Agricultural
Economics," p. 65.

[26] See the account of Mr. A. G. Gardiner, Manchester Guardian, Weekly Edition, Feb. 6, 1920,
quoted by Norman Angell in "The Fruits of Victory," p. 27: "Suddenly all this elaborate structure
of economic life was swept away. Vienna, instead of being the vital center of fifty millions
of people, finds itself a derelict city, with a province of six millions. It is cut off from
its coal supplies, from its food supplies, from its factories, from everything that means existence.
It is enveloped by tariff walls."

[27] "The Fruits of Victory," p. 12, New York, 1921.

[28] Ibid., p. 14.

[29] (George William Russell), "The National Being," p. 167.

CHAPTER VIII

HOW COÖPERATION STRENGTHENS THE COMMUNITY

The greatest improvements in marketing are being effected through coöperation. We have indicated
that willingness to work together for the common good and loyalty to this principle are essential
for successful coöperative enterprises. As these same attitudes are the basis of community
life, it seems obvious that to the extent that membership in coöperative associations becomes
general throughout a community, the stronger will be the community life. Indeed, the very etymology
of the two words, coöperate--to work together, and community--having in common, indicate that
community activities are essentially a form of coöperation--of working together. Inasmuch as
coöperative enterprises are rapidly increasing and that they must, therefore, exercise a powerful
influence upon community life, it is necessary to gain a clear idea of just what is involved
in the principle of coöperation and to what types of organization the term is applicable.

In a general way there has always been a certain amount of coöperation between neighboring
farmers in the exchange of work in barn-raisings, threshing, silo-filling, slaughtering, etc.
Out of this have grown such coöperative organizations as threshing rings, and groups for the
common ownership and use of all sorts of more expensive machinery, the coöperative ownership
of sires, cow-test associations, and many other forms of organization for mutual aid in farm
operations. All of these are coöperative associations in the common usage of the word coöperation,
but in recent years the term has come to have a more technical meaning to denote a form of
organization in contrast to the corporation or stock company, which has been the most prevalent
type of business organization in recent years.

The coöperative association differs from the corporation or stock company in three essentials.
First, it is democratic in its control; all true coöperative organizations employ the principle
of "one man, one vote," the influence of each member of the association being equal as far
as the legal control of its administration is concerned. The individual members and not the
amount of stock owned controls the policy of the association. Coöperation is democracy applied
to business. Second, the coöperative association is organized to secure more efficient service
rather than to exact profits. This is a point upon which there is much misunderstanding upon
the part of those starting coöperative enterprises and which requires further explanation.
Third, the earnings or savings of the association (commonly thought of as "profits") are distributed
among the members or patrons of the association pro rata according to the volume of the business
which they have transacted with the association, so that although its control is democratic
its benefits accrue according to the amount of financial interest involved. There are certain
other principles of business procedure which have been found essential to the successful operation
of different kinds of coöperative associations, but these three--individual voting, service
rather than profits, and pro-rating the earnings--are fundamental to all truly coöperative
associations, and it is to this combination of business methods to which the term coöperation
has now come to be applied in a technical sense.

Exclusive of associations formed for coöperation in the general sense of the term, i.e., for
various purposes of farm operation as mentioned above, farmers' coöperative associations may
be divided into three general groups: for buying, for selling, and for finance.

Coöperative buying has been most successfully developed by industrial workers in towns and
cities and is commonly known as "consumers' coöperation." Starting with a few poverty-stricken
workers who pooled their meager savings so that they could buy at wholesale and share in the
profits of the retailer, the Rochdale system has grown until the wholesale coöperative societies
of England and Scotland are probably the largest general merchandising corporations in the
world, doing a business of approximately a billion dollars a year.

Coöperative buying of farm supplies, fertilizers, machinery, spraying materials, feeds, binder
twine, etc., is one of the first forms of coöperative effort ordinarily undertaken by farmers'
associations, and is carried on by numerous methods. In most cases the services rendered in
the business management of such buying is at first largely on a voluntary basis or is but poorly
paid. Only in a few sections of the country has the coöperative buying of agricultural supplies
assumed a permanent or stable form of organization, and in those cases it is very frequently
a department of a coöperative selling association, such as a fruit exchange. From an educational
standpoint there is much to be said for commencing coöperation through organization for buying
agricultural supplies, for through it farmers are trained in the principles of coöperation
with the greatest possibility of advantage and the least risk of loss. There is little probability
of loss in judicious coöperative purchases of carload lots with orders in hand, while in coöperative
selling, unless marketing facilities are so bad as to force him to take the risk, the chance
of loss is a serious consideration to the farmer. This point has been well stated by Edwin
A. Pratt, a leader of agricultural organization in England, who says:

      "Inquiry into the conditions under which organization of
      agriculture has been successfully carried out in other
      countries showed that a beginning had invariably been made
      with the simplest form of combination for the joint purchase
      of agricultural necessaries. In this way the advantages of
      coöperation could be brought home to cultivators, who were
      gradually educated in the theory and practice of combination
      without having their suspicions aroused and their mutual
      distrust stimulated by proposals that they should at once
      alter their old conditions of trading in accordance with
      that system of combination for transport or sale which
      really constitutes not the beginning of agricultural
      organization, but one of the most difficult and most
      complicated of all its many phases."[30]

One of the allurements of coöperative buying has been to at once establish a coöperative store
for a general merchandising business. The history of such stores started by granges in the
70's and 80's is instructive in this connection. A few of them survive, but most of them were
failures. Only after years of experience and education in coöperative purchasing and other
coöperative enterprises have the aims and methods of operating coöperative stores been sufficiently
appreciated by most rural communities to ensure their successful establishment. We have already
considered (page 48) some of the considerations which should govern the attempt to compete
with local merchants. Generally the successful operation of a coöperative store is more difficult
for an average group of farmers to manage than the simpler forms of coöperative purchasing,
or coöperative credit or selling associations.[31] Moreover, a coöperative store will seriously
affect the solidarity of a small community unless a goodly majority, both from farm and village,
are convinced of the necessity of competing with local retailers and will give the store their
patronage. Except in the buying of agricultural supplies, which may be considered rather as
the raw materials and equipment of the farm as a manufacturing business and which are therefore
entitled to wholesale prices, consumers' coöperation as usually conducted through coöperative
stores is not a distinctively agricultural problem, but is the same for the farmer as for the
villager or industrial worker, and its desirability and limitations are determined by similar
considerations.

With the change to a commercial type of farming and with the higher price of land, the American
farmer has had to make larger use of borrowed capital and his business has been seriously hampered
by a lack of credit facilities to meet his needs. Probably in no field of coöperative effort
have the benefits been more apparent than in that of the rural credit banks which are found
throughout Europe and which have thoroughly demonstrated their usefulness. Attention has been
called to the fact that our best farm lands are more and more operated by tenants, and that
this is inimical to strong community life. One of the reasons for this tendency has been the
inability to secure long-term loans on farm real estate by the man who has little capital of
his own. As lands rose in value this became increasingly difficult. To meet this situation
a commission representative of all sections of the United States visited various countries
in Europe in the spring of 1913, and as a result of their report, in 1916 Congress finally
enacted the Federal Farm Loan Act establishing a system of farm land banks. Under this system
one-half of the value of a farm and buildings up to $10,000 may be borrowed and paid off under
the amortization plan in from five to forty years at a low rate of interest. The details of
the system do not concern our present discussion, but the essential feature of the system is
the local land bank through which the loans are made and collected. The local land bank is
strictly a coöperative society organized to secure long-term credit facilities for its members
under the terms of the federal act through the regional land banks of which each local bank
is a member. Like other coöperative associations, the area in which the local bank does business
is not necessarily that of a community, it may be a whole county where there are but few members,
or there may be more than one bank in a single community, but more commonly it is located at
a village center and tends to become a community institution.

Equally important for financing the current expenses of farming operations and to make possible
the orderly marketing of crops, is the farmer's need for short-time credit. Our banking system
has been developed to meet the needs of the business world, and the period for which loans
can be made is too short to meet the needs of the farmer, who often requires credit for six
months to a year. In some ten states legislation has been passed authorizing the formation
of local credit associations, which are really local coöperative banks, but the number of credit
associations established in rural communities has been insignificant, thirty-three out of a
total of thirty-six being in North Carolina.[32] The tremendous losses suffered by American
farmers during 1921 and their inability to secure sufficient credit from their local banks
has shown the necessity for better short-time credit facilities, and bills are now before Congress
which will enable the local land banks to also handle short-time loans in coöperation with
the Federal Reserve Banks. If this is done, the amount of business done by these local banks
will be greatly increased and the coöperative principle in banking will be greatly strengthened.

Coöperative selling associations have had a rapid growth in the United States during the past
decade. In 1919 the federal Bureau of Markets estimated that agricultural products worth one
and a half billions out of a total of nearly nineteen billion dollars sold from farms were
marketed through coöperative associations, and the total has greatly increased since then.
The California Fruit Growers' Exchange, probably the largest coöperative selling association,
does a business of over $50,000,000 annually and has one of the most efficient distributing
systems in the country.

At the present time some very ambitious programs of national organizations for coöperative
marketing are being started, such as the United States Grain Growers, Inc., which is modeled
after the successful Canadian Grain Growers, Inc. One of the chief obstacles to all such plans
of effectively organizing the marketing of various agricultural products is the fact that a
strong central organization can be developed only by the federation of local associations whose
members understand the purposes of the organization and are loyal to them. The history of all
coöperative movements shows that those which have been permanently successful have arisen through
the federation of strong local associations, and numerous failures of well-intentioned efforts
at large-scale coöperative marketing have been due to the fact that numerous local associations
cannot be organized by the parent association with any assurance that they will function effectively.

The late G. Harold Powell, for many years the successful manager of the California Fruit Growers'
Exchange, in his discussion of the fundamentals of coöperation emphasizes that coöperative
associations must be born of a real need:

      "Among farmers, who under existing conditions are already
      prosperous, the need of business organization is not usually
      felt, even though the costs of marketing and extravagant
      profits of the middlemen or the railroads might be greatly
      reduced. They must feel the pressure of need before they can
      launch a successful business association. When the farmers
      buy their supplies at reasonable prices, and sell their
      products readily at a good profit, they do not feel the
      necessity of organization. It has been the experience of the
      past that they must feel the need of getting together to
      meet a crisis in their affairs, and the realization of the
      need must spring from within and not be forced upon them
      from without by the enthusiasm of some opportunist who seeks
      to unite the farmers on the principle that organization is a
      good thing.... In short, if an organization is to be
      successful, the investment of the farmer must be threatened
      by existing social and economic conditions before he can
      overcome his individualism sufficiently and can develop a
      fraternal spirit strong enough to pull with his neighbors in
      coöperative team work."[33]

The tremendous losses suffered by American agriculture in 1921 furnish exactly such a crisis
as Mr. Powell suggests, and have given the strongest impetus to the coöperative movement. But
even when the necessity exists and is recognized it takes time to build up a strong coöperative
association.

The successful operation of a local coöperative association is a matter of slow growth, because
it requires the education of the membership in the principles both of coöperation and of marketing,
and what is equally essential, the development of a willingness to sometimes forego the advantage
of larger profits by individual members in order to ensure the permanent success of the association.
The local association has to learn how to conduct its business just as does the individual
business man, and it has to compete with individuals and firms who are in business for profit
and who have the advantage of experience in the existing marketing system and the financial
backing of its business connections. In the attempt to create local selling associations rapidly
so as to secure a sufficient volume of business to ensure the success of large marketing enterprises,
there is always a tendency to encourage the local members to believe that they will secure
a considerably larger share of the consumer's dollar, and when prices are not materially better
than under the old system they readily become dissatisfied and withdraw. The best authorities
and advocates of coöperative marketing insist that it will be successful only to the degree
that it can become more efficient than the existing system and so effect savings and make legitimate
earnings, but that there is little prospect for large "profits"; indeed, that the legitimate
objective of coöperation is not profits, but savings. Professor Macklin summarizes the matter
as follows:

      "The true coöperative organization seeks to establish and
      maintain a distributing system to provide adequately and
      dependably at minimum cost the essential marketing services
      of which the industry and its individual members have
      constant and vital need. Its justification lies in rendering
      these services at a lower cost and in bringing to farmers a
      higher proportion of the consumer's dollar."[34]

With the factors involved in successful coöperative selling associations we are not here concerned,
except to insist upon the point that as the weakest link measures the strength of a chain,
so the strength of the local association determines the strength or weakness of the central
selling association. A joint stock company may afford more efficient management than a coöperative
association, and unless the local membership is convinced of the superior equity and ultimate
advantages of a strong coöperative system, there is little hope for the coöperative to compete
with the stock company. Coöperation means working together, and its emphasis is more on duties
and obligations than on rights and personal advantage. In coöperative enterprises the individual
must be convinced that his best interest in the long run is bound up with the best interest
of the whole membership, and unless he is sometimes willing to forego immediate personal advantage
and unless he can learn how to work with others, sometimes without compensation or with less
than he could secure otherwise, there is little chance for developing a strong organization.
For coöperation is but democracy applied to certain phases of business, and, like democracy
in politics or any other sphere of life, its highest sanction lies in belief and satisfaction
in the collective well-being.

It seems obvious, therefore, that those attitudes which are essential for coöperation are the
same which encourage community life, and that where the coöperative spirit dominates, community
activities will be strengthened. Whereas, on the contrary, in those localities where family,
political, or personal feuds, jealousies and suspicions are rife, coöperative enterprises will
be difficult and the community will be weak.

That coöperation does develop those qualities which make for better communities is attested
by all who have observed its effects. As a result of his long experience Sir Horace Plunkett says:

      "It is here, in furnishing opportunity for the exercise of
      education secured from the agricultural colleges, that the
      educational value of coöperative societies comes in; they
      act as agencies through which scientific teaching may become
      actual practice, not in the uncertain future, but in the
      living present. A coöperative association has a quality
      which should commend it to the social reformer--the power of
      evoking character; it brings to the front a new type of
      local leader, not the best talker, but the man whose
      knowledge enables him to make some solid contribution to the
      welfare of the community."[35]

So, likewise, a keen observer of Danish coöperation describes its influence in creating scientific
and social attitudes:

      "Among the indirect, but equally tangible results of
      coöperation, I should be inclined to put the development of
      mind and character among those by whom it is practised. The
      peasant or little farmer, who is a member of one or more of
      these societies, who helps to build up their success and
      enjoy their benefits, acquires a new outlook. The jealousies
      and suspicions which are in most countries so common among
      those who live by the land fall from him. Feeling that he
      has a voice in great affairs he acquires an added value and
      a healthy importance in his own eyes. He knows also that in
      his degree and according to his output he is on an equal
      footing with the largest producer and proportionately is
      doing as well. There is no longer any fear that because he
      is a little man he will be browbeaten or forced to accept a
      worse price for what he has to sell than does his rich and
      powerful neighbor. The skilled minds which direct his
      business work as zealously for him as for that important
      neighbor."[36]

It is interesting to note that the three highest authorities on the coöperative movement in
Ireland all lay great stress on its importance as a means of community organization and value
its social effects as highly as its economic benefits. Thus Sir Horace Plunkett says:

      "Gradually the (coöperative) Society becomes the most
      important institution in the district, the most important in
      a social as well as an economic sense. The members feel a
      pride in its material expansion. They accumulate large
      profits, which in time become a sort of communal fund. In
      some cases this is used for the erection of village halls
      where social entertainments, concerts and dances are held,
      lectures delivered and libraries stored. Finally, the
      association assumes the character of a rural commune, where,
      instead of the old basis of the commune, the joint ownership
      of land, a new basis for union is found in the voluntary
      communism of effort."[37]

In the same vein Smith-Gordon and Staples in their account of the coöperative movement in Ireland,
see it as the most important force for socialization because it makes the most immediate and
practical appeal to men of all parties and sects and establishes a business system which develops
the community attitude:

      "The present individualist system which takes care of the
      business interests of the farmer is a dividing and
      disintegrating force. It tends to destroy the natural
      associative character and to set each man against his
      neighbor.... But as a member of a society with interests in
      common with others, the individual consciously and
      unconsciously develops the social virtues.... The society is
      in miniature a community, and the community is but a part of
      the larger social group."[38]

George William Russell ("A.E."), the poet-prophet of Irish agriculture, bases his whole conception
of a desirable polity for the Irish State upon coöperative communities, and considers coöperative
societies as a prerequisite to rural organization. After describing the marked economic and
social changes which have taken place in a typical Irish community as the result of coöperation,
he says:

      "I have tried to indicate the difference between a rural
      population and a rural community, between a people loosely
      knit together by the vague ties of a common latitude and
      longitude, and people who are closely knit together in an
      association and who form a true social organism, a true
      rural community, where the general will can find expression
      and society is malleable to the general will. I will assert
      that there never can be any progress in rural districts or
      any real prosperity without such farmers' organizations or
      guilds. Wherever rural prosperity is reported in any country
      inquire into it, and it will be found that it depends on
      rural organization. Wherever there is rural decay, if it is
      inquired into, it will be found that there was a rural
      population but no rural community, no organization, no guild
      to promote common interests and unite the countrymen in
      defence of them."[39]

The same observations might be made upon the effect of coöperative enterprises in solidifying
rural communities in the United States. It seems doubtful whether coöperative associations
in the United States will develop a general social program as they have done in Ireland, Belgium,
and Russia. On account of a different social inheritance and account of our facility in forming
and belonging to numerous organizations, it seems probable that we will limit our coöperative
societies to strictly economic functions, and will use the increased income secured through
them in other organizations for social purposes.

Commercial farming is breaking down the old individualism of the farmer, for the exigencies
of the economic situation are forcing him to market collectively through coöperative selling
associations, and as he learns that his own best interests are bound up with those of the whole
community, he becomes increasingly concerned for the common welfare; he commences to think
in terms of "us" and "ours," instead of only "me" and "mine." The community becomes a reality
to him.

FOOTNOTES:

[30] "Agricultural Organization," p. 99. London, P. S. King & Son, 1912.

[31] See Clarence Poe, "How Farmers Coöperate," Chap. III, p. 37. "Coöperative buying is good;
coöperative merchandising may or may not be." New York, Orange Judd Co., 1915.

[32] V. N. Valgren and E. E. Engelbert, "The Credit Association as an Agency for Rural Short-time
Credit." Department Circular 197, U. S. Dept. Agr., 1921.

[33] "Coöperation in Agriculture," pp. 22, 23. New York, The Macmillan Co., 1913.

[34] Theodore Macklin, "Efficient Marketing for Agriculture," p. 260. New York, Macmillan Co.,
1921.

[35] "The Country Life Problem in the United States," p. 123.

[36] Harvey, "Denmark and the Danes," p. 146, quoted by F. C. Howe, "Denmark a Coöperative
Commonwealth," p. 61.

[37] Ibid., p. 128.

[38] "Rural Reconstruction in Ireland; a Record of Coöperative Organizations." New Haven, Yale
Univ. Press, 1919.

[39] "The National Being," p. 39.

CHAPTER IX

THE COMMUNITY'S EDUCATION

THE SCHOOL

At its beginning the United States Government gave support to education by the allotment of
public lands to the states as an endowment for public schools, and although the federal government
has done but little since then for primary education, the support of education has become one
of the chief concerns of state and local governments. In colonial times public schools were
largely confined to New England. With the settlement of the Middle West district schools were
established with the aid of the government land grants. But in the South conditions were not
favorable for public schools until long after the Civil War, and only in the last generation
or two has public education become firmly established.

The district school, the famous "little red school-house" of the nineteenth century, was frequently
the neighborhood center and the school district commonly formed a neighborhood area, particularly
in hilly sections where its lines were adjusted by topography. A recent study of neighborhood
areas in Otsego County, New York, shows that about half of them are identical with the school
districts, chiefly on account of topography, while in Dane County, Wisconsin, more neighborhood
areas are determined primarily by the school district than by any one factor.[40] Formerly
the district school-house was quite frequently used for Sunday school or preaching services;
spelling-bees and other entertainments were held from time to time; and political meetings
and elections were commonly held there.

Although the district school is still a neighborhood social center in many sections, its decadence
commenced at the close of the nineteenth century, the change depending upon the general progress
or isolation of the community, particularly as affected by transportation. Several factors
have combined to make the district school unsatisfactory to the rural community of to-day.
In the older parts of the country the population has so decreased that in many districts the
maintenance of a school has become exceedingly expensive, it is difficult to secure competent
teachers, and there are too few pupils to make the school attractive. The better educational
advantages of town and city schools have caused much dissatisfaction upon the part of the better
class of farmers who wish their children to have the best possible start in life, and many
of those who can afford to do so have "moved to town" to educate their children, thus making
a bad matter worse for the district school. As long as roads were poor the district school
was the only one possible, but with better roads, automobiles and trolleys, the consolidation
of schools has proceeded rapidly in the past decade, particularly in the prairie states.

A modern school cannot be maintained at every other crossroads. Improved roads naturally radiate
from the village center and hence it is the logical point for a consolidated school or high
school. There are localities in isolated regions where it might be desirable to establish consolidated
schools in the open country, but in most cases where there is a natural village center, the
school should be located there and the school laws should make possible the organization of
the consolidated school district regardless of township or county lines. Indeed legislation
has already been enacted to this end in several states and forms one of the most important
movements for strengthening the rural community. Here and there are to be found consolidated
schools which have been placed in the open country at the center of a township because it was
the point most easily agreed upon by all the patrons, particularly where the township is an
administrative unit of the school system. In some cases somewhat successful efforts are being
made to have such consolidated schools serve as social centers, but it is believed that in
the long run community life will flow to its natural centers and that the seeming success of
such social centers in the open country, unless the neighborhood be an isolated one, will tend
to weaken the communities concerned. Usually a consolidated district of this sort will contain
parts of two or three community areas and the location of the school at a point between them
weakens the support of the community centers to that extent. Here we encounter one of the many
ways in which our artificial unit of rural government--the township--interferes with community
progress.[41]

Formerly only the children of the upper classes who were preparing for college received a secondary
education, but during the past generation there has been a rapid growth of public high schools
which serve as the "people's colleges." At first these were found only in the cities and larger
towns, but rural communities have demanded equal advantages and state and national legislation
has aided them in the cost of maintenance. Federal aid for secondary education in vocational
subjects, now available through the Smith-Hughes Act of 1917, has encouraged the establishment
of rural high schools and has greatly increased the number giving instruction in agriculture
and home economics. Hundreds of rural high schools are now giving agricultural courses better
than the agricultural colleges gave twenty-five years ago.

Rural high schools with full four-year courses have been found mostly in the larger villages
and towns, but the movement is now well under way to divide the period of secondary education
into a junior and senior high school (the so-called "six-six" plan), and junior high schools,
including the seventh to ninth grades, are being established in many smaller communities by
simply adding a grade to the consolidated schools. The educational forces of the country, as
expressed by statements of the U. S. Bureau of Education and the National Education Association,
are now committed to the policy of consolidated rural schools wherever they are practicable
and to the establishment of a sufficient number of high schools so that every rural child may
attend high school and still be able to live at home. Obviously it is important from the standpoint
of community development that the high schools should be placed at community centers and that
where some of the communities are too small to support senior high schools that they should
be located at a village which serves as a center of what, for want of a better term, we may
call "the larger community" (see pages 232-3).

One of the reasons for consolidated schools is that the objectives of rural education are changing
and that country people are demanding that their children be educated for country as well as
for town life. Formerly the content and method of rural education was an imitation of that
of the city and inevitably made industrial, commercial, and professional occupations the ideal
of the pupil. The schools of New England have done an immense service to the rest of the country
but they were an important factor in depopulating many a New England town. The introduction
of nature study, agriculture, and home economics is becoming general in rural schools. Educators
do not desire to train rural children solely for farm life, and thus to segregate a farm class,
even were that possible, but they are attempting to give equal emphasis to the values of country
life so that it may prove equally attractive to the best as well as to the less efficient rural
youth.

Furthermore the whole attitude of rural as well as urban education is changing from that of
teaching individuals so as to equip them with intellectual tools for their personal advancement,
to one of training future citizens who will attain their own best interests by useful service
to the community. The curriculum and objectives of the school are rapidly becoming socialized,
and as this process goes on the school will more and more become the most important single
institution for creating community loyalty.

The community school, particularly the high school, no longer confines itself to the instruction
of its regular pupils; it is the educational center and headquarters of the community. With
the assistance of the Extension Service of the agricultural colleges, rural high schools are
holding one-week extension schools for farm men and women, and under the Smith-Hughes Act they
are offering continuation short courses for the younger farmers. The progressive rural high
school is taking a live interest in the one-room district schools which may be too far from
the center for consolidation, and is seeking to interest their pupils in attending high schools
through athletic meets, play festivals, and similar assemblages of all the schools of the community,
which thus create a natural bond of interest and common enthusiasm. The principal of the high
school at Oxford, N. Y., recently organized a public-speaking contest of representatives of
all the country schools in his supervisory district, in connection with the annual play festival
which he had established several years before. This proved to be a huge success and gave the
boys and girls from the district schools new confidence in their ability of self-expression.
One of the greatest needs which farmers' organizations are to-day feeling is their lack of
leaders who can speak for them effectively at public gatherings and before legislative hearings
in competition with men who make their living by talking. Such contests, particularly when
the topics discussed deal with affairs of country life with which the children are acquainted
and in which they are vitally interested, as was the case with the one at Oxford and to which
much of its success was attributed, are therefore of great value and may well be substituted
for the academic debates so often heard on subjects quite foreign to the child's life and beyond
his real comprehension.

In many places new school buildings are being constructed with an auditorium, which may be
used as a gymnasium, library room, dining room, etc., so that they may serve as social centers
for the community. Where the community is not large enough to afford a separate community house
this is frequently the best and most economical means of meeting this need. This will be discussed
further in considering community buildings.

Numerous rural high schools are conducting lyceum and entertainment courses, and some are operating
motion-picture shows on Saturday nights. Where no other organization is better adapted for
taking the responsibility of furnishing high-class entertainment to the community, this is
a useful service. School orchestras and bands, choruses, and dramatic clubs are also valuable
additions to the community life.

The successful community school will not center all of its activities in its own building,
but it will take some of its talent to the country schools for local athletic and play contests,
dramatic or musical entertainments, etc., and thus magnify the importance of the local school
in the neighborhood, for only by acquiring a desire for these advantages will the people in
the more isolated parts of the community come to interest themselves in the activities of the
whole community at its village center.

It is becoming more and more apparent that if the school is really to function as it should,
that it must have the active interest and support of its patrons. It is not enough that they
should assemble at the annual school meeting, elect school officials, vote taxes for its maintenance,
and then leave its management to the school board and teachers. It is highly desirable that
every encouragement should be given toward making teaching a life profession, but as teaching
becomes professionalized it tends, like every other calling, to become more or less of a bureaucracy.
It is essential that educational methods should be determined by and be in charge of educators
who are trained for such service, but if they get the idea, as sometimes seems unfortunately
the case, that it is the business of the people to supply funds for the support of the schools
and then to leave their entire operation to the teachers and superintendents, they assume an
attitude which is fatal to the life of the school, for no educational system, however ideal
in theory, can be effective without the sympathetic understanding and cordial support of the
majority of its patrons. It is for this reason that large emphasis is being placed by progressive
educators on the organization of parent-teachers associations or school improvement leagues
for the discussion of school problems by parents and teachers. In many cases the parent-teachers
association forms one of the chief bonds of the country community and the State of Virginia
has built up a remarkable system of community organization through its Coöperative Educational
League with hundreds of local leagues which interest themselves in all phases of community life.

The school is also coming to realize that although it is the institution specially created
for the systematic education of the child, that much of his education is received outside the
school and that certain phases of his education may be accomplished more effectively through
the coöperation of the school with other institutions and agencies. Thus instead of seeking
to absorb all of the time of the child and to give it all kinds of training within the school
or as part of its curriculum, the school is commencing to develop methods for strengthening
and coördinating the educational work of the home, the church, and of various organizations.

The teaching of agriculture has been made vital and effective by the home project in which
the boy comes to appreciate the value of the principles studied at school in connection with
an agricultural enterprise in raising crops or livestock of his own on the home farm. This
tends to enlist the interest of the parents, who contribute largely to the educational process.
The same principle is being applied to a less extent in work in home economics, and the giving
of school credit for various kinds of home work has established a community of interest between
home and school. In the teaching of hygiene, and particularly with regard to sex hygiene, the
school finds it difficult to establish those habits and attitudes which are as important as
mere knowledge without the help and coöperation of the home. So, too, the medical inspection
of school children, with the work of school nurses and clinics held at the school for children
of pre-school age, stimulate the home to better health.

Because of the separation of church and state in this country we have very largely neglected
all effort toward religious education in our public schools, and even ethical training has
been more or less of a secondary objective until very recently. A growing appreciation of the
inadequacy of the ordinary Sunday school has led to a movement for giving systematic instruction
and training in religious education under church auspices at a time set apart by the school
and for which school credit is given when it meets reasonable educational standards. The week-day
school of religion is still in an experimental stage. It has been established longest in cities,
but is now being attempted in rural communities, and if sectarian dogmatism and jealousies
can be submerged, there seems every reason to hope that this may be a most important feature
of our educational system.

So, too, the boys' and girls' clubs in agriculture and home economics, the boy and girl scouts,
the campfires, the little mothers' leagues, the health crusades, the Y.M.C.A and Y.W.C.A.,
and other organizations for children and youth, have created new interest in certain aspects
of school work and are a source of educational dynamic which progressive educators are utilizing
as valuable allies.

Thus in very many ways the school is adapting its methods to meet its responsibility for developing
good citizens who are loyal to the welfare of the community, and the school principal is rightly
expected to be a leader in community affairs in so far as they concern the participation and
interests of the school.

It is a far cry from the isolated one-room, box-type district school, with a young girl with
no professional training teaching a dozen youngsters of all ages as best she can with little
or no equipment, to the modern consolidated school or rural high school with all the intimate
connections with the life of the whole community above described, but this difference measures
one phase of the progress which has been made in recent years toward the integration of the
rural community and depicts one of the most important forces involved in this process, whose
influence is only commencing to be felt. How different will the life of rural communities be
a generation or two hence when in most of them practically all of the parents and children
will have had a high-school education, with all the broader contacts and outlook on life which
that involves! We need only to study the influence of the Danish Folk High Schools[42] to visualize
the outcome.

THE PUBLIC LIBRARY

The public library has possibilities as an educational institution exceeded only by those of
the school. In many cases it is the intellectual center of the community, while in others the
caricature of the library of Gopher Prairie in Sinclair Lewis' "Main Street," where one of
the chief objects was to keep the books from being soiled or worn out, is not much overdrawn.
Increasingly, however, the librarian is studying methods of salesmanship for increasing the
local consumption of the products of the world's best minds in books and magazines, and is
of inestimable service to all organizations whose members have occasion to study what human
thought has contributed to the solution of their problems. The public library gives the means
of further education to many a person deprived of academic privileges, who may realize the
truth of Carlyle's saying: "The true University of these days is a Collection of Books."

In many states public libraries are aided by state and local appropriations, particularly in
New England and the states settled by New England stock, for it is to New England[43] that
we are indebted for the public library as well as the public school. It is not, however, economically
possible for every small community to support a permanent local library, and many of those
established have a precarious existence and are maintained only through the devotion of public-spirited
individuals. To meet the need of isolated neighborhoods a few county libraries, notably in
Washington County, Maryland, and a few counties in Delaware and Minnesota, have made use of
book-wagons which are accompanied by a librarian who makes a "rural free delivery" of books
to each home and assists the families in their selection. It seems, however, that the chief
value of the book-wagon is as a means of creating a desire for books, and that when this is
created it will be much more economical to furnish them through branch stations at neighborhood
or community centers. Systems of traveling libraries are also supported by many states and
make it possible for the most isolated neighborhoods to secure the best of books. Unfortunately,
however, the places which need them most do not always know of them nor will they take the
initiative to secure them. They are of particular value for securing collections of books on
special topics for the use of granges, churches, and study clubs of all sorts. But as the demand
for traveling libraries grows, the administration of the system from the state library becomes
a large undertaking and the need of better local libraries is realized.

A system of "county libraries" has been developed in California, has spread to several other
states, and is now being advocated by the American Library Association and by library leaders
generally. Under the county system a central library is established at the county seat, with
branches or loan stations at the different community centers, and with traveling collections
for the more isolated neighborhoods. The larger centers which have local libraries continue
to maintain them and simply serve as part of the system. Thus the library resources of the
county are pooled and the farm people are given the same sort of service that a city library
gives its people through its branches. The feature of interest from a community standpoint
is that, although this is a county system, it recognizes the usefulness of local branches and
makes possible a library service adapted to its needs for every small community, whereas separate
libraries have heretofore been possible only in the larger centers.

THE COUNTRY WEEKLY

One of the most important educational agencies of the rural community is the oft-derided weekly
newspaper. After a period of difficult competition with city dailies the surviving weeklies
are becoming recognized as community institutions. Those which are succeeding are doing so
by becoming the voice of the community and the means of its self-acquaintance. No agency may
be more powerful in unifying or disrupting the life of the local community. This new concept
of the country weekly has been well expressed by W. P. Kirkwood, of the University of Minnesota:

      "Community building was a concept unknown to the editor of
      thirty or forty years ago. To-day it is an accepted concept
      of dynamic force, full of significance in most of the
      country towns of America.

      "Community service, as such a concept, is fast finding its
      way into the country press--in the Middle West, at least. As
      this ideal gains acceptance, giving definite direction to
      newspaper effort for the upbuilding of communities, the
      press gains an enlarged constituency with a truer conception
      of the power and usefulness of the newspaper....

      "Community service, community building, then, as a master
      motive, establishes the country weekly newspaper publisher
      securely in his position of leadership. It assures added
      community prosperity and the local development of the finer
      satisfactions of life in which he must share, and no other
      agency can take this from him, neither the city daily,
      coming in from a distance and concerned with the larger
      affairs of the larger community, nor the school, nor the
      church, nor any other."[44]

In a bulletin on "The Country Weekly in New York State,"[45] Professor M. V. Atwood, of the
New York State College of Agriculture and for several years a successful publisher, discusses
the purposes and future of the country weekly. He holds that the country weekly is not, as
often stated, and should not be a molder of public opinion, but should rather express and interpret
the sentiment of its constituency.

      "The country newspaper," he says, "is a service agency; it
      is a community institution like the church, the school, the
      library, and the farm and home bureau. It helps all these
      institutions to do their work....

      "If the country newspaper does not do much thought-molding
      it does offer a medium for the dissemination of thought, for
      the propagation of ideas of the people of the community. The
      value of the newspaper to the community becomes especially
      apparent when some local project is to be considered, like
      the erection of a school, the building of good roads, or the
      installation of a water system. For weeks the paper will
      offer in the form of letters, the views of different people
      of the community. The subject is thoroughly aired. Even if
      the editor takes no sides in the matter, his paper has been
      of inestimable service to the community."

Indeed, as we shall see later, such a free discussion is a most essential step in all community
activities, and the service of the newspaper is probably greater if it acts as a free and open
forum for discussion rather than a partisan of either side. Of the news of the future, Professor
Atwood says:

      "Most of these papers will also be printing much more farm
      news than they do to-day because as the publishers have
      surveyed their fields they will have found the primary
      interest of their readers is agricultural. There will be
      some exceptions for some communities will have ceased to be
      dominated by agriculture because of the coming of factories.
      The real country weeklies will not become agricultural text
      hooks; but the news of the farms, the improvements to farm
      buildings, and the experiences of successful local farmers
      will find much space in their columns.

      "The community editor of the future is not going to worry
      much about 'hot' news. He will realize that most of the
      striking facts of any story have already been printed in the
      neighboring city papers, but he will realize also that the
      genuine community interest in the event has not been
      glimpsed by the city editor, who is out of touch with the
      local situation; around these community aspects the local
      editor will weave his story."

Possibly the best appreciation of the country weekly is a prose poem written by Professor Bristow
Adams, editor of the New York State College of Agriculture, and presented at the first country
newspaper conference held at that institution during Farmers Week 1920, entitled "I am the
Country Weekly,"[46] and which vividly depicts its service as an agency for developing community
consciousness:

      "I am the Country Weekly.

      "I am the friend of the family, the bringer of tidings from
      other friends; I speak to the home in the evening light of
      summers vine-clad porch or the glow of winters lamp.

      "I help to make this evening hour; I record the great and
      the small, the varied acts of the days and weeks that go to
      make up life.

      "I am for and of the home; I follow those who leave humble
      beginnings; whether they go to greatness or to the gutter, I
      take to them the thrill of old days, with wholesome
      messages.

      "I speak the language of the common man; my words are fitted
      to his understanding. My congregation is larger than that of
      any church in my town; my readers are more than those in the
      school. Young and old alike find in me stimulation,
      instruction, entertainment, inspiration, solace, comfort. I
      am the chronicler of birth, and love and death--the three
      great facts of man's existence.

      "I bring together buyer and seller, to the benefit of both;
      I am part of the market-place of the world. Into the home I
      carry word of the goods which feed and clothe, and shelter,
      and which minister to comfort, ease, health, and happiness.

      "I am the word of the week, the history of the year, the
      record of my community in the archives of state and nation.

      "I am the exponent of the lives of my readers.

      "I am the Country Weekly."

FOOTNOTES:

[40] Out of 185 neighborhood areas, 39 were chiefly due to the school district, the next most
important influence being the church parish which determined the neighborhood in 33 cases.
J. H. Kolb, "Rural Primary Groups." Research Bull. 51, Agr. Exp. Sta. of the Univ. of Wisconsin,
p. 48.

[41] The relation of the consolidated school to township and community lines is well shown
in a study of the schools of Randolph County, Indiana, and Marshall County, Iowa, by Dr. A.
W. Hayes, in his "Rural Community Organization" (Chap. VI, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1921). In
Randolph County more of the schools are located in the open country while the more recent consolidations
in Marshall County are located mostly at the village centers. Dr. Hayes recognizes the differences
but he gives no facts which make possible a judgment as to the relative efficiency of the two
methods from a community standpoint.

[42] F. C. Howe, "Denmark a Coöperative Commonwealth." H. W. Foght, "Rural Denmark and its
Schools."

[43] "In Pease and Niles' 'Gazateer of Connecticut and Rhode Island' (1819) the social library
is almost as regularly mentioned in the descriptions of the various towns as are the saw-mills,
or the ministers and doctors."--Bidwell, "Rural Economy in New England," p. 347.

[44] In the Inland Printer, February, 1920, quoted by Atwood, l. c., p. 305.

[45] "The Cornell Reading Course for the Farm," Lesson 155, March, 1920. See also his "The
Country Newspaper and the Community," Chicago, A. C. McClurg & Co., 1922.

[46] Quoted by Atwood, l. c., p. 314.

CHAPTER X

THE COMMUNITY'S EDUCATION (CONTINUED)

THE EXTENSION MOVEMENT

The era of modern agriculture in the United States began with the passage of the Morrill Act
by the Federal Congress in 1861. This made a grant of public land to each state to establish
a college for instruction in agriculture and the mechanic arts, and it has been the influence
of the "land-grant colleges," more than any other agency, which has been responsible for our
agricultural advancement. In 1888 the Hatch Act made an annual federal appropriation to each
of these colleges for the establishment of an agricultural experiment station, whose investigations,
with those of the United States Department of Agriculture, have been largely responsible for
the scientific basis of modern agriculture.

From the beginning the agricultural colleges realized their obligation to bring the results
of scientific investigations to the attention of farmers as well as to their own students,
and their faculties spoke before meetings of state and county agricultural societies, granges,
and farmers' institutes. In 1875 Michigan was the first state to make an appropriation to its
State Board of Agriculture for conducting farmers' institutes, and in the next twenty-five
years most of the states established systems of farmers' institutes either under their state
boards or departments of agriculture or under the agricultural colleges, through which itinerant
speakers addressed one or more meetings of farmers in each county every year. These institutes
grew in popularity and led to separate meetings for farm women, and sometimes for children,
and in some cases permanent county organizations were created for holding institutes with local
speakers as well as for managing those furnished by the state. Farmers' institutes have performed
an important service in the education of the rural community. Not only have they given instruction
in methods of agriculture and in the problems of country life, but they have been an important
means of bringing rural people together in a common cause; they are a community activity and
strengthen the community bond. In many cases in isolated localities the annual farmers' institute
has been one of the few occasions at which the people of the community get together, and has
been looked forward to as a social event. Furthermore, it was through experience with farmers'
institutes that the need of better means for bringing instruction to rural communities was
appreciated and other methods were developed.

It was but a few years after the establishment of the agricultural experiment stations under
the Hatch Act of 1888, that the colleges commenced to realize that the results of their investigations
would not be extensively utilized by farmers unless other means were employed than mere publication
of reports and bulletins and addresses at farmers' institutes and agricultural meetings. These
were good, but they were felt to be inadequate and it was evident that to secure the general
adoption of new methods some means of more systematic instruction and of local demonstrations
were necessary. The agricultural colleges came to feel that they should have definite departments
with men who could devote their time to giving instruction to the people on the land. The first
appropriation for agricultural extension work was made to Cornell University by the State of
New York in 1894, but it was a decade later before the leading agricultural colleges had established
departments of extension work. In general the early period of the extension movement was chiefly
concerned with methods of agricultural production and had no definite program for the local
organization of its work. This finally came about through the county agent movement.

The county agent movement[47] had its origin in an effort to combat the ravages of the Mexican
Cotton Boll Weevil as it swept through Texas and advanced eastward from 1900 to 1910. It was
in 1903 that Dr. S. A. Knapp was commissioned by the Federal Secretary of Agriculture, James
Wilson, to devise methods whereby the Texas farmers might be shown how they could grow cotton
in spite of the weevil. He soon found that progressive farmers who were using the cultural
methods which the entomologists had found to be successful for raising an early crop, were
able to raise fairly good crops before injury became serious. He therefore employed practical
farmers to go among their neighbors and get them to agree to give a fair trial to the methods
advocated by the government, i.e., to demonstrate their practicability. Those making the trials
were called "demonstrators" and their neighbors who came to follow their example in testing
the new methods were called "coöperators" and were called together at the "demonstrator's"
farm to see the results of his work and to receive instruction from the "demonstration agent"
who supervised the work for the government. As this work was in charge of practical farmers
more or less known locally, it appealed to the farmers as a common-sense method, the results
spoke for themselves, and the demand for the work spread rapidly. Dr. Knapp found that the
county was the best unit for the work of the supervising demonstration agent, and he soon came
to be known as the county demonstration agent, which was later contracted to county agent or
county agricultural agent. The whole movement came to be called "the farmers' coöperative demonstration
work." Three new features in agricultural instruction of farmers were involved in this system;
it was more or less coöperative on the part of a local group of farmers; it used the demonstration
method of teaching, i.e., the farmer demonstrated to himself by his own trial; and a local
county agent was employed for the supervision of the work. It soon became apparent that merely
trying to circumvent the depredations of the boll weevil would not solve the problem and that
instead of raising only cotton as a cash crop the farmer must diversify his crops so as to
raise more of the foodstuffs consumed on the farm and to have other products for sale. This
involved the application of the demonstration method to the growing of corn, legumes, hogs,
etc., in short, it involved the whole field of farm management and agricultural practice. The
work of the county agricultural agents was liberally supported by local business men, commercial
clubs and railroads, and the General Education Board, as well as by the U. S. Department of
Agriculture. In 1909 the Mississippi legislature passed the first act permitting counties to
appropriate funds for this work, and this was followed by most of the southern states within
a few years.

The Report of President Roosevelt's Country Life Commission in 1909 called attention to the
need of a national system of agricultural extension work in charge of the agricultural colleges,
and congressmen and agricultural leaders in the North who had observed the success of the county
agent movement in the South commenced to feel that county agricultural agents might be equally
valuable in the North as a means of local agricultural education. As a result, the first county
agricultural agents in the North were appointed by the Office of Farm Management of the U.
S. Department of Agriculture in 1910 and 1911. In 1912, 113 were employed in coöperation with
the state agricultural colleges and local county organizations in the North and West. The success
of the work of these agents and of the extension work of the agricultural colleges led to a
general demand from the agricultural interests of the country for a federal appropriation to
the agricultural colleges for establishing a system of extension work the chief feature of
which would be the employment of county agricultural agents who would supervise field demonstrations
by the farmers on their own farms. This resulted in the federal Smith-Lever Act of 1914, which
made an annual appropriation to each land-grant college "to aid in diffusing among the people
of the United States useful and practical information on agriculture and home economics and
to encourage the application of the same ... through field demonstrations, publications, and
otherwise, ... to persons not attending or resident at said college." This act is notable in
that it established the most comprehensive national system of non-resident instruction in agriculture
and home economics of any country, and recognized the necessity of de-centralizing this instruction
by having it carried on by agents in the counties who could have immediate and continuous contact
with individual farmers and groups of farmers.

As the work of the county agents in the South grew more permanent they found that it was more
efficient if they worked with and through local groups of farmers, and community agricultural
clubs were quite widely organized, but no strong county federation was developed, except in
West Virginia, where the local clubs formed a county organization which was called a Farm Bureau.
The term Farm Bureau originated in Broome County, New York, in 1911, when the first county
agent in that state was employed by the Binghamton Chamber of Commerce, the Lackawanna Railroad,
and the U. S. Department of Agriculture. As the number of county agents rapidly increased in
the northern states it soon became apparent that if their work was to be of the greatest service
to the farmers for whose benefit they worked, that it should be supported and managed by the
farmers themselves rather than by business interests. The Farm Bureau Association, composed
of farmers throughout a county, soon came to be a prerequisite to the placing of an agricultural
agent in a county, and with the passage of the Smith-Lever Act and of state legislation accepting
its provisions and appropriating state funds contingent upon similar appropriations by the
counties, this became the usual procedure. The county farm bureau association coöperates with
the state college of agriculture and the U. S. Department of Agriculture in the employment
of the county agent, and the annual membership fees together with county appropriations pay
the expenses of the work other than salary. The affairs of the farm bureau association are
in the hands of the usual officers and executive committee, who report to an annual meeting
of the membership. Further than this the method of organization varies in different states.
In most of the northern and western states there is a local committee in each community which
arranges for the demonstrations and meetings to be held by the county agent, and there is no
further organization of the local membership, but in a few states definite local organizations
or community clubs with officers and regular meetings have developed. In either case, however,
the unit of local organization and interest in the work of the farm bureau is usually the community,
although its executive administration is on a county basis.

As the extension work came under the local control of these organizations of farmers, the objectives
of the work were more largely determined by the farmers' point of view. Whereas the original
purpose had been to "extend" to the farmer the better methods of agriculture discovered by
the experiment stations and the federal department of agriculture, the program of work came
to be largely determined by the particular needs and problems of the local communities in a
given county. The farmers conferred with the agent--their agent--and pointed out their greatest
difficulties. The program of work was then a matter of determining what demonstrations and
instruction could be arranged to meet these problems, under the direction of the county agent
and with any assistance possible from the state agricultural college. With the rapid growth
of Farm Bureaus,--for on June 30, 1918, there were 791 farm bureaus with approximately 290,000
members,--the movement became truly a farmers' movement rather than a mere "extension" of the
work of the agricultural colleges, though the close affiliation with them constituted its strength
and furnished its leadership.

It so happened that almost as soon as the Smith-Lever Act became effective the world was plunged
into war and marketing problems became more and more important. Whereas in the first decade
of the county agent movement interest had been chiefly in better methods of production, it
now rapidly shifted to include better methods of marketing and the development of coöperative
selling associations, whose organization was assisted by the farm bureaus wherever they were
needed and practicable.

The entry of the United States into the World War greatly accelerated the farm bureau movement.
"Food will win the war" was the slogan which challenged American agriculture. The number of
county agents in the North and West increased from 542 to 1,133 within the year ending June
30, 1918. It was the county agent system which formed the mechanism through which the federal
government secured the whole-souled coöperation of the farmers of the United States under peculiarly
trying conditions. The winter of 1917-18 was severe and seed corn was unusually poor. As a
result, the available supply of sound seed corn in the spring of 1918 was the lowest on record
in the face of the greatest need for a bumper crop. Had it not been for the remarkable organization
developed through the county agents and the farm bureau system of the entire country, the corn
crop of the great Corn Belt would have been far below normal. As it was, nearly a normal acreage
was planted and an abundant harvest secured. The rôle which the agriculture of the United States
played in the World War has never been adequately written or appreciated, but it was full of
as much romance and heroism as were the industries which commanded the headlines of the press.
Dr. Bradford Knapp, for many years in charge of the county agent work in the Southern States
after the death of his father, its founder, has called attention to the fact that during the
war "of the four great activities or industries in America, agriculture, manufacturing, mining,
and transportation,--one alone--agriculture, stood the test, and that mainly because there
was already in existence an organization extending from the United States Department of Agriculture
through every state agricultural college ... to the counties and the farmers, by which information
was rapidly disseminated and farmers were made aware of conditions of what must be done to
win the war."

It was inevitable that such an organization growing rapidly during a war should develop an
unusual solidarity, and this was but strengthened by the difficulties which agriculture encountered
with the cessation of hostilities. During the war several states had formed state federations
of the county farm bureau associations and in November, 1919, a convention was called at Chicago
for the formation of a national organization, which resulted in the formal organization of
the American Farm Bureau Federation[48] in March, 1920, with 28 states represented, and a membership
in county farm bureaus of 400,000. In the next two years the southern states, which previously
had developed no strong county organizations, rapidly adopted the farm bureau idea, and when
the American Farm Bureau Federation held its second annual meeting at Atlanta, Ga., in November,
1921, it included 35 states with a local membership of 967,279.

I have dwelt at length upon the growth of the county agent and farm bureau movement, because
there is probably no one agency which has done more in the last decade toward the integration
of rural communities throughout the United States or which has had a larger educational influence
on all aspects of country life. The farm bureau usually organizes its local work by communities
and in large numbers of counties the community areas have been defined for the first time by
the county agents. The value of this organization by communities was repeatedly shown during
the war. For example, in New York State it was possible for the county agents to organize meetings
on the Agricultural Mobilization Day called by the Governor on April 21, 1917, in 1,089 communities,
with an attendance of 85,075 persons, upon only a weeks notice. In several of the states which
have encouraged community organizations, a very definite effort has been made to develop an
all-round program of community improvement. Thus the West Virginia extension service has invented
a community score card[49] with which several communities have scored themselves for three
successive years in order to make an analysis of their social situation and to enable them
to outline a program of work for the solution of their local problems. Several of the states
are now employing specialists to assist the farm bureaus in their problems of community organization.

The county organization of extension work has been unique in its educational methods; methods
which have large significance for all movements for rural progress.

First, its educational method is that of the demonstration carried out by farm people under
the expert direction of paid county leaders in an effort to solve the immediate problems of
the farm and the farm home. It builds on the experience, point of view, and interests of its
pupils, who learn under the supervision of a teacher chosen by them, through a process which
involves their making real experiments in finding the best solution of their problems. No class
of people, here or elsewhere, has ever had opportunity for the training in the scientific attitude
and point of view which American farmers may now receive, and on account of the nature and
organization of their work they are steadily and surely, if not entirely consciously, adopting
the method of science. The consequence of this movement in the social and political development
of this country cannot be foretold, for the scientific attitude must finally be the basis of
all true democracy.

Secondly, the program of work--the subject matter of the educational method--is largely chosen
by the people themselves, but with the help of experts employed by them to supervise its execution.
Here we have an institution arising from the land, wholly democratic in spirit and polity,
yet recognizing the services of experts and employing them for its own purposes. In the county
farm bureaus, and the organizations to which they have given rise, there is developing a new
use of science both in the educational methods and in the employment of scientifically trained
leaders, in the service of and directed by a democracy--a democracy no longer provincial but
of national scope in that there is real coöperation between the local community, the county,
the state, and the nation.

Lastly, the extension movement recognizes that only by the development and training of the
largest amount of enthusiastic, voluntary, local leadership can its work have a foundation
which will make it permanent. It thus recognizes an essential factor of all social organization,
i.e., the power of personal leadership in shaping the public opinion of the group, and it consciously
undertakes the development of intelligent initiative as a means of social progress.

When one has observed the feeble beginnings of this movement only a decade ago, and has witnessed
its growth to the present nation-wide system, promoting plans for national organizations for
coöperative marketing, he appreciates the power of science, education, and organization as
new forces in the life of the rural community, whose future influence one would be rash to
prophesy.

This account would be misleading if it failed to indicate that the extension movement has given
attention to the problems of the farm home, of the mother and the children, as well as to those
of the farm business. In 1910, girls' canning clubs were started in the Southern States and
young women were employed to supervise their work. Very soon the mothers became interested
and before long home demonstration agents were appointed to work with the agricultural demonstration
agents. In 1916 home demonstration work was in progress in 420 counties in the South. A few
home demonstration agents were employed by farm bureaus in the Northern States prior to 1917,
but the additional funds appropriated by Congress for food conservation work during the war
caused a rapid increase in their number and women's work in the North received its chief impetus
during the war. The Smith-Lever Act specified that its funds should be used for extension work
in home economics as well as in agriculture, but it was not until the farm bureaus commenced
to employ home demonstration agents and to organize the women for their support that work with
the farm home became established on a permanent basis. In most of the northern states the farm
bureau is now organized on what is called the "family plan," that is, it includes in its program
of work projects dealing with the farm for men, with the farm home for women, and with club
work in agriculture and home economics for boys and girls. In many of the states a separate
agent is employed for each of these lines of work and the women are organized in a separate
department of the county farm bureau and have their own local farm women's clubs. In New York
State the women's work has been further differentiated by organizing it as a County Home Bureau
which with the Farm Bureau forms the County Farm and Home Bureau Association.

During the war the home demonstration agents gave their attention to food conservations and
clothing, but as a permanent program has developed the local clubs of farm women have shown
a lively interest in problems of health, home management, care of children, education, recreation,
and civics. They have found that the problems of the home cannot be solved without an effort
to create better community conditions and "community housekeeping" has attracted an increasing
interest. The present aims of the women's work have been aptly phrased in the Home Bureau Creed
written by Dr. Ruby Green Smith, associate state leader of home demonstration agents in New York:

      The Home Bureau Creed

      "To maintain the highest ideals of home life; to count
      children the most important of crops; to so mother them that
      their bodies may be sound, their minds clear, their spirits
      happy, and their characters generous:

      "To place service above comfort; to let loyalty to high
      purposes silence discordant note; to let neighborliness
      supplant hatreds; to be discouraged never:

      "To lose self in generous enthusiasms; to extend to the less
      fortunate a helping hand; to believe one's community may
      become the best of communities; and to coöperate with others
      for the common ends of a more abundant home and community
      life:

      "This is the offer of the Home Bureau to the homemaker of
      to-day."

Nor should we fail to recognize the part which the boys' and girls' club work has had in the
extension movement. Space will not permit any adequate account of its origin and growth, or
of its methods and influence. No movement has done more to redirect and give dynamic to the
rural school than has the club work; nor has any movement done more to train leadership among
the coming generation on the farms. Commencing with corn clubs for the boys, canning clubs
were soon organized for the girls, and later pig clubs, potato clubs, calf clubs, sewing clubs,
cooking clubs, and clubs are now organized with various projects covering almost all phases
of agriculture and home economics. These clubs may be called the Junior Farm Bureau, for in
them farm children are receiving a training which will mean much for the future organization
of country life. The public confidence in the work is shown by the fact that in 1920, 500 banks
in the northern and western states loaned nearly $900,000 to club boys and girls for financing
their projects.[50] As a result of the school exhibits of the products of the club work, many
a community fair has been started, and as a result of club picnics and play days community
picnics or festivals have become an annual event in many places and have brought better feeling
and increased pride and loyalty to the community. In 1919, 464,979 boys and girls were enrolled
in club work.

Thus the extension movement started by the agricultural colleges and the United States Department
of Agriculture has become a national movement of rural people, men, women, and children, whose
strength is largely due to the fact that it has been the means of organizing the local communities
and of bringing them together in county organizations, which with the aid of state and national
funds and supervision, employ trained executives to stimulate and supervise the work of the
local groups. It is a unique agency for the education and organization of rural life which
is giving the American farmer a new position in the life of the nation.

FOOTNOTES:

[47] This movement can only be sketched in barest outline. It is fully and authoritatively
discussed in another volume of this series by Prof. M. C. Burritt, entitled "The County Agent
and the Farm Bureau." See also O. B. Martin, "The Demonstration Work." Boston, The Stratford Co.

[48] For a full discussion of this movement, its objectives and accomplishments, see O. M.
Kile, "The Farm Bureau Movement," Macmillan, New York, 1921.

[49] Nat. T. Frame, "Lifting the Country Community." Circular 255, Extension Division, W. Va.
University, 1921.

[50] See "Status and Results of Boys' and Girls' Club Work, Northern and Western States," 1920.
George E. Farell. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Department Circular 192.

CHAPTER XI

THE COMMUNITY'S RELIGIOUS LIFE

From the earliest times and among all peoples the common religious life has formed one of the
strongest bonds of the rural community. Several of the original thirteen colonies which formed
the United States were settled by those seeking freedom to worship as they chose, and as their
descendants migrated westward many of the new settlements were largely composed of the membership
of some one church or those of a similar faith. Dr. Warren H. Wilson has called attention to
the fact that the Mormons, the Pennsylvania Germans, and the Scotch Presbyterians are the most
successful farmers and remain on the land because they have given a religious sanction to country
life and have made the church the center of the life of the community, as it was in the medieval
village community of Europe. Whatever attitude one may take toward their religious beliefs,
all impartial observers are agreed that the Mormons have established the strongest agricultural
communities and that they have discovered and applied to a high degree some of the most fundamental
principles of social organization. Concerning them Dr. Wilson says:

      "These exceptional farmers are organized in the interest of
      agriculture. The Mormons represent this organization in the
      highest degree. Perhaps no other so large or so powerful a
      body of united farmers is found in the whole country. They
      have approached the economic questions of farming with
      determination to till the soil. They distrust city life and
      condemn it. They teach their children and they discipline
      themselves to love the country, to appreciate its
      advantages and to recognize that their own welfare is bound
      up in their success as farmers, and in the continuance of
      their farming communities. This agricultural organization
      centers in their country churches. They have turned the
      force of religion into a community making power, and from
      the highest to the lowest of their church officers the
      Mormon people are devoted to agriculture as a mode of
      living."[51]

But although large numbers of communities throughout the United States were settled by people
of one religious faith, and thus had the strongest bond of community, yet large areas were
settled by scattered homesteaders belonging to different sects, and as time went on, newcomers
came into the older communities and established churches of various denominations, so that
throughout most of the country the churches have come to have more of a divisive than a unifying
influence on community life.

In our discussion of the religious life of the rural community we shall confine our attention
to the protestant churches, because most of our rural people are protestants. It is true that
in some sections, such as Louisiana and southern Maryland, and in many sections recently settled
by Europeans, the people are mostly Roman Catholics; but in general the catholic church is
strongest in the cities and towns and does not have strong rural parishes throughout the country.
Throughout most of the United States the Methodist, Episcopal and Baptist denominations have
by far the largest number of churches and membership, and their traditions and methods have
largely shaped the religious life of our rural communities.

During the century in which the United States west of the Alleghanies has been settled conditions
have changed with such rapidity that the religious life is still largely dominated by its development
during the days of early settlement and the present generation is faced with the problem of
readjustment of its religious institutions to meet the present situation. In the days of the
pioneer the circuit rider made his rounds over a large district, preaching at school houses
and private homes and in the few country churches at intervals of one to three months. As the
country became more thickly populated, country churches sprang up and several of them were
joined together in the employment of a resident pastor with preaching at the larger churches
every week and at the outlying stations once in two or three weeks. Doctrinal beliefs were
strong and theological differences were frequently bitter. The preaching was practically the
only service of the church, except for an annual "protracted meeting" or revival. The main
emphasis was upon the personal salvation of the sinner. Sunday schools had not become a recognized
feature of the church and but little thought was given to religious education and training
by the church. The minister christened the babies, married the young people and buried the
dead, but otherwise, with numerous preaching services, he was unable to do much pastoral work.
A large proportion of the rural churches were located in the open country and like the district
school were largely neighborhood churches, for bad roads and horse-drawn vehicles made it difficult
for people to go over two or three miles. In many cases several churches were established in
a single village or in nearby neighborhoods by different denominations and were largely supported
by home-missionary aid contributed by the older churches in the East and the wealthier city
parishes. Prior to the Civil War when most of our population was engaged in farming and before
the exodus of the last half century to the towns and cities, most of the rural churches were
fairly well attended, but with the recent decline in rural population, many of them, and particularly
those in the open country, have faced the same situation as the district school in that there
are now too few people to make possible the economic support of a pastor and church building.

Furthermore, it must be recognized that the standards of rural people have changed as regards
the church in the same way that they have concerning the school. When all of the people have
had a common school education, many of them have had high school training, a few have been
to college, and many of them now and then visit the larger churches of towns and cities, they
are no longer satisfied with the occasional preaching of an uneducated man, however religious
and earnest he may be. The Sunday school has become an established part of the work of the
church and as people have appreciated the value of education in secular affairs, they have
come to place more hope in the religious training of their children than in merely saving them
by sudden conversion. The church is becoming more and more an institution for the training
and expression of religious life rather than only a place for preaching. Moreover, the church
now has to meet the competition of other institutions and interests which did not exist in
the earlier days. The grange, the lodge, organizations of all sorts, moving pictures, athletics
and automobiles, furnish means of association and command the interest and support of the people,
where formerly there was only the church for the righteous and the tavern or the saloon for
the convivial.

All of these and other factors have conspired to weaken the relative influence of the church
in our rural communities and the situation has become so serious in many sections that it has
challenged the attention of denominational leaders. During the past fifteen years there have
been a series of careful studies of the condition of the rural churches in various parts of
the country. These studies have given indisputable evidence of the conditions responsible for
the decline of the rural church and of the measures which must be taken if the religious life
of the rural community is to be adequately fostered; and they have clearly shown that the problems
of the rural church must be solved from the standpoint of meeting the religious needs of the
rural community rather than that of the interests of the individual church. In the older parts
of the country, and--alas--far too frequently in the newer sections, the most serious obstacle
to the religious life of the community is an unnecessary number of churches, which divide its
limited resources both of funds and leadership. Overchurching is more largely responsible for
the decadence of the rural church than any one factor. Small congregations are unable to support
a full time pastor, and where several of them are competing in a small community, it is deprived
of the services of a resident minister. Preaching once in two weeks and practically no pastoral
visitation are not conducive to the life of a church. The small church maintains its Sunday
school with difficulty for there are too few of any one age for a satisfactory division of
classes. Equally serious is the fact that the ablest men will not enter the ministry to devote
themselves to what they regard as an unnecessary and unchristian competition.

Tompkins County, where I live, is a fair average of rural New York. A recent survey shows that
but eight of its twenty-eight rural communities have full time resident pastors, though there
are ministers residing in twenty-five parishes who also serve other parishes nearby. Throughout
the county there was one church for every 332 people, but the average village church had but
92 active members, and the average country church had but 32. The church membership has remained
practically stationary for thirty years, while the attendance has decreased from 21 percent
of the rural population in 1890 to 14 percent in 1920. One community of 900 population had
five churches, no one of which had a resident pastor or over 45 members, while two of them
had but 11 members each and were closed. Six strictly rural communities in the southern part
of the county have 16 churches, though none of these places can properly support more than
one church with a resident pastor. After a careful study of the whole county, I am of the opinion
that if at least one-third of the rural churches were abandoned or combined, the work of the
church would be greatly strengthened. This county is cited because it is fairly typical; many
worse have been reported in other surveys.

Another handicap of the rural church is the frequent shift of ministers. In Tompkins County
only 4 of the 57 churches have had the same pastor for ten years, 17 changed pastors three
times in ten years and 17 of the pastors had been in their parishes one year or less. When
a minister stays but a year or two, his parishioners tend to be only acquaintances and rarely
does he really know them. A minister cannot become well enough acquainted with a new parish
to do effective pastoral work in less than a year, and many ministers who have seemingly good
programs of work fail to realize them because they attempt to force progress and to secure
results more rapidly than is possible. One of the chief duties of the rural pastor is to train
leadership. A church is no stronger than its permanent resident leadership. No matter how brilliant
the work of the minister, if he has failed to develop local leadership, his work is soon dissipated
when he leaves. Now leadership cannot be produced in a year or so and where it is most needed
it requires several years to discover and develop it. Unfortunately much of this frequent shifting
of rural pastors is directly due to ecclesiastical rule rather than to the needs of the local
churches, though much of it results from meager salaries and sectarian rivalries which soon
discourage a man who sees larger opportunities for service elsewhere.

Numerous studies of the actual condition of the rural church in many parts of the country all
show the futility of denominational competition in maintaining two or three churches where
only one is needed or can be supported. Furthermore, the present generation of young married
people who desire the best religious influences for their children are no longer much interested
in the theological or ecclesiastical differences of the various denominations, and they refuse
to support them or do so under protest and with an apathy which makes effective church work
impossible. As a result, there has been a strong movement in recent years toward the consolidation
of rural churches and for the establishment of what are called "community churches." Although
much effort has been given toward getting denominational boards and leaders to form state federations
for promoting inter-denominational comity, and although notable progress in this direction
has been made in a few states, particularly in Maine and Vermont, yet the chief impetus to
the community church movement has come from the people themselves, who have insisted upon a
combination of the local churches often in spite of ecclesiastical indifference or opposition.
The lack of coal in 1918 induced many churches to hold their services together and in many
cases gave an impetus to the idea of their permanent federation.

The term community church has come to be applied to various forms of churches, but whatever
its form, its fundamental purpose is the service of the community rather than the advancement
of a particular denomination and it admits all Christian people to its fellowship, in contrast
to the exclusiveness of the purely denominational church which insists upon the importance
of particular theological beliefs or systems of church government.

As the term is now used a "community church" may be a church definitely affiliated with some
denomination, it may be a "federated" church, or a "union" church. The union church is unaffiliated
with any religious denomination. If it be the only church in a community, it is then a community
church, but if one or two others decline to unite, it is a community church only in aspiration.
It is this type of independent union church, to which the term community church is most commonly
applied by the laity, and such community churches have increased rapidly in the past five years
as a protest of the people against denominational competition and inefficiency. These independent
community churches have now become so numerous in one or two states that they are holding state
conventions. The question at once arises whether if they become affiliated in even the most
nominal manner they will not soon constitute what will practically be another denomination
and will fail to effect the growth of Christian unity which they desire. On the other hand,
denominational leaders who are in entire sympathy with the abolishment of competition and the
establishment of but one church in a rural community where only one is needed, point out that
the union church loses the advantages of affiliation with a body of churches which have regional
and national boards and agencies for giving them assistance and support in their work. The
history not only of church but of all sorts of secular organizations, indicates that sooner
or later local organizations with common aims and purposes tend to get together in conventions
and to establish federations through which they may unite their resources in maintaining agencies
to promote the common cause. Most organizations, whether religious or secular, need the stimulus
of association with kindred organizations devoted to the same purposes and the help of expert
supervision which can be secured only from state or national bodies.

The "federated church" obviates this difficulty to a certain extent. Each of the federating
churches maintains its own corporate identity and its affiliation with its own denomination,
to which it sends its contributions for benevolences and denominational work. The federating
churches form a joint organization for the employment of a minister and use the same building,
or use two buildings in common--sometimes one for church and one for Sunday school services
or social purposes,--and the church is a community church for all practical purposes. In the
long run this usually results in a federated church finally affiliating with the denomination
which is preferred by the large majority of its membership and which is least objectionable
to the minority.

Denominational leaders, on the other hand, hold that neither "union" or "federated" churches
will be permanently satisfactory, but that the community church, though organized on the "federated"
principle, should be definitely affiliated with some one denomination, and that a single denominational
church which effectively serves the whole community may be truly a "community church."

Whatever the outcome of this movement may be it has forced the recognition of the fact that
the religious welfare of the rural community should be the first consideration and that denominational
relations must be conceived as a means rather than an end, as has commonly been the case heretofore.
When country people have learned the advantages of consolidated schools and of coöperation
in marketing, and have developed the ability to work together in these and other phases of
community life, they are no longer content to waste their energies in maintaining feeble churches,
whose differences no longer command their loyalties, and they very naturally desire to bury
their religious differences and to coöperate in the maintenance of a single church which will
give that inspiration and dynamic to all the life of the community which can be furnished only
through the religious motive. So in religion as in other phases of life, the community idea
is replacing the older individualism.

We have already noted the change of emphasis in the work of the church from that of merely
holding a preaching service for the personal salvation of adults, to a greater reliance upon
the power of religious education through the Sunday school and other organizations of young
people. When Sunday schools were first started, a century or more ago, they were bitterly opposed
by many of the more conservative church people. To-day they are a recognized part of all protestant
churches, but oddly enough their advancement has been due more largely to the work of the laity
than to that of the clergy, although there can be no question that church membership is most
largely recruited from the Sunday schools. Thus in our survey of Tompkins County, New York,
we found that out of 175 persons admitted to the rural churches on confession of faith, 61
of whom were adults and 114 children, 134 were previous members of the Sunday school.

The rural Sunday school in the small church has the same difficulty as does the district school,
in that it has too few scholars of approximately the same age to form classes of sufficient
size to command their interest and enthusiasm. Likewise it is forced to depend upon untrained
and frequently-changing teachers. Although there has been a marked advance in the grading and
organization of Sunday schools and of the literature for their study, yet there is a growing
conviction that a period of twenty minutes a week is inadequate to secure effective religious
education. On the other hand, although the separation of church and state in this country prevents
the giving of religious instruction in our public schools, educators have come to recognize
its importance in the education of the child. As a result there is now a definite movement
for the organization of week-day schools of religion. When these schools are conducted by trained
teachers and their work is of an educational standard satisfactory to the public schools, the
pupils are given credit for their work toward promotion in the public schools. The State of
New York has enacted definite legislation permitting the schools to dismiss those pupils whose
parents so desire, for a definite period each week when they may attend whatever school of
religious instruction their parents may designate, and for which the public schools shall give
credit when satisfactory as to educational methods. Such week-day schools of religious instruction
have been carried on in some of our cities for several years, and at the present time are being
introduced into rural communities in various sections of the country. Sometimes each church
maintains its own school, but inasmuch as this movement is usually promoted by the inter-denominational
Sunday school associations the tendency is to secure the coöperation of all the protestant
churches in establishing one school for the community. This movement is still young, but if
it makes the progress which now seems probable, it should be a powerful agency toward the elimination
of weak churches. It makes possible the organization of graded classes of sufficient size so
that a real group spirit and interest are created and the instruction can be given with the
same pedagogical efficiency as in the public schools. Obviously the success of the movement
will depend upon the degree to which it can command the support of the whole community and
it will thus tend to strengthen community life.

A new attitude toward the social life of its people is also having a large influence upon the
program of many rural churches. Formerly religion was one thing and sociability was another,
and the church felt no responsibility for the recreation of its people. Gradually church suppers
and sociables became customary, but they were held either to raise money or as a means for
attracting outsiders into the fold. In the days when money was scarce in the rural community
it was often difficult to raise the pastor's salary. Much of his salary was paid in kind, and
annual "donation parties" contributed a considerable share of his living. But as markets developed
and farmers came to sell most of their products for cash, money became more plentiful and it
became evident that no church can be maintained upon a sound business basis which does not
make up an annual budget and raise it by the direct contributions of its people. Putting the
finances of the church on a business basis has removed the need of church suppers for raising
funds, but their social value has become so apparent that they are now held merely for the
better acquaintance and enjoyment of the church people. In so far as the social life of the
church has been consciously planned as a "bait" for outsiders to attract them into the church,
it has, in the long run usually been ineffectual. Too often the motive has been so thinly veiled
and the program of the social hour has been given such a religious atmosphere that outsiders
very naturally take a defensive attitude, and although they may enjoy the occasion they are
perfectly aware of its ulterior objective.

Recently, however, the church has come to appreciate that play and recreation are a normal
and necessary part of the life of its people and that it cannot abolish the saloon and condemn
certain amusements without incurring a responsibility to provide, or to see that there is provided,
satisfying facilities for recreation and sociability. In short, it is coming to recognize that
a social program should be undertaken because it is a worthy service and a real need of the
people and not as a mere means to other ends. Furthermore, where the church generously sponsors
a social program which is enjoyed by all the people of the community, without thought of its
being aimed at any proselyting, many of them come to take an increased interest in the strictly
religious services and work of the church.

So to-day many a rural church is holding community sings, its young people are staging amateur
dramatic entertainments, its boys have a troop of boy scouts and the girls join the girl scouts
or the camp-fire girls, baseball and basketball teams are formed from the Sunday school classes,
the men have a club which meets once a month for the discussion of current topics and a supper,
the women come together for sewing parties, and the whole people assemble for suppers and for
the celebration of national holidays and festival occasions. In a small village in western
New York the four Sunday schools have recently formed an athletic association which has erected
a one-story gymnasium in which the boys can play basketball and all can find enjoyment.

One of the handicaps of the average country church is that its building is not adapted to social
purposes, although the newer buildings are being constructed with better facilities. Sometimes
this need is being met by erecting a separate church house which is used for Sunday school
and social purposes. Where there is more than one church it is frequently felt that one building
may serve the needs of all and so in many communities the churches have united in the promotion
of community buildings to serve as social centers for all the people. Thus in its social as
well as in its educational program the church finds that a satisfactory social life cannot
be secured through sectarian competition, but that by united effort the churches may meet the
community needs.

Although in the past the chief duty of the country minister was to preach on Sunday, yet those
most beloved and most successful in building up strong churches have won the hearts of their
people more largely through their pastoral work, through their personal acquaintance and influence
on the lives of families and individuals. Although a broader educational and social program
is needed in the rural church, there is an equal opportunity for a larger service through a
new sort of pastoral work by the minister who can serve the community as a social worker. There
is an impression that there is no need for so-called social work, for the expert assistance
of the poor, the neglected, the delinquent, and the mentally defective, in most rural communities;
that this may be necessary for the city slums, but that there are but few such people in the
open country. But the recent work started during the war by the Home Service of the local chapters
of the American Red Cross and the work of various child welfare and health organizations have
shown that country people are not always aware of the needs of some of their not distant neighbors,
and that there is a deal of service which might be given the more unfortunate members of the
average rural community which they are not now receiving. The average rural community cannot
support a paid social worker and needs but part of her time, while the county is usually too
large an area for her to cover. Why should not the rural minister be qualified to do much of
the family welfare work of his community, calling in outside expert assistance when needed?
What better pastoral work could he do, and yet how many rural pastors are doing this sort of
work in any intelligent sort of fashion, and how many families in need, outside of his own
membership, would turn to the average rural minister for help? Dr. C. J. Galpin has well said
of the rural minister that "he is the recognized community psychologist and sociologist." The
trouble is that although he is often so recognized, he is usually an amateur rather than a
professional. Obviously, as a doctor of souls, the village pastor should be the local "social
worker" of every rural community, but if he is to so serve he must first be trained so that
he can bring to bear a knowledge of social science upon the problems of the families with which
he deals. An average rural community can hardly afford more than one pastor with such qualifications,
and it is evident that he would need to give his whole time to one parish. Such a modern representative
of the old "curé" of the medieval parish could give real spiritual service to many a rural
family which the average rural church never reaches, and he would be a real father to his people.

Finally, and most important, we must recognize that no other institution can take the place
of the Christian church as a source of those ideals of life which give religious sanction to
loyalty to the common good--to the community--rather than to self or particular interests.
The ideals of its Founder who conceived the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man as
the norm of human relationships, and who thought man's relation to man should be the expression
of his loyalty to their common Father, will ever furnish the strongest spiritual dynamic for
the best community life, for the whole community movement is but one means toward the realization
of His ideal of the Kingdom of God on earth. Indeed so keen a mind as the late Professor Josiah
Royce has interpreted the spirit of the early church and the ultimate aim of Christianity as
that of "the beloved community."[52] Though it may require new equipment and new methods to
meet the changed conditions of modern life, the mission of religion to interpret the highest
values of life will ever make it the motive force of community life, the heart of the community.
As Dr. E. DeS. Brunner has well said, "The aim of the country church movement is not to substitute
anything for the Gospel. It is to assist in expressing the best religion of the ages in terms
of the best spirit of the age."[53]

FOOTNOTES:

[51] "The Evolution of the Country Community," p. 63. Boston, The Pilgrim Press, 1912.

[52] Cf. "The Problem of Christianity."

[53] "The Country Church in the New World Order," p. 39.

CHAPTER XII

THE COMMUNITY'S HEALTH

In the early days in which the country was but sparsely settled, sickness, except for epidemics
of such diseases as smallpox and yellow fever, was regarded as an individual affair. In recent
years bacteriology and medical science have revealed the causes of many diseases and the manner
in which they are spread. With a denser population and with more frequent contacts as a result
of better transportation, the possibility of contagion has very largely increased and we now
appreciate that the health of the family--even of the rural family--cannot be maintained without
attention to the health of the community as a whole. Good health has become a responsibility
of the community.

The rapid growth of cities in the last fifty years has forced them to take measures for the
preservation of health, and public health administration has become a distinct branch of medical
science. It is the health problems which have arisen in the congested sections of our large
cities, and those which are due to a sedentary life or to unhealthful conditions of certain
trades and industries, which have incited the discoveries of medical science and which have
created a new attitude toward sanitation and hygiene among city people.

There has been a distinct change with regard to the attitude of society toward health. A generation
or two ago many people--particularly elderly females--were not ashamed of "enjoying poor health,"
and a delicate physique was regarded as rather incidental to the more highly cultured. To-day,
although we sympathize with the afflicted, society places a premium upon a sound physique.
The importance of physical exercise, of recreation and athletics for the development and maintenance
of a sound body are now much more fully appreciated than they were fifty years ago. We are
coming to understand that good health is largely due to habits of personal hygiene which must
be instilled by the home and the school, and that without such habits the mere knowledge of
sanitation and hygiene will not be generally applied. This new emphasis upon physical fitness
has naturally received larger attention in the cities on account of the more unfavorable conditions
of city life, while the new knowledge and appreciation of the value of health has not been
so constantly forced upon the attention of rural people.

Gradually we are coming to appreciate that we have an ethical responsibility for good health,
and it is even receiving a religious sanction, for we have come to know that the cause of evil
behavior may be due primarily to an unsound body rather than to a perverted soul. The church
has ever ministered to the sick and has supported hospitals, but to-day it is commencing to
advocate the prevention of disease through sanitation and hygiene, and to preach the religious
duty of fostering health and preventing sickness.

One of the principal factors in the farmer's relative indifference to health measures is the
fact that he has become accustomed to think that an outdoor life and isolation from other people
give him an ability to withstand sickness and he has rather gloried in his ability to throw
off ordinary ailments and to withstand the physical hardship which his work often demands.
He can see how health conditions may need attention in the city where people are crowded together,
but he is not impressed that other causes make such diseases as typhoid and malaria much more
prevalent in the open country, and that bad sanitation on a farm a mile away may cause sickness
in his own family. American farmers have been educated on the nature and spread of disease
by their experience with animal diseases, such as bovine tuberculosis, hog cholera, and Texas
fever. If they can be interested to utilize this knowledge in the care of the health of their
own families, and if they will provide health facilities for their own families equal to those
which they feel necessary for their livestock, health conditions on the farm will show rapid
improvement. It is not that the farmer is indifferent to the health of his family, but he has
been forced to have his herd tested for tuberculosis, and he faces the possibility of heavy
losses if he does not have his hogs vaccinated for cholera, while he has not appreciated that
by preventative agencies the better health of his wife and children may be insured and the
cost of remedial treatment be greatly lessened.

The purely economic aspects of sickness and disease have been a potent factor in the health
movement, particularly in cities. The vast sums invested in life insurance have led progressive
insurance companies into extensive campaigns for promoting public health so that their risks
may be reduced. Vast quantities of the best health literature have been distributed by some
of the industrial insurance companies and they have done much to demonstrate the value of public
health nursing by employing nurses who visit their policy holders. The extension of the insurance
method to health insurance, and the adoption of insurance by large corporations for their employees
has furthered this general movement, and has revealed the tremendous economic losses due to
preventable sickness and disease. The farmer has failed to appreciate the purely economic handicap
under which he labors as a result of sickness and the lack of adequate medical service and
efficient public health administration such as cities enjoy, because the cost of sickness is
distributed and is borne by each family and he has no means of knowing the aggregate cost for
the whole community. Were it possible for a rural community to secure and have brought to its
attention the total economic loss due to sickness in a given year and the proportion which
might be preventable with a reasonable expenditure for better health facilities, its people
would doubtless become as interested in better health administration as does the employer in
a large city industry, and the true economy of better health facilities would be apparent.

Few concrete studies of the losses occasioned by sickness in rural communities have been made,
but one of Dutchess County,[54] New York, in 1915 well illustrates the conditions which would
doubtless be found in many another rural county. This survey covered five districts of the
county with an aggregate population of about 11,800--most of which was rural territory. 1,600
cases of serious illness were found to have occurred during the year. "Some 9,000 days were
lost by men and women of working age (15 to 54 years). Children lost 13,700 school days. On
the average this cost the community for each child at least 33 cents a day for which it received
no return. These two items safely represent a money loss of $20,000 to $25,000." As a result
of the study it was estimated that the total money loss occasioned by sickness in a year within
the whole county would be at least $412,000. "Of the 1,600 patients whose care has been analyzed
in this report, 72 percent could have been cared for adequately in their own homes had there
been available medical and nursing service. The remaining 28 percent (442 patients) could not
have been cared for adequately in their own homes ... 24 percent of the patients secured no
medical care. Many startling instances of unnecessary and indefensible suffering and misery
were found.... Of the 113 women who went through childbirth in their homes, only one had the
continuous care of a graduate nurse, and only 18 had any service whatever from graduate visiting
nurses. 35 percent of the children born came into the world under unfit conditions and surroundings."
Largely as a result of this study, Dutchess County now has an efficient county health association
through which a number of public health nurses are employed, who visit all districts of the county.

One of the most serious handicaps in maintaining the health of the rural community is its frequent
lack of medical service. The number of doctors practising in the open country was always inadequate,
but in recent years it has decreased until now many large sections are without any resident
physician. The influenza epidemic of 1918, following the shortage of doctors during the war,
revealed the plight of many a rural community without medical service. The higher standards
now required by medical colleges and state licensing boards has resulted in a real shortage
of physicians and the young men are not going into the country to practise. A recent study
made by the New York State Department of Health showed that in 20 rural counties 88 percent
of the physicians had been practising over 25 years and only 3 percent less than ten years.
This means that most of the rural doctors in these counties have less than ten years more to
practise and that there is no indication that their places will be filled by younger men. In
Manitoba one rural municipality has employed a physician on full time, and a recent act of
the New York legislature makes it possible for towns to employ physicians. It seems probable
that country people will be forced to employ physicians on a salaried basis if they are to
secure adequate medical service. This does not necessarily mean, however, that the physician
will be employed by the local government. Industrial workers are now employing physicians on
a salary and farmers' organizations are employing salaried veterinarians. Why cannot a local
health association be formed to employ a physician, whose job it will be to keep its people well?

Two factors prevent the larger use of physicians now available. Chief of these is the cost.
Farmers handle relatively less actual money than townsmen, and their income is less frequent
so that they have less on hand, while the cost of medical attendance is necessarily higher
in the country. Fear of running up a bill deters many a farm woman from calling a doctor, when
one call might prevent many more later on. The farm home tends to employ a physician only for
serious sickness, rather than as a medical adviser who may forestall illness. Another difficulty
is one of the physician's own making. The experience is far too common that in cases of immediate
need when the family doctor cannot be located, doctors will refuse to attend a case on account
of so-called "professional courtesy." It is time that public opinion be aroused so that such
cases be brought to the attention of county medical societies with sufficient public opinion
to force them to take suitable action. The ethics of every profession must be shaped to meet
the needs of those it serves as well as the pocketbooks of its members.

Lack of medical attendance is most serious for the farm mother during confinement, and the
mortality of rural mothers during childbirth, as shown by the investigations of the U. S. Children's
Bureau, is an indictment of our supposed civilization. When we learn that in a homesteading
county in Montana there were 12.7 deaths of mothers per 1,000 births, which is twice the rate
for the United States as a whole, which is higher than that of fifteen foreign countries for
which statistics were available in 1915, we face a condition which cannot be neglected. When
we find that in Wisconsin this rate was but 6 per 1,000, and that 68 percent were attended
by physicians, and in Kansas it was but 2.9 per thousand and 95 percent had physicians, while
in Montana only 47 percent were attended, loss of life due to isolation and lack of medical
care is apparent. In sparsely settled regions the solution of this problem seems to demand
the provision of local maternity hospitals, for the difficulty is primarily one of isolation.

Since medical science has shown that sparkling spring water may carry the deadly typhoid germ
as a result of distant contamination, that wells are frequently contaminated by nearby privies
or barn yards, that malaria is carried by mosquitoes, and that the house fly may carry typhoid
fever and intestinal diseases of infants, we have come to appreciate that isolation and pure
country air do not insure freedom from infection, and that sanitation is as important on the
farm as in the city. Indeed the transmission of disease by flies is much easier on the farm,
for too often the manure pile where they multiply is not far from the house, while in many
a city the smaller number of horses and the cleaning of manure from the streets prevents their
increase. The sanitation of the farm home thus becomes a very large factor in the health of
the rural community. Surveys made by health officers in recent years have shown the general
need of better sanitary provisions and also the possibility of the direct benefits secured
from their improvement. In Indiana the State Board of Health surveyed nine typical rural counties
taking only the homes on farms and in unincorporated villages. The average score of 6,124 rural
homes in these nine counties was but 56.2 percent, the average for individual counties varying
from 43 to 61 percent. In 1914, 1915, and 1916, the U. S. Public Health Service made sanitary
surveys of 51,544 farm homes in 15 rural counties scattered throughout the United States, but
mostly in the South. Its report[55] states that only 1.22 percent of these farm homes were
equipped for a really sanitary disposal of human excreta, while in one county in Alabama less
than 20 percent of the farm homes had toilets of any kind. "Sixty-eight percent of the water
supply used for drinking or culinary purposes was obviously exposed to dangerous contamination
from privy contents"; and only 32.88 percent of the houses were effectively screened against
flies. A very considerable improvement in farm sanitation has resulted from the educational
campaigns conducted during the past decade, but effective rural sanitation awaits the employment
of public health officials who will convince the people of each local community of their individual
responsibility for the health conditions on their own farms and of their common liability for
the health of each other.

With the above conditions in mind, let us now consider the agencies for health conservation
in rural communities. We have already seen that the old-fashioned country doctor is rapidly
disappearing. With better transportation now available it seems probable that physicians will
live in the larger village centers, but with telephone communication and the automobile it
should be possible to secure as prompt medical attendance. We may as well recognize that many
a rural community is too small a unit to support a resident physician and that if satisfactory
medical treatment is to be secured we shall have to have better hospital and clinical facilities
so that the time of the physician can be economized and frequent attention can be given.

Most rural townships have a local board of health and health officer, who is charged with reporting
births and deaths and with the enforcement of quarantines against contagious diseases, but
it is notorious that these local health officials are rarely efficient or take any leadership
in the betterment of public health. Ordinarily the health officer receives little if any pay,
and is a resident physician who is not inclined to antagonize his own clients when the enforcement
of health regulations would meet their opposition. Students of rural health problems are now
fairly agreed that the only means of securing efficient administration of public health regulations
in rural communities is by the employment of a full time county health officer, working under
a county board of health, who will have the same general duties as the health officers in our
cities. Local health officers would be retained, but their work would be under the supervision
of the county health officer and would have the benefit not only of his support and encouragement,
but also of his superior technical training. If a county superintendent is necessary for our
schools, a county health officer is equally necessary for the supervision of public health,
and several states have enacted legislation requiring or permitting the employment of county
health officers. The county is usually the best unit for rural health administration.[56] The
county health officer would have laboratory facilities for the examination of drinking water,
and samples of blood, urine, or sputum for the detection of disease, and would give direction
for the taking of samples which might be sent to the laboratories of the state department of
health for the examination of those specimens for which his laboratory was not equipped. He
would have general supervision of the medical examination of school children. In numerous ways
he would promote better means for health conservation, as can be done by one who has had special
training for such work and who is giving his whole time and thought to its problems.

Although the county health officer is necessary for the administration of the technical aspects
of public health administration, the most important gains in the health of the rural community
will come through the personal education of its people on matters of hygiene and sanitation.
This is the field of public health nurses, and I believe that the records of their work in
rural communities will show that they have done more for health education than any other one
agency. A decade ago trained visiting nurses were practically unknown in rural communities.
In 1914 the American Red Cross first organized its Town and Country Nursing Service and coöperated
with a few rural communities in supervising the work of trained public health nurses, but relatively
few places employed rural nurses prior to the war. The county tuberculosis societies also employed
visiting nurses who worked throughout a whole county and whose work inevitably created a demand
for visiting nurses for a more general service. The shortage of physicians during the war and
the influenza epidemic of 1918 revealed the need for rural nurses and since the war the local
chapters of the American Red Cross, which is devoting much of its attention to public health
work, have employed hundreds of rural public health nurses.

