The terrors of the king's irresistible strength, and the near prospect of his vengeance, had
also compelled George, Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt, to a timely submission.  His connection
with the Emperor, and his indifference to the Protestant cause, were no secret to the king,
but he was satisfied with laughing at so impotent an enemy.  As the Landgrave knew his own
strength and the political situation of Germany so little, as to offer himself as mediator
between the contending parties, Gustavus used jestingly to call him the peacemaker.  He was
frequently heard to say, when at play he was winning from the Landgrave, "that the money afforded
double satisfaction, as it was Imperial coin." To his affinity with the Elector of Saxony,
whom Gustavus had cause to treat with forbearance, the Landgrave was indebted for the favourable
terms he obtained from the king, who contented himself with the surrender of his fortress of
Russelheim, and his promise of observing a strict neutrality during the war.  The Counts of
Westerwald and Wetteran also visited the King in Frankfort, to offer him their assistance against
the Spaniards, and to conclude an alliance, which was afterwards of great service to him. 
The town of Frankfort itself had reason to rejoice at the presence of this monarch, who took
their commerce under his protection, and by the most effectual measures restored the fairs,
which had been greatly interrupted by the war.

The Swedish army was now reinforced by ten thousand Hessians, which the Landgrave of Casse
commanded.  Gustavus Adolphus had already invested Koenigstein; Kostheim and Floersheim surrendered
after a short siege; he was in command of the Maine; and transports were preparing with all
speed at Hoechst to carry his troops across the Rhine.  These preparations filled the Elector
of Mentz, Anselm Casimir, with consternation; and he no longer doubted but that the storm of
war would next fall upon him.  As a partisan of the Emperor, and one of the most active members
of the League, he could expect no better treatment than his confederates, the Bishops of Wurtzburg
and Bamberg, had already experienced.  The situation of his territories upon the Rhine made
it necessary for the enemy to secure them, while the fertility afforded an irresistible temptation
to a necessitous army.  Miscalculating his own strength and that of his adversaries, the Elector
flattered himself that he was able to repel force by force, and weary out the valour of the
Swedes by the strength of his fortresses.  He ordered the fortifications of his capital to
be repaired with all diligence, provided it with every necessary for sustaining a long siege,
and received into the town a garrison of 2,000 Spaniards, under Don Philip de Sylva.  To prevent
the approach of the Swedish transports, he endeavoured to close the mouth of the Maine by driving
piles, and sinking large heaps of stones and vessels.  He himself, however, accompanied by
the Bishop of Worms, and carrying with him his most precious effects, took refuge in Cologne,
and abandoned his capital and territories to the rapacity of a tyrannical garrison.  But these
preparations, which bespoke less of true courage than of weak and overweening confidence, did
not prevent the Swedes from marching against Mentz, and making serious preparations for an
attack upon the city.  While one body of their troops poured into the Rheingau, routed the
Spaniards who remained there, and levied contributions on the inhabitants, another laid the
Roman Catholic towns in Westerwald and Wetterau under similar contributions.  The main army
had encamped at Cassel, opposite Mentz; and Bernhard, Duke of Weimar, made himself master of
the Maeusethurm and the Castle of Ehrenfels, on the other side of the Rhine.  Gustavus was
now actively preparing to cross the river, and to blockade the town on the land side, when
the movements of Tilly in Franconia suddenly called him from the siege, and obtained for the
Elector a short repose.

The danger of Nuremberg, which, during the absence of Gustavus Adolphus on the Rhine, Tilly
had made a show of besieging, and, in the event of resistance, threatened with the cruel fate
of Magdeburg, occasioned the king suddenly to retire from before Mentz.  Lest he should expose
himself a second time to the reproaches of Germany, and the disgrace of abandoning a confederate
city to a ferocious enemy, he hastened to its relief by forced marches.  On his arrival at
Frankfort, however, he heard of its spirited resistance, and of the retreat of Tilly, and lost
not a moment in prosecuting his designs against Mentz.  Failing in an attempt to cross the
Rhine at Cassel, under the cannon of the besieged, he directed his march towards the Bergstrasse,
with a view of approaching the town from an opposite quarter.  Here he quickly made himself
master of all the places of importance, and at Stockstadt, between Gernsheim and Oppenheim,
appeared a second time upon the banks of the Rhine.  The whole of the Bergstrasse was abandoned
by the Spaniards, who endeavoured obstinately to defend the other bank of the river.  For this
purpose, they had burned or sunk all the vessels in the neighbourhood, and arranged a formidable
force on the banks, in case the king should attempt the passage at that place.

On this occasion, the king's impetuosity exposed him to great danger of falling into the hands
of the enemy.  In order to reconnoitre the opposite bank, he crossed the river in a small boat;
he had scarcely landed when he was attacked by a party of Spanish horse, from whose hands he
only saved himself by a precipitate retreat.  Having at last, with the assistance of the neighbouring
fishermen, succeeded in procuring a few transports, he despatched two of them across the river,
bearing Count Brahe and 300 Swedes.  Scarcely had this officer time to entrench himself on
the opposite bank, when he was attacked by 14 squadrons of Spanish dragoons and cuirassiers.
Superior as the enemy was in number, Count Brahe, with his small force, bravely defended himself,
and gained time for the king to support him with fresh troops. The Spaniards at last retired
with the loss of 600 men, some taking refuge in Oppenheim, and others in Mentz.  A lion of
marble on a high pillar, holding a naked sword in his paw, and a helmet on his head, was erected
seventy years after the event, to point out to the traveller the spot where the immortal monarch
crossed the great river of Germany.

Gustavus Adolphus now conveyed his artillery and the greater part of his troops over the river,
and laid siege to Oppenheim, which, after a brave resistance, was, on the 8th December, 1631,
carried by storm.  Five hundred Spaniards, who had so courageously defended the place, fell
indiscriminately a sacrifice to the fury of the Swedes.  The crossing of the Rhine by Gustavus
struck terror into the Spaniards and Lorrainers, who had thought themselves protected by the
river from the vengeance of the Swedes.  Rapid flight was now their only security; every place
incapable of an effectual defence was immediately abandoned.  After a long train of outrages
on the defenceless citizens, the troops of Lorraine evacuated Worms, which, before their departure,
they treated with wanton cruelty.  The Spaniards hastened to shut themselves up in Frankenthal,
where they hoped to defy the victorious arms of Gustavus Adolphus.

The king lost no time in prosecuting his designs against Mentz, into which the flower of the
Spanish troops had thrown themselves.  While he advanced on the left bank of the Rhine, the
Landgrave of Hesse Cassel moved forward on the other, reducing several strong places on his
march. The besieged Spaniards, though hemmed in on both sides, displayed at first a bold determination,
and threw, for several days, a shower of bombs into the Swedish camp, which cost the king many
of his bravest soldiers.  But notwithstanding, the Swedes continually gained ground, and had
at last advanced so close to the ditch that they prepared seriously for storming the place.
The courage of the besieged now began to droop.  They trembled before the furious impetuosity
of the Swedish soldiers, of which Marienberg, in Wurtzburg, had afforded so fearful an example.
The same dreadful fate awaited Mentz, if taken by storm; and the enemy might even be easily
tempted to revenge the carnage of Magdeburg on this rich and magnificent residence of a Roman
Catholic prince.  To save the town, rather than their own lives, the Spanish garrison capitulated
on the fourth day, and obtained from the magnanimity of Gustavus a safe conduct to Luxembourg;
the greater part of them, however, following the example of many others, enlisted in the service
of Sweden.

On the 13th December, 1631, the king made his entry into the conquered town, and fixed his
quarters in the palace of the Elector.  Eighty pieces of cannon fell into his hands, and the
citizens were obliged to redeem their property from pillage, by a payment of 80,000 florins.
The benefits of this redemption did not extend to the Jews and the clergy, who were obliged
to make large and separate contributions for themselves.  The library of the Elector was seized
by the king as his share, and presented by him to his chancellor, Oxenstiern, who intended
it for the Academy of Westerrah, but the vessel in which it was shipped to Sweden foundered at sea.

After the loss of Mentz, misfortune still pursued the Spaniards on the Rhine.  Shortly before
the capture of that city, the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel had taken Falkenstein and Reifenberg,
and the fortress of Koningstein surrendered to the Hessians.  The Rhinegrave, Otto Louis, one
of the king's generals, defeated nine Spanish squadrons who were on their march for Frankenthal,
and made himself master of the most important towns upon the Rhine, from Boppart to Bacharach.
After the capture of the fortress of Braunfels, which was effected by the Count of Wetterau,
with the co-operation of the Swedes, the Spaniards quickly lost every place in Wetterau, while
in the Palatinate they retained few places besides Frankenthal.  Landau and Kronweisenberg
openly declared for the Swedes; Spires offered troops for the king's service; Manheim was gained
through the prudence of the Duke Bernard of Weimar, and the negligence of its governor, who,
for this misconduct, was tried before the council of war, at Heidelberg, and beheaded.

The king had protracted the campaign into the depth of winter, and the severity of the season
was perhaps one cause of the advantage his soldiers gained over those of the enemy.  But the
exhausted troops now stood in need of the repose of winter quarters, which, after the surrender
of Mentz, Gustavus assigned to them, in its neighbourhood.  He himself employed the interval
of inactivity in the field, which the season of the year enjoined, in arranging, with his chancellor,
the affairs of his cabinet, in treating for a neutrality with some of his enemies, and adjusting
some political disputes which had sprung up with a neighbouring ally.  He chose the city of
Mentz for his winter quarters, and the settlement of these state affairs, and showed a greater
partiality for this town, than seemed consistent with the interests of the German princes,
or the shortness of his visit to the Empire.  Not content with strongly fortifying it, he erected
at the opposite angle which the Maine forms with the Rhine, a new citadel, which was named
Gustavusburg from its founder, but which is better known under the title of Pfaffenraub or
Pfaffenzwang.--[Priests' plunder; alluding to the means by which the expense of its erection
had been defrayed.]

While Gustavus Adolphus made himself master of the Rhine, and threatened the three neighbouring
electorates with his victorious arms, his vigilant enemies in Paris and St.  Germain's made
use of every artifice to deprive him of the support of France, and, if possible, to involve
him in a war with that power.  By his sudden and equivocal march to the Rhine, he had surprised
his friends, and furnished his enemies with the means of exciting a distrust of his intentions.
After the conquest of Wurtzburg, and of the greater part of Franconia, the road into Bavaria
and Austria lay open to him through Bamberg and the Upper Palatinate; and the expectation was
as general, as it was natural, that he would not delay to attack the Emperor and the Duke of
Bavaria in the very centre of their power, and, by the reduction of his two principal enemies,
bring the war immediately to an end.  But to the surprise of both parties, Gustavus left the
path which general expectation had thus marked out for him; and instead of advancing to the
right, turned to the left, to make the less important and more innocent princes of the Rhine
feel his power, while he gave time to his more formidable opponents to recruit their strength.
Nothing but the paramount design of reinstating the unfortunate Palatine, Frederick V., in
the possession of his territories, by the expulsion of the Spaniards, could seem to account
for this strange step; and the belief that Gustavus was about to effect that restoration, silenced
for a while the suspicions of his friends and the calumnies of his enemies.  But the Lower
Palatinate was now almost entirely cleared of the enemy; and yet Gustavus continued to form
new schemes of conquest on the Rhine, and to withhold the reconquered country from the Palatine,
its rightful owner.  In vain did the English ambassador remind him of what justice demanded,
and what his own solemn engagement made a duty of honour; Gustavus replied to these demands
with bitter complaints of the inactivity of the English court, and prepared to carry his victorious
standard into Alsace, and even into Lorraine.

A distrust of the Swedish monarch was now loud and open, while the malice of his enemies busily
circulated the most injurious reports as to his intentions.  Richelieu, the minister of Louis
XIII., had long witnessed with anxiety the king's progress towards the French frontier, and
the suspicious temper of Louis rendered him but too accessible to the evil surmises which the
occasion gave rise to.  France was at this time involved in a civil war with her Protestant
subjects, and the fear was not altogether groundless, that the approach of a victorious monarch
of their party might revive their drooping spirit, and encourage them to a more desperate resistance.
This might be the case, even if Gustavus Adolphus was far from showing a disposition to encourage
them, or to act unfaithfully towards his ally, the King of France.  But the vindictive Bishop
of Wurtzburg, who was anxious to avenge the loss of his dominions, the envenomed rhetoric of
the Jesuits and the active zeal of the Bavarian minister, represented this dreaded alliance
between the Huguenots and the Swedes as an undoubted fact, and filled the timid mind of Louis
with the most alarming fears.  Not merely chimerical politicians, but many of the best informed
Roman Catholics, fully believed that the king was on the point of breaking into the heart of
France, to make common cause with the Huguenots, and to overturn the Catholic religion within
the kingdom.  Fanatical zealots already saw him, with his army, crossing the Alps, and dethroning
the Viceregent of Christ in Italy.  Such reports no doubt soon refute themselves; yet it cannot
be denied that Gustavus, by his manoeuvres on the Rhine, gave a dangerous handle to the malice
of his enemies, and in some measure justified the suspicion that he directed his arms, not
so much against the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria, as against the Roman Catholic religion itself.

The general clamour of discontent which the Jesuits raised in all the Catholic courts, against
the alliance between France and the enemy of the church, at last compelled Cardinal Richelieu
to take a decisive step for the security of his religion, and at once to convince the Roman
Catholic world of the zeal of France, and of the selfish policy of the ecclesiastical states
of Germany.  Convinced that the views of the King of Sweden, like his own, aimed solely at
the humiliation of the power of Austria, he hesitated not to promise to the princes of the
League, on the part of Sweden, a complete neutrality, immediately they abandoned their alliance
with the Emperor and withdrew their troops.  Whatever the resolution these princes should adopt,
Richelieu would equally attain his object.  By their separation from the Austrian interest,
Ferdinand would be exposed to the combined attack of France and Sweden; and Gustavus Adolphus,
freed from his other enemies in Germany, would be able to direct his undivided force against
the hereditary dominions of Austria.  In that event, the fall of Austria was inevitable, and
this great object of Richelieu's policy would be gained without injury to the church.  If,
on the other hand, the princes of the League persisted in their opposition, and adhered to
the Austrian alliance, the result would indeed be more doubtful, but still France would have
sufficiently proved to all Europe the sincerity of her attachment to the Catholic cause, and
performed her duty as a member of the Roman Church.  The princes of the League would then appear
the sole authors of those evils, which the continuance of the war would unavoidably bring upon
the Roman Catholics of Germany; they alone, by their wilful and obstinate adherence to the
Emperor, would frustrate the measures employed for their protection, involve the church in
danger, and themselves in ruin.

Richelieu pursued this plan with greater zeal, the more he was embarrassed by the repeated
demands of the Elector of Bavaria for assistance from France; for this prince, as already stated,
when he first began to entertain suspicions of the Emperor, entered immediately into a secret
alliance with France, by which, in the event of any change in the Emperor's sentiments, he
hoped to secure the possession of the Palatinate.  But though the origin of the treaty clearly
showed against what enemy it was directed, Maximilian now thought proper to make use of it
against the King of Sweden, and did not hesitate to demand from France that assistance against
her ally, which she had simply promised against Austria.  Richelieu, embarrassed by this conflicting
alliance with two hostile powers, had no resource left but to endeavour to put a speedy termination
to their hostilities; and as little inclined to sacrifice Bavaria, as he was disabled, by his
treaty with Sweden, from assisting it, he set himself, with all diligence, to bring about a
neutrality, as the only means of fulfilling his obligations to both. For this purpose, the
Marquis of Breze was sent, as his plenipotentiary, to the King of Sweden at Mentz, to learn
his sentiments on this point, and to procure from him favourable conditions for the allied
princes. But if Louis XIII.  had powerful motives for wishing for this neutrality, Gustavus
Adolphus had as grave reasons for desiring the contrary.  Convinced by numerous proofs that
the hatred of the princes of the League to the Protestant religion was invincible, their aversion
to the foreign power of the Swedes inextinguishable, and their attachment to the House of Austria
irrevocable, he apprehended less danger from their open hostility, than from a neutrality which
was so little in unison with their real inclinations; and, moreover, as he was constrained
to carry on the war in Germany at the expense of the enemy, he manifestly sustained great loss
if he diminished their number without increasing that of his friends.  It was not surprising,
therefore, if Gustavus evinced little inclination to purchase the neutrality of the League,
by which he was likely to gain so little, at the expense of the advantages he had already obtained.

The conditions, accordingly, upon which he offered to adopt the neutrality towards Bavaria
were severe, and suited to these views.  He required of the whole League a full and entire
cessation from all hostilities; the recall of their troops from the imperial army, from the
conquered towns, and from all the Protestant countries; the reduction of their military force;
the exclusion of the imperial armies from their territories, and from supplies either of men,
provisions, or ammunition. Hard as the conditions were, which the victor thus imposed upon
the vanquished, the French mediator flattered himself he should be able to induce the Elector
of Bavaria to accept them.  In order to give time for an accommodation, Gustavus had agreed
to a cessation of hostilities for a fortnight.  But at the very time when this monarch was
receiving from the French agents repeated assurances of the favourable progress of the negociation,
an intercepted letter from the Elector to Pappenheim, the imperial general in Westphalia, revealed
the perfidy of that prince, as having no other object in view by the whole negociation, than
to gain time for his measures of defence.  Far from intending to fetter his military operations
by a truce with Sweden, the artful prince hastened his preparations, and employed the leisure
which his enemy afforded him, in making the most active dispositions for resistance.  The negociation
accordingly failed, and served only to increase the animosity of the Bavarians and the Swedes.

Tilly's augmented force, with which he threatened to overrun Franconia, urgently required the
king's presence in that circle; but it was necessary to expel previously the Spaniards from
the Rhine, and to cut off their means of invading Germany from the Netherlands.  With this
view, Gustavus Adolphus had made an offer of neutrality to the Elector of Treves, Philip von
Zeltern, on condition that the fortress of Hermanstein should be delivered up to him, and a
free passage granted to his troops through Coblentz.  But unwillingly as the Elector had beheld
the Spaniards within his territories, he was still less disposed to commit his estates to the
suspicious protection of a heretic, and to make the Swedish conqueror master of his destinies.
Too weak to maintain his independence between two such powerful competitors, he took refuge
in the protection of France.  With his usual prudence, Richelieu profited by the embarrassments
of this prince to augment the power of France, and to gain for her an important ally on the
German frontier.  A numerous French army was despatched to protect the territory of Treves,
and a French garrison was received into Ehrenbreitstein.  But the object which had moved the
Elector to this bold step was not completely gained, for the offended pride of Gustavus Adolphus
was not appeased till he had obtained a free passage for his troops through Treves.

Pending these negociations with Treves and France, the king's generals had entirely cleared
the territory of Mentz of the Spanish garrisons, and Gustavus himself completed the conquest
of this district by the capture of Kreutznach.  To protect these conquests, the chancellor
Oxenstiern was left with a division of the army upon the Middle Rhine, while the main body,
under the king himself, began its march against the enemy in Franconia.

The possession of this circle had, in the mean time, been disputed with variable success, between
Count Tilly and the Swedish General Horn, whom Gustavus had left there with 8,000 men; and
the Bishopric of Bamberg, in particular, was at once the prize and the scene of their struggle.
Called away to the Rhine by his other projects, the king had left to his general the chastisement
of the bishop, whose perfidy had excited his indignation, and the activity of Horn justified
the choice.  In a short time, he subdued the greater part of the bishopric; and the capital
itself, abandoned by its imperial garrison, was carried by storm.  The banished bishop urgently
demanded assistance from the Elector of Bavaria, who was at length persuaded to put an end
to Tilly's inactivity.  Fully empowered by his master's order to restore the bishop to his
possessions, this general collected his troops, who were scattered over the Upper Palatinate,
and with an army of 20,000 men advanced upon Bamberg.  Firmly resolved to maintain his conquest
even against this overwhelming force, Horn awaited the enemy within the walls of Bamberg; but
was obliged to yield to the vanguard of Tilly what he had thought to be able to dispute with
his whole army.  A panic which suddenly seized his troops, and which no presence of mind of
their general could check, opened the gates to the enemy, and it was with difficulty that the
troops, baggage, and artillery, were saved.  The reconquest of Bamberg was the fruit of this
victory; but Tilly, with all his activity, was unable to overtake the Swedish general, who
retired in good order behind the Maine.  The king's appearance in Franconia, and his junction
with Gustavus Horn at Kitzingen, put a stop to Tilly's conquests, and compelled him to provide
for his own safety by a rapid retreat.

The king made a general review of his troops at Aschaffenburg.  After his junction with Gustavus
Horn, Banner, and Duke William of Weimar, they amounted to nearly 40,000 men.  His progress
through Franconia was uninterrupted; for Tilly, far too weak to encounter an enemy so superior
in numbers, had retreated, by rapid marches, towards the Danube. Bohemia and Bavaria were now
equally near to the king, and, uncertain whither his victorious course might be directed, Maximilian
could form no immediate resolution.  The choice of the king, and the fate of both provinces,
now depended on the road that should be left open to Count Tilly.  It was dangerous, during
the approach of so formidable an enemy, to leave Bavaria undefended, in order to protect Austria;
still more dangerous, by receiving Tilly into Bavaria, to draw thither the enemy also, and
to render it the seat of a destructive war.  The cares of the sovereign finally overcame the
scruples of the statesman, and Tilly received orders, at all hazards, to cover the frontiers
of Bavaria with his army.

Nuremberg received with triumphant joy the protector of the Protestant religion and German
freedom, and the enthusiasm of the citizens expressed itself on his arrival in loud transports
of admiration and joy.  Even Gustavus could not contain his astonishment, to see himself in
this city, which was the very centre of Germany, where he had never expected to be able to
penetrate.  The noble appearance of his person, completed the impression produced by his glorious
exploits, and the condescension with which he received the congratulations of this free city
won all hearts.  He now confirmed the alliance he had concluded with it on the shores of the
Baltic, and excited the citizens to zealous activity and fraternal unity against the common
enemy.  After a short stay in Nuremberg, he followed his army to the Danube, and appeared unexpectedly
before the frontier town of Donauwerth.  A numerous Bavarian garrison defended the place; and
their commander, Rodolph Maximilian, Duke of Saxe Lauenburg, showed at first a resolute determination
to defend it till the arrival of Tilly.  But the vigour with which Gustavus Adolphus prosecuted
the siege, soon compelled him to take measures for a speedy and secure retreat, which amidst
a tremendous fire from the Swedish artillery he successfully executed.

The conquest of Donauwerth opened to the king the further side of the Danube, and now the small
river Lech alone separated him from Bavaria. The immediate danger of his dominions aroused
all Maximilian's activity; and however little he had hitherto disturbed the enemy's progress
to his frontier, he now determined to dispute as resolutely the remainder of their course.
On the opposite bank of the Lech, near the small town of Rain, Tilly occupied a strongly fortified
camp, which, surrounded by three rivers, bade defiance to all attack.  All the bridges over
the Lech were destroyed; the whole course of the stream protected by strong garrisons as far
as Augsburg; and that town itself, which had long betrayed its impatience to follow the example
of Nuremberg and Frankfort, secured by a Bavarian garrison, and the disarming of its inhabitants.
The Elector himself, with all the troops he could collect, threw himself into Tilly's camp,
as if all his hopes centred on this single point, and here the good fortune of the Swedes was
to suffer shipwreck for ever.

Gustavus Adolphus, after subduing the whole territory of Augsburg, on his own side of the river,
and opening to his troops a rich supply of necessaries from that quarter, soon appeared on
the bank opposite the Bavarian entrenchments.  It was now the month of March, when the river,
swollen by frequent rains, and the melting of the snow from the mountains of the Tyrol, flowed
full and rapid between its steep banks. Its boiling current threatened the rash assailants
with certain destruction, while from the opposite side the enemy's cannon showed their murderous
mouths.  If, in despite of the fury both of fire and water, they should accomplish this almost
impossible passage, a fresh and vigorous enemy awaited the exhausted troops in an impregnable
camp; and when they needed repose and refreshment they must prepare for battle.  With exhausted
powers they must ascend the hostile entrenchments, whose strength seemed to bid defiance to
every assault. A defeat sustained upon this shore would be attended with inevitable destruction,
since the same stream which impeded their advance would also cut off their retreat, if fortune
should abandon them.

The Swedish council of war, which the king now assembled, strongly urged upon him all these
considerations, in order to deter him from this dangerous undertaking.  The most intrepid were
appalled, and a troop of honourable warriors, who had grown gray in the field, did not hesitate
to express their alarm.  But the king's resolution was fixed.  "What!" said he to Gustavus
Horn, who spoke for the rest, "have we crossed the Baltic, and so many great rivers of Germany,
and shall we now be checked by a brook like the Lech?"  Gustavus had already, at great personal
risk, reconnoitred the whole country, and discovered that his own side of the river was higher
than the other, and consequently gave a considerable advantage to the fire of the Swedish artillery
over that of the enemy.  With great presence of mind he determined to profit by this circumstance.
At the point where the left bank of the Lech forms an angle with the right, he immediately
caused three batteries to be erected, from which 72 field-pieces maintained a cross fire upon
the enemy.  While this tremendous cannonade drove the Bavarians from the opposite bank, he
caused to be erected a bridge over the river with all possible rapidity.  A thick smoke, kept
up by burning wood and wet straw, concealed for some time the progress of the work from the
enemy, while the continued thunder of the cannon overpowered the noise of the axes.  He kept
alive by his own example the courage of his troops, and discharged more than 60 cannon with
his own hand.  The cannonade was returned by the Bavarians with equal vivacity for two hours,
though with less effect, as the Swedish batteries swept the lower opposite bank, while their
height served as a breast-work to their own troops.  In vain, therefore, did the Bavarians
attempt to destroy these works; the superior fire of the Swedes threw them into disorder, and
the bridge was completed under their very eyes.  On this dreadful day, Tilly did every thing
in his power to encourage his troops; and no danger could drive him from the bank.  At length
he found the death which he sought, a cannon ball shattered his leg; and Altringer, his brave
companion-in-arms, was, soon after, dangerously wounded in the head. Deprived of the animating
presence of their two generals, the Bavarians gave way at last, and Maximilian, in spite of
his own judgment, was driven to adopt a pusillanimous resolve.  Overcome by the persuasions
of the dying Tilly, whose wonted firmness was overpowered by the near approach of death, he
gave up his impregnable position for lost; and the discovery by the Swedes of a ford, by which
their cavalry were on the point of passing, accelerated his inglorious retreat.  The same night,
before a single soldier of the enemy had crossed the Lech, he broke up his camp, and, without
giving time for the King to harass him in his march, retreated in good order to Neuburgh and
Ingolstadt.  With astonishment did Gustavus Adolphus, who completed the passage of the river
on the following day behold the hostile camp abandoned; and the Elector's flight surprised
him still more, when he saw the strength of the position he had quitted.  "Had I been the Bavarian,"
said he, "though a cannon ball had carried away my beard and chin, never would I have abandoned
a position like this, and laid open my territory to my enemies."

Bavaria now lay exposed to the conqueror; and, for the first time, the tide of war, which had
hitherto only beat against its frontier, now flowed over its long spared and fertile fields.
Before, however, the King proceeded to the conquest of these provinces, he delivered the town
of Augsburg from the yoke of Bavaria; exacted an oath of allegiance from the citizens; and
to secure its observance, left a garrison in the town. He then advanced, by rapid marches,
against Ingolstadt, in order, by the capture of this important fortress, which the Elector
covered with the greater part of his army, to secure his conquests in Bavaria, and obtain a
firm footing on the Danube.

Shortly after the appearance of the Swedish King before Ingolstadt, the wounded Tilly, after
experiencing the caprice of unstable fortune, terminated his career within the walls of that
town.  Conquered by the superior generalship of Gustavus Adolphus, he lost, at the close of
his days, all the laurels of his earlier victories, and appeased, by a series of misfortunes,
the demands of justice, and the avenging manes of Magdeburg.  In his death, the Imperial army
and that of the League sustained an irreparable loss; the Roman Catholic religion was deprived
of its most zealous defender, and Maximilian of Bavaria of the most faithful of his servants,
who sealed his fidelity by his death, and even in his dying moments fulfilled the duties of
a general.  His last message to the Elector was an urgent advice to take possession of Ratisbon,
in order to maintain the command of the Danube, and to keep open the communication with Bohemia.

With the confidence which was the natural fruit of so many victories, Gustavus Adolphus commenced
the siege of Ingolstadt, hoping to gain the town by the fury of his first assault.  But the
strength of its fortifications, and the bravery of its garrison, presented obstacles greater
than any he had had to encounter since the battle of Breitenfeld, and the walls of Ingolstadt
were near putting an end to his career.  While reconnoitring the works, a 24-pounder killed
his horse under him, and he fell to the ground, while almost immediately afterwards another
ball struck his favourite, the young Margrave of Baden, by his side.  With perfect self-possession
the king rose, and quieted the fears of his troops by immediately mounting another horse.

The occupation of Ratisbon by the Bavarians, who, by the advice of Tilly, had surprised this
town by stratagem, and placed in it a strong garrison, quickly changed the king's plan of operations.
He had flattered himself with the hope of gaining this town, which favoured the Protestant
cause, and to find in it an ally as devoted to him as Nuremberg, Augsburg, and Frankfort. 
Its seizure by the Bavarians seemed to postpone for a long time the fulfilment of his favourite
project of making himself master of the Danube, and cutting off his adversaries' supplies from
Bohemia.  He suddenly raised the siege of Ingolstadt, before which he had wasted both his time
and his troops, and penetrated into the interior of Bavaria, in order to draw the Elector into
that quarter for the defence of his territories, and thus to strip the Danube of its defenders.

The whole country, as far as Munich, now lay open to the conqueror. Mosburg, Landshut, and
the whole territory of Freysingen, submitted; nothing could resist his arms.  But if he met
with no regular force to oppose his progress, he had to contend against a still more implacable
enemy in the heart of every Bavarian--religious fanaticism.  Soldiers who did not believe in
the Pope were, in this country, a new and unheard-of phenomenon; the blind zeal of the priests
represented them to the peasantry as monsters, the children of hell, and their leader as Antichrist.
No wonder, then, if they thought themselves released from all the ties of nature and humanity
towards this brood of Satan, and justified in committing the most savage atrocities upon them.
Woe to the Swedish soldier who fell into their hands!  All the torments which inventive malice
could devise were exercised upon these unhappy victims; and the sight of their mangled bodies
exasperated the army to a fearful retaliation.  Gustavus Adolphus, alone, sullied the lustre
of his heroic character by no act of revenge; and the aversion which the Bavarians felt towards
his religion, far from making him depart from the obligations of humanity towards that unfortunate
people, seemed to impose upon him the stricter duty to honour his religion by a more constant
clemency.

The approach of the king spread terror and consternation in the capital, which, stripped of
its defenders, and abandoned by its principal inhabitants, placed all its hopes in the magnanimity
of the conqueror. By an unconditional and voluntary surrender, it hoped to disarm his vengeance;
and sent deputies even to Freysingen to lay at his feet the keys of the city.  Strongly as
the king might have been tempted by the inhumanity of the Bavarians, and the hostility of their
sovereign, to make a dreadful use of the rights of victory; pressed as he was by Germans to
avenge the fate of Magdeburg on the capital of its destroyer, this great prince scorned this
mean revenge; and the very helplessness of his enemies disarmed his severity.  Contented with
the more noble triumph of conducting the Palatine Frederick with the pomp of a victor into
the very palace of the prince who had been the chief instrument of his ruin, and the usurper
of his territories, he heightened the brilliancy of his triumphal entry by the brighter splendour
of moderation and clemency.

