A reference to the various photographs depicting damage shows that although most of the buildings
within the effective limits of the blast were totally destroyed or severely damaged, a large
number of chimneys even close to X were left standing, apparently uninjured by the concussion.
One explanation is that concrete chimneys are approximately cylindrical in shape and consequently
offer much less wind resistance than flat surfaces such as buildings.  Another explanation
is that since the cities were subject to typhoons the more modern chimneys were probably designed
to withstand winds of high velocity.  It is also probable that most of the recently constructed
chimneys as well as the more modern buildings were constructed to withstand the acceleration
of rather severe earthquakes.  Since the bombs were exploded high in the air, chimneys relatively
close to X were subjected to more of a downward than a lateral pressure, and consequently the
overturning moment was much less than might have been anticipated.

Although the blast damaged many bridges to some extent, bridge damage was on the whole slight
in comparison to that suffered by buildings. The damage varied from only damaged railings to
complete destruction of the superstructure.  Some of the bridges were wrecked and the spans
were shoved off their piers and into the river bed below by the force of the blast.  Others,
particularly steel plate girder bridges, were badly buckled by the blast pressure.  None of
the failures observed could be attributed to inadequate design or structural weaknesses.

The roads, and railroad and street railway trackage sustained practically no primary damage
as a result of the explosion.  Most of the damage to railroads occurred from secondary causes,
such as fires and damage to bridges or other structures.  Rolling stock, as well as automobiles,
trolleys, and buses were destroyed and burned up to a considerable distance from X.  Streets
were impassable for awhile because of the debris, but they were not damaged.  The height of
the bomb explosion probably explains the absence of direct damage to railroads and roads.

A large part of the electric supply was interrupted by the bomb blast chiefly through damage
to electric substations and overhead transmission systems.  Both gas works in Nagasaki were
severely damaged by the bomb.  These works would have required 6-7 months to get into operation.
In addition to the damage sustained by the electrical and gas systems, severe damage to the
water supply system was reported by the Japanese government; the chief damage was a number
of breaks in the large water mains and in almost all of the distributing pipes in the areas
which were affected by the blast.  Nagasaki was still suffering from a water shortage inside
the city six weeks after the atomic attack.

The Nagasaki Prefectural report describes vividly the effects of the bomb on the city and its
inhabitants:

"Within a radius of 1 kilometer from X, men and animals died almost instantaneously and outside
a radius of 1 kilometer and within a radius of 2 kilometers from X, some men and animals died
instantly from the great blast and heat but the great majority were seriously or superficially
injured.  Houses and other structures were completely destroyed while fires broke out everywhere.
Trees were uprooted and withered by the heat.

"Outside a radius of 2 kilometers and within a radius of 4 kilometers from X, men and animals
suffered various degrees of injury from window glass and other fragments scattered about by
the blast and many were burned by the intense heat.  Dwellings and other structures were half
damaged by blast.

"Outside a radius of 4 kilometers and within a radius of 8 kilometers living creatures were
injured by materials blown about by the blast; the majority were only superficially wounded.
Houses were only half or partially damaged."

The British Mission to Japan interpreted their observations of the destruction of buildings
to apply to similar construction of their own as follows:

A similar bomb exploding in a similar fashion would produce the following effects on normal
British houses:

Up to 1,000 yards from X it would cause complete collapse.

Up to 1 mile from X it would damage the houses beyond repair.

Up to 1.5 miles from X it would render them uninhabitable without extensive repair, particularly
to roof timbers.

Up to 2.5 miles from X it would render them uninhabitable until first-aid repairs had been
carried out.

The fire damage in both cities was tremendous, but was more complete in Hiroshima than in Nagasaki.
The effect of the fires was to change profoundly the appearance of the city and to leave the
central part bare, except for some reinforced concrete and steel frames and objects such as
safes, chimney stacks, and pieces of twisted sheet metal.  The fire damage resulted more from
the properties of the cities themselves than from those of the bombs.

The conflagration in Hiroshima caused high winds to spring up as air was drawn in toward the
center of the burning area, creating a "fire storm".  The wind velocity in the city had been
less than 5 miles per hour before the bombing, but the fire-wind attained a velocity of 30-40
miles per hour.  These great winds restricted the perimeter of the fire but greatly added to
the damage of the conflagration within the perimeter and caused the deaths of many persons
who might otherwise have escaped.  In Nagasaki, very severe damage was caused by fires, but
no extensive "fire storm" engulfed the city.  In both cities, some of the fires close to X
were no doubt started by the ignition of highly combustible material such as paper, straw,
and dry cloth, upon the instantaneous radiation of heat from the nuclear explosion.  The presence
of large amounts of unburnt combustible materials near X, however, indicated that even though
the heat of the blast was very intense, its duration was insufficient to raise the temperature
of many materials to the kindling point except in cases where conditions were ideal.  The majority
of the fires were of secondary origin starting from the usual electrical short-circuits, broken
gas lines, overturned stoves, open fires, charcoal braziers, lamps, etc., following collapse
or serious damage from the direct blast.

Fire fighting and rescue units were stripped of men and equipment. Almost 30 hours elapsed
before any rescue parties were observable.  In Hiroshima only a handful of fire engines were
available for fighting the ensuing fires, and none of these were of first class type.  In any
case, however, it is not likely that any fire fighting equipment or personnel or organization
could have effected any significant reduction in the amount of damage caused by the tremendous
conflagration.

A study of numerous aerial photographs made prior to the atomic bombings indicates that between
10 June and 9 August 1945 the Japanese constructed fire breaks in certain areas of the cities
in order to control large scale fires.  In general these fire breaks were not effective because
fires were started at so many locations simultaneously.  They appear, however, to have helped
prevent fires from spreading farther east into the main business and residential section of
Nagasaki.

TOTAL CASUALTIES

There has been great difficulty in estimating the total casualties in the Japanese cities as
a result of the atomic bombing.  The extensive destruction of civil installations (hospitals,
fire and police department, and government agencies) the state of utter confusion immediately
following the explosion, as well as the uncertainty regarding the actual population before
the bombing, contribute to the difficulty of making estimates of casualties.  The Japanese
periodic censuses are not complete.  Finally, the great fires that raged in each city totally
consumed many bodies.

The number of total casualties has been estimated at various times since the bombings with
wide discrepancies.  The Manhattan Engineer District's best available figures are:

  TABLE A
  Estimates of Casualties

                        Hiroshima  Nagasaki
  Pre-raid population   255,000    195,000
  Dead                   66,000     39,000
  Injured                69,000     25,000
  Total Casualties      135,000     64,000

The relation of total casualties to distance from X, the center of damage and point directly
under the air-burst explosion of the bomb, is of great importance in evaluating the casualty-producing
effect of the bombs.  This relationship for the total population of Nagasaki is shown in the
table below, based on the first-obtained casualty figures of the District:

  TABLE B
  Relation of Total Casualties to Distance from X

  Distance                                  Total      Killed per
  from X, feet   Killed  Injured  Missing  Casualties  square mile
      0 - 1,640   7,505      960    1,127    9,592      24,700
  1,640 - 3,300   3,688    1,478    1,799    6,965       4,040
  3,300 - 4,900   8,678   17,137    3,597   29,412       5,710
  4,900 - 6,550     221   11,958       28   12,207         125
  6,550 - 9,850     112    9,460       17    9,589          20

No figure for total pre-raid population at these different distances were available.  Such
figures would be necessary in order to compute per cent mortality.  A calculation made by the
British Mission to Japan and based on a preliminary analysis of the study of the Joint Medical-Atomic
Bomb Investigating Commission gives the following calculated values for per cent mortality
at increasing distances from X:

  TABLE C
  Per-Cent Mortality at Various Distances

  Distance from X,    Per-cent Mortality
   in feet
     0 - 1000           93.0%
  1000 - 2000           92.0
  2000 - 3000           86.0
  3000 - 4000           69.0
  4000 - 5000           49.0
  5000 - 6000           31.5
  6000 - 7000           12.5
  7000 - 8000            1.3
  8000 - 9000            0.5
  9000 - 10,000          0.0

It seems almost certain from the various reports that the greatest total number of deaths were
those occurring immediately after the bombing.  The causes of many of the deaths can only be
surmised, and of course many persons near the center of explosion suffered fatal injuries from
more than one of the bomb effects.  The proper order of importance for possible causes of death
is: burns, mechanical injury, and gamma radiation.  Early estimates by the Japanese are shown
in D below:

  TABLE D
  Cause of Immediate Deaths

  City         Cause of Death    Per-cent of Total
  Hiroshima    Burns             60%
               Falling debris    30
               Other             10

  Nagasaki     Burns             95%
               Falling debris     9
               Flying glass       7
               Other              7

THE NATURE OF AN ATOMIC EXPLOSION

The most striking difference between the explosion of an atomic bomb and that of an ordinary
T.N.T. bomb is of course in magnitude; as the President announced after the Hiroshima attack,
the explosive energy of each of the atomic bombs was equivalent to about 20,000 tons of T.N.T.

But in addition to its vastly greater power, an atomic explosion has several other very special
characteristics.  Ordinary explosion is a chemical reaction in which energy is released by
the rearrangement of the atoms of the explosive material.  In an atomic explosion the identity
of the atoms, not simply their arrangement, is changed.  A considerable fraction of the mass
of the explosive charge, which may be uranium 235 or plutonium, is transformed into energy.
Einstein's equation, E = mc^2, shows that matter that is transformed into energy may yield
a total energy equivalent to the mass multiplied by the square of the velocity of light.  The
significance of the equation is easily seen when one recalls that the velocity of light is
186,000 miles per second.  The energy released when a pound of T.N.T. explodes would, if converted
entirely into heat, raise the temperature of 36 lbs. of water from freezing temperature (32
deg F) to boiling temperature (212 deg F).  The nuclear fission of a pound of uranium would
produce an equal temperature rise in over 200 million pounds of water.

The explosive effect of an ordinary material such as T.N.T. is derived from the rapid conversion
of solid T.N.T. to gas, which occupies initially the same volume as the solid; it exerts intense
pressures on the surrounding air and expands rapidly to a volume many times larger than the
initial volume.  A wave of high pressure thus rapidly moves outward from the center of the
explosion and is the major cause of damage from ordinary high explosives.  An atomic bomb also
generates a wave of high pressure which is in fact of, much higher pressure than that from
ordinary explosions; and this wave is again the major cause of damage to buildings and other
structures.  It differs from the pressure wave of a block buster in the size of the area over
which high pressures are generated.  It also differs in the duration of the pressure pulse
at any given point: the pressure from a blockbuster lasts for a few milliseconds (a millisecond
is one thousandth of a second) only, that from the atomic bomb for nearly a second, and was
felt by observers both in Japan and in New Mexico as a very strong wind going by.

The next greatest difference between the atomic bomb and the T.N.T. explosion is the fact that
the atomic bomb gives off greater amounts of radiation.  Most of this radiation is "light"
of some wave-length ranging from the so-called heat radiations of very long wave length to
the so-called gamma rays which have wave-lengths even shorter than the X-rays used in medicine.
All of these radiations travel at the same speed; this, the speed of light, is 186,000 miles
per second.  The radiations are intense enough to kill people within an appreciable distance
from the explosion, and are in fact the major cause of deaths and injuries apart from mechanical
injuries.  The greatest number of radiation injuries was probably due to the ultra-violet rays
which have a wave length slightly shorter than visible light and which caused flash burn comparable
to severe sunburn.  After these, the gamma rays of ultra short wave length are most important;
these cause injuries similar to those from over-doses of X-rays.

The origin of the gamma rays is different from that of the bulk of the radiation: the latter
is caused by the extremely high temperatures in the bomb, in the same way as light is emitted
from the hot surface of the sun or from the wires in an incandescent lamp.  The gamma rays
on the other hand are emitted by the atomic nuclei themselves when they are transformed in
the fission process.  The gamma rays are therefore specific to the atomic bomb and are completely
absent in T.N.T. explosions.  The light of longer wave length (visible and ultra-violet) is
also emitted by a T.N.T.  explosion, but with much smaller intensity than by an atomic bomb,
which makes it insignificant as far as damage is concerned.

A large fraction of the gamma rays is emitted in the first few microseconds (millionths of
a second) of the atomic explosion, together with neutrons which are also produced in the nuclear
fission.  The neutrons have much less damage effect than the gamma rays because they have a
smaller intensity and also because they are strongly absorbed in air and therefore can penetrate
only to relatively small distances from the explosion: at a thousand yards the neutron intensity
is negligible. After the nuclear emission, strong gamma radiation continues to come from the
exploded bomb.  This generates from the fission products and continues for about one minute
until all of the explosion products have risen to such a height that the intensity received
on the ground is negligible.  A large number of beta rays are also emitted during this time,
but they are unimportant because their range is not very great, only a few feet.  The range
of alpha particles from the unused active material and fissionable material of the bomb is
even smaller.

Apart from the gamma radiation ordinary light is emitted, some of which is visible and some
of which is the ultra violet rays mainly responsible for flash burns.  The emission of light
starts a few milliseconds after the nuclear explosion when the energy from the explosion reaches
the air surrounding the bomb.  The observer sees then a ball of fire which rapidly grows in
size.  During most of the early time, the ball of fire extends as far as the wave of high pressure.
As the ball of fire grows its temperature and brightness decrease. Several milliseconds after
the initiation of the explosion, the brightness of the ball of fire goes through a minimum,
then it gets somewhat brighter and remains at the order of a few times the brightness of the
sun for a period of 10 to 15 seconds for an observer at six miles distance.  Most of the radiation
is given off after this point of maximum brightness.  Also after this maximum, the pressure
waves run ahead of the ball of fire.

The ball of fire rapidly expands from the size of the bomb to a radius of several hundred feet
at one second after the explosion.  After this the most striking feature is the rise of the
ball of fire at the rate of about 30 yards per second.  Meanwhile it also continues to expand
by mixing with the cooler air surrounding it.  At the end of the first minute the ball has
expanded to a radius of several hundred yards and risen to a height of about one mile.  The
shock wave has by now reached a radius of 15 miles and its pressure dropped to less than 1/10
of a pound per square inch.  The ball now loses its brilliance and appears as a great cloud
of smoke: the pulverized material of the bomb.  This cloud continues to rise vertically and
finally mushrooms out at an altitude of about 25,000 feet depending upon meteorological conditions.
The cloud reaches a maximum height of between 50,000 and 70,000 feet in a time of over 30 minutes.

It is of interest to note that Dr. Hans Bethe, then a member of the Manhattan Engineer District
on loan from Cornell University, predicted the existence and characteristics of this ball of
fire months before the first test was carried out.

To summarize, radiation comes in two bursts--an extremely intense one lasting only about 3
milliseconds and a less intense one of much longer duration lasting several seconds.  The second
burst contains by far the larger fraction of the total light energy, more than 90%.  But the
first flash is especially large in ultra-violet radiation which is biologically more effective.
Moreover, because the heat in this flash comes in such a short time, there is no time for any
cooling to take place, and the temperature of a person's skin can be raised 50 degrees centigrade
by the flash of visible and ultra-violet rays in the first millisecond at a distance of 4,000
yards.  People may be injured by flash burns at even larger distances.  Gamma radiation danger
does not extend nearly so far and neutron radiation danger is still more limited.

The high skin temperatures result from the first flash of high intensity radiation and are
probably as significant for injuries as the total dosages which come mainly from the second
more sustained burst of radiation.  The combination of skin temperature increase plus large
ultra-violet flux inside 4,000 yards is injurious in all cases to exposed personnel.  Beyond
this point there may be cases of injury, depending upon the individual sensitivity.  The infra-red
dosage is probably less important because of its smaller intensity.

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE ATOMIC BOMBS

The damage to man-made structures caused by the bombs was due to two distinct causes: first
the blast, or pressure wave, emanating from the center of the explosion, and, second, the fires
which were caused either by the heat of the explosion itself or by the collapse of buildings
containing stoves, electrical fixtures, or any other equipment which might produce what is
known as a secondary fire, and subsequent spread of these fires.

The blast produced by the atomic bomb has already been stated to be approximately equivalent
to that of 20,000 tons of T.N.T.  Given this figure, one may calculate the expected peak pressures
in the air, at various distances from the center of the explosion, which occurred following
detonation of the bomb.  The peak pressures which were calculated before the bombs were dropped
agreed very closely with those which were actually experienced in the cities during the attack
as computed by Allied experts in a number of ingenious ways after the occupation of Japan.

The blast of pressure from the atomic bombs differed from that of ordinary high explosive bombs
in three main ways:

A.  Downward thrust.  Because the explosions were well up in the air, much of the damage resulted
from a downward pressure.  This pressure of course most largely effected flat roofs.  Some
telegraph and other poles immediately below the explosion remained upright while those at greater
distances from the center of damage, being more largely exposed to a horizontal thrust from
the blast pressure waves, were overturned or tilted.  Trees underneath the explosion remained
upright but had their branches broken downward.

B.  Mass distortion of buildings.  An ordinary bomb can damage only a part of a large building,
which may then collapse further under the action of gravity.  But the blast wave from an atomic
bomb is so large that it can engulf whole buildings, no matter how great their size, pushing
them over as though a giant hand had given them a shove.

C.  Long duration of the positive pressure pulse and consequent small effect of the negative
pressure, or suction, phase.  In any explosion, the positive pressure exerted by the blast
lasts for a definite period of time (usually a small fraction of a second) and is then followed
by a somewhat longer period of negative pressure, or suction.  The negative pressure is always
much weaker than the positive, but in ordinary explosions the short duration of the positive
pulse results in many structures not having time to fail in that phase, while they are able
to fail under the more extended, though weaker, negative pressure. But the duration of the
positive pulse is approximately proportional to the 1/3 power of the size of the explosive
charge.  Thus, if the relation held true throughout the range in question, a 10-ton T.N.T.
explosion would have a positive pulse only about 1/14th as long as that of a 20,000-ton explosion.
Consequently, the atomic explosions had positive pulses so much longer then those of ordinary
explosives that nearly all failures probably occurred during this phase, and very little damage
could be attributed to the suction which followed.

One other interesting feature was the combination of flash ignition and comparative slow pressure
wave.  Some objects, such as thin, dry wooden slats, were ignited by the radiated flash heat,
and then their fires were blown out some time later (depending on their distance from X) by
the pressure blast which followed the flash radiation.

CALCULATIONS OF THE PEAK PRESSURE OF THE BLAST WAVE

Several ingenious methods were used by the various investigators to determine, upon visiting
the wrecked cities, what had actually been the peak pressures exerted by the atomic blasts.
These pressures were computed for various distances from X, and curves were then plotted which
were checked against the theoretical predictions of what the pressures would be.  A further
check was afforded from the readings obtained by the measuring instruments which were dropped
by parachute at each atomic attack.  The peak pressure figures gave a direct clue to the equivalent
T.N.T. tonnage of the atomic bombs, since the pressures developed by any given amount of T.N.T.
can be calculated easily.

One of the simplest methods of estimating the peak pressure is from crushing of oil drums,
gasoline cans, or any other empty thin metal vessel with a small opening.  The assumption made
is that the blast wave pressure comes on instantaneously, the resulting pressure on the can
is more than the case can withstand, and the walls collapse inward. The air inside is compressed
adiabatically to such a point that the pressure inside is less by a certain amount than the
pressure outside, this amount being the pressure difference outside and in that the walls can
stand in their crumpled condition.  The uncertainties involved are, first, that some air rushes
in through any opening that the can may have, and thus helps to build up the pressure inside;
and, second, that as the pressure outside falls, the air inside cannot escape sufficiently
fast to avoid the walls of the can being blown out again to some extent.  These uncertainties
are such that estimates of pressure based on this method are on the low side, i.e., they are
underestimated.

Another method of calculating the peak-pressure is through the bending of steel flagpoles,
or lightning conductors, away from the explosion. It is possible to calculate the drag on a
pole or rod in an airstream of a certain density and velocity; by connecting this drag with
the strength of the pole in question, a determination of the pressure wave may be obtained.

Still another method of estimating the peak pressure is through the overturning of memorial
stones, of which there are a great quantity in Japan.  The dimensions of the stones can be
used along with known data on the pressure exerted by wind against flat surfaces, to calculate
the desired figure.

LONG RANGE BLAST DAMAGE

There was no consistency in the long range blast damage.  Observers often thought that they
had found the limit, and then 2,000 feet farther away would find further evidence of damage.

The most impressive long range damage was the collapse of some of the barracks sheds at Kamigo,
23,000 feet south of X in Nagasaki.  It was remarkable to see some of the buildings intact
to the last details, including the roof and even the windows, and yet next to them a similar
building collapsed to ground level.

The limiting radius for severe displacement of roof tiles in Nagasaki was about 10,000 feet
although isolated cases were found up to 16,000 feet.  In Hiroshima the general limiting radius
was about 8,000 feet; however, even at a distance of 26,000 feet from X in Hiroshima, some
tiles were displaced.

At Mogi, 7 miles from X in Nagasaki, over steep hills over 600 feet high, about 10% of the
glass came out.  In nearer, sequestered localities only 4 miles from X, no damage of any kind
was caused.  An interesting effect was noted at Mogi; eyewitnesses said that they thought a
raid was being made on the place; one big flash was seen, then a loud roar, followed at several
second intervals by half a dozen other loud reports, from all directions.  These successive
reports were obviously reflections from the hills surrounding Mogi.

GROUND SHOCK

The ground shock in most cities was very light.  Water pipes still carried water and where
leaks were visible they were mainly above ground.  Virtually all of the damage to underground
utilities was caused by the collapse of buildings rather than by any direct exertion of the
blast pressure.  This fact of course resulted from the bombs' having been exploded high in the air.

SHIELDING, OR SCREENING FROM BLAST

In any explosion, a certain amount of protection from blast may be gained by having any large
and substantial object between the protected object and the center of the explosion.  This
shielding effect was noticeable in the atomic explosions, just as in ordinary cases, although
the magnitude of the explosions and the fact that they occurred at a considerable height in
the air caused marked differences from the shielding which would have characterized ordinary
bomb explosions.

The outstanding example of shielding was that afforded by the hills in the city of Nagasaki;
it was the shielding of these hills which resulted in the smaller area of devastation in Nagasaki
despite the fact that the bomb used there was not less powerful.  The hills gave effective
shielding only at such distances from the center of explosion that the blast pressure was becoming
critical--that is, was only barely sufficient to cause collapse--for the structure.  Houses
built in ravines in Nagasaki pointing well away from the center of the explosion survived without
damage, but others at similar distances in ravines pointing toward the center of explosion
were greatly damaged.  In the north of Nagasaki there was a small hamlet about 8,000 feet from
the center of explosion; one could see a distinctive variation in the intensity of damage across
the hamlet, corresponding with the shadows thrown by a sharp hill.

The best example of shielding by a hill was southeast of the center of explosion in Nagasaki.
The damage at 8,000 feet from X consisted of light plaster damage and destruction of about
half the windows.  These buildings were of European type and were on the reverse side of a
steep hill.  At the same distance to the south-southeast the damage was considerably greater,
i.e., all windows and frames, doors, were damaged and heavy plaster damage and cracks in the
brick work also appeared. The contrast may be illustrated also by the fact that at the Nagasaki
Prefectural office at 10,800 feet the damage was bad enough for the building to be evacuated,
while at the Nagasaki Normal School to which the Prefectural office had been moved, at the
same distance, the damage was comparatively light.

Because of the height of the bursts no evidence was expected of the shielding of one building
by another, at least up to a considerable radius.  It was in fact difficult to find any evidence
at any distance of such shielding.  There appeared to have been a little shielding of the building
behind the Administration Building of the Torpedo Works in Nagasaki, but the benefits were
very slight.  There was also some evidence that the group of buildings comprising the Medical
School in Nagasaki did afford each other mutual protection.  On the whole, however, shielding
of one building by another was not noticeable.

There was one other peculiar type of shielding, best exhibited by the workers' houses to the
north of the torpedo plant in Nagasaki.  These were 6,000 to 7,000 feet north of X.  The damage
to these houses was not nearly as bad as those over a thousand feet farther away from the center
of explosion.  It seemed as though the great destruction caused in the torpedo plant had weakened
the blast a little, and the full power was not restored for another 1,000 feet or more.

FLASH BURN

