A thriving place is the Good Samaritan City of the Mississippi: has a great wholesale jobbing
trade; foundries, machine shops; and manufactories of wagons, carriages, and cotton-seed oil;
and is shortly to have cotton mills and elevators.

Her cotton receipts reached five hundred thousand bales last year--an increase of sixty thousand
over the year before.  Out from her healthy commercial heart issue five trunk lines of railway;
and a sixth is being added.

This is a very different Memphis from the one which the vanished and unremembered procession
of foreign tourists used to put into their books long time ago.  In the days of the now forgotten
but once renowned and vigorously hated Mrs. Trollope, Memphis seems to have consisted mainly
of one long street of log-houses, with some outlying cabins sprinkled around rearward toward
the woods; and now and then a pig, and no end of mud. That was fifty-five years ago.  She stopped
at the hotel. Plainly it was not the one which gave us our breakfast. She says--

'The table was laid for fifty persons, and was nearly full. A melancholy picture, and a continuous
one;--hundreds of miles of it. Sometimes the beacon lights stood in water three feet deep,
in the edge of dense forests which extended for miles without farm, wood-yard, clearing, or
break of any kind; which meant that the keeper of the light must come in a skiff a great distance
to discharge his trust,--and often in desperate weather. Yet I was told that the work is faithfully
performed, in all weathers; and not always by men, sometimes by women, if the man is sick or
absent.  The Government furnishes oil, and pays ten or fifteen dollars a month for the lighting
and tending. A Government boat distributes oil and pays wages once a month.

The Ship Island region was as woodsy and tenantless as ever. The common yew is a native of Europe,
of North America, and of the Japanese Isles. It used to be very plentiful in England and Ireland, and
probably also Scotland. Caesar mentions it as having been abundant in Gaul; and much of it is
found in Ireland, imbedded in the earth.

We were getting down now into the migrating negro region. These poor people could never travel
when they were slaves; so they make up for the privation now.  They stay on a plantation till
the desire to travel seizes them; then they pack up, hail a steamboat, and clear out.  Not
for any particular place; no, nearly any place will answer; they only want to be moving.  The
amount of money on hand will answer the rest of the conundrum for them. If it will take them
fifty miles, very well; let it be fifty. If not, a shorter flight will do.

During a couple of days, we frequently answered these hails. Sometimes there was a group of
high-water-stained, tumble-down cabins, populous with colored folk, and no whites visible;
with grassless patches of dry ground here and there; a few felled trees, with skeleton cattle,
mules, and horses, eating the leaves and gnawing the bark--no other food for them in the flood-wasted
land. Sometimes there was a single lonely landing-cabin; near it the colored family that had
hailed us; little and big, old and young, roosting on the scant pile of household goods; these
consisting of a rusty gun, some bed-ticks, chests, tinware, stools, a crippled looking-glass,
a venerable arm-chair, and six or eight base- born and spiritless yellow curs, attached to
the family by strings. They must have their dogs; can't go without their dogs. Yet the dogs
are never willing; they always object; so, one after another, in ridiculous procession, they
are dragged aboard; all four feet braced and sliding along the stage, head likely to be pulled
off; but the tugger marching determinedly forward, bending to his work, with the rope over
his shoulder for better purchase. Sometimes a child is forgotten and left on the bank; but
never a dog.

The usual river-gossip going on in the pilot-house. Island No. 63--an island with a lovely
'chute,' or passage, behind it in the former times. They said Jesse Jamieson, in the 'Skylark,'
had a visiting pilot with him one trip--a poor old broken-down, superannuated fellow--left
him at the wheel, at the foot of 63, to run off the watch. The ancient mariner went up through
the chute, and down the river outside; and up the chute and down the river again; and yet again
and again; and handed the boat over to the relieving pilot, at the end of three hours of honest
endeavor, at the same old foot of the island where he had originally taken the wheel!  A darkey
on shore who had observed the boat go by, about thirteen times, said, 'clar to gracious, I
wouldn't be s'prised if dey's a whole line o' dem Sk'ylarks!'

Anecdote illustrative of influence of reputation in the changing of opinion.  The 'Eclipse'
was renowned for her swiftness. One day she passed along; an old darkey on shore, absorbed
in his own matters, did not notice what steamer it was. Presently someone asked--

'Any boat gone up?'

'Yes, sah.'

'Was she going fast?'

'Oh, so-so--loafin' along.'

'Now, do you know what boat that was?'

'No, sah.'

'Why, uncle, that was the "Eclipse."'

'No!  Is dat so?  Well, I bet it was--cause she jes' went by here a- SPARKLIN'!'

Piece of history illustrative of the violent style of some of the people down along here, During
the early weeks of high water, A's fence rails washed down on B's ground, and B's rails washed
up in the eddy and landed on A's ground.  A said, 'Let the thing remain so; I will use your
rails, and you use mine.'  But B objected--wouldn't have it so.  One day, A came down on B's
ground to get his rails.  B said, 'I'll kill you!' and proceeded for him with his revolver.
A said, 'I'm not armed.' So B, who wished to do only what was right, threw down his revolver;
then pulled a knife, and cut A's throat all around, but gave his principal attention to the
front, and so failed to sever the jugular. Struggling around, A managed to get his hands on
the discarded revolver, and shot B dead with it--and recovered from his own injuries.

