"Calm thyself, mad descendant of consuls. We do not lead in barbarians bound behind our cars,
to make wives of their daughters. Beware of extremes. Exhaust simple, honorable methods, and
give thyself and me time for meditation. Chrysothemis seemed to me too a daughter of Jove,
and still I did not marry her, just as Nero did not marry Acte, though they called her a daughter
of King Attalus. Calm thyself! Think that if she wishes to leave Aulus for thee, he will have
no right to detain her. Know also that thou art not burning alone, for Eros has roused in her
the flame too. An' she could'n see me, caze dey had me pushed down out o' sight on de floe o'
de buggy.

"I ain't never seed nor heared tell o' my Ma an' Paw, an' bruthers,
an' susters from dat day to dis.

"My new owners tuck me to Baltymore, whar dey had herded tergether
two two-hoss wagon loads o' Niggers.

All o' us Niggers wuz den shipped on a boat to Savannah, an' frum
dar us wuz put on de cyars an' sont to Macon.

"In Macon, us wuz sold out, and Doctor (W.R.) Little, of Talbotton,
bought me at oxion (auction) an' tuck me home wid 'im.

"I? Dost thou know what amuses me yet in Chrysothemis? This, that she is false to me with my
freedman Theokles, and thinks that I do not notice it. Once I loved her, but now she amuses
me with her lying and stupidity. Come with me to her. Should she begin to flirt with thee,
and write letters on the table with her fingers steeped in wine, know that I shall not be jealous."

And he gave command to bear them both to Chrysothemis.

But in the entrance Petronius put his hand on Vinicius's shoulder, and said,--"Wait; it seems
to me that I have discovered a plan."

"May all the gods reward thee!"

"I have it! I judge that this plan is infallible. Knowest what, Marcus?"

"I listen to thee, my wisdom."

"Well, in a few days the divine Lygia will partake of Demeter's grain in thy house."

"Thou art greater than Cæsar!" exclaimed Vinicius with enthusiasm.

Chapter IV

IN fact, Petronius kept his promise. He slept all the day following his visit to Chrysothemis,
it is true; but in the evening he gave command to bear him to the Palatine, where he had a
confidential conversation with Nero; in consequence of this, on the third day a centurion,
at the head of some tens of pretorian soldiers, appeared before the house of Plautius.

The period was uncertain and terrible. Messengers of this kind were more frequently heralds
of death. So when the centurion struck the hammer at Aulus's door, and when the guard of the
atrium announced that there were soldiers in the anteroom, terror rose through the whole house.
The family surrounded the old general at once, for no one doubted that danger hung over him
above all. Pomponia, embracing his neck with her arms, clung to him with all her strength,
and her blue lips moved quickly while uttering some whispered phrase. Lygia, with a face pale
as linen, kissed his hand; little Aulus clung to his toga. From the corridor, from chambers
in the lower story intended for servant-women and attendants, from the bath, from the arches
of lower dwellings, from the whole house, crowds of slaves began to hurry out, and the cries
of "Heu! heu, me miserum!" were heard. The women broke into great weeping; some scratched their
cheeks, or covered their heads with kerchiefs.

Only the old general himself, accustomed for years to look death straight in the eye, remained
calm, and his short eagle face became as rigid as if chiselled from stone. After a while, when
he had silenced the uproar, and commanded the attendants to disappear, he said,--"Let me go,
Pomponia. If my end has come, we shall have time to take leave."

And he pushed her aside gently; but she said,--"God grant thy fate and mine to be one, O Aulus!"

Then, failing on her knees, she began to pray with that force which fear for some dear one
alone can give.

Aulus passed out to the atrium, where the centurion was waiting for him. It was old Caius Hasta,
his former subordinate and companion in British wars.

"I greet thee, general," said he. "I bring a command, and the greeting of Cæsar; here are the
tablets and the signet to show that I come in his name."

"I am thankful to Cæsar for the greeting, and I shall obey the command," answered Aulus. "Be
welcome, Hasta, and say what command thou hast brought."

"Aulus Plautius," began Hasta, "Cæsar has learned that in thy house is dwelling the daughter
of the king of the Lygians, whom that king during the life of the divine Claudius gave into
the hands of the Romans as a pledge that the boundaries of the empire would never be violated
by the Lygians. The divine Nero is grateful to thee, O general, because thou hast given her
hospitality in thy house for so many years; but, not wishing to burden thee longer, and considering
also that the maiden as a hostage should be under the guardianship of Cæsar and the senate,
he commands thee to give her into my hands."

Aulus was too much a soldier and too much a veteran to permit himself regret in view of an
order, or vain words, or complaint. A slight wrinkle of sudden anger and pain, however, appeared
on his forehead. Before that frown legions in Britain had trembled on a time, and even at that
moment fear was evident on the face of Hasta. But in view of the order, Aulus Plautius felt
defenceless. He looked for some time at the tablets and the signet; then raising his eyes to
the old centurion, he said calmly,--"Wait, Hasta, in the atrium till the hostage is delivered
to thee."

After these words he passed to the other end of the house, to the hall called oecus, where
Pomponia Græcina, Lygia, and little Aulus were waiting for him in fear and alarm.

"Death threatens no one, nor banishment to distant islands," said he; "still Cæsar's messenger
is a herald of misfortune. It is a question of thee, Lygia."

"Of Lygia?" exclaimed Pomponia, with astonishment.

"Yes," answered Aulus.

And turning to the maiden, he began: "Lygia, thou wert reared in our house as our own child;
I and Pomponia love thee as our daughter. But know this, that thou art not our daughter. Thou
art a hostage, given by thy people to Rome, and guardianship over thee belongs to Cæsar. Now
Cæsar takes thee from our house."

The general spoke calmly, but with a certain strange, unusual voice. Lygia listened to his
words, blinking, as if not understanding what the question was. Pomponia's cheeks became pallid.
In the doors leading from the corridor to the oecus, terrified faces of slaves began to show
themselves a second time.

"The will of Cæsar must be accomplished," said Aulus.

"Aulus!" exclaimed Pomponia, embracing the maiden with her arms, as if wishing to defend her,
"it would be better for her to die."

Lygia, nestling up to her breast, repeated, "Mother, mother!" unable in her sobbing to find
other words.

On Aulus's face anger and pain were reflected again. "If I were alone in the world," said he,
gloomily, "I would not surrender her alive, and my relatives might give offerings this day
to 'Jupiter Liberator.' But I have not the right to kill thee and our child, who may live to
happier times. I will go to Cæsar this day, and implore him to change his command. Whether
he will hear me, I know not. Meanwhile, farewell, Lygia, and know that I and Pomponia ever
bless the day in which thou didst take thy seat at our hearth."

Thus speaking, he placed his hand on her head; but though he strove to preserve his calmness,
when Lygia turned to him eyes filled with tears, and seizing his hand pressed it to her lips,
his voice was filled with deep fatherly sorrow.

"Farewell, our joy, and the light of our eyes," said he.

And he went to the atrium quickly, so as not to let himself be conquered by emotion unworthy
of a Roman and a general.

Meanwhile Pomponia, when she had conducted Lygia to the cubiculum, began to comfort, console,
and encourage her, uttering words meanwhile which sounded strangely in that house, where near
them in an adjoining chamber the lararium remained yet, and where the hearth was on which Aulus
Plautius, faithful to ancient usage, made offerings to the household divinities. Now the hour
of trial had come. On a time Virginius had pierced the bosom of his own daughter to save her
from the hands of Appius; still earlier Lucretia had redeemed her shame with her life. The
house of Cæsar is a den of infamy, of evil, of crime. But we, Lygia, know why we have not the
right to raise hands on ourselves! Yes! The law under which we both live is another, a greater,
a holier, but it gives permission to defend oneself from evil and shame even should it happen
to pay for that defence with life and torment. Whoso goes forth pure from the dwelling of corruption
has the greater merit thereby. The earth is that dwelling; but fortunately life is one twinkle
of the eye, and resurrection is only from the grave; beyond that not Nero, but Mercy bears
rule, and there instead of pain is delight, there instead of tears is rejoicing.

Next she began to speak of herself. Yes! she was calm; but in her breast there was no lack
of painful wounds. For example, Aulus was a cataract on her eye; the fountain of light had
not flowed to him yet. Neither was it permitted her to rear her son in Truth. When she thought,
therefore, that it might be thus to the end of her life, and that for them a moment of separation
might come which would be a hundred times more grievous and terrible than that temporary one
over which they were both suffering then, she could not so much as understand how she might
be happy even in heaven without them. And she had wept many nights through already, she had
passed many nights in prayer, imploring grace and mercy. But she offered her suffering to God,
and waited and trusted. And now, when a new blow struck her, when the tyrant's command took
from her a dear one,--the one whom Aulus had called the light of their eyes,--she trusted yet,
believing that there was a power greater than Nero's and a mercy mightier than his anger.

And she pressed the maiden's head to her bosom still more firmly. Lygia dropped to her knees
after a while, and, covering her eyes in the folds of Pomponia's peplus, she remained thus
a long time in silence; but when she stood up again, some calmness was evident on her face.

"I grieve for thee, mother, and for father and for my brother; but I know that resistance is
useless, and would destroy all of us. I promise thee that in the house of Cæsar I will never
forget thy words."

Once more she threw her arms around Pomponia's neck; then both went out to the oecus, and she
took farewell of little Aulus, of the old Greek their teacher, of the dressing-maid who had
been her nurse, and of all the slaves. One of these, a tall and broad-shouldered Lygian, called
Ursus in the house, who with other servants had in his time gone with Lygia's mother and her
to the camp of the Romans, fell now at her feet, and then bent down to the knees of Pomponia,
saying,--"O domina! permit me to go with my lady, to serve her and watch over her in the house
of Cæsar."

"Thou art not our servant, but Lygia's," answered Pomponia; "but if they admit thee through
Cæsar's doors, in what way wilt thou be able to watch over her?"

"I know not, domina; I know only that iron breaks in my hands just as wood does."

When Aulus, who came up at that moment, had heard what the question was, not only did he not
oppose the wishes of Ursus, but he declared that he had not even the right to detain him. They
were sending away Lygia as a hostage whom Cæsar had claimed, and they were obliged in the same
way to send her retinue, which passed with her to the control of Cæsar. Here he whispered to
Pomponia that under the form of an escort she could add as many slaves as she thought proper,
for the centurion could not refuse to receive them.

There was a certain comfort for Lygia in this. Pomponia also was glad that she could surround
her with servants of her own choice. Therefore, besides Ursus, she appointed to her the old
tire-woman, two maidens from Cyprus well skilled in hair-dressing, and two German maidens for
the bath. Her choice fell exclusively on adherents of the new faith; Ursus, too, had professed
it for a number of years. Pomponia could count on the faithfulness of those servants, and at
the same time consoled herself with the thought that soon grains of truth would be in Cæsar's
house.

She wrote a few words also, committing care over Lygia to Nero's freedwoman, Acte. Pomponia
had not seen her, it is true, at meetings of confessors of the new faith; but she had heard
from them that Acte had never refused them a service, and that she read the letters of Paul
of Tarsus eagerly. It was known to her also that the young freedwoman lived in melancholy,
that she was a person different from all other women of Nero's house, and that in general she
was the good spirit of the palace.

Hasta engaged to deliver the letter himself to Acte. Considering it natural that the daughter
of a king should have a retinue of her own servants, he did not raise the least difficulty
in taking them to the palace, but wondered rather that there should be so few. He begged haste,
however, fearing lest he might be suspected of want of zeal in carrying out orders.

The moment of parting came. The eyes of Pomponia and Lygia were filled with fresh tears; Aulus
placed his hand on her head again, and after a while the soldiers, followed by the cry of little
Aulus, who in defence of his sister threatened the centurion with his small fists, conducted
Lygia to Cæsar's house.

The old general gave command to prepare his litter at once; meanwhile, shutting himself up
with Pomponia in the pinacotheca adjoining the oecus, he said to her,--"Listen to me, Pomponia.
I will go to Cæsar, though I judge that my visit will be useless; and though Seneca's word
means nothing with Nero now, I will go also to Seneca. To-day Sophonius, Tigellinus, Petronius,
or Vatinius have more influence. As to Cæsar, perhaps he has never even heard of the Lygian
people; and if he has demanded the delivery of Lygia, the hostage, he has done so because some
one persuaded him to it,--it is easy to guess who could do that."

She raised her eyes to him quickly.

"Is it Petronius?"

"It is."

A moment of silence followed; then the general continued,--"See what it is to admit over the
threshold any of those people without conscience or honor. Cursed be the moment in which Vinicius
entered our house, for he brought Petronius. Woe to Lygia, since those men are not seeking
a hostage, but a concubine."

And his speech became more hissing than usual, because of helpless rage and of sorrow for his
adopted daughter. He struggled with himself some time, and only his clenched fists showed how
severe was the struggle within him.

"I have revered the gods so far," said he; "but at this moment I think that not they are over
the world, but one mad, malicious monster named Nero."

"Aulus," said Pomponia. "Nero is only a handful of rotten dust before God."

But Aulus began to walk with long steps over the mosaic of the pinacotheca. In his life there
had been great deeds, but no great misfortunes; hence he was unused to them. The old soldier
had grown more attached to Lygia than he himself had been aware of, and now he could not be
reconciled to the thought that he had lost her. Besides, he felt humiliated. A hand was weighing
on him which he despised, and at the same time he felt that before its power his power was
as nothing.

But when at last he stifled in himself the anger which disturbed his thoughts, he said,--"I
judge that Petronius has not taken her from us for Cæsar, since he would not offend Poppæa.
Therefore he took her either for himself or Vinicius. Today I will discover this."

And after a while the litter bore him in the direction of the Palatine. Pomponia, when left
alone, went to little Aulus, who did not cease crying for his sister, or threatening Cæsar.

Chapter V

AULUS had judged rightly that he would not be admitted to Nero's presence. They told him that
Cæsar was occupied in singing with the lute-player, Terpnos, and that in general he did not
receive those whom he himself had not summoned. He says, in one of his contributions to lunar
science, "It may safely be asserted that the opportunities presented
during the life of any single astronomer for a trustworthy investigation
of any portion of the moon's surface, under like conditions, are few
and far between, and the whole time so employed must be brief, even
though the astronomer devote many more years than usual to observational
research."

[450] This prepares us to find in another of the same author's works the following suggestive sentence:
"With regard to the present habitability of the moon, it may be remarked that we are not justified
in asserting positively that no life exists upon her surface. Life has been found under conditions
so strange, we have been so often mistaken in assuming that here certainly, or there, no living
creatures can possibly exist, that it would be rash indeed to dogmatise
respecting the state of the moon in this respect."

[451] Narrien, one of the historians of the science, may be heard, though his contribution might
be cast into either scale. He writes: "The absence of those variations of light and shade which
would be produced by clouds floating above her surface, and the irregularities of the ground,
visible at the bottom and on the sides of her cavities, have given reason to believe that no
atmosphere surrounds her, and that she is destitute of rivers and seas. Such are the opinions
generally entertained concerning the moon; but M. Schroeter, a German astronomer, ventures
to assert that our satellite is the abode of living and intellectual beings; he has perceived
some indications of an atmosphere which, however, he admits, cannot exceed two miles in height,
and certain elevations which appear to him to be works of art rather than of nature. He considers
that a uniformity of temperature must be produced on her surface by her slow rotation on her
axis, by the insensible change from day to night, and the attenuated
state of her atmosphere, which is never disturbed by storms; and that
light vapours, rising from her valleys, fall in the manner of a gentle
and refreshing dew to fertilize her fields."

[452] Dr. H. W. M. Olbers is fully persuaded "that the moon is inhabited by rational creatures,
and that its surface is more or less covered with a vegetation not very dissimilar to that of
our own earth." Dr. Gruithuisen, of Munich, maintains that he has descried through his large
achromatic telescope "great artificial works in the moon erected by the lunarians," which he
considers to be "a system of fortifications thrown up by the selenitic engineers." We should have
scant hope of deciding the dispute by the dicta of the ancients, were these far more copious
than we find them to be. Yet reverence for antiquity may justify our quoting one of the classic
fathers. Plutarch says, "The Pythagoreans affirme, that the moone appeereth terrestriall, for that
she is inhabited round about, like as the earth wherein we are, and
peopled as it were with the greatest living creatures, and the fairest
plants."

Again, "And of all this that hath been said (my friend Theon) there is nothing that doth proove
and show directly, this habitation of men in the moon to be impossible." [453] Here we close the
argument based on induction, and sum up the evidence in our possession. On the one hand, several
scientific men, whose names we need not repeat, having surveyed the
moon, deny it an atmosphere, water, and other conditions of life.

Consequently, they disbelieve in its inhabitation, solely because
they consider the fact undemonstrable; none of them being so unscientific
as to believe it to be absolutely impossible.

On the other hand, we have the valuable views of Mädler and Beer, whose lunar labours are unsurpassed,
and whose map of the moon is a marvel and model of advanced selenography. They do not suppose
the conditions on our satellite to be exactly what they are on this globe. In their own words,
the moon is "no copy of the earth, much less a colony of the same."

They merely believe her to be environed with air, and thus habitable. And when we recall our own
Sir David Brewster, Professor Bonnycastle, Dr. Brinkley, Dr. Dick, Mr. Neison, and Mr. Proctor;
and reckon with them the continental astronomers, Dr. Gruithuisen, Dr. Olbers, and Schroeter,
all of whom attempted to fix the idea of planetary inhabitation on the popular mind, we must acknowledge
that they, with their opponents, have a strong claim on our attention. The only verdict we
are able just now to render, after hearing these conflicting testimonies,
is the Scotch one, Not proven.

We but append the legal indorsement ignoramus, we do not know.

The subject must remain sub judice; but what we know not now, we hope to know hereafter.

Having interrogated sense and science, with the solution of our enigma anything but complete,
we resort last of all to the argument from analogy. If this can illumine the obscurity, it will
all be on the positive side of the inquiry. At present the question resembles a half-moon:
analogy may show that the affirmative is waxing towards a full-orbed conviction. We open with Huyghens,
a Dutch astronomer of note, who, while he thinks it certain "that the moon has no air or atmosphere
surrounding it as we have," and "cannot imagine how any plants or animals whose whole nourishment
comes from fluid bodies, can thrive in a dry, waterless, parched soil," yet asks, "What, then,
shall this great ball be made for; nothing but to give us a little weak light in the night
time, or to raise our tides in the sea? Shall not we plant some people there that may have the pleasure
of seeing our earth turn upon its axis, presenting them sometimes with a prospect of Europe
and Africa, and then of Asia and America; sometimes half and sometimes full?" [454] Ray was
"persuaded that this luminary doth serve many ends and uses, especially to maintain the creatures
which in all likelihood breed and inhabit there."

[455] Swedenborg's ipse dixit ought to convince the most incredulous; for he speaks "from what
has been heard and seen." Thus he says: "That there are inhabitants in the moon is well known
to spirits and angels, and in like manner that there are inhabitants
in the moons or satellites which revolve about Jupiter and Saturn.

They who have not seen and discoursed with spirits coming from those moons still entertain no
doubt but there are men inhabiting them, because they are earths alike with the planets, and
wherever an earth is, there are men inhabitants; for man is the end for which every earth was
created, and nothing was made by the great Creator without an end."

[456] If any are still sceptical, Sir William Herschel, an intellectual light of no mean magnitude,
may reach them. He writes: "While man walks upon the ground, the birds fly in the air, and fishes
swim in water, we can certainly not object to the conveniences afforded by the moon, if those
that are to inhabit its regions are fitted to their conditions as well as we on this globe
arc to ours. An absolute or total sameness seems rather to denote imperfections, such as nature
never exposes to our view; and, on this account, I believe the analogies that have been mentioned
fully sufficient to establish the high probability of the moon's being inhabited like the earth." [457]
The voice of Dr. Dwight, the American theologian, will not be out of harmony here. In discoursing
of the starry heavens, he says of the planets: "Of these inferior
worlds, the moon is one; and to us, far the most interesting.

How many important purposes which are known does this beautiful attendant of our earth continually
accomplish! How many more, in all probability, which are hitherto unknown, and which hereafter
may be extensively disclosed to more enlightened, virtuous, and happy generations of men! At
the same time, it is most rationally concluded that intelligent beings in great multitudes
inhabit her lucid regions, being far better and happier than ourselves."

[458] Whewell's Bridgewater Treatise will furnish us a fitting quotation. "The earth, the globular
body thus covered with life, is not the only globe in the universe. There are, circling about our
own sun, six others, so far as we can judge, perfectly analogous
in their nature: besides our moon and other bodies analogous to it.

No one can resist the temptation to conjecture, that these globes,
some of them much larger than our own, are not dead and barren: --that
they are, like ours, occupied with organization, life, intelligence."

[459] In a most eloquent passage, Dr. Chalmers, who will always be
heard with admiration, exclaims: "Who shall assign a limit to the
discoveries of future ages?

Who shall prescribe to science her boundaries, or restrain the active
and insatiable curiosity of man within the circle of his present acquirements?

We may guess with plausibility what we cannot anticipate with confidence. The day may yet be
coming when our instruments of observation shall be inconceivably
more powerful.

They may ascertain still more decisive points of resemblance.

They may resolve the same question by the evidence of sense which
is now so abundantly convincing by the evidence of analogy.

They may lay open to us the unquestionable vestiges of art, and industry, and intelligence. We
may see summer throwing its green mantle over those mighty tracts, and we may see them left
naked and colourless after the flush of vegetation has disappeared. In the progress of years
or of centuries, we may trace the hand of cultivation spreading a new aspect over some portion
of a planetary surface. Perhaps some large city, the metropolis of a mighty empire, may expand
into a visible spot by the powers of some future telescope.

Perhaps the glass of some observer, in a distant age, may enable him to construct the map of
another world, and to lay down the surface of it in all its minute and topical varieties.
But there is no end of conjecture; and to the men of other times we leave the full assurance
of what we can assert with the highest probability, that yon planetary orbs are so many worlds,
that they teem with life, and that the mighty Being who presides
in high authority over this scene of grandeur and astonishment has
there planted the worshippers of His glory."

[460]

How fine is this outburst of the great Scotch orator!

He spoke as one inspired with prophetic foreknowledge; for in less than twenty years after this
utterance, Beer and Mädler published their splendid Mappe Selenographica,
or map of the moon; and photography offered its aid to the fuller
delineation of our silvery satellite.

Who can tell what the last fifteen years of this eventful century may develop in the same
direction? [461] Equally noble with the language of Chalmers is a paragraph which we have extracted
from a work by that scholarly writer, Isaac Taylor. He says: "There are two facts, each of which
is significant in relation to our present subject, and of which the
first has long been understood, while the latter (only of late ascertained)
is every day receiving new illustrations; namely, that our planet
is, in no sense, of primary importance in the general system, or entitled,
by its magnitude, or its position, or its constitution, to be considered
as exerting any peculiar influence over others, or as the object of
more regard than any others.

This knowledge of our real place and value in the universe is a very
important consequence of our modern astronomy, and should not be lost
sight of in any of our speculations.

But then it is also now ascertained that the great laws of our own
planet, and of the solar system to which it belongs, prevail in all
other and the most remote systems, so as to make the visible universe,
in the strictest sense, ONE SYSTEM--indicating one origin and showing
the presence of one Controlling Power.

Thus the law of gravitation, with all the conditions it implies,
and the laws of light, are demonstrated to be in operation in regions
incalculably remote; and just so far as the physical constitution
of the other planets of our system can be either traced, or reasonably
conjectured, it appears that, amid great diversities of constitution,
the same great principles prevail in all; and therefore our further
conjecture concerning the existence of sentient and rational life
in other worlds is borne out by every sort of analogy, abstract and
physical; and this same rule of analogy impels us to suppose that
rational and moral agents, in whatever world found, and whatever diversity
of form may distinguish them, would be such that we should soon feel
at home in their society, and able to confer with them, to communicate
knowledge to them, and to receive knowledge from them.

Neither truth nor virtue is local; nor can there be wisdom and goodness in one planet, which
is not wisdom and goodness in every other." [462] The writer of the Plurality of Worlds, a little
work distinct from the essay already quoted, vigorously vindicates "the deeply cherished belief
of some philosophers, and of many Christians, that our world, in
its present state, contains the mere embryo of intelligent, moral,
and religious happiness; that the progress of man in his present state
is but the initiation of an interminable career of glory; and that
his most widely extended associations are a preparation for as interminably
an intercourse with the whole family of an intelligent universe."

[463] Dr. Arnott may add a final word, a last link in this evidential chain of analogy. He
writes: "To think, as our remote forefathers did, that the wondrous
array of the many planets visible from this earth serve no purpose
but to adorn its nocturnal sky, would now appear absurd indeed; but
whether they are inhabited by beings at all resembling the men of
this earth, we have not the means of knowing.

All the analogies favour the opinion that they are the abodes of life and its satisfactions.
On this earth there is no place so hot or so cold, so illumined or so dark, so dry or so wet,
but that it has creatures constituted to enjoy life there." [464]

Here our long list of learned authorities shall terminate.

We have strung together a large number of citations, and have ourselves
furnished only the string.

Indeed, what more have amateurs that they can do? For, as Pope puts it,--

"Who shall decide, when doctors disagree, And soundest casuists doubt, like you and me?"

Besides, astronomy is no child's play, nor are its abstruse problems to be mastered by superficial
meddlers. "Its intricacy," as Narrien reminds us, "in the higher departments, is such as to render
the processes unintelligible to all but the few distinguished persons who, by nature and profound
application to the subject, are qualified for such researches." [465] But if professionals must be
summoned as witnesses, ordinary men may sit as jurors. This function we have wished to fufil;
and we avow ourselves considerably perplexed, though not in despair. We hoped that after a
somewhat exhaustive examination, we might be able to state the result with an emphasis of conviction.
This we find impossible; but we can affirm on which side the evidence appears to preponderate,
and whither, we rest assured, further light will lead our willing feet. The conclusion, therefore,
of the whole matter is: we cannot see any living creatures on the
moon, however long we strain our eyes.

No instrument has yet been constructed that will reveal the slightest
vestige of inhabitation.

Consequently, the actual evidence of sense is all against us, and we resign it without demur.
This point, being settled, is dismissed.

Next, we reconsider the results of scientific study, and are strongly inclined to think the
weight of testimony favours the existence of a thin atmosphere, at least some water, and a measure
of light and shade in succession. These conditions must enable vegetables and animals to exist
upon its surface, though their constitution is in all probability
not analogous with that of those which are found upon our earth.

But to deny the being of inhabitants of some kind, even in the absence of these conditions, we
submit would be unphilosophical, seeing that the Power which adapted
terrestrial life to terrestrial environments could also adapt lunar
life to the environments in the moon.

We are seeking no shelter in the miraculous, nor do we run from a dilemma to the refuges of religion.
Apart from our theological belief in the potency of the Creator and Controller of all worlds,
we simply regard it as illogical and inconclusive to argue that because organization, life,
and intelligence obtain within one sphere under one order of circumstances, therefore the same
order obtains in every other sphere throughout the system to which
that one belongs.

The unity of nature is as clear to us as the unity of God; but unity is not uniformity. We
view the whole creation as we view this world; the entire empire
as we view this single province,

"Where order in variety we see,
And where, though all things differ, all agree."

And, finally, as analogy is unreservedly on the side of the occupation of every domain in creation,
by some creatures who have the dominion, we cannot admit the probability that the earth is the only
tenement with tenants: we must be confirmed in our judgment that the sun and the planets, with
their moons, ours of course included, are neither blank nor barren, but abodes of variously
organized beings, fitted to fulfil the chief end of all noble existence: the enjoyment of life,
the effluence of love, the good of all around and the glory of God above.

This article, that the moon is inhabited, may therefore form a clause of our scientific creed;
not to be held at any hazard, as a matter of life or death, or a test of communion, but to
be maintained subject to corrections such as future elucidation may require. We believe that
we are justified by science, reason, and analogy; and confidently look to be further justified
by verification. We accept many things as matters of faith, which we have not fully ascertained
to be matters of fact; but "faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the proving of things not
seen." By double entry the books of science are kept, by reasoning and demonstration: when future
auditors shall examine the accounts of the moon's inhabitation, we are persuaded that the result
of our reckoning will be found to be correct.

If any would charge us with a wish to be wise above what is written, we merely reply: There are unwritten
revelations which are nevertheless true. Besides, we are not sure that at least an intimation
of other races than those of the earth is not already on record.

Not to prove any position, but to check obstructive criticism, we refer to the divine who is said to have
witnessed in magnificent apocalypse some closing scenes of the human
drama.

If he also heard in sublime oratorio a prelude of this widely extended glory, our vision may
not be a "baseless fabric." After the quartettes of earth, and the interludes of angels, came
the grand finale, when every creature which is in heaven, as well as on the earth, was heard
ascribing "Blessing and honour and glory and power to Him who sitteth
upon the throne."

Assuredly, our conception of a choir worthy to render that chorus
is not of an elect handful of "saints," or contracted souls, embraced
within any Calvinistic covenant, but of an innumerable multitude of
ennobled, purified, and expanded beings, convoked from every satellite
and planet, every sun and star, and overflowing with gratitude and
love to that universal Father of lights, with whom is no parallax,
nor descension, and who kindled every spark of life and beauty that
in their individual and combined lustre He might reflect and repeat
His own ineffable blessedness.

APPENDIX.

Literature of the Lunar Man.

Vide p. 8.

1. The Man in the Moone. Telling Strange Fortunes. London, 1609.

2.
 Though young, she was not without knowledge, for knowledge of evil in those
times reached even children's ears early. She knew, therefore, that ruin was threatening her
in the palace. Pomponia, moreover, had warned her of this at the moment of parting. But having
a youthful spirit, unacquainted with corruption, and confessing a lofty faith, implanted in
her by her foster mother, she had promised to defend herself against that ruin; she had promised
her mother, herself and also that Divine Teacher in whom she not only believed, but whom she
had come to love with her half-childlike heart for the sweetness of his doctrine, the bitterness
of his death, and the glory of his resurrection.

She was confident too that now neither Aulus nor Pomponia would be answerable for her actions;
she was thinking therefore whether it would not be better to resist and not go to the feast.
On the one hand fear and alarm spoke audibly in her soul; on the other the wish rose in her
to show courage in suffering, in exposure to torture and death. The Divine Teacher had commanded
to act thus. He had given the example himself. Pomponia had told her that the most earnest
among the adherents desire with all their souls such a test, and pray for it. And Lygia, when
still in the house of Aulus, had been mastered at moments by a similar desire. She had seen
herself as a martyr, with wounds on her feet and hands, white as snow, beautiful with a beauty
not of earth, and borne by equally white angels into the azure sky; and her imagination admired
such a vision. There was in it much childish brooding, but there was in it also something of
delight in herself, which Pomponia had reprimanded. But now, when opposition to Cæsar's will
might draw after it some terrible punishment, and the martyrdom scene of imagination become
a reality, there was added to the beautiful visions and to the delight a kind of curiosity
mingled with dread, as to how they would punish her, and what kind of torments they would provide.
And her soul, half childish yet, was hesitating on two sides. But Acte, hearing of these hesitations,
looked at her with astonishment as if the maiden were talking in a fever. To oppose Cæsar's
will, expose oneself from the first moment to his anger? To act thus one would need to be a
child that knows not what it says. From Lygia's own words it appears that she is, properly
speaking, not really a hostage, but a maiden forgotten by her own people. No law of nations
protects her; and even if it did, Cæsar is powerful enough to trample on it in a moment of
anger. It has pleased Cæsar to take her, and he will dispose of her. Thenceforth she is at
his will, above which there is not another on earth.

"So it is," continued Acte. "I too have read the letters of Paul of Tarsus, and I know that
above the earth is God, and the Son of God, who rose from the dead; but on the earth there
is only Cæsar. Think of this, Lygia. I know too that thy doctrine does not permit thee to be
what I was, and that to you as to the Stoics,--of whom Epictetus has told me,--when it comes
to a choice between shame and death, it is permitted to choose only death. But canst thou say
that death awaits thee and not shame too? Hast thou heard of the daughter of Sejanus, a young
maiden, who at command of Tiberius had to pass through shame before her death, so as to respect
a law which prohibits the punishment of virgins with death? Lygia, Lygia, do not irritate Cæsar.
If the decisive moment comes when thou must choose between disgrace and death, thou wilt act
as thy faith commands; but seek not destruction thyself, and do not irritate for a trivial
cause an earthly and at the same time a cruel divinity."

Acte spoke with great compassion, and even with enthusiasm; and being a little short-sighted,
she pushed her sweet face up to Lygia's as if wishing to see surely the effect of her words.

But Lygia threw her arms around Acte's neck with childish trustfulness and said,--"Thou art
kind, Acte."

Acte, pleased by the praise and confidence, pressed her to her heart; and then disengaging
herself from the arms of the maiden, answered,--"My happiness has passed and my joy is gone,
but I am not wicked." Then she began to walk with quick steps through the room and to speak
to herself, as if in despair.

"No! And he was not wicked. He thought himself good at that time, and he wished to be good.
I know that best. All his change came later, when he ceased to love. Others made him what he
is--yes, others--and Poppæa."

Here her eyelids filled with tears. Lygia followed her for some time with her blue eyes, and
asked at last,--"Art thou sorry for him, Acte?"

"I am sorry for him!" answered the Grecian, with a low voice. And again she began to walk,
her hands clinched as if in pain, and her face without hope.

"Dost thou love him yet, Acte?" asked Lygia, timidly.

"I love him."

And after a while she added,--"No one loves him but me."

Silence followed, during which Acte strove to recover her calmness, disturbed by memories;
and when at length her face resumed its usual look of calm sorrow, she said,--

"Let us speak of thee, Lygia. Do not even think of opposing Cæsar; that would be madness. And
be calm. I know this house well, and I judge that on Cæsar's part nothing threatens thee. If
Nero had given command to take thee away for himself, he would not have brought thee to the
Palatine. Here Poppæa rules; and Nero, since she bore him a daughter, is more than ever under
her influence. No, Nero gave command, it is true, that thou shouldst be at the feast, but he
has not seen thee yet; he has not inquired about thee, hence he does not care about thee. Maybe
he took thee from Aulus and Pomponia only through anger at them. Petronius wrote me to have
care of thee; and since Pomponia too wrote, as thou knowest, maybe they had an understanding.
Maybe he did that at her request. If this be true, if he at the request of Pomponia will occupy
himself with thee, nothing threatens thee; and who knows if Nero may not send thee back to
Aulus at his persuasion? I know not whether Nero loves him over much, but I know that rarely
has he the courage to be of an opinion opposite to his."

"Ah, Acte!" answered Lygia; "Petronius was with us before they took me, and my mother was convinced
that Nero demanded my surrender at his instigation."

"That would be bad," said Acte. But she stopped for a while, and then said,--"Perhaps Petronius
only said, in Nero's presence at some supper, that he saw a hostage of the Lygians at Aulus's,
and Nero, who is jealous of his own power, demanded thee only because hostages belong to Cæsar.
But he does not like Aulus and Pomponia. No! it does not seem to me that if Petronius wished
to take thee from Aulus he would use such a method. I do not know whether Petronius is better
than others of Cæsar's court, but he is different. Maybe too thou wilt find some one else who
would be willing to intercede for thee. Hast thou not seen at Aulus's some one who is near Cæsar?"

"I have seen Vespasian and Titus."

"Cæsar does not like them."

"And Seneca."

"If Seneca advised something, that would be enough to make Nero act otherwise."

The bright face of Lygia was covered with a blush. "And Vinicius-"

"I do not know him."

"He is a relative of Petronius, and returned not long since from Armenia."

"Dost thou think that Nero likes him?"

"All like Vinicius."

"And would he intercede for thee?"

"He would."

Acte smiled tenderly, and said, "Then thou wilt see him surely at the feast. Thou must be there,
first, because thou must,--only such a child as thou could think otherwise. Second, if thou
wish to return to the house of Aulus, thou wilt find means of beseeching Petronius and Vinicius
to gain for thee by their influence the right to return. If they were here, both would tell
thee as I do, that it would be madness and ruin to try resistance. Cæsar might not notice thy
absence, it is true; but if he noticed it and thought that thou hadst the daring to oppose
his will, here would be no salvation for thee. Go, Lygia! Dost thou hear the noise in the palace?
The sun is near setting; guests will begin to arrive soon."

"Thou art right," answered Lygia, "and I will follow thy advice."

How much desire to see Vinicius and Petronius there was in this resolve, how much of woman's
curiosity there was to see such a feast once in life, and to see at it Cæsar, the court, the
renowned Poppæa and other beauties, and all that unheard-of splendor, of which wonders were
narrated in Rome, Lygia could not give account to herself of a certainty. But Acte was right,
and Lygia felt this distinctly. There was need to go; therefore, when necessity and simple
reason supported the hidden temptation, she ceased to hesitate.

Acte conducted her to her own unctorium to anoint and dress her; and though there was no lack
of slave women in Cæsar's house, and Acte had enough of them for her personal service, still,
through sympathy for the maiden whose beauty and innocence had caught her heart, she resolved
to dress her herself. It became clear at once that in the young Grecian, in spite of her sadness
and her perusal of the letters of Paul of Tarsus, there was yet much of the ancient Hellenic
spirit, to which physical beauty spoke with more eloquence than aught else on earth. When she
had undressed Lygia, she could not restrain an exclamation of wonder at sight of her form,
at once slender and full, created, as it were, from pearl and roses; and stepping back a few
paces, she looked with delight on that matchless, spring-like form.

"Lygia," exclaimed she at last, "thou art a hundred times more beautiful than Poppæa!"

But, reared in the strict house of Pomponia, where modesty was observed, even when women were
by themselves, the maiden, wonderful as a wonderful dream, harmonious as a work of Praxiteles
or as a song, stood alarmed, blushing from modesty, with knees pressed together, with her hands
on her bosom, and downcast eyes. At last, raising her arms with sudden movement, she removed
the pins which held her hair, and in one moment, with one shake of her head, she covered herself
with it as with a mantle.

Acte, approaching her and touching her dark tresses, said,--

"Oh, what hair thou hast! I will not sprinkle golden powder on it; it gleams of itself in one
place and another with gold, where it waves. I will add, perhaps, barely a sprinkle here and
there; but lightly, lightly, as if a sun ray had freshened it. Wonderful must thy Lygian country
be where such maidens are born!

"I do not remember it," answered Lygia; "but Ursus has told me that with us it is forests,
forests, and forests."

"But flowers bloom in those forests," said Acte, dipping her hand in a vase filled with verbena,
and moistening Lygia's hair with it. When she had finished this work, Acte anointed her body
lightly with odoriferous oils from Arabia, and then dressed her in a soft gold-colored tunic
without sleeves, over which was to be put a snow-white peplus. But since she had to dress Lygia's
hair first, she put on her meanwhile a kind of roomy dress called synthesis, and, seating her
in an armchair, gave her for a time into the hands of slave women, so as to stand at a distance
herself and follow the hairdressing. Two other slave women put on Lygia's feet white sandals,
embroidered with purple, fastening them to her alabaster ankles with golden lacings drawn crosswise.
When at last the hair-dressing was finished, they put a peplus on her in very beautiful, light
folds; then Acte fastened pearls to her neck, and touching her hair at the folds with gold
dust, gave command to the women to dress her, following Lygia with delighted eyes meanwhile.

But she was ready soon; and when the first litters began to appear before the main gate, both
entered the side portico from which were visible the chief entrance, the interior galleries,
and the courtyard surrounded by a colonnade of Numidian marble.

Gradually people passed in greater and greater numbers under the lofty arch of the entrance,
over which the splendid quadrigæ of Lysias seemed to bear Apollo and Diana into space. Lygia's
eyes were struck by that magnificence, of which the modest house of Aulus could not have given
her the slightest idea. It was sunset; the last rays were falling on the yellow Numidian marble
of the columns, which shone like gold in those gleams and changed into rose color also. Among
the columns, at the side of white statues of the Danaides and others, representing gods or
heroes, crowds of people flowed past,--men and women; resembling statues also, for they were
draped in togas, pepluses, and robes, falling with grace and beauty toward the earth in soft
folds, on which the rays of the setting sun were expiring. A gigantic Hercules, with head in
the light yet, from the breast down sunk in shadow cast by the columns, looked from above on
that throng. Acte showed Lygia senators in wide-bordered togas, in colored tunics, in sandals
with crescents on them, and knights, and famed artists; she showed her Roman ladies, in Roman,
in Grecian, in fantastic Oriental costume, with hair dressed in towers or pyramids, or dressed
like that of the statues of goddesses, low on the head, and adorned with flowers. Many men
and women did Acte call by name, adding to their names histories, brief and sometimes terrible,
which pierced Lygia with fear, amazement, and wonder. For her this was a strange world, whose
beauty intoxicated her eyes, but whose contrasts her girlish understanding could not grasp.
In those twilights of the sky, in those rows of motionless columns vanishing in the distance,
and in those statuesque people, there was a certain lofty repose. It seemed that in the midst
of those marbles of simple lines demigods might live free of care, at peace and in happiness.
Meanwhile the low voice of Acte disclosed, time after time, a new and dreadful secret of that
palace and those people. See, there at a distance is the covered portico on whose columns and
floor are still visible red stains from the blood with which Caligula sprinkled the white marble
when he fell beneath the knife of Cassius Chærea; there his wife was slain; there his child
was dashed against a stone; under that wing is the dungeon in which the younger Drusus gnawed
his hands from hunger; there the elder Drusus was poisoned; there Gemellus quivered in terror,
and Claudius in convulsions; there Germanicus suffered,--everywhere those walls had heard the
groans and death-rattle of the dying; and those people hurrying now to the feast in togas,
in colored tunics, in flowers, and in jewels, may be the condemned of to-morrow; on more than
one face, perhaps, a smile conceals terror, alarm, the uncertainty of the next day; perhaps
feverishness, greed, envy are gnawing at this moment into the hearts of those crowned demigods,
who in appearance are free of care. Lygia's frightened thoughts could not keep pace with Acte's
words; and when that wonderful world attracted her eyes with increasing force, her heart contracted
within her from fear, and in her soul she struggled with an immense, inexpressible yearning
for the beloved Pomponia Græcina, and the calm house of Aulus, in which love, and not crime,
was the ruling power.

Meanwhile new waves of guests were flowing in from the Vicus Apollinis. From beyond the gates
came the uproar and shouts of clients, escorting their patrons. The courtyard and the colonnades
were swarming with the multitude of Cæsar's slaves, of both sexes, small boys, and pretorian
soldiers, who kept guard in the palace. Here and there among dark or swarthy visages was the
black face of a Numidian, in a feathered helmet, and with large gold rings in his ears. Some
were bearing lutes and citharas, hand lamps of gold, silver, and bronze, and bunches of flowers,
reared artificially despite the late autumn season. Louder and louder the sound of conversation
was mingled with the splashing of the fountain, the rosy streams of which fell from above on
the marble and were broken, as if in sobs.

Acte had stopped her narration; but Lygia gazed at the throng, as if searching for some one.
All at once her face was covered with a blush, and from among the columns came forth Vinicius
with Petronius. They went to the great triclinium, beautiful, calm, like white gods, in their
togas. It seemed to Lygia, when she saw those two known and friendly faces among strange people,
and especially when she saw Vinicius, that a great weight had fallen from her heart. She felt
less alone. That measureless yearning for Pomponia and the house of Aulus, which had broken
out in her a little while before, ceased at once to be painful. The desire to see Vinicius
and to talk with him drowned in her other voices. In vain did she remember all the evil which
she had heard of the house of Cæsar, the words of Acte, the warnings of Pomponia; in spite
of those words and warnings, she felt all at once that not only must she be at that feast,
but that she wished to be there. At the thought that soon she would hear that dear and pleasant
voice, which had spoken of love to her and of happiness worthy of the gods, and which was sounding
like a song in her ears yet, delight seized her straightway.

But the next moment she feared that delight. It seemed to her that she would be false to the
pure teaching in which she had been reared, false to Pomponia, and false to herself. It is
one thing to go by constraint, and another to delight in such a necessity. She felt guilty,
unworthy, and ruined.

Despair swept her away, and she wanted to weep. Had she been alone, she would have knelt down
and beaten her breast, saying, "Mea culpa! mea culpa!" Acte, taking her hand at that moment,
led her through the interior apartments to the grand triclinium, where the feast was to be.
Darkness was in her eyes, and a roaring in her ears from internal emotion; the beating of her
heart stopped her breath. As in a dream, she saw thousands of lamps gleaming on the tables
and on the walls; as in a dream, she heard the shout with which the guests greeted Cæsar; as
through a mist, she saw Cæsar himself. The shout deafened her, the glitter dazzled, the odors
intoxicated; and, losing the remnant of her consciousness, she was barely able to recognize
Acte, who seated her at the table and took a place at her side.

But after a while a low and known voice was heard at the other side,--"A greeting, most beautiful
of maidens on earth and of stars in heaven. A greeting to thee, divine Callina!"

Lygia, having recovered somewhat, looked up; at her side was Vinicius. He was without a toga,
for convenience and custom had enjoined to cast aside the toga at feasts. His body was covered
with only a sleeveless scarlet tunic embroidered in silver palms. His bare arms were ornamented
in Eastern fashion with two broad golden bands fastened above the elbow; below they were carefully
stripped of hair. They were smooth, but too muscular,--real arms of a soldier, they were made
for the sword and the shield. On his head was a garland of roses. With brows joining above
the nose, with splendid eyes and a dark complexion, he was the impersonation of youth and strength,
as it were. To Lygia he seemed so beautiful that though her first amazement had passed, she
was barely able to answer,--"A greeting, Marcus."

"Happy," said he, "are my eyes, which see thee; happy my ears, which hear thy voice, dearer
to me than the sound of lutes or citharas. Were it commanded me to choose who was to rest here
by my side at this feast, thou, Lygia, or Venus, I would choose thee, divine one!"

And he looked at the maiden as if he wished to sate himself with the sight of her, to burn
her eyes with his eyes. His glance slipped from her face to her neck and bare arms, fondled
her shapely outlines, admired her, embraced her, devoured her; but besides desire, there was
gleaming in him happiness, admiration, and ecstasy beyond limit.

"I knew that I should see thee in Cæsar's house," continued he; "but still, when I saw thee,
such delight shook my whole soul, as if a happiness entirely unexpected had met me."

Lygia, having recovered herself and feeling that in that throng and in that house he was the
only being who was near to her, began to converse with him, and ask about everything which
she did not understand and which filled her with fear. Whence did he know that he would find
her in Cæsar's house? Why is she there? Why did Cæsar take her from Pomponia? She is full of
fear where she is, and wishes to return to Pomponia. She would die from alarm and grief were
it not for the hope that Petronius and he will intercede for her before Cæsar.

Vinicius explained that he learned from Aulus himself that she had been taken. Why she is there,
he knows not. Cæsar gives account to no one of his orders and commands. But let her not fear.
He, Vinicius, is near her and will stay near her. He would rather lose his eyes than not see
her; he would rather lose his life than desert her. She is his soul, and hence he will guard
her as his soul. In his house he will build to her, as to a divinity, an altar on which he
will offer myrrh and aloes, and in spring saffron and apple-blossoms; and since she has a dread
of Cæsar's house, he promises that she shall not stay in it.

And though he spoke evasively and at times invented, truth was to be felt in his voice, because
his feelings were real. Genuine pity possessed him, too, and her words went to his soul so
thoroughly that when she began to thank him and assure him that Pomponia would love him for
his goodness, and that she herself would be grateful to him all her life, he could not master
his emotion, and it seemed to him that he would never be able in life to resist her prayer.
The heart began to melt in him. Her beauty intoxicated his senses, and he desired her; but
at the same time he felt that she was very dear to him, and that in truth he might do homage
to her, as to a divinity; he felt also irresistible need of speaking of her beauty and of his
own homage. As the noise at the feast increased, he drew nearer to her, whispered kind, sweet
words flowing from the depth of his soul, words as resonant as music and intoxicating as wine.

And he intoxicated her. Amid those strange people he seemed to her ever nearer, ever dearer,
altogether true, and devoted with his whole soul. He pacified her; he promised to rescue her
from the house of Cæsar; he promised not to desert her, and said that he would serve her. Besides,
he had spoken before at Aulus's only in general about love and the happiness which it can give;
but now he said directly that he loved her, and that she was dear and most precious to him.
Lygia heard such words from a man's lips for the first time; and as she heard them it seemed
to her that something was wakening in her as from a sleep, that some species of happiness was
embracing her in which immense delight was mingled with immense alarm. Her cheeks began to
burn, her heart to beat, her mouth opened as in wonder. She was seized with fear because she
was listening to such things, still she did not wish for any cause on earth to lose one word.
At moments she dropped her eyes; then again she raised her clear glance to Vinicius, timid
and also inquiring, as if she wished to say to him, "Speak on!" The sound of the music, the
odor of flowers and of Arabian perfumes, began to daze her. In Rome it was the custom to recline
at banquets, but at home Lygia occupied a place between Pomponia and little Aulus. Now Vinicius
was reclining near her, youthful, immense, in love, burning; and she, feeling the heat that
issued from him, felt both delight and shame. A kind of sweet weakness, a kind of faintness
and forgetfulness seized her; it was as if drowsiness tortured her.

But her nearness to him began to act on Vinicius also. His nostrils dilated, like those of
an Eastern steed. The beating of his heart with unusual throb was evident under his scarlet
tunic; his breathing grew short, and the expressions that fell from his lips were broken. For
the first time, too, he was so near her. His thoughts grew disturbed; he felt a flame in his
veins which he tried in vain to quench with wine. Not wine, but her marvellous face, her bare
arms, her maiden breast heaving under the golden tunic, and her form hidden in the white folds
of the peplus, intoxicated him more and more. Finally, he seized her arm above the wrist, as
he had done once at Aulus's, and drawing her toward him whispered, with trembling lips,--"I
love thee, Callina,--divine one."

"Let me go, Marcus," said Lygia.

But he continued, his eyes mist-covered, "Love me, my goddess!"

But at that moment was heard the voice of Acte, who was reclining on the other side of Lygia.

"Cæsar is looking at you both."

Vinicius was carried away by sudden anger at Cæsar and at Acte. Her words had broken the charm
of his intoxication. To the young man even a friendly voice would have seemed repulsive at
such a moment, but he judged that Acte wished purposely to interrupt his conversation with
Lygia. So, raising his head and looking over the shoulder of Lygia at the young freedwoman,
he said with malice:

"The hour has passed, Acte, when thou didst recline near Cæsar's side at banquets, and they
say that blindness is threatening thee; how then canst thou see him?"

But she answered as if in sadness: "Still I see him. He, too, has short sight, and is looking
at thee through an emerald."

Everything that Nero did roused attention, even in those nearest him; hence Vinicius was alarmed.
He regained self-control, and began imperceptibly to look toward Cæsar. Lygia, who, embarrassed
at the beginning of the banquet, had seen Nero as in a mist, and afterward, occupied by the
presence and conversation of Vinicius, had not looked at him at all, turned to him eyes at
once curious and terrified.

Acte spoke truly. Cæsar had bent over the table, half-closed one eye, and holding before the
other a round polished emerald, which he used, was looking at them. For a moment his glance
met Lygia's eyes, and the heart of the maiden was straitened with terror. When still a child
on Aulus's Sicilian estate, an old Egyptian slave had told her of dragons which occupied dens
in the mountains, and it seemed to her now that all at once the greenish eye of such a monster
was gazing at her. She caught at Vinicius's hand as a frightened child would, and disconnected,
quick impressions pressed into her head: Was not that he, the terrible, the all-powerful? She
had not seen him hitherto, and she thought that he looked differently. She had imagined some
kind of ghastly face, with malignity petrified in its features; now she saw a great head, fixed
on a thick neck, terrible, it is true, but almost ridiculous, for from a distance it resembled
the head of a child. A tunic of amethyst color, forbidden to ordinary mortals, cast a bluish
tinge on his broad and short face. He had dark hair, dressed, in the fashion introduced by
Otho, in four curls.

He had no beard, because he had sacrificed it recently to Jove,--for which all Rome gave him
thanks, though people whispered to each other that he had sacrificed it because his beard,
like that of his whole family, was red. In his forehead, projecting strongly above his brows,
there remained something Olympian. In his contracted brows the consciousness of supreme power
was evident; but under that forehead of a demigod was the face of a monkey, a drunkard, and
a comedian,--vain, full of changing desires, swollen with fat, notwithstanding his youth; besides,
it was sickly and foul. To Lygia he seemed ominous, but above all repulsive.

After a while he laid down the emerald and ceased to look at her. Then she saw his prominent
blue eyes, blinking before the excess of light, glassy, without thought, resembling the eyes
of the dead.

"Is that the hostage with whom Vinicius is in love?" asked he, turning to Petronius.

"That is she," answered Petronius.

"What are her people called?"

"The Lygians."

"Does Vinicius think her beautiful?"

"Array a rotten olive trunk in the peplus of a woman, and Vinicius will declare it beautiful.
But on thy countenance, incomparable judge, I read her sentence already. Thou hast no need
to pronounce it! The sentence is true: she is too dry, thin, a mere blossom on a slender stalk;
and thou, O divine æsthete, esteemest the stalk in a woman. Thrice and four times art thou
right! The face alone does not signify. I have learned much in thy company, but even now I
have not a perfect cast of the eye. But I am ready to lay a wager with Tullius Senecio concerning
his mistress, that, although at a feast, when all are reclining, it is difficult to judge the
whole form, thou hast said in thy mind already, 'Too narrow in the hips.'"

"Too narrow in the hips," answered Nero, blinking.

On Petronius's lips appeared a scarcely perceptible smile; but Tullius Senecio, who till that
moment was occupied in conversing with Vestinius, or rather in reviling dreams, while Vestinius
believed in them, turned to Petronius, and though he had not the least idea touching that of
which they were talking, he said,--"Thou art mistaken! I hold with Cæsar."

"Very well," answered Petronius. "I have just maintained that thou hast a glimmer of understanding,
but Cæsar insists that thou art an ass pure and simple."

"Habet!" said Cæsar, laughing, and turning down the thumb, as was done in the Circus, in sign
that the gladiator had received a blow and was to be finished.

But Vestinius, thinking that the question was of dreams, exclaimed,--"But I believe in dreams,
and Seneca told me on a time that he believes too."

"Last night I dreamt that I had become a vestal virgin," said Calvia Crispinilla, bending over
the table.

At this Nero clapped his hands, other followed, and in a moment clapping of hands was heard
all around,--for Crispinilla had been divorced a number of times, and was known throughout
Rome for her fabulous debauchery.

But she, not disconcerted in the least, said,--"Well! They are all old and ugly. Rubria alone
has a human semblance, and so there would be two of us, though Rubria gets freckles in summer."

"But admit, purest Calvia," said Petronius, "that thou couldst become a vestal only in dreams."

"But if Cæsar commanded?"

"I should believe that even the most impossible dreams might come true."

"But they do come true," said Vestinius. "I understand those who do not believe in the gods,
but how is it possible not to believe in dreams?"

"But predictions?" inquired Nero. "It was predicted once to me, that Rome would cease to exist,
and that I should rule the whole Orient."

"Predictions and dreams are connected," said Vestinius. "Once a certain proconsul, a great
disbeliever, sent a slave to the temple of Mopsus with a sealed letter which he would not let
any one open; he did this to try if the god could answer the question contained in the letter.
The slave slept a night in the temple to have a prophetic dream; he returned then and said:
'I saw a youth in my dreams; he was as bright as the sun, and spoke only one word, "Black."'
The proconsul, when he heard this, grew pale, and turning to his guests, disbelievers like
himself, said: 'Do ye know what was in the letter?'" Here Vestinius stopped, and, raising his
goblet with wine, began to drink.

"What was in the letter?" asked Senecio.

"In the letter was the question: 'What is the color of the bull which I am to sacrifice: white
or black?'"

But the interest roused by the narrative was interrupted by Vitelius, who, drunk when he came
to the feast, burst forth on a sudden and without cause in senseless laughter.

"What is that keg of tallow laughing at?" asked Nero.

"Laughter distinguishes men from animals," said Petronius, "and he has no other proof that
he is not a wild boar."

Vitelius stopped half-way in his laughter, and smacking his lips, shining from fat and sauces,
looked at those present with as much astonishment as if he had never seen them before; then
he raised his two hands, which were like cushions, and said in a hoarse voice,--"The ring of
a knight has fallen from my finger, and it was inherited from my father."

"Who was a tailor," added Nero.

But Vitelius burst forth again in unexpected laughter, and began to search for his ring in
the peplus of Calvia Crispinilla.

Hereupon Vestinius fell to imitating the cries of a frightened woman. Nigidia, a friend of
Calvia,--a young widow with the face of a child and the eyes of a wanton,--said aloud,--"He
is seeking what he has not lost."

"And which will be useless to him if he finds it," finished the poet Lucan.

The feast grew more animated. Crowds of slaves bore around successive courses; from great vases
filled with snow and garlanded with ivy, smaller vessels with various kinds of wine were brought
forth unceasingly. All drank freely. On the guests, roses fell from the ceiling at intervals.

Petronius entreated Nero to dignify the feast with his song before the guests drank too deeply.
A chorus of voices supported his words, but Nero refused at first. It was not a question of
courage alone, he said, though that failed him always. The gods knew what efforts every success
cost him. He did not avoid them, however, for it was needful to do something for art; and besides,
if Apollo had gifted him with a certain voice, it was not proper to let divine gifts be wasted.
He understood, even, that it was his duty to the State not to let them be wasted. But that
day he was really hoarse. In the night he had placed leaden weights on his chest, but that
had not helped in any way. He was thinking even to go to Antium, to breathe the sea air.

Lucan implored him in the name of art and humanity. All knew that the divine poet and singer
had composed a new hymn to Venus, compared with which Lucretius's hymn was as the howl of a
yearling wolf. Let that feast be a genuine feast. So kind a ruler should not cause such tortures
to his subjects. "Be not cruel, O Cæsar!"

"Be not cruel!" repeated all who were sitting near.

Nero spread his hands in sign that he had to yield. All faces assumed then an expression of
gratitude, and all eyes were turned to him; but he gave command first to announce to Poppæa
that he would sing; he informed those present that she had not come to the feast, because she
did not feel in good health; but since no medicine gave her such relief as his singing, he
would be sorry to deprive her of this opportunity.

In fact, Poppæa came soon. Hitherto she had ruled Nero as if he had been her subject, but she
knew that when his vanity as a singer, a charioteer, or a poet was involved, there was danger
in provoking it. She came in therefore, beautiful as a divinity, arrayed, like Nero, in robes
of amethyst color, and wearing a necklace of immense pearls, stolen on a time from Massinissa;
she was golden-haired, sweet, and though divorced from two husbands she had the face and the
look of a virgin.

She was greeted with shouts, and the appellation "Divine Augusta." Lygia had never seen any
one so beautiful, and she could not believe her own eyes, for she knew that Poppæa Sabina was
one of the vilest women on earth. She knew from Pomponia that she had brought Cæsar to murder
his mother and his wife; she knew her from accounts given by Aulus's guests and the servants;
she had heard that statues to her had been thrown down at night in the city; she had heard
of inscriptions, the writers of which had been condemned to severest punishment, but which
still appeared on the city walls every morning. Yet at sight of the notorious Poppæa, considered
by the confessors of Christ as crime and evil incarnate, it seemed to her that angels or spirits
of heaven might look like her. She was unable simply to take her eyes from Poppæa; and from
her lips was wrested involuntarily the question,--"Ah, Marcus, can it be possible?"

But he, roused by wine, and as it were impatient that so many things had scattered her attention,
and taken her from him and his words, said,--"Yes, she is beautiful, but thou art a hundred
times more beautiful. Thou dost not know thyself, or thou wouldst be in love with thyself,
as Narcissus was; she bathes in asses' milk, but Venus bathed thee in her own milk. Thou dost
not know thyself, Ocelle mi! Look not at her. Turn thy eyes to me, Ocelle mi! Touch this goblet
of wine with thy lips, and I will put mine on the same place."

And he pushed up nearer and nearer, and she began to withdraw toward Acte. But at that moment
silence was enjoined because Cæsar had risen. The singer Diodorus had given him a lute of the
kind called delta; another singer named Terpnos, who had to accompany him in playing, approached
with an instrument called the nablium. Nero, resting the delta on the table, raised his eyes;
and for a moment silence reigned in the triclinium, broken only by a rustle, as roses fell
from the ceiling.

Then he began to chant, or rather to declaim, singingly and rhythmically, to the accompaniment
of the two lutes, his own hymn to Venus. Neither the voice, though somewhat injured, nor the
verses were bad, so that reproaches of conscience took possession of Lygia again; for the hymn,
though glorifying the impure pagan Venus, seemed to her more than beautiful, and Cæsar himself,
with a laurel crown on his head and uplifted eyes, nobler, much less terrible, and less repulsive
than at the beginning of the feast.

The guests answered with a thunder of applause. Cries of, "Oh, heavenly voice!" were heard
round about; some of the women raised their hands, and held them thus, as a sign of delight,
even after the end of the hymn; others wiped their tearful eyes; the whole hall was seething
as in a beehive. Poppæa, bending her golden-haired head, raised Nero's hand to her lips, and
held it long in silence. Pythagoras, a young Greek of marvellous beauty,--the same to whom
later the half-insane Nero commanded the flamens to marry him, with the observance of all rites,--knelt
now at his feet.

But Nero looked carefully at Petronius, whose praises were desired by him always before every
other, and who said,--"If it is a question of music, Orpheus must at this moment be as yellow
from envy as Lucan, who is here present; and as to the verses, I am sorry that they are not
worse; if they were I might find proper words to praise them."

Lucan did not take the mention of envy evil of him; on the contrary, he looked at Petronius
with gratitude, and, affecting ill-humor, began to murmur,--"Cursed fate, which commanded me
to live contemporary with such a poet. One might have a place in the memory of man, and on
Parnassus; but now one will quench, as a candle in sunlight."

Petronius, who had an amazing memory, began to repeat extracts from the hymn and cite single
verses, exalt, and analyze the more beautiful expressions. Lucan, forgetting as it were his
envy before the charm of the poetry, joined his ecstasy to Petronius's words. On Nero's face
were reflected delight and fathomless vanity, not only nearing stupidity, but reaching it perfectly.
He indicated to them verses which he considered the most beautiful; and finally he began to
comfort Lucan, and tell him not to lose heart, for though whatever a man is born that he is,
the honor which people give Jove does not exclude respect for other divinities.

Then he rose to conduct Poppæa, who, being really in ill health, wished to withdraw. But he
commanded the guests who remained to occupy their places anew, and promised to return, In fact,
he returned a little later, to stupefy himself with the smoke of incense, and gaze at further
spectacles which he himself, Petronius, or Tigellinus had prepared for the feast. 

What became of it ultimately does not appear in the manuscript from which this account is taken;
but the moral of the story seems to be the common one, that unlawful knowledge is punished by all
kinds of calamity." [189] There is also a story of the moon-god Chonsu, which is worthy of repetition.
Its original is in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris, and for its first translation we are
indebted to Dr. Birch, of the British Museum. [190] A certain Asiatic princess of Bechten, wherever
that was, was possessed by a spirit. Being connected, through her sister's marriage, with the
court of Egypt, on her falling ill, an Egyptian practitioner was summoned to her aid. He declared
that she had a demon, with which he himself was unable to cope. Thereupon the image of the moon-god
Chonsu was despatched in his mystic ark, for the purpose of exorcising the spirit and delivering
the princess. The demon at once yielded to the divine influence; and the king of Bechten was
so delighted that he kept the image in his possession for upwards of three years. In consequence
of an alarming dream he then sent him back to Egypt with presents
of great value.

Whatever evil powers the moon may have exerted since, we must credit him with having once ejected
an evil spirit and prolonged a royal life.

Returning to Thoth, we find the following valuable hints in the great work of Baron Bunsen:--"The
connection between Tet and the moon may allude, according to Wilkinson,
to the primitive use of a lunar year.

The ancients had already remarked that the moon in Egyptian was masculine, not feminine, as
the Greeks and Romans generally made it. Still we have no right to suppose a particular moon-god,
separate from Thoth. We meet with a deity called after the moon (Aah) either as a mere personification,
or as Thoth, in whom the agency of the moon and nature become a living principle. We find
him so represented in the tombs of the Ramesseum, opposite to Phre; a similar representation
in Dendyra is probably symbolical. According to Champollion he is often seen in the train of
Ammon, and then he is Thoth. He makes him green, with the four sceptres and cup of Ptah, by the
side of which, however, is a sort of Horus curl, the infantine lock, as child or son. In the
inscriptions there is usually only the crescent, but on one occasion the sign nuter (god)
is added. In the tombs a moon-god is represented sitting on a bark, and holding the sceptre
of benign power, to whom two Cynocephali are doing homage, followed by the Crescent and Nuter
god.

Lastly, the same god is found in a standing posture, worshipped by two souls and two Cynocephali."
[191]

With these "dog-headed" worshippers of the moon may be associated another animal that from an
early date has been connected with the luminaries of the day and night. We saw that the Australian
moon-myth of Mityan was of a native cat. Renouf says: "It is not improbable that the cat, in
Egyptian mäu, became the symbol of the Sun-god, or Day, because the word mäu also means light."
[192] Charles James Fox, with no thought of Egyptian, told the Prince of Wales that "cats always
prefer the sunshine." The native land of this domestic pet, or nuisance, is certainly Persia, and
some etymologists assign pers as the origin of puss. Be this as it may, the pupil of a cat's
eye is singularly changeable, dilating from the narrow line in the day-time to the luminous orb
in the dark. On this account the cat is likened to the moon.

But in Egypt feline eyes shine with supernatural lustre. Mr. Hyde Clarke tells us that "the
mummies of cats, which Herodotus saw at Bubastis, attested then, as they do now, to the dedication
of the cat to Pasht, the moon, and the veneration of the Egyptians
for this animal.

The cat must have been known to man, and have been named at least as early as the origin of language.
The superstition of its connection with the moon is also of pre-historic date, and not invented
by the Egyptians. According to Plutarch, a cat placed in a lustrum denoted the moon, illustrating
the mutual symbology. He supposes that this is because the pupils of a cat's eyes dilate and decrease
with the moon. The reason most probably depends, as before intimated, on another phenomenon of
periodicity corresponding to the month. Dr. Rae has, however, called my attention to another
possible cause of the association, which is the fact that the cat's eyes glisten at night or in
the dark. It is to be observed that the name of the sun in the Malayan and North American languages
is the day-eye, or sky-eye, and that of the moon the night-eye." [193] Our own daisy, too, is
the day's eye, resembling the sun, and opening its little pearly lashes when the spring wakes
to newness of life.

The Nubians "pay adoration to the moon; and that their worship is performed with pleasure and
satisfaction, is obvious every night that she shines. Coming out from the darkness of their
huts, they say a few words upon seeing her brightness, and testify great joy, by motions of
their feet and hands, at the first appearance of the new moon."

[194] The Shangalla worship the moon, and think that "a star passing near the horns of the moon
denotes the coming of an enemy." [195] In Western Africa moon-worship is very prevalent. Merolla
says: "They that keep idols in their houses, every first day of the moon are obliged to anoint
them with a sort of red wood powdered. At the appearance of every new moon, these people fall
on their knees, or else cry out, standing and clapping their hands, 'So may I renew my life
as thou art renewed.'" [196]

H. H. Johnston, Esq., F.Z.S., F.R.G.S., who had just returned from
the region of the Congo, related the following curious incident before
the Anthropological Institute, in January, 1884.

It looks remarkably like a relic of ancient worship, which gave the fruit of the body for the
sin of the soul, and committed murder on earth to awaken mercy in heaven! "At certain villages
between Manyanga and Isangila there are curious eunuch dances to celebrate the new moon, in
which a white cock is thrown up into the air alive, with clipped
wings, and as it falls towards the ground it is caught and plucked
by the eunuchs.

I was told that originally this used to be a human sacrifice, and that a young boy or girl was thrown
up into the air and torn to pieces by the eunuchs as he or she fell, but that of late years slaves
had got scarce or manners milder, and a white cock was now substituted." [197]

The Mandingoes are more attracted to the varying moon than to the sun.

[199] The Makololo and Bechuana custom of greeting the new moon is
curious.

"They watch most eagerly for the first glimpse of the new moon, and when they perceive the faint
outline after the sun has set deep in the west, they utter a loud shout of 'Ku?!' and vociferate
prayers to it."

[200] The degraded Hottentots have not much improved since Bory de St. Vincent described them
as "brutish, lazy, and stupid," and their worship of the moon is still demonstrative, as when Kolben
wrote: "These dances and noises are religious honours and invocations to the moon. They call her
Gounja.

The Supreme they call Gounja-Gounja, or Gounja Ticquoa, the god of gods, and place him far
above the moon. The moon, with them, is an inferior visible god --the subject and representation
of the High and Invisible. They judge the moon to have the disposal of the weather, and invoke
her for such as they want. They assemble for the celebration of her worship at full and change
constantly.

No inclemency of the weather prevents them. And their behaviour at those times is indeed very
astonishing. They throw their bodies into a thousand different distortions, and make mouths and
faces strangely ridiculous and horrid. Now they throw themselves flat on the ground, screaming
out a strange, unintelligible jargon. Then jumping up on a sudden, and stamping like mad (insomuch
that they make the ground shake), they direct, with open throats, the following expressions,
among others, to the moon: 'I salute you; you are welcome. Grant us fodder for our cattle and
milk in abundance.' These and other addresses to the moon they repeat over and over, accompanying
them with dancing and clapping of hands.

At the end of the dance they sing 'Ho!

Ho! Ho!

Ho!' many times over, with a variation of notes; which being accompanied with clapping of hands
makes a very odd and a very merry entertainment to a stranger." [201] In reality they hold
a primitive watch-night service; their welcome of the new moon being
very similar to our popular welcome of the new year.

Nor should it be omitted that the ancient Ethiopians worshipped the
moon; and that those who lived above Meroë admitted the existence
of eternal and incorruptible gods, among which the moon ranked as
a chief divinity.

Descending the Nile and crossing the Mediterranean, we come to Greece. [202]

Yes, Pericles and Plato, Sophocles and Pheidias, are dust; and much
of their nation's pristine glory has "melted into the infinite azure
of the past": but the sun shines as youthful yet as on that eventful
day when unwearied he sank in ocean, "loth, and ere his time:

"So
the sun sank, and all the host had rest From onset and the changeful
chance of war."

[203]

Where Phoebus sprang, sprang Phoebe also--the bright and beautiful moon. To a people addicted
to the idolatry of perfect form and comeliness, no object could be more attractive than the queen
of the night. When Socrates was accused of innovating upon the Greek religion, and of ridiculing
the Athenian deities, he replied on his trial, "You strange man, Melêtus, are you seriously affirming
that I do not think Helios and Selene to be gods, as the rest of mankind think?" [204] Pausanias,
the historian, tells us that in Phocis there was a chapel consecrated
to Isis, which of all the places erected by the Greeks to this Egyptian
goddess was by far the most holy.

It was not lawful for any one to approach this sacred edifice but those whom the goddess had invited
by appearing to them for that purpose in a dream. [205] By Isis, as we saw from Diodorus, the
Greeks understood the moon.

Diana was also one of the Grecian moon-goddesses, but Sir George C. Lewis thinks that this was
not till a comparatively late period. The religion of Greece was so mixed up, or made up,
with mythology, that for an interpretation of their theogony we must resort to poetry and impersonation.
Here again we see the working of sexual anthropomorphism. Ouranos espoused Ge, and their offspring
was Kronos; which is but an ancient mode of saying that chronology is the measurement on earth
of heavenly motion. Solar and lunar worship was but the recognition in the primitive consciousness
of the superior worth-ship of these celestial bodies. As Grote says: "To us these now appear puerile,
though pleasing fancies, but to our Homeric Greek they seemed perfectly natural and plausible.
In his view, the description of the sun, as given in a modern astronomical
treatise, would have appeared not merely absurd, but repulsive and
impious."

[206] What an amount of misunderstanding would be obviated if readers of the Bible would bear
this in mind when they meet with erroneous conceptions in Hebrew cosmogony. Grote further says
on the same page of his magnificent history: "Personifying fiction was blended by the Homeric
Greeks with their conception of the physical phenomena before them,
not simply in the way of poetical ornament, but as a genuine portion
of their everyday belief."

We cannot better conclude our brief glance at ancient Greece than by quoting that splendid comparison
from the bard of Chios, which Pope thought "the most beautiful night-piece that can be found
in poetry." [207]

The Romans had many gods, superior and inferior. The former were the celestial deities, twelve
in number, among whom was Diana; and the Dii Selecti, numbering eight.

Of these, one was Luna, the moon, daughter of Hyperion and sister of the Sun. [208] Livy speaks
of "a temple of Luna, which is on the Aventine"; and Tacitus mentions, in his Annals, a temple consecrated
to the moon. In Horace, Luna is "siderum regina"; [209] and in Apuleius, "Regina coeli," [210] Bishop
Warburton, in his synopsis of Apuleius, speaks of the hopeless condition
of Lucius, which obliged him to fly to heaven for relief.

"The moon is in full splendour; and the awful silence of the night
inspires him with sentiments of religion."

He then purifies himself, and so makes his prayer to the moon, invoking
her by her several names, as the celestial Venus and Diana.

[211] This whole section of the Divine Legation is worthy of close study.

"The ancient Goths," says Rudbeck ("Atalantis," ii. 609), "paid such regard to the moon, that
some have thought that they worshipped her more than the sun." [212]

And of the ancient Germans Grimm says: "That to our remote ancestry
the heavenly bodies, especially the sun and moon, were divine beings,
will not admit of any doubt."

[213] Gibbon, Friedrich Schlegel, and others, say the same.

The Finns worshipped "Kun, the male god of the moon, who corresponded exactly with the Aku, Enizuna,
or Itu of the Accadians." [214]

In ancient Britain the moon occupied a high position in the religion of the Druids, who had superstitious
rites at the lunar changes, and who are "always represented as having the crescent in their hands."
[215] "From the Penitential of Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the seventh century,
and the Confessional of Ecgbert, Archbishop of York, in the early part of the eighth century,
we may infer that homage was then offered to the sun and moon." [216] Again, "There are many
proofs, direct and circumstantial, that place it beyond all doubt that the moon was one of the
objects of heathen worship in Britain. But under what name the moon was invoked is not discoverable,
unless it may have been Andraste, the goddess to whom the British queen Boadicea, with hands outstretched
to heaven, appealed when about to engage in battle with the Romans." [217] A writer of the seventeenth
century, says: "In Yorkeshire, etc., northwards, some country woemen do-e worship the New Moon
on their bare knees, kneeling upon an earthfast stone. And the people of Athol, in the High-lands
in Scotland, doe worship the New Moon."

[218] Camden writes of the Irish: "Whether or no they worship the
moon, I know not; but, when they first see her after the change, they
commonly bow the knee, and say the Lord's Prayer; and near the wane,
address themselves to her with a loud voice, after this manner: 'Leave
us as well as thou foundest us.'"

[219] Sylvester O'Halloran, the Irish general and historian, speaking of "the correspondent
customs of the Phoenicians and the Irish," adds: "Their deities were the same. They both adored
Bel, or the sun, the Moon, and the stars. The house of Rimmon (2 Kings v. 18), which the Phoenicians
worshipped in, like our temples of Fleachta, in Meath, was sacred to the moon. The word 'Rimmon'
has by no means been understood by the different commentators; and
yet by recurring to the Irish (a branch of the Phoenicians) it becomes
very intelligible; for Re is Irish for the moon, and Muadh signifies
an image; and the compound word Reamham signifies prognosticating
by the appearances of the moon.

It appears by the life of our great St. Columba, that the Druid temples were here decorated with
figures of the sun, the moon, and the stars. The Phoenicians, under the name of Bel-Samen,
adored the Supreme; and it is pretty remarkable that to this very day, to wish a friend every happiness
this life can afford, we say in Irish, 'the blessings of Samen and Eel be with you!' that is,
of all the seasons; Bel signifying the sun, and Samhain the moon."

[220] And again: "Next to the sun was the moon, which the Irish undoubtedly
adored.

Some remains of this worship may be traced, even at this day; as particularly borrowing, if
they should not have it about them, a piece of silver on the first night of a new moon, as an omen
of plenty during the month; and at the same time saying in Irish, 'As you have found us in peace
and prosperity, so leave us in grace and mercy.'" [221] Tuathal, the prince to whom the estates
(circa A.D. 106) swore solemnly "by the sun, moon, and stars," to bear true allegiance, "in
that portion of the imperial domain taken from Munster, erected a
magnificent temple called Flachta, sacred to the fire of Samhain,
and to the Samnothei, or priests of the moon.

Here, on every eve of November, were the fires of Samhain lighted up, with great pomp and ceremony,
the monarch, the Druids, and the chiefs of the kingdom attending; and from this holy fire,
and no other, was every fire in the land first lit for the winter. It was deemed an act of the
highest impiety to kindle the winter fires from any other; and for this favour the head of every
house paid a Scrubal, or threepence, tax, to the Arch-Druid of Samhain."

[222] Another writer mentions another Irish moon-god. "The next heathen divinity which I would
bring under notice is St. Luan, alias Molua, alias Euan, alias Lugidus,
alias Lugad, and Moling, etc. The foundations, with which this saint
under some of his aliases is connected, extend over eight counties
in the provinces of Ulster, Leinster, and Munster.

Luan is to this; day the common Irish word for the moon. We read that there were fifteen saints
of the name of Lugadius; and as Lugidus was one of Luan's aliases, I have set them all down as
representing the moon in the several places where that planet was worshipped as the symbol of
Female nature." [223] We have already seen that the moon was the embodiment of the female principle
in China, and now we see that the primitive Kelts associated sexuality with astronomy and religion.
It but further proves that "one touch of nature makes the whole world kin."

Moreover, to show that former moon-worship still colours our religion, it is not to be overlooked
that, as our Christmas festivities are but a continuation of the
Roman saturnalia, with their interchanges of visits and presents,
so "the Church, celebrating in August the festival of the harvest
moon, celebrates at the same time the feast of the Assumption and
of the Sacred Heart of the Virgin.

And Catholic painters, following the description in the Apocalypse, fondly depict her as 'clothed
with the sun, and having the moon under her feet,' and both as overriding
the dragon.

Even the triumph of Easter is not celebrated until, by attaining its full, the moon accords its
aid and sanction.

Is it not interesting thus to discover the true note of Catholicism
in the most ancient paganisms, and to find that the moon, which for
us is incarnate in the blessed Virgin Mary, was for the Syrians and
Greeks respectively personified in the virgin Ashtoreth, the queen
of heaven, and Diana, or Phoebe, the feminine of Phoebus?"

[224]

A recent contributor to one of our valuable serials writes: "I take the following extract from
a little book published under the auspices of Dr. Barnardo. It is the 'truthful narrative' of
a little sweep-girl picked up in the streets of some place near Brighton, and 'admitted into
Dr. Barnardo's Village Home.' 'She had apparently no knowledge of God or sense of His presence.
The only thing she had any reverence for was the moon. On one occasion, when the children were going
to evening service, and a beautiful moon was shining, one of them
pointed to it, exclaiming, 'Oh, mother! look, what a beautiful moon!'
Little Mary caught hold of her hand, and cried, 'Yer mustn't point
at the blessed moon like that; and yer mustn't talk about it!' Was
it from constantly sleeping under hedges and in barns, and waking
up and seeing that bright calm eye looking at her, that some sense
of a mysterious Presence had come upon the child?"

[225] To this query, the answer we think should be negative.

The cause more likely was that she had heard the common tradition
which is yet current in East Lancashire, Cumberland, and elsewhere,
that it is a sin to point at the moon.

Certain old gentlemen, who ought to be better informed, still touch their hats, and devout
young girls in the country districts still curtsey, to the new moon, as an act of worship.

The
American races practise luniolatry very generally.

The Dakotahs worship both sun and moon.

The Delaware and Iroquois Indians sacrifice to these orbs, and it is most singular that "they sacrifice
to a hare, because, according to report, the first ancestor of the
Indian tribes had that name."

But, although they receive in a dream as their tutelar spirits, the sun, moon, owl, buffalo, and
so forth, "they positively deny that they pay any adoration to these subordinate good spirits,
and affirm that they only worship the true God, through them." [226] This reminds us of some
excellent remarks made by one whose intimate acquaintance with North
American Indians entitled him to speak with authority.

We have seen from Dr. Legge's writings that though the Chinese worshipped a multitude of celestial
spirits, "yet the monotheism remained."

Mr. Catlin will now assure us that though the American Indians adore the heavenly bodies, they
recognise the Great Spirit who inhabits them all. These are his words: "I have heard it said by
some very good men, and some who have even been preaching the Christian religion amongst them,
that they have no religion--that all their zeal in their worship of the Great Spirit was but the
foolish excess of ignorant superstition--that their humble devotions and supplications to the
sun and the moon, where many of them suppose that the Great Spirit resides, were but the absurd
rantings of idolatry. To such opinions as these I never yet gave answer, nor drew other instant
inferences from them, than that, from the bottom of my heart, I pitied the persons who gave
them." [227] Mr. Catlin undoubtedly was right, as the Apostle Paul was right, when he acknowledged
that the Athenians worshipped the true God, albeit in ignorance. At the same time, though idolatry
is in numberless instances nothing more than the use of media and mediators, in seeking the
One, Invisible, Absolute Spirit, it is so naturally abused by sensuous beings who rest in the
concrete, that no image worshipper is free from the propensity to worship the creature more
than the Creator, and to forget the Essence in familiarity with the
form.

The perfection of worship, we conceive, is pure theism; but how few are capable of breathing
in such a supersensuous air!

Men must have their "means of grace," their visible symbols, their
holy waters and consecrated wafers, their crucifixes and talismans,
their silver shrines and golden calves.

"These be thy gods, O Israel."

"The Ahts undoubtedly worship the sun and the moon, particularly the full moon, and the sun
while ascending to the zenith. Like the Teutons, they regard the moon as the husband, and the
sun as the wife; hence their prayers are more generally addressed to the moon, as being the
superior deity. The moon is the highest of all the objects of their worship; and they describe
the moon--I quote the words of my Indian informant--as looking down upon the earth in answer
to prayer, and as seeing everybody." [228] Of the Indians of Vancouver Island, another writer
says: "The moon is among all the heavenly bodies the highest object of veneration. When working
at the settlement at Alberni in gangs by moonlight, individuals have
been observed to look up to the moon, blow a breath, and utter quickly
the word, 'Teech! teech!' (health, or life).

Life! life! this is the great prayer of these people's hearts." [229] "Among the Comanches of
Texas, the sun, moon, and earth are the principal objects of worship." The Kaniagmioutes consider
the moon and sun to be brother and sister. [230]

Meztli was the moon as deified by the Mexicans. In Teotihuacan, thirty miles north of the city
of Mexico, is the site of an ancient city twenty miles in circumference.
 Besides, he could assemble Christians
himself. Are his acquaintances few among slaves, gladiators, and free people, both in the Subura
and beyond the bridges? He can collect a couple of thousand of them. He will rescue his lady,
and take her outside the city, and he can go with her. They will go to the end of the world,
even to that place from which they had come, where no one has heard of Rome.

Here he began to look forward, as if to see things in the future and very distant.

"To the forest? Ai, what a forest, what a forest!"

But after a while he shook himself out of his visions. Well, he will go to the bishop at once,
and in the evening will wait with something like a hundred men for the litter. And let not
slaves, but even pretorians, take her from him! Better for any man not to come under his fist,
even though in iron armor,--for is iron so strong? When he strikes iron earnestly, the head
underneath will not survive.

But Lygia raised her finger with great and also childlike seriousness.

"Ursus, do not kill," said she.

Ursus put his fist, which was like a maul, to the back of his head, and, rubbing his neck with
great seriousness, began to mutter. But he must rescue "his light." She herself had said that
his turn had come. He will try all he can. But if something happens in spite of him? In every
case he must save her. But should anything happen, he will repent, and so entreat the Innocent
Lamb that the Crucified Lamb will have mercy on him, poor fellow. He has no wish to offend
the Lamb; but then his hands are so heavy.

Great tenderness was expressed on his face; but wishing to hide it, he bowed and said,--"Now
I will go to the holy bishop."

Acte put her arms around Lygia's neck, and began to weep. Once more the freedwoman understood
that there was a world in which greater happiness existed, even in suffering, than in all the
excesses and luxury of Cæsar's house. Once more a kind of door to the light was opened a little
before her, but she felt at once that she was unworthy to pass through it.

Chapter IX

LYGIA was grieved to lose Pomponia Græcina, whom she loved with her whole soul, and she grieved
for the household of Aulus; still her despair passed away. She felt a certain delight even
in the thought that she was sacrificing plenty and comfort for her Truth, and was entering
on an unknown and wandering existence. Perhaps there was in this a little also of childish
curiosity as to what that life would be, off somewhere in remote regions, among wild beasts
and barbarians. But there was still more a deep and trusting faith, that by acting thus she
was doing as the Divine Master had commanded, and that henceforth He Himself would watch over
her, as over an obedient and faithful child. In such a case what harm could meet her? If sufferings
come, she will endure them in His name. If sudden death comes, He will take her; and some time,
when Pomponia dies, they will be together for all eternity. More than once when she was in
the house of Aulus, she tortured her childish head because she, a Christian, could do nothing
for that Crucified, of whom Ursus spoke with such tenderness. But now the moment had come.
Lygia felt almost happy, and began to speak of her happiness to Acte, who could not understand
her, however. To leave everything,--to leave house, wealth, the city, gardens, temples, porticos,
everything that is beautiful; leave a sunny land and people near to one--and for what purpose?
To hide from the love of a young and stately knight. In Acte's head these things could not
find place. At times she felt that Lygia's action was right, that there must be some immense
mysterious happiness in it; but she could not give a clear account to herself of the matter,
especially since an adventure was before Lygia which might have an evil ending,--an adventure
in which she might lose her life simply. Acte was timid by nature, and she thought with dread
of what the coming evening might bring. But she was loath to mention her fears to Lygia; meanwhile,
as the day was clear and the sun looked into the atrium, she began to persuade her to take
the rest needed after a night without sleep. Lygia did not refuse; and both went to the cubiculum,
which was spacious and furnished with luxury because of Acte's former relations with Cæsar.
There they lay down side by side, but in spite of her weariness Acte could not sleep. For a
long time she had been sad and unhappy, but now she was seized by a certain uneasiness which
she had never felt before. So far life had seemed to her simply grievous and deprived of a
morrow; now all at once it seemed to her dishonorable.

Increasing chaos rose in her head. Again the door to light began to open and close. But in
the moment when it opened, that light so dazzled her that she could see nothing distinctly.
She divined, merely, that in that light there was happiness of some kind, happiness beyond
measure, in presence of which every other was nothing, to such a degree that if Cæsar, for
example, were to set aside Poppæa, and love her, Acte, again, it would be vanity. Suddenly
the thought came to her that that Cæsar whom she loved, whom she held involuntarily as a kind
of demigod, was as pitiful as any slave, and that palace, with columns of Numidian marble,
no better than a heap of stones. At last, however, those feelings which she had not power to
define began to torment her; she wanted to sleep, but being tortured by alarm she could not.
Thinking that Lygia, threatened by so many perils and uncertainties, was not sleeping either,
she turned to her to speak of her flight in the evening. But Lygia was sleeping calmly. Into
the dark cubiculum, past the curtain which was not closely drawn, came a few bright rays, in
which golden dust-motes were playing. By the light of these rays Acte saw her delicate face,
resting on her bare arm, her closed eyes, and her mouth slightly open. She was breathing regularly,
but as people breathe while asleep.

"She sleeps,--she is able to sleep," thought Acte. "She is a child yet." Still, after a while
it came to her mind that that child chose to flee rather than remain the beloved of Vinicius;
she preferred want to shame, wandering to a lordly house, to robes, jewels, and feasts, to
the sound of lutes and citharas.

"Why?"

And she gazed at Lygia, as if to find an answer in her sleeping face. She looked at her clear
forehead, at the calm arch of her brows, at her dark tresses, at her parted lips, at her virgin
bosom moved by calm breathing; then she thought again,--"How different from me!"

Lygia seemed to her a miracle, a sort of divine vision, something beloved of the gods, a hundred
times more beautiful than all the flowers in Cæsar's garden, than all the statues in his palace.
But in the Greek woman's heart there was no envy. On the contrary, at thought of the dangers
which threatened the girl, great pity seized her. A certain motherly feeling rose in the woman.
Lygia seemed to her not only as beautiful as a beautiful vision, but also very dear, and, putting
her lips to her dark hair, she kissed it.

But Lygia slept on calmly, as if at home, under the care of Pomponia Græcina. And she slept
rather long. Midday had passed when she opened her blue eyes and looked around the cubiculum
in astonishment. Evidently she wondered that she was not in the house of Aulus.

"That is thou, Acte?" said she at last, seeing in the darkness the face of the Greek.

"I, Lygia."

"Is it evening?"

"No, child; but midday has passed."

"And has Ursus not returned?"

"Ursus did not say that he would return; he said that he would watch in the evening, with Christians,
for the litter."

"True."

Then they left the cubiculum and went to the bath, where Acte bathed Lygia; then she took her
to breakfast and afterward to the gardens of the palace, in which no dangerous meeting might
be feared, since Cæsar and his principal courtiers were sleeping yet. For the first time in
her life Lygia saw those magnificent gardens, full of pines, cypresses, oaks, olives, and myrtles,
among which appeared white here and there a whole population of statues. The mirror of ponds
gleamed quietly; groves of roses were blooming, watered with the spray of fountains; entrances
to charming grottos were encircled with a growth of ivy or woodbine; silver-colored swans were
sailing on the water; amidst statues and trees wandered tame gazelles from the deserts of Africa,
and rich-colored birds from all known countries on earth.

The gardens were empty; but here and there slaves were working, spade in hand, singing in an
undertone; others, to whom was granted a moment of rest, were sitting by ponds or in the shade
of groves, in trembling light produced by sun-rays breaking in between leaves; others were
watering roses or the pale lily-colored blossoms of the saffron. Acte and Lygia walked rather
long, looking at all the wonders of the gardens; and though Lygia's mind was not at rest, she
was too much a child yet to resist pleasure, curiosity, and wonder. It occurred to her, even,
that if Cæsar were good, he might be very happy in such a palace, in such gardens.

But at last, tired somewhat, the two women sat down on a bench hidden almost entirely by dense
cypresses and began to talk of that which weighed on their hearts most,--that is, of Lygia's
escape in the evening. Acte was far less at rest than Lygia touching its success. At times
it seemed to her even a mad project, which could not succeed. She felt a growing pity for Lygia.
It seemed to her that it would be a hundred times safer to try to act on Vinicius. After a
while she inquired of Lygia how long she had known him, and whether she did not think that
he would let himself be persuaded to return her to Pomponia.

But Lygia shook her dark head in sadness. "No. In Aulus's house, Vinicius had been different,
he had been very kind, but since yesterday's feast she feared him, and would rather flee to
the Lygians."

"But in Aulus's house," inquired Acte, "he was dear to thee, was he not?"

"He was," answered Lygia, inclining her head.

"And thou wert not a slave, as I was," said Acte, after a moment's thought. "Vinicius might
marry thee. Thou art a hostage, and a daughter of the Lygian king. Aulus and Pomponia love
thee as their own child; I am sure that they are ready to adopt thee. Vinicius might marry
thee, Lygia."

But Lygia answered calmly, and with still greater sadness, "I would rather flee to the Lygians."

"Lygia, dost thou wish me to go directly to Vinicius, rouse him, if he is sleeping, and tell
him what I have told thee? Yes, my precious one, I will go to him and say, 'Vinicius, this
is a king's daughter, and a dear child of the famous Aulus; if thou love her, return her to
Aulus and Pomponia, and take her as wife from their house.'"

But the maiden answered with a voice so low that Acte could barely hear it,--

"I would rather flee to the Lygians." And two tears were hanging on her drooping lids.

Further conversation was stopped by the rustle of approaching steps, and before Acte had time
to see who was coming, Poppæa Sabina appeared in front of the bench with a small retinue of
slave women. Two of them held over her head bunches of ostrich feathers fixed to golden wires;
with these they fanned her lightly, and at the same time protected her from the autumn sun,
which was hot yet. Before her a woman from Egypt, black as ebony, and with bosom swollen as
if from milk, bore in her arms an infant wrapped in purple fringed with gold. Acte and Lygia
rose, thinking that Poppæa would pass the bench without turning attention to either; but she
halted before them and said,--"Acte, the bells sent by thee for the doll were badly fastened;
the child tore off one and put it to her mouth; luckily Lilith saw it in season."

"Pardon, divinity," answered Acte, crossing her arms on her breast and bending her head.

But Poppæa began to gaze at Lygia.

"What slave is this?" asked she, after a pause.

"She is not a slave, divine Augusta, but a foster child of Pomponia Græcina, and a daughter
of the Lygian king given by him as hostage to Rome."

"And has she come to visit thee?"

"No, Augusta. She is dwelling in the palace since the day before yesterday."

"Was she at the feast last night?"

"She was, Augusta."

"At whose command?"

"At Cæsar's command."

Poppæa looked still more attentively at Lygia, who stood with bowed head, now raising her bright
eyes to her with curiosity, now covering them with their lids. Suddenly a frown appeared between
the brows of the Augusta. Jealous of her own beauty and power, she lived in continual alarm
lest at some time a fortunate rival might ruin her, as she had ruined Octavia. Hence every
beautiful face in the palace roused her suspicion. With the eye of a critic she took in at
once every part of Lygia's form, estimated every detail of her face, and was frightened. "That
is simply a nymph," thought she, "and 'twas Venus who gave birth to her." On a sudden this
came to her mind which had never come before at sight of any beauty,--that she herself had
grown notably older! Wounded vanity quivered in Poppæa, alarm seized her, and various fears
shot through her head. "Perhaps Nero has not seen the girl, or, seeing her through the emerald,
has not appreciated her. But what would happen should he meet such a marvel in the daytime,
in sunlight? Moreover she is not a slave, she is the daughter of a king,--a king of barbarians,
it is true, but a king. Immortal gods! she is as beautiful as I am, but younger!" The wrinkle
between her brows increased, and her eyes began to shine under their golden lashes with a cold
gleam.

"Hast thou spoken with Cæsar?"

"No, Augusta."

"Why dost thou choose to be here rather than in the house of Aulus?"

"I do not choose, lady. Petronius persuaded Cæsar to take me from Pomponia. I am here against
my will."

"And wouldst thou return to Pomponia?"

This last question Poppæa gave with a softer and milder voice; hence a sudden hope rose in
Lygia's heart.

"Lady," said she, extending her hand to her, "Cæsar promised to give me as a slave to Vinicius,
but do thou intercede and return me to Pomponia."

"Then Petronius persuaded Cæsar to take thee from Aulus, and give thee to Vinicius?"

"True, lady. Vinicius is to send for me to-day, but thou art good, have compassion on me."
When she had said this, she inclined, and, seizing the border of Poppæa's robe, waited for
her word with beating heart. Poppæa looked at her for a while, with a face lighted by an evil
smile, and said,--"Then I promise that thou wilt become the slave of Vinicius this day." And
she went on, beautiful as a vision, but evil. To the ears of Lygia and Acte came only the wail
of the infant, which began to cry, it was unknown for what reason.

Lygia's eyes too were filled with tears; but after a while she took Acte's hand and said,--"Let
us return. Help is to be looked for only whence it can come." And they returned to the atrium,
which they did not leave till evening.

When darkness had come and slaves brought in tapers with great flames, both women were very
pale. Their conversation failed every moment. Both were listening to hear if some one were
coming. Lygia repeated again and again that, though grieved to leave Acte, she preferred that
all should take place that day, as Ursus must be waiting in the dark for her then. But her
breathing grew quicker from emotion, and louder. Acte collected feverishly such jewels as she
could, and, fastening them in a corner of Lygia's peplus, implored her not to reject that gift
and means of escape. At moments came a deep silence full of deceptions for the ear. It seemed
to both that they heard at one time a whisper beyond the curtain, at another the distant weeping
of a child, at another the barking of dogs.

Suddenly the curtain of the entrance moved without noise, and a tall, dark man, his face marked
with small-pox, appeared like a spirit in the atrium. In one moment Lygia recognized Atacinus,
a freedman of Vinicius, who had visited the house of Aulus.

Acte screamed; but Atacinus bent low and said,--"A greeting, divine Lygia, from Marcus Vinicius,
who awaits thee with a feast in his house which is decked in green."

The lips of the maiden grew pale.

"I go," said she.

Then she threw her arms around Acte's neck in farewell.

Chapter X

THE house of Vinicius was indeed decked in the green of myrtle and ivy, which had been hung
on the walls and over the doors. The columns were wreathed with grape vine. In the atrium,
which was closed above by a purple woollen cloth as protection from the night cold, it was
as clear as in daylight. Eight and twelve flamed lamps were burning; these were like vessels,
trees, animals, birds, or statues, holding cups filled with perfumed olive oil, lamps of alabaster,
marble, or gilded Corinthian bronze, not so wonderful as that famed candlestick used by Nero
and taken from the temple of Apollo, but beautiful and made by famous masters. Some of the
lights were shaded by Alexandrian glass, or transparent stuffs from the Indus, of red, blue,
yellow, or violet color, so that the whole atrium was filled with many colored rays. Everywhere
was given out the odor of nard, to which Vinicius had grown used, and which he had learned
to love in the Orient. The depths of the house, in which the forms of male and female slaves
were moving, gleamed also with light. In the triclinium a table was laid for four persons.
At the feast were to sit, besides Vinicius and Lygia, Petronius and Chrysothemis. Vinicius
had followed in everything the words of Petronius, who advised him not to go for Lygia, but
to send Atacinus with the permission obtained from Cæsar, to receive her himself in the house,
receive her with friendliness and even with marks of honor.

"Thou wert drunk yesterday," said he; "I saw thee. Thou didst act with her like a quarryman
from the Alban Hills. Be not over-insistent, and remember that one should drink good wine slowly.
Know too that it is sweet to desire, but sweeter to be desired."

Chrysothemis had her own and a somewhat different opinion on this point; but Petronius, calling
her his vestal and his dove, began to explain the difference which must exist between a trained
charioteer of the Circus and the youth who sits on the quadriga for the first time. Then, turning
to Vinicius, he continued,--"Win her confidence, make her joyful, be magnanimous. I have no
wish to see a gloomy feast. Swear to her, by Hades even, that thou wilt return her to Pomponia,
and it will be thy affair that to-morrow she prefers to stay with thee."

Then pointing to Chrysothemis, he added,--"For five years I have acted thus more or less with
this timid dove, and I cannot complain of her harshness."

Chrysothemis struck him with her fan of peacock feathers, and said,--"But I did not resist,
thou satyr!"

"Out of consideration for my predecessor--"

"But wert thou not at my feet?"

"Yes; to put rings on thy toes."

Chrysothemis looked involuntarily at her feet, on the toes of which diamonds were really glittering;
and she and Petronius began to laugh. But Vinicius did not give ear to their bantering. His
heart was beating unquietly under the robes of a Syrian priest, in which he had arrayed himself
to receive Lygia.

"They must have left the palace," said he, as if in a monologue.

"They must," answered Petronius. "Meanwhile I may mention the predictions of Apollonius of
Tyana, or that history of Rufinus which I have not finished, I do not remember why."

But Vinicius cared no more for Apollonius of Tyana than for the history of Rufinus. His mind
was with Lygia; and though he felt that it was more appropriate to receive her at home than
to go in the rôle of a myrmidon to the palace, he was sorry at moments that he had not gone,
for the single reason that he might have seen her sooner, and sat near her in the dark, in
the double litter.

Meanwhile slaves brought in a tripod ornamented with rams' heads, bronze dishes with coals,
on which they sprinkled bits of myrrh and nard.

"Now they are turning toward the Carinæ," said Vinicius, again.

"He cannot wait; he will run to meet the litter, and is likely to miss them!" exclaimed Chrysothemis.

Vinicius smiled without thinking, and said,--"On the contrary, I will wait."

But he distended his nostrils and panted; seeing which, Petronius shrugged his shoulders, and
said,--"There is not in him a philosopher to the value of one sestertium, and I shall never
make a man of that son of Mars."

"They are now in the Carinæ."

In fact, they were turning toward the Carinæ. The slaves called lampadarii were in front; others
called pedisequii, were on both sides of the litter. Atacinus was right behind, overseeing
the advance. But they moved slowly, for lamps showed the way badly in a place not lighted at
all. The streets near the palace were empty; here and there only some man moved forward with
a lantern, but farther on the place was uncommonly crowded. From almost every alley people
were pushing out in threes and fours, all without lamps, all in dark mantles. Some walked on
with the procession, mingling with the slaves; others in greater numbers came from the opposite
direction. Some staggered as if drunk. At moments the advance grew so difficult that the lampadarii
cried,--"Give way to the noble tribune, Marcus Vinicius!"

Lygia saw those dark crowds through the curtains which were pushed aside, and trembled with
emotion. She was carried away at one moment by hope, at another by fear.

"That is he!--that is Ursus and the Christians! Now it will happen quickly," said she, with
trembling lips. "O Christ, aid! O Christ, save!"

Atacinus himself, who at first did not notice the uncommon animation of the street, began at
last to be alarmed. There was something strange in this. The lampadarii had to cry oftener
and oftener, "Give way to the litter of the noble tribune!" From the sides unknown people crowded
up to the litter so much that Atacinus commanded the slaves to repulse them with clubs.

Suddenly a cry was heard in front of the procession. In one instant all the lights were extinguished.
Around the litter came a rush, an uproar, a struggle.

Atacinus saw that this was simply an attack; and when he saw it he was frightened. It was known
to all that Cæsar with a crowd of attendants made attacks frequently for amusement in the Subura
and in other parts of the city. It was known that even at times he brought out of these night
adventures black and blue spots; but whoso defended himself went to his death, even if a senator.
The house of the guards, whose duty it was to watch over the city, was not very far; but during
such attacks the guards feigned to be deaf and blind.

Meanwhile there was an uproar around the litter; people struck, struggled, threw, and trampled
one another. The thought flashed on Atacinus to save Lygia and himself, above all, and leave
the rest to their fate. So, drawing her out of the litter, he took her in his arms and strove
to escape in the darkness.

But Lygia called, "Ursus! Ursus!"

She was dressed in white; hence it was easy to see her. Atacinus, with his other arm, which
was free, was throwing his own mantle over her hastily, when terrible claws seized his neck,
and on his head a gigantic, crushing mass fell like a stone.

He dropped in one instant, as an ox felled by the back of an axe before the altar of Jove.

The slaves for the greater part were either lying on the ground, or had saved themselves by
scattering in the thick darkness, around the turns of the walls. On the spot remained only
the litter, broken in the onset. Ursus bore away Lygia to the Subura; his comrades followed
him, dispersing gradually along the way.

The slaves assembled before the house of Vinicius, and took counsel. They had not courage to
enter. After a short deliberation they returned to the place of conflict, where they found
a few corpses, and among them Atacinus. He was quivering yet; but, after a moment of more violent
convulsion, he stretched and was motionless.

They took him then, and, returning, stopped before the gate a second time. But they must declare
to their lord what had happened.

"Let Gulo declare it," whispered some voices; "blood is flowing from his face as from ours;
and the master loves him; it is safer for Gulo than for others."

Gulo, a German, an old slave, who had nursed Vinicius, and was inherited by him from his mother,
the sister of Petronius, said,--

"I will tell him; but do ye all come. Do not let his anger fall on my head alone."

Vinicius was growing thoroughly impatient. Petronius and Chrysothemis were laughing; but he
walked with quick step up and down the atrium.

"They ought to be here! They ought to be here!"

He wished to go out to meet the litter, but Petronius and Chrysothemis detained him.

Steps were heard suddenly in the entrance; the slaves rushed into the atrium in a crowd, and,
halting quickly at the wall, raised their hands, and began to repeat with groaning,--"Aaaa!--aa!"

Vinicius sprang toward them.

"Where is Lygia?" cried he, with a terrible and changed voice.

"Aaaa!"

Then Gulo pushed forward with his bloody face, and exclaimed, in haste and pitifully,--

"See our blood, lord! We fought! See our blood! See our blood!"

But he had not finished when Vinicius seized a bronze lamp, and with one blow shattered the
skull of the slave; then, seizing his own head with both hands, he drove his fingers into his
hair, repeating hoarsely,--"Me miserum! me miserum!"

His face became blue, his eyes turned in his head, foam came out on his lips.

"Whips!" roared he at last, with an unearthly voice.

"Lord! Aaaa! Take pity!" groaned the slaves.

Petronius stood up with an expression of disgust on his face. "Come, Chrysothemis!" said he.
"If 'tis thy wish to look on raw flesh, I will give command to open a butcher's stall on the
Carinæ!"

And he walked out of the atrium. But through the whole house, ornamented in the green of ivy
and prepared for a feast, were heard, from moment to moment, groans and the whistling of whips,
which lasted almost till morning.

Chapter XI

VINICIUS did not lie down that night. Some time after the departure of Petronius, when the
groans of his flogged slaves could allay neither his rage nor his pain, he collected a crowd
of other servants, and, though the night was far advanced, rushed forth at the head of these
to look for Lygia. He visited the district of the Esquiline, then the Subura, Vicus Sceleratus,
and all the adjoining alleys. Passing next around the Capitol, he went to the island over the
bridge of Fabricius; after that he passed through a part of the Trans-Tiber. But that was a
pursuit without object, for he himself had no hope of finding Lygia, and if he sought her it
was mainly to fill out with something a terrible night. In fact he returned home about daybreak,
when the carts and mules of dealers in vegetables began to appear in the city, and when bakers
were opening their shops.

On returning he gave command to put away Gulo's corpse, which no one had ventured to touch.
The slaves from whom Lygia had been taken he sent to rural prisons,--a punishment almost more
dreadful than death. Throwing himself at last on a couch in the atrium, he began to think confusedly
of how he was to find and seize Lygia.

To resign her, to lose her, not to see her again, seemed to him impossible; and at this thought
alone frenzy took hold of him. For the first time in life the imperious nature of the youthful
soldier met resistance, met another unbending will, and he could not understand simply how
any one could have the daring to thwart his wishes. Vinicius would have chosen to see the world
and the city sink in ruins rather than fail of his purpose. The cup of delight had been snatched
from before his lips almost; hence it seemed to him that something unheard of had happened,
something crying to divine and human laws for vengeance.

But, first of all, he was unwilling and unable to be reconciled with fate, for never in life
had he so desired anything as Lygia. It seemed to him that he could not exist without her.
He could not tell himself what he was to do without her on the morrow, how he was to survive
the days following. At moments he was transported by a rage against her, which approached madness.
He wanted to have her, to beat her, to drag her by the hair to the cubiculum, and gloat over
her; then, again, he was carried away by a terrible yearning for her voice, her form, her eyes,
and he felt that he would be ready to lie at her feet. He called to her, gnawed his fingers,
clasped his head with his hands. He strove with all his might to think calmly about searching
for her,--and was unable. A thousand methods and means flew through his head, but one wilder
than another. At last the thought flashed on him that no one else had intercepted her but Aulus,
that in every case Aulus must know where she was hiding. And he sprang up to run to the house
of Aulus.

If they will not yield her to him, if they have no fear of his threats, he will go to Cæsar,
accuse the old general of disobedience, and obtain a sentence of death against him; but before
that, he will gain from them a confession of where Lygia is. If they give her, even willingly,
he will be revenged. They received him, it is true, in their house and nursed him,--but that
is nothing! With this one injustice they have freed him from every debt of gratitude. Here
his vengeful and stubborn soul began to take pleasure at the despair of Pomponia Græcina, when
the centurion would bring the death sentence to old Aulus. He was almost certain that he would
get it. Petronius would assist him. Moreover, Cæsar never denies anything to his intimates,
the Augustians, unless personal dislike or desire enjoins a refusal.

Suddenly his heart almost died within him, under the influence of this terrible supposition,--"But
if Cæsar himself has taken Lygia?"

All knew that Nero from tedium sought recreation in night attacks. Even Petronius took part
in these amusements. Their main object was to seize women and toss each on a soldier's mantle
till she fainted. Even Nero himself on occasions called these expeditions "pearl hunts," for
it happened that in the depth of districts occupied by a numerous and needy population they
caught a real pearl of youth and beauty sometimes. Then the "sagatio," as they termed the tossing,
was changed into a genuine carrying away, and the pearl was sent either to the Palatine or
to one of Cæsar's numberless villas, or finally Cæsar yielded it to one of his intimates. So
might it happen also with Lygia. Cæsar had seen her during the feast; and Vinicius doubted
not for an instant that she must have seemed to him the most beautiful woman he had seen yet.
How could it be otherwise? It is true that Lygia had been in Nero's own house on the Palatine,
and he might have kept her openly. But, as Petronius said truly, Cæsar had no courage in crime,
and, with power to act openly, he chose to act always in secret. This time fear of Poppæa might
incline him also to secrecy. It occurred now to the young soldier that Aulus would not have
dared, perhaps, to carry off forcibly a girl given him, Vinicius, by Cæsar. Besides, who would
dare? Would that gigantic blue-eyed Lygian, who had the courage to enter the triclinium and
carry her from the feast on his arm? But where could he hide with her; whither could he take
her? No! a slave would not have ventured that far. Hence no one had done the deed except Cæsar.

At this thought it grew dark in his eyes, and drops of sweat covered his forehead. In that
case Lygia was lost to him forever. It was possible to wrest her from the hands of any one
else, but not from the hands of Cæsar. Now, with greater truth than ever, could he exclaim,
"Væ misero mihi!" His imagination represented Lygia in Nero's arms, and, for the first time
in life, he understood that there are thoughts which are simply beyond man's endurance. He
knew then, for the first time, how he loved her. As his whole life flashes through the memory
of a drowning man, so Lygia began to pass through his. He saw her, heard every word of hers,--saw
her at the fountain, saw her at the house of Aulus, and at the feast; felt her near him, felt
the odor of her hair, the warmth of her body, the delight of the kisses which at the feast
he had pressed on her innocent lips. She seemed to him a hundred times sweeter, more beautiful,
more desired than ever,--a hundred times more the only one, the one chosen from among all mortals
and divinities. And when he thought that all this which had become so fixed in his heart, which
had become his blood and life, might be possessed by Nero, a pain seized him, which was purely
physical, and so piercing that he wanted to beat his head against the wall of the atrium, until
he should break it. He felt that he might go mad; and he would have gone mad beyond doubt,
had not vengeance remained to him. But as hitherto he had thought that he could not live unless
he got Lygia, he thought now that he would not die till he had avenged her. This gave him a
certain kind of comfort. "I will be thy Cassius Chærea!" [The slayer of Caligula] said he to
himself in thinking of Nero. After a while, seizing earth in his hands from the flower vases
surrounding the impluvium, he made a dreadful vow to Erebus, Hecate, and his own household
lares, that he would have vengeance.

And he received a sort of consolation. He had at least something to live for and something
with which to fill his nights and days. Then, dropping his idea of visiting Aulus, he gave
command to bear him to the Palatine. Along the way he concluded that if they would not admit
him to Cæsar, or if they should try to find weapons on his person, it would be a proof that
Cæsar had taken Lygia. He had no weapons with him. He had lost presence of mind in general;
but as is usual with persons possessed by a single idea, he preserved it in that which concerned
his revenge. He did not wish his desire of revenge to fall away prematurely. He wished above
all to see Acte, for he expected to learn the truth from her. At moments the hope flashed on
him that he might see Lygia also, and at that thought he began to tremble. For if Cæsar had
carried her away without knowledge of whom he was taking, he might return her that day. But
after a while he cast aside this supposition. Had there been a wish to return her to him, she
would have been sent yesterday. Acte was the only person who could explain everything, and
there was need to see her before others.

Convinced of this, he commanded the slaves to hasten; and along the road he thought without
order, now of Lygia, now of revenge. He had heard that Egyptian priests of the goddess Pasht
could bring disease on whomever they wished, and he determined to learn the means of doing
this. In the Orient they had told him, too, that Jews have certain invocations by which they
cover their enemies' bodies with ulcers. He had a number of Jews among his domestic slaves;
hence he promised himself to torture them on his return till they divulged the secret. He found
most delight, however, in thinking of the short Roman sword which lets out a stream of blood
such as had gushed from Caius Caligula and made ineffaceable stains on the columns of the portico.
He was ready to exterminate all Rome; and had vengeful gods promised that all people should
die except him and Lygia, he would have accepted the promise.

In front of the arch he regained presence of mind, and thought when he saw the pretorian guard,
"If they make the least difficulty in admitting me, they will prove that Lygia is in the palace
by the will of Cæsar."

But the chief centurion smiled at him in a friendly manner, then advanced a number of steps,
and said,--"A greeting, noble tribune. If thou desire to give an obeisance to Cæsar, thou hast
found an unfortunate moment. I do not think that thou wilt be able to see him."

"What has happened?" inquired Vinicius.

"The infant Augusta fell ill yesterday on a sudden. Cæsar and the august Poppæa are attending
her, with physicians whom they have summoned from the whole city."

This was an important event. When that daughter was born to him, Cæsar was simply wild from
delight, and received her with extra humanum gaudium. Previously the senate had committed the
womb of Poppæa to the gods with the utmost solemnity. A votive offering was made at Antium,
where the delivery took place; splendid games were celebrated, and besides a temple was erected
to the two Fortunes. Nero, unable to be moderate in anything, loved the infant beyond measure;
to Poppæa the child was dear also, even for this, that it strengthened her position and made
her influence irresistible.

The fate of the whole empire might depend on the health and life of the infant Augusta; but
Vinicius was so occupied with himself, his own case and his love, that without paying attention
to the news of the centurion he answered, "I only wish to see Acte." And he passed in.

But Acte was occupied also near the child, and he had to wait a long time to see her. She came
only about midday, with a face pale and wearied, which grew paler still at sight of Vinicius.

"Acte!" cried Vinicius, seizing her hand and drawing her to the middle of the atrium, "where
is Lygia?"

"I wanted to ask thee touching that," answered she, looking him in the eyes with reproach.

But though he had promised himself to inquire of her calmly, he pressed his head with his hands
again, and said, with a face distorted by pain and anger,--"She is gone. She was taken from
me on the way!"

After a while, however, he recovered, and thrusting his face up to Acte's, said through his
set teeth,--"Acte! If life be dear to thee, if thou wish not to cause misfortunes which thou
are unable even to imagine, answer me truly. Did Cæsar take her?"

"Cæsar did not leave the palace yesterday."

"By the shade of thy mother, by all the gods, is she not in the palace?"

"By the shade of my mother, Marcus, she is not in the palace, and Cæsar did not intercept her.
The infant Augusta is ill since yesterday, and Nero has not left her cradle."

Vinicius drew breath. That which had seemed the most terrible ceased to threaten him.

"Ah, then," said he, sitting on the bench and clinching his fists, "Aulus intercepted her,
and in that case woe to him!"

"Aulus Plautius was here this morning. He could not see me, for I was occupied with the child;
but he inquired of Epaphroditus, and others of Cæsar's servants, touching Lygia, and told them
that he would come again to see me."

"He wished to turn suspicion from himself. If he knew not what happened, he would have come
to seek Lygia in my house."

"He left a few words on a tablet, from which thou wilt see that, knowing Lygia to have been
taken from his house by Cæsar, at thy request and that of Petronius, he expected that she would
be sent to thee, and this morning early he was at thy house, where they told him what had happened."

When she had said this, she went to the cubiculum and returned soon with the tablet which Aulus
had left.

Vinicius read the tablet, and was silent; Acte seemed to read the thoughts on his gloomy face,
for she said after a while,--"No, Marcus. That has happened which Lygia herself wished."

"It was known to thee that she wished to flee!" burst out Vinicius.

"I knew that she would not become thy concubine." And she looked at him with her misty eyes
almost sternly.

"And thou,--what hast thou been all thy life?"

"I was a slave, first of all."

But Vinicius did not cease to be enraged. Cæsar had given him Lygia; hence he had no need to
inquire what she had been before. He would find her, even under the earth, and he would do
what he liked with her. He would indeed! She should be his concubine. He would give command
to flog her as often as he pleased. If she grew distasteful to him, he would give her to the
lowest of his slaves, or he would command her to turn a handmill on his lands in Africa. He
would seek her out now, and find her only to bend her, to trample on her, and conquer her.

And, growing more and more excited, he lost every sense of measure, to the degree that even
Acte saw that he was promising more than he could execute; that he was talking because of pain
and anger. She might have had even compassion on him, but his extravagance exhausted her patience,
and at last she inquired why he had come to her.

Vinicius did not find an answer immediately. He had come to her because he wished to come,
because he judged that she would give him information; but really he had come to Cæsar, and,
not being able to see him, he came to her. Lygia, by fleeing, opposed the will of Cæsar; hence
he would implore him to give an order to search for her throughout the city and the empire,
even if it came to using for that purpose all the legions, and to ransacking in turn every
house within Roman dominion. Petronius would support his prayer, and the search would begin
from that day.

"Have a care," answered Acte, "lest thou lose her forever the moment she is found, at command
of Cæsar."

Vinicius wrinkled his brows. "What does that mean?" inquired he.

"Listen to me, Marcus. Yesterday Lygia and I were in the gardens here, and we met Poppæa, with
the infant Augusta, borne by an African woman, Lilith. In the evening the child fell ill, and
Lilith insists that she was bewitched; that that foreign woman whom they met in the garden
bewitched her. Should the child recover, they will forget this, but in the opposite case Poppæa
will be the first to accuse Lygia of witchcraft, and wherever she is found there will be no
rescue for her."

A moment of silence followed; then Vinicius said,--"But perhaps she did bewitch her, and has
bewitched me."

"Lilith repeats that the child began to cry the moment she carried her past us. And really
the child did begin to cry. It is certain that she was sick when they took her out of the garden.
Marcus, seek for Lygia whenever it may please thee, but till the infant Augusta recovers, speak
not of her to Cæsar, or thou wilt bring on her Poppæa's vengeance. Her eyes have wept enough
because of thee already, and may all the gods guard her poor head."

"Dost thou love her, Acte?" inquired Vinicius, gloomily.

"Yes, I love her." And tears glittered in the eyes of the freedwoman.

"Thou lovest her because she has not repaid thee with hatred, as she has me."

Acte looked at him for a time as if hesitating, or as if wishing to learn if he spoke sincerely;
then she said,--"O blind and passionate man--she loved thee."

Vinicius sprang up under the influence of those words, as if possessed. "It is not true."

She hated him. How could Acte know? Would Lygia make a confession to her after one day's acquaintance?
What love is that which prefers wandering, the disgrace of poverty, the uncertainty of to-morrow,
or a shameful death even, to a wreath-bedecked house, in which a lover is waiting with a feast?
It is better for him not to hear such things, for he is ready to go mad. He would not have
given that girl for all Cæsar's treasures, and she fled. What kind of love is that which dreads
delight and gives pain? Who can understand it? Who can fathom it? Were it not for the hope
that he should find her, he would sink a sword in himself. Love surrenders; it does not take
away. There were moments at the house of Aulus when he himself believed in near happiness,
but now he knows that she hated him, that she hates him, and will die with hatred in her heart.

But Acte, usually mild and timid, burst forth in her turn with indignation. How had he tried
to win Lygia? Instead of bowing before Aulus and Pomponia to get her, he took the child away
from her parents by stratagem. He wanted to make, not a wife, but a concubine of her, the foster
daughter of an honorable house, and the daughter of a king. He had her brought to this abode
of crime and infamy; he defiled her innocent eyes with the sight of a shameful feast; he acted
with her as with a wanton. Had he forgotten the house of Aulus and Pomponia Græcina, who had
reared Lygia? Had he not sense enough to understand that there are women different from Nigidia
or Calvia Crispinilla or Poppæa, and from all those whom he meets in Cæsar's house? Did he
not understand at once on seeing Lygia that she is an honest maiden, who prefers death to infamy?
Whence does he know what kind of gods she worships, and whether they are not purer and better
than the wanton Venus, or than Isis, worshipped by the profligate women of Rome? No! Lygia
had made no confession to her, but she had said that she looked for rescue to him, to Vinicius:
she had hoped that he would obtain for her permission from Cæsar to return home, that he would
restore her to Pomponia. And while speaking of this, Lygia blushed like a maiden who loves
and trusts. Lygia's heart beat for him; but he, Vinicius, had terrified and offended her; had
made her indignant; let him seek her now with the aid of Cæsar's soldiers, but let him know
that should Poppæa's child die, suspicion will fall on Lygia, whose destruction will then be
inevitable.

Emotion began to force its way through the anger and pain of Vinicius. The information that
he was loved by Lygia shook him to the depth of his soul. He remembered her in Aulus's garden,
when she was listening to his words with blushes on her face and her eyes full of light. It
seemed to him then that she had begun to love him; and all at once, at that thought, a feeling
of certain happiness embraced him, a hundred times greater than that which he desired. He thought
that he might have won her gradually, and besides as one loving him. She would have wreathed
his door, rubbed it with wolf's fat, and then sat as his wife by his hearth on the sheepskin.
He would have heard from her mouth the sacramental: "Where thou art, Caius, there am I, Caia."
And she would have been his forever. Why did he not act thus? True, he had been ready so to
act. But now she is gone, and it may be impossible to find her; and should he find her, perhaps
he will cause her death, and should he not cause her death, neither she nor Aulus nor Pomponia
Græcina will favor him. Here anger raised the hair on his head again; but his anger turned
now, not against the house of Aulus, or Lygia, but against Petronius. Petronius was to blame
for everything. Had it not been for him Lygia would not have been forced to wander; she would
be his betrothed, and no danger would be hanging over her dear head. But now all is past, and
it is too late to correct the evil which will not yield to correction.

"Too late!" And it seemed to him that a gulf had opened before his feet. He did not know what
to begin, how to proceed, whither to betake himself. Acte repeated as an echo the words, "Too
late," which from another's mouth sounded like a death sentence. He understood one thing, however,
that he must find Lygia, or something evil would happen to him.

And wrapping himself mechanically in his toga, he was about to depart without taking farewell
even of Acte, when suddenly the curtain separating the entrance from the atrium was pushed
aside, and he saw before him the pensive figure of Pomponia Græcina.

Evidently she too had heard of the disappearance of Lygia, and, judging that she could see
Acte more easily than Aulus, had come for news to her.

But, seeing Vinicius, she turned her pale, delicate face to him, and said, after a pause,--"May
God forgive thee the wrong, Marcus, which thou hast done to us and to Lygia."

He stood with drooping head, with a feeling of misfortune and guilt, not understanding what
God was to forgive him or could forgive him. Pomponia had no cause to mention forgiveness;
she ought to have spoken of revenge.

At last he went out with a head devoid of counsel, full of grievous thoughts, immense care,
and amazement.

In the court and under the gallery were crowds of anxious people. Among slaves of the palace
were knights and senators who had come to inquire about the health of the infant, and at the
same time to show themselves in the palace, and exhibit a proof of their anxiety, even in presence
of Nero's slaves. News of the illness of the "divine" had spread quickly it was evident, for
new forms appeared in the gateway every moment, and through the opening of the arcade whole
crowds were visible. Some of the newly arrived, seeing that Vinicius was coming from the palace,
attacked him for news; but he hurried on without answering their questions, till Petronius,
who had come for news too, almost struck his breast and stopped him.

Beyond doubt Vinicius would have become enraged at sight of Petronius, and let himself do some
lawless act in Cæsar's palace, had it not been that when he had left Acte he was so crushed,
so weighed down and exhausted, that for the moment even his innate irascibility had left him.
He pushed Petronius aside and wished to pass; but the other detained him, by force almost.

"How is the divine infant?" asked he.

But this constraint angered Vinicius a second time, and roused his indignation in an instant.

"May Hades swallow her and all this house!" said he, gritting his teeth.

"Silence, hapless man!" said Petronius, and looking around he added hurriedly,--"If thou wish
to know something of Lygia, come with me; I will tell nothing here! Come with me; I will tell
my thoughts in the litter." 

Thus Professor Nilsson writes: "Every religious change in a people is, in fact, only an intermixture
of religions; because the new religion, whether received by means of convincing arguments, or enforced
by the eloquence of fire and sword, cannot at once tear up all the wide-spreading roots by which
its forerunner has grown in the heart of the people; this must be the work of many years, perhaps
of many generations." [108] We cannot better close this lengthy introduction than by reminding
Christians of the saying of their Great and Good Teacher, "I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil."

II.
THE MOON MOSTLY A MALE DEITY.

We have already in part pointed out that the moon has been considered as of the masculine gender;
and have therefore but to travel a little farther afield to show
that in the Aryan of India, in Egyptian, Arabian, Slavonian, Latin,
Lithuanian, Gothic, Teutonic, Swedish, Anglo-Saxon, and South American,
the moon is a male god.

To do this, in addition to former quotations, it will be sufficient
to adduce a few authorities.

"Moon," says Max Müller, "is a very old word.

It was móna in Anglo-Saxon, and was used there, not as a feminine,
but as a masculine for the moon was originally a masculine, and the
sun a feminine, in all Teutonic languages; and it is only through
the influence of classical models that in English moon has been changed
into a feminine, and sun into a masculine.

It was a most unlucky assertion which Mr. Harris made in his Hermes, that all nations ascribe
to the sun a masculine, and to the moon a feminine gender." [109] Grimm says, "Down to recent
times, our people were fond of calling the sun and moon frau sonne and herr mond." [110] Sir Gardner
Wilkinson writes: "Another reason that the moon in the Egyptian mythology could not be related
to Bubastis is, that it was a male and not a female deity, personified
in the god Thoth.

This was also the case in some religions of the West. The Romans recognised the god Lunus; and
the Germans, like the Arabs, to this day, consider the moon masculine, and not feminine, as were
the Selênê and Luna of the Greeks and Latins." [111] Again, "The Egyptians represented their
moon as a male deity, like the German mond and monat, or the Lunus of the Latins; and it is
worthy of remark, that the same custom of calling it male is retained in the East to the present
day, while the sun is considered female, as in the language of the Germans." [112] "In Slavonic,"
Sir George Cox tells us, "as in the Teutonic mythology, the moon is male. His wedding with
the sun brings on him the wrath of Perkunas [the thunder-god], as the song tells us

'The moon wedded the sun In the first spring. The sun rose early The moon departed from her. The
moon wandered alone; Courted the morning star.

Perkunas, greatly wroth, Cleft him with a sword.

'Wherefore dost thou depart from the sun, Wandering by night alone, Courting the morning star?'"
[113]

"In a Servian song a girl cries to the sun--

'O brilliant sun!

I am fairer than thou Than thy brother, the bright moon.'"

In South Slavonian poetry the sun often figures as a radiant youth.

But among the northern Slavonians, as well as the Lithuanians, the sun was regarded as a female
being, the bride of the moon.

'Thou askest me of what race, of what family I am,' says the fair maiden of a song preserved in
the Tambof Government--

'My mother is--the beauteous Sun, And my father--the bright Moon.'" [114]

"Among the Mbocobis of South America the moon is a man and the sun
his wife."

[115] The Ahts of North America take the same view; and we know that
in Sanskrit and in Hebrew the word for moon is masculine.

This may seem to many a matter of no importance; but if mythology
throws much light upon ancient history and religion, its importance
may be considerable, especially as it lies at the root of that sexuality
which has been the most prolific parent of both good and evil in human
life.

The sexual relation has existed from the very birth of animated nature; and it is remarkable
that a man of learning and piety in Germany has made the strange if not absurd statement that
in the beginning "Adam was externally sexless." [116] Another idea, more excusable, but equally
preposterous, is, that grammatical gender has been the cause of the male and female personation
of deities, when really it has been the result.

The cause, no doubt, was inherent in man's constitution; and was the inevitable effect of thought
and expression.

The same necessity of natural language which led the Hebrew prophets to speak of their land
as married, of their nation as a wife in prosperity and a widow in
calamity, of their Maker as their husband, who rejoices over them
as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride: [117] this same necessity,
becoming a habit like that of our own country folks in Hampshire,
of whom Cobbett speaks, who call almost everything he or she; led
the sensuous and imaginative ancients, as it leads simple and poetical
peoples still, to call the moon a man and to worship him as a god.

Objects of fear and reverence would be usually masculines; and objects of love and desire feminines.
We may thus find light thrown upon the honours paid to such goddesses as Astarte and Aphrodite:
which will also help us to understand the deification by a celibate priesthood of the Virgin
Mary. We may, moreover, account partly for the fact that to the sailor his ship is always she;
to the swain the flowers which resemble his idol, as the lily and the rose, are always feminine,
and used as female names; while to the patriot the mother country
is nearly always of the tender sex.

[118] Prof. Max Müller thinks that the distinction between males
and females began, "not with the introduction of masculine nouns,
but with the introduction of feminines, i.e. with the setting apart
of certain derivative suffixes for females.

By this all other words became masculine." [119] Thus the sexual emotions of men created that
grammatical gender which has contributed so powerfully to our later mythology, and has therefore
been mistaken for the author of our male and female personations. What beside sexuality suggested
the thought of the Chevalier Marini? "He introduces the god Pan, who boasts that the spots
which are seen in the moon are impressions of the kisses he gave it." [120] That grammar is very
much younger than sexual relations is proven by the curious fact
mentioned by Max Müller that pater is not a masculine, nor mater a
feminine.

Gender, we must not forget, is from genus, a kind or class; and that
the classification in various languages has been arranged on no fixed
plan.

We in our modern English, with much still to do, have improved in
this respect, since, in Anglo-Saxon, wif = wife, was neuter, and wif-mann
= woman, was masculine.

In German still die frau, the woman, is feminine; but das weib, the
wife, is neuter.

[121] Dr. Farrar finds the root of gender in the imagination: which we admit if associated with
sex. Otherwise, we cannot understand how an unfelt distinction of this sort could be mentally
seen.

But Dr. Farrar means more than imagination, for he says, "from this
source is derived the whole system of genders for inanimate things,
which was perhaps inevitable at that early childish stage of the human
intelligence, when the actively working soul attributed to everything
around it some portion of its own life.

Hence, well-nigh everything is spoken of as masculine or feminine."

[122] We are surprised that Dr. Farrar seems to think German an exception,
in making a masculine noun of the moon.

He has failed to apply to this point his usual learned and laborious investigation. [123]

Diogenes Laertius describes the theology of the Jews as an offshoot from that of the Chaldees,
and says that the former affirm of the latter "that they condemn images, and especially those
persons who say that the gods are male and female." [124] Which condemnation implies the prevalence
of this sexual distinction between their deities.

In concluding this chapter we think that it will be granted that gender
in the personification of inanimate objects was the result of sex
in the animate subject: that primitive men saw the moon as a most
conspicuous object, whose spots at periods had the semblance of a
man's face, whose waxing and waning increased their wonder: whose
coming and going amid the still and solemn night added to the mystery:
until from being viewed as a man, it was feared, especially when apparently
angry in a mist or an eclipse, and so reverenced and worshipped as
the heaven-man, the monthly god.

III. THE MOON A WORLD-WIDE DEITY.

Anthropomorphism, or the representation of outward objects in the form of man, wrought largely,
as we have seen, in the manufacture of the man in the moon; it entered
no less into the composition of the moon-god.

The twenty-first verse of the fiftieth Psalm contains its recognition and rebuke. "Thou thoughtest
that I was altogether as thyself"; or, still more literally, "Thou
hast thought that being, I shall be like thee."

As Dr. Delitzsch says, "Because man in God's likeness has a bodily form, some have presumed
to infer backwards therefrom that God also has a bodily form like
to man, which is related by way of prototype to the human form."

[125] As well might we say that because a watchmaker constructs a chronometer with a movement
somewhat like that of his own heart, therefore he is mechanical, metallic, and round. Against
this anthropomorphic materialism science lifts up its voice; for
what modern philosopher, worthy of the name, fails to distinguish
between phenomenon and fact, inert matter and active force?

Says a recent writer, "We infer that as our own master of the mint is neither a sovereign nor
a half-sovereign, so the force which coins and recoins this ulh, or matter, must be altogether
in the god-part and none of it in the metal or paste in which it works." [126] With the progress
of man's intelligence we shall observe improvement in this anthropomorphism, but it will still
survive. As Mr. Baring-Gould tells us: "The savage invests God with bodily attributes; in a
more civilized state man withdraws the bodily attributes, but imposes
the limitations of his own mental nature; and in his philosophic elevation
he recognises in God intelligence only, though still with anthropomorphic
conditions."

[127]

Xenophanes said that if horses, oxen, and lions could paint, they would make gods like themselves.
[128] And a devout author, whose orthodoxy --whatever that may mean--is unquestioned, acknowledges
that man adored the unknown power in the sun, and "in the moon, which bathes the night with
its serene splendours. Under this latter form, completed by a very simple anthropomorphism which applies
to the gods the law of the sexes, the religions of nature weighed
during long ages upon Western Asia."

[129] A volume might be written upon this subject; but we have other
work in hand.

It seems to be generally admitted that no form of idolatry is older than the worship of the
moon. Lord Kames says, "It is probable that the sun and moon were early held to be deities,
and that they were the first visible objects of worship." [130] Dr. Inman says, "That the sun and
moon were at a very early period worshipped, none who has studied antiquity can deny." [131]
And Goldziher maintains that "the lunar worship is older than the solar." [132] Maimonides,
"the light of Israel," says that the Zabaists not only worshipped the moon themselves, but
they also asserted that Adam led mankind to that species of worship.

No doubt luniolatry is as old as the human race. In some parts the moon is still the superior god.
Mr. Tylor writes: "Moon worship, naturally ranking below sun worship
in importance, ranges through nearly the same district of culture.

There are remarkable cases in which the moon is recognised as a great deity by tribes who take
less account, or none at all, of the sun. An old account of the Caribs describes them as esteeming
the moon more than the sun, and at new moon coming out of their houses crying, Behold the moon!"
[133] This deity, then, is ancient and modern: also a chief of the gods: let us now show that
he is a god whose empire is the world.

We begin in Asia, and with the Assyrian monuments, which display many religious types and emblems.
"Representations of the heavenly bodies, as sacred symbols, are of
constant occurrence in the most ancient sculptures.

In the bas-reliefs we find figures of the sun, moon, and stars, suspended round the neck of the
king when engaged in the performance of religious ceremonies." [134] In Chaldaea "the moon
was named Sin and Hur. Hurki, Hur, and Ur was the chief place of his worship, for the satellite
was then considered as being masculine. The name for the moon in Armenian was Khaldi, which
has been considered by some to be the origin of the word Chaldee,
as signifying moon worshippers."

[135] With this Chaldaean deity may be connected "the Akkadian moon god, who corresponds with
the Semitic Sin," and who "is Aku, 'the seated-father,' as chief supporter of kosmic order, styled
'the maker of brightness,' En-zuna, 'the lord of growth,' and Idu, 'the measuring lord,' the
Aïdês of Hesychios." [138] "Sin is used for the moon in Mendaean and Syriac at the present
day. It is the name given to the moon god in St. James of Seruj's list of the idols of Harran; and it
was the term used for Monday by the Sabaeans as late as the ninth century." [139] Another author
writes: "The Babylonian and Assyrian moon god is Sin, whose name probably appears in Sinai. The
expression, 'from the origin of the god Sin,' was used by the Assyrians to mark remote antiquity; because,
as chaos preceded order, so night preceded day, and the enthronement of the moon as the night-king
marks the commencement of the annals of kosmic order."

[140]

When we search the Hebrew Scriptures, we find too many allusions to the Queen of Heaven, to Astarte
and the groves, for us to doubt that the Israelites adored

"--moonèd
Ashtaroth, Heaven's queen and mother both."

(Milton's Odes.)

Dr. Goldziher is an incontestable authority, and thus writes: "Queen or Princess of Heaven is a
very frequent name for the moon." [141] Again, "Even in the latest times the Hebrews called
the moon the 'Queen of Heaven' (Jer. vii. 18), and paid her Divine honours in this character
at the time of the captivity." [142] And, to complete this author's witness, he again says: "What
was the antiquity of this lunar worship among the Hebrews, is testified (as has long been known)
by the part played by Mount Sinai in the history of Hebrew religion. For this geographical name
is doubtless related to Sin, one of the Semitic names of the moon. The mountain must in ancient
times have been consecrated to the moon. The beginning of the Hebrew religion, which was connected
with the phenomena of the night-sky, germinated first during the residence in Egypt on the
foundation of an ancient myth.

The recollection of this occasioned them to call the part of Egypt which they had long inhabited,
eres Sînîm, 'moonland' (Isa. xlix. 12)." [143] It is but just that we should hear the other side,
when there is a difference of opinion. The above mentioned 'Queen of Heaven' is beyond question
the Ashtoreth or Astarte (identical with our star), which was the
principal goddess of the Phoenicians; and we believe she was originally
the goddess of the moon.

This is doubted by a modern writer, who says, "Baal is constantly
coupled with Astarte; and the more philosophical opinion is that this
national god and goddess were the lord and lady of Phoenicia, rather
than the sun and moon: for to a people full of political life the
sun and moon would have been themselves representatives, while a Divine
king and queen were the realities.

And if so, the habitual inclination of the Israelites, an essentially political people, for
this worship becomes the more easily understood." [144] Professor F. D. Maurice, in his Moral
and Metaphysical Philosophy, also takes this view. The question here is not whether the Jews
worshipped Astarte, but whether Astarte was the moon. This we cannot hesitate to answer in
the affirmative. Kenrick writes: "Ashtoreth or Astarte appears physically to represent the moon.
She was the chief local deity of Sidon; but her worship must have
been extensively diffused, not only in Palestine, but in the countries
east of the Jordan, as we find Ashtaroth-Karnaim (Ashtaroth of two
horns) mentioned in the book of Genesis (xiv.

5).

This goddess, like other lunar deities, appears to have been symbolized by a heifer, or a figure
with a heifer's head, whose horns resembled the crescent moon.

The children of Israel renounced her worship at the persuasion of Samuel; and we do not read
again of her idolatry till the reign of Solomon (1 Kings xi. 5), after which it appears never
to have been permanently banished, though put down for a time by Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 13).
She is the Queen of Heaven, to whom, according to the reproaches
of Jeremiah (vii.

18, xliv.

25), the women of Israel poured out their drink-offerings, and burnt
incense, and offered cakes, regarding her as the author of their national
prosperity.

 But on the way to the cubiculum he remembered--it is unknown why--that
he had noticed wrinkles, that day, in the corners of Chrysothemis's eyes. He thought, also,
that her beauty was more celebrated in Rome than it deserved; and that Fonteius Capiton, who
had offered him three boys from Clazomene for Eunice, wanted to buy her too cheaply.

Chapter XIII

NEXT morning, Petronius had barely finished dressing in the unctorium when Vinicius came, called
by Tiresias. He knew that no news had come from the gates. This information, instead of comforting
him, as a proof that Lygia was still in Rome, weighed him down still more, for he began to
think that Ursus might have conducted her out of the city immediately after her seizure, and
hence before Petronius's slaves had begun to keep watch at the gates. It is true that in autumn,
when the days become shorter, the gates are closed rather early; but it is true, also, that
they are opened for persons going out, and the number of these is considerable. It was possible,
also, to pass the walls by other ways, well known, for instance, to slaves who wish to escape
from the city. Vinicius had sent out his people to all roads leading to the provinces, to watchmen
in the smaller towns, proclaiming a pair of fugitive slaves, with a detailed description of
Ursus and Lygia, coupled with the offer of a reward for seizing them. But it was doubtful whether
that pursuit would reach the fugitives; and even should it reach them, whether the local authorities
would feel justified in making the arrest at the private instance of Vinicius, without the
support of a pretor. Indeed, there had not been time to obtain such support. Vinicius himself,
disguised as a slave, had sought Lygia the whole day before, through every corner of the city,
but had been unable to find the least indication or trace of her. He had seen Aulus's servants,
it is true; but they seemed to be seeking something also, and that confirmed him in the belief
that it was not Aulus who had intercepted the maiden, and that the old general did not know
what had happened to her.

When Tiresias announced to him, then, that there was a man who would undertake to find Lygia,
he hurried with all speed to the house of Petronius; and barely had he finished saluting his
uncle, when he inquired for the man.

"We shall see him at once, Eunice knows him," said Petronius. "She will come this moment to
arrange the folds of my toga, and will give nearer information concerning him."

"Oh! she whom thou hadst the wish to bestow on me yesterday?"

"The one whom thou didst reject; for which I am grateful, for she is the best vestiplica in
the whole city."

In fact, the vestiplica came in before he had finished speaking, and taking the toga, laid
on a chair inlaid with pearl, she opened the garment to throw it on Petronius's shoulder. Her
face was clear and calm; joy was in her eyes.

Petronius looked at her. She seemed to him very beautiful. After a while, when she had covered
him with the toga, she began to arrange it, bending at times to lengthen the folds. He noticed
that her arms had a marvellous pale rose-color, and her bosom and shoulders the transparent
reflections of pearl or alabaster.

"Eunice," said he, "has the man come to Tiresias whom thou didst mention yesterday?"

"He has, lord."

"What is his name?"

"Chilo Chilonides."

"Who is he?"

"A physician, a sage, a soothsayer, who knows how to read people's fates and predict the future."

"Has he predicted the future to thee?"

Eunice was covered with a blush which gave a rosy color to her ears and her neck even.

"Yes, lord."

"What has he predicted?"

"That pain and happiness would meet me."

"Pain met thee yesterday at the hands of Tiresias; hence happiness also should come."

"It has come, lord, already."

"What?"

"I remain," said she in a whisper.

Petronius put his hand on her golden head.

"Thou hast arranged the folds well to-day, and I am satisfied with thee, Eunice."

Under that touch her eyes were mist-covered in one instant from happiness, and her bosom began
to heave quickly.

Petronius and Vinicius passed into the atrium, where Chilo Chilonides was waiting. When he
saw them, he made a low bow. A smile came to the lips of Petronius at thought of his suspicion
of yesterday, that this man might be Eunice's lover. The man who was standing before him could
not be any one's lover. In that marvellous figure there was something both foul and ridiculous.
He was not old; in his dirty beard and curly locks a gray hair shone here and there. He had
a lank stomach and stooping shoulders, so that at the first cast of the eye he appeared to
be hunchbacked; above that hump rose a large head, with the face of a monkey and also of a
fox; the eye was penetrating. His yellowish complexion was varied with pimples; and his nose,
covered with them completely, might indicate too great a love for the bottle. His neglected
apparel, composed of a dark tunic of goat's wool and a mantle of similar material with holes
in it, showed real or simulated poverty. At sight of him, Homer's Thersites came to the mind
of Petronius. Hence, answering with a wave of the hand to his bow, he said,--

"A greeting, divine Thersites! How are the lumps which Ulysses gave thee at Troy, and what
is he doing himself in the Elysian Fields?"

"Noble lord," answered Chilo Chilonides, "Ulysses, the wisest of the dead, sends a greeting
through me to Petronius, the wisest of the living, and the request to cover my lumps with a
new mantle."

"By Hecate Triformis!" exclaimed Petronius, "the answer deserves a new mantle."

But further conversation was interrupted by the impatient Vinicius, who inquired directly,--"Dost
thou know clearly what thou art undertaking?"

"When two households in two lordly mansions speak of naught else, and when half Rome is repeating
the news, it is not difficult to know," answered Chilo. "The night before last a maiden named
Lygia, but specially Callina, and reared in the house of Aulus Plautius, was intercepted. Thy
slaves were conducting her, O lord, from Cæsar's palace to thy 'insula,' and I undertake to
find her in the city, or, if she has left the city--which is little likely--to indicate to
thee, noble tribune, whither she has fled and where she has hidden."

"That is well," said Vinicius, who was pleased with the precision of the answer. "What means
hast thou to do this?"

Chilo smiled cunningly. "Thou hast the means, lord; I have the wit only."

Petronius smiled also, for he was perfectly satisfied with his guest.

"That man can find the maiden," thought he. Meanwhile Vinicius wrinkled his joined brows, and
said,--"Wretch, in case thou deceive me for gain, I will give command to beat thee with clubs."

"I am a philosopher, lord, and a philosopher cannot be greedy of gain, especially of such as
thou hast just offered magnanimously."

"Oh, art thou a philosopher?" inquired Petronius. "Eunice told me that thou art a physician
and a soothsayer. Whence knowest thou Eunice?"

"She came to me for aid, for my fame struck her ears."

"What aid did she want?"

"Aid in love, lord. She wanted to be cured of unrequited love."

"Didst thou cure her?"

"I did more, lord. I gave her an amulet which secures mutuality. In Paphos, on the island of
Cyprus, is a temple, O lord, in which is preserved a zone of Venus. I gave her two threads
from that zone, enclosed in an almond shell."

"And didst thou make her pay well for them?"

"One can never pay enough for mutuality, and I, who lack two fingers on my right hand, am collecting
money to buy a slave copyist to write down my thoughts, and preserve my wisdom for mankind."

"Of what school art thou, divine sage?"

"I am a Cynic, lord, because I wear a tattered mantle; I am a Stoic, because I bear poverty
patiently; I am a Peripatetic, for, not owning a litter, I go on foot from one wine-shop to
another, and on the way teach those who promise to pay for a pitcher of wine."

"And at the pitcher thou dost become a rhetor?"

"Heraclitus declares that 'all is fluid,' and canst thou deny, lord, that wine is fluid?"

"And he declared that fire is a divinity; divinity, therefore, is blushing in thy nose."

"But the divine Diogenes from Apollonia declared that air is the essence of things, and the
warmer the air the more perfect the beings it makes, and from the warmest come the souls of
sages. And since the autumns are cold, a genuine sage should warm his soul with wine; and wouldst
thou hinder, O lord, a pitcher of even the stuff produced in Capua or Telesia from bearing
heat to all the bones of a perishable human body?"

"Chilo Chilonides, where is thy birthplace?"

"On the Euxine Pontus. I come from Mesembria."

"Oh, Chilo, thou art great!"

"And unrecognized," said the sage, pensively.

But Vinicius was impatient again. In view of the hope which had gleamed before him, he wished
Chilo to set out at once on his work; hence the whole conversation seemed to him simply a vain
loss of time, and he was angry at Petronius.

"When wilt thou begin the search?" asked he, turning to the Greek.

"I have begun it already," answered Chilo. "And since I am here, and answering thy affable
question, I am searching yet. Only have confidence, honored tribune, and know that if thou
wert to lose the string of thy sandal I should find it, or him who picked it up on the street."

"Hast thou been employed in similar services?" asked Petronius.

The Greek raised his eyes. "To-day men esteem virtue and wisdom too low, for a philosopher
not to be forced to seek other means of living."

"What are thy means?"

"To know everything, and to serve those with news who are in need of it."

"And who pay for it?"

"Ah, lord, I need to buy a copyist. Otherwise my wisdom will perish with me."

"If thou hast not collected enough yet to buy a sound mantle, thy services cannot be very famous."

"Modesty hinders me. But remember, lord, that to-day there are not such benefactors as were
numerous formerly; and for whom it was as pleasant to cover service with gold as to swallow
an oyster from Puteoli. No; my services are not small, but the gratitude of mankind is small.
At times, when a valued slave escapes, who will find him, if not the only son of my father?
When on the walls there are inscriptions against the divine Poppæa, who will indicate those
who composed them? Who will discover at the book-stalls verses against Cæsar? Who will declare
what is said in the houses of knights and senators? Who will carry letters which the writers
will not intrust to slaves? Who will listen to news at the doors of barbers? For whom have
wine-shops and bake-shops no secret? In whom do slaves trust? Who can see through every house,
from the atrium to the garden? Who knows every street, every alley and hiding-place? Who knows
what they say in the baths, in the Circus, in the markets, in the fencing-schools, in slave-dealers'
sheds, and even in the arenas?"

"By the gods! enough, noble sage!" cried Petronius; "we are drowning in thy services, thy virtue,
thy wisdom, and thy eloquence. Enough! We wanted to know who thou art, and we know!"

But Vinicius was glad, for he thought that this man, like a hound, once put on the trail, would
not stop till he had found out the hiding-place.

"Well," said he, "dost thou need indications?"

"I need arms."

"Of what kind?" asked Vinicius, with astonishment.

The Greek stretched out one hand; with the other he made the gesture of counting money.

"Such are the times, lord," said he, with a sigh.

"Thou wilt be the ass, then," said Petronius, "to win the fortress with bags of gold?"

"I am only a poor philosopher," answered Chilo, with humility; "ye have the gold."

Vinicius tossed him a purse, which the Greek caught in the air, though two fingers were lacking
on his right hand.

He raised his head then, and said: "I know more than thou thinkest. I have not come empty-handed.
I know that Aulus did not intercept the maiden, for I have spoken with his slaves. I know that
she is not on the Palatine, for all are occupied with the infant Augusta; and perhaps I may
even divine why ye prefer to search for the maiden with my help rather than that of the city
guards and Cæsar's soldiers. I know that her escape was effected by a servant,--a slave coming
from the same country as she. He could not find assistance among slaves, for slaves all stand
together, and would not act against thy slaves. Only a co-religionist would help him."

"Dost hear, Vinicius?" broke in Petronius. "Have I not said the same, word for word, to thee?"

"That is an honor for me," said Chilo. "The maiden, lord," continued he, turning again to Vinicius,
"worships beyond a doubt the same divinity as that most virtuous of Roman ladies, that genuine
matron, Pomponia. I have heard this, too, that Pomponia was tried in her own house for worshipping
some kind of foreign god, but I could not learn from her slaves what god that is, or what his
worshippers are called. If I could learn that, I should go to them, become the most devoted
among them, and gain their confidence. But thou, lord, who hast passed, as I know too, a number
of days in the house of the noble Aulus, canst thou not give me some information thereon?"

"I cannot," said Vinicius.

"Ye have asked me long about various things, noble lords, and I have answered the questions;
permit me now to give one. Hast thou not seen, honored tribune, some statuette, some offering,
some token, some amulet on Pomponia or thy divine Lygia? Hast thou not seen them making signs
to each other, intelligible to them alone?"

"Signs? Wait! Yes; I saw once that Lygia made a fish on the sand."

"A fish? A-a! O-o-o! Did she do that once, or a number of times?"

"Only once."

"And art thou certain, lord, that she outlined a fish? O-o?"

"Yes," answered Vinicius, with roused curiosity. "Dost thou divine what that means?"

"Do I divine!" exclaimed Chilo. And bowing in sign of farewell, he added: "May Fortune scatter
on you both equally all gifts, worthy lords!"

"Give command to bring thee a mantle," said Petronius to him at parting.

"Ulysses gives thee thanks for Thersites," said the Greek; and bowing a second time, he walked out.

"What wilt thou say of that noble sage?" inquired Petronius.

"This, that he will find Lygia," answered Vinicius, with delight; "but I will say, too, that
were there a kingdom of rogues he might be the king of it."

"Most certainly. I shall make a nearer acquaintance with this stoic; meanwhile I must give
command to perfume the atrium."

But Chilo Chilonides, wrapping his new mantle about him, threw up on his palm, under its folds,
the purse received from Vinicius, and admired both its weight and its jingle. Walking on slowly,
and looking around to see if they were not looking at him from the house, he passed the portico
of Livia, and, reaching the corner of the Clivus Virbius, turned toward the Subura.

"I must go to Sporus," said he to himself, "and pour out a little wine to Fortuna. I have found
at last what I have been seeking this long time. He is young, irascible, bounteous as mines
in Cyprus, and ready to give half his fortune for that Lygian linnet. Just such a man have
I been seeking this long time. It is needful, however, to be on one's guard with him, for the
wrinkling of his brow forebodes no good. Ah! the wolf-whelps lord it over the world to-day!
I should fear that Petronius less. O gods! but the trade of procurer pays better at present
than virtue. Ah! she drew a fish on the sand! If I know what that means, may I choke myself
with a piece of goat's cheese! But I shall know. Fish live under water, and searching under
water is more difficult than on land, ergo he will pay me separately for this fish. Another
such purse and I might cast aside the beggar's wallet and buy myself a slave. But what wouldst
thou say, Chilo, were I to advise thee to buy not a male but a female slave? I know thee; I
know that thou wouldst consent. If she were beautiful, like Eunice, for instance, thou thyself
wouldst grow young near her, and at the same time wouldst have from her a good and certain
income. I sold to that poor Eunice two threads from my old mantle. She is dull; but if Petronius
were to give her to me, I would take her. Yes, yes, Chilo Chilonides, thou hast lost father
and mother, thou art an orphan; therefore buy to console thee even a female slave. She must
indeed live somewhere, therefore Vinicius will hire her a dwelling, in which thou too mayest
find shelter; she must dress, hence Vinicius will pay for the dress; and must eat, hence he
will support her. Och! what a hard life! Where are the times in which for an obolus a man could
buy as much pork and beans as he could hold in both hands, or a piece of goat's entrails as
long as the arm of a boy twelve years old, and filled with blood? But here is that villain
Sporus! In the wine-shop it will be easier to learn something."

Thus conversing, he entered the wine-shop and ordered a pitcher of "dark" for himself. Seeing
the sceptical look of the shopkeeper, he took a gold coin from his purse, and, putting it on
the table, said,--"Sporus, I toiled to-day with Seneca from dawn till midday, and this is what
my friend gave me at parting."

The plump eyes of Sporus became plumper still at this sight, and the wine was soon before Chilo.
Moistening his fingers in it, he drew a fish on the table, and said,--"Knowest what that means?"

"A fish? Well, a fish,--yes, that's a fish."

"Thou art dull; though thou dost add so much water to the wine that thou mightst find a fish
in it. This is a symbol which, in the language of philosophers, means 'the smile of fortune.'
If thou hadst divined it, thou too mightst have made a fortune. Honor philosophy, I tell thee,
or I shall change my wine-shop,--an act to which Petronius, my personal friend, has been urging
me this long time."

Chapter XIV

FOR a number of days after the interview, Chilo did not show himself anywhere. Vinicius, since
he had learned from Acte that Lygia loved him, was a hundred times more eager to find her,
and began himself to search. He was unwilling, and also unable, to ask aid of Cæsar, who was
in great fear because of the illness of the infant Augusta.

Sacrifices in the temples did not help, neither did prayers and offerings, nor the art of physicians,
nor all the means of enchantment to which they turned finally. In a week the child died. Mourning
fell upon the court and Rome. Cæsar, who at the birth of the infant was wild with delight,
was wild now from despair, and, confining himself in his apartments, refused food for two days;
and though the palace was swarming with senators and Augustians, who hastened with marks of
sorrow and sympathy, he denied audience to every one. The senate assembled in an extraordinary
session, at which the dead child was pronounced divine. It was decided to rear to her a temple
and appoint a special priest to her service. New sacrifices were offered in other temples in
honor of the deceased; statues of her were cast from precious metals; and her funeral was one
immense solemnity, during which the people wondered at the unrestrained marks of grief which
Cæsar exhibited; they wept with him, stretched out their hands for gifts, and above all amused
themselves with the unparalleled spectacle.

That death alarmed Petronius. All knew in Rome that Poppæa ascribed it to enchantment. The
physicians, who were thus enabled to explain the vanity of their efforts, supported her; the
priests, whose sacrifices proved powerless, did the same, as well as the sorcerers, who were
trembling for their lives, and also the people. Petronius was glad now that Lygia had fled;
for he wished no evil to Aulus and Pomponia, and he wished good to himself and Vinicius; therefore
when the cypress, set out before the Palatine as a sign of mourning, was removed, he went to
the reception appointed for the senators and Augustians to learn how far Nero had lent ear
to reports of spells, and to neutralize results which might come from his belief.

Knowing Nero, he thought, too, that though he did not believe in charms, he would feign belief,
so as to magnify his own suffering, and take vengeance on some one, finally, to escape the
suspicion that the gods had begun to punish him for crimes. Petronius did not think that Cæsar
could love really and deeply even his own child; though he loved her passionately, he felt
certain, however, that he would exaggerate his suffering. As a child Mr. Favors was not very strong
physically and because of this the "Widow" made him her pet. He never had to do any work other
than that of waiting on the mistress while she ate her meals. Even in this he had to get up at
four o'clock in the morning and help his mother in the kitchen. Sometimes he would sweep the
yards if he felt like doing so. When he grew older he was given the task of picking the seed
out of the cotton at night.

On Sundays all the servants were free to do as they pleased, that is, with the exception of Mr.
Favors, his mother, and the two women who serve as maids to the "Widow's" two neices. At other
times if a task was done before the day was over with they were given the remaining time to do
as they pleased.

However, everybody had a one week holiday at Christmas.

Mr. Favors made the following statement in regard to the clothing: "Everybody wore the homespun
cotton clothes that were made on the plantation by the slave women. The women wore striped
ausenberg dresses while the men wore ausenberg pants and shirts that
had been made into one garment.

My clothes were always better than the other little fellows, who ran around in their shirttails
because I was always in the house of the "Widow." They used red clay to do the dyeing with.
In the winter time cracked feet were common. The grown people wore
heavy shoes called brogans while I wore the cast-off shoes of the
white ladies.

We all wrapped our feet in bagging sacks to help them to keep warm. We were given one complete outfit
of clothes each year and these had to last until the time for the
next issue."

Sheets for the beds were also made out of homespun material while
the heavier cover such as the quilts, etc., were made from the dresses
and the other clothing that was no longer fit for wear.

As a general
rule all of the slaves on this plantation had enough food to keep
them well and healthy. At the end of each week the field hands were
given enough food to last them seven days.

Tigellinus grew yellow from envy; but Petronius continued,--

"Go to Antium! there she came to the world, there joy flowed in on thee, there solace will
come to thee. Let the sea air freshen thy divine throat; let thy breast breathe the salt dampness.
We, thy devoted ones, will follow thee everywhere; and when we assuage thy pain with friendship,
thou wilt comfort us with song.

"True!" answered Nero, sadly, "I will write a hymn in her honor, and compose music for it."

"And then thou wilt find the warm sun in Baiæ."

"And afterward--forgetfulness in Greece."

"In the birthplace of poetry and song."

And his stony, gloomy state of mind passed away gradually, as clouds pass that are covering
the sun; and then a conversation began which, though full of sadness, yet was full of plans
for the future,--touching a journey, artistic exhibitions, and even the receptions required
at the promised coming of Tiridates, King of Armenia. Tigellinus tried, it is true, to bring
forward again the enchantment; but Petronius, sure now of victory, took up the challenge directly.

"Tigellinus," said he, "dost thou think that enchantments can injure the gods?"

"Cæsar himself has mentioned them," answered the courtier.

"Pain was speaking, not Cæsar; but thou--what is thy opinion of the matter?"

"The gods are too mighty to be subject to charms."

"Then wouldst thou deny divinity to Cæsar and his family?"

"Peractum est!" muttered Eprius Marcellus, standing near, repeating that shout which the people
gave always when a gladiator in the arena received such a blow that he needed no other.

Tigellinus gnawed his own anger. Between him and Petronius there had long existed a rivalry
touching Nero. Tigellinus had this superiority, that Nero acted with less ceremony, or rather
with none whatever in his presence; while thus far Petronius overcame Tigellinus at every encounter
with wit and intellect.

So it happened now. Tigellinus was silent, and simply recorded in his memory those senators
and knights who, when Petronius withdrew to the depth of the chamber, surrounded him straightway,
supposing that after this incident he would surely be Cæsar's first favorite.

Petronius, on leaving the palace, betook himself to Vinicius, and described his encounter with
Cæsar and Tigellinus.

"Not only have I turned away danger," said he, "from Aulus Plautius, Pomponia, and us, but
even from Lygia, whom they will not seek, even for this reason, that I have persuaded Bronzebeard,
the monkey, to go to Antium, and thence to Naples or Baiæ and he will go. I know that he has
not ventured yet to appear in the theatre publicly; I have known this long time that he intends
to do so at Naples. He is dreaming, moreover, of Greece, where he wants to sing in all the
more prominent cities, and then make a triumphal entry into Rome, with all the crowns which
the 'Græculi' will bestow on him. During that time we shall be able to seek Lygia unhindered
and secrete her in safety. But has not our noble philosopher been here yet?"

"Thy noble philosopher is a cheat. No; he has not shown himself, and he will not show himself
again!"

"But I have a better understanding, if not of his honesty, of his wit. He has drawn blood once
from thy purse, and will come even for this, to draw it a second time."

"Let him beware lest I draw his own blood."

"Draw it not; have patience till thou art convinced surely of his deceit. Do not give him more
money, but promise a liberal reward if he brings thee certain information. Wilt thou thyself
undertake something?"

"My two freedmen, Nymphidius and Demas, are searching for her with sixty men. Freedom is promised
the slave who finds her. Besides I have sent out special persons by all roads leading from
Rome to inquire at every inn for the Lygian and the maiden. I course through the city myself
day and night, counting on a chance meeting."

"Whenever thou hast tidings let me know, for I must go to Antium."

"I will do so."

"And if thou wake up some morning and say, 'It is not worth while to torment myself for one
girl, and take so much trouble because of her,' come to Antium. It is considered as an almost infallible
presage of bad weather, if she lies sair on her back, or when her
horns are pointed towards the zenith.

It is a similar prognostic, when the new moon appears wi' the auld moon in her arm, or, in
other words, when that part of the moon which is covered with the shadow of the earth is seen
through it." [356] The last sentence is a lapsus calami. Dr. Jamieson should have said, when
that part of the moon which is turned from the sun is dimly visible
through the reflected light of the earth.

"At Whitby, when the moon is surrounded by a halo with watery clouds, the seamen say that there
will be a change of weather, for the 'moon dogs' are about."

[357] At Ulceby, in Lincolnshire, "there is a very prevalent belief amongst sailors and seafaring
men that when a large star or planet is seen near the moon, or, as
they express it, 'a big star is dogging the moon,' that this is a
certain prognostication of wild weather.

I have met old sailors having the strongest faith in this prediction,
and who have told me that they have verified it by a long course of
observation."

[358]

"Some years ago," says a writer from Torquay, "an old fisherman of this place told me, on the morning
next after a violent gale, that he had foreseen the storm for some
time, as he had observed one star ahead of the moon, towing her, and
another astern, chasing her.

'I know'd 'twas coming, safe enough.'" [359] The moon was simply in apparent proximity to two stars;
but the old Devonian descried mischief.

The following incident from Zulu life will be of interest. "1878.

A curious phenomenon occurred 7th January.

A bright star appeared near the moon at noonday, the sun shining brightly. Omen--The natives
from this foretold the coming war with the Amazulu.

Intense heat and drought prevailed at this time."

[360]

Hitherto we have reviewed only the imaginary influences of the moon over inanimate nature and
what are called irrational beings.

We have seen that this potent orb is supposed to affect the lightning
and thunder of the air; the rocks and seas, the vegetables and animals
of the earth; and generally to govern terrestrial matters in a manner
altogether its own.



"Then she is a Christian and Christians carried her away." A moment of silence followed.

"Listen, Chilo," said Petronius. "My relative has predestined to thee a considerable sum of
money for finding the girl, but a no less considerable number of rods if thou deceive him.
In the first case thou wilt purchase not one, but three scribes; in the second, the philosophy
of all the seven sages, with the addition of thy own, will not suffice to get thee ointment."

"The maiden is a Christian, lord," cried the Greek.

"Stop, Chilo. Thou art not a dull man. We know that Junia and Calvia Crispinilla accused Pomponia
Græcina of confessing the Christian superstition; but we know too, that a domestic court acquitted
her. Wouldst thou raise this again? Wouldst thou persuade us that Pomponia, and with her Lygia,
could belong to the enemies of the human race, to the poisoners of wells and fountains, to
the worshippers of an ass's head, to people who murder infants and give themselves up to the
foulest license? Think, Chilo, if that thesis which thou art announcing to us will not rebound
as an antithesis on thy own back."

Chilo spread out his arms in sign that that was not his fault, and then said,--"Lord, utter
in Greek the following sentence: Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour." [Iesous Christos, Theou
Uios, Soter.]

"Well, I have uttered it. What comes of that?"

"Now take the first letters of each of those words and put them into one word."

"Fish!" said Petronius with astonishment. [Ichthus, the Greek word for "fish."]

"There, that is why fish has become the watchword of the Christians," answered Chilo, proudly.

A moment of silence followed. But there was something so striking in the conclusions of the
Greek that the two friends could not guard themselves from amazement.

"Vinicius, art thou not mistaken?" asked Petronius. "Did Lygia really draw a fish for thee?"

"By all the infernal gods, one might go mad!" cried the young man, with excitement. "If she
had drawn a bird for me, I should have said a bird."

"Therefore she is a Christian," repeated Chilo.

"This signifies," said Petronius, "that Pomponia and Lygia poison wells, murder children caught
on the street, and give themselves up to dissoluteness! Folly! Thou, Vinicius, wert at their
house for a time, I was there a little while; but I know Pomponia and Aulus enough, I know
even Lygia enough, to say monstrous and foolish! If a fish is the symbol of the Christians,
which it is difficult really to deny, and if those women are Christians, then, by Proserpina!
evidently Christians are not what we hold them to be."

"Thou speakest like Socrates, lord," answered Chilo. "Who has ever examined a Christian? Who
has learned their religion? When I was travelling three years ago from Naples hither to Rome
(oh, why did I not stay in Naples!), a man joined me, whose name was Glaucus, of whom people
said that he was a Christian; but in spite of that I convinced myself that he was a good and
virtuous man."

"Was it not from that virtuous man that thou hast learned now what the fish means?"

"Unfortunately, lord, on the way, at an inn, some one thrust a knife into that honorable old
man; and his wife and child were carried away by slave-dealers. I lost in their defence these
two fingers; since, as people say, there is no lack among Christians of miracles, I hope that
the fingers will grow out on my hand again."

"How is that? Hast thou become a Christian?"

"Since yesterday, lord, since yesterday! The fish made me a Christian. But see what a power
there is in it. For some days I shall be the most zealous of the zealous, so that they may
admit me to all their secrets; and when they admit me to their secrets, I shall know where
the maiden is hiding. Perhaps then my Christianity will pay me better than my philosophy. I
have made a vow also to Mercury, that if he helps me to find the maiden, I will sacrifice to
him two heifers of the same size and color and will gild their horns."

"Then thy Christianity of yesterday and thy philosophy of long standing permit thee to believe
in Mercury?"

"I believe always in that in which I need to believe; that is my philosophy, which ought to
please Mercury. Unfortunately (ye know, worthy lords, what a suspicious god he is), he does
not trust the promises even of blameless philosophers, and prefers the heifers in advance;
meanwhile this outlay is immense. Not every one is a Seneca, and I cannot afford the sacrifice;
should the noble Vinicius, however, wish to give something, on account of that sum which he
promised--"

"Not an obolus, Chilo!" said Petronius, "not an obolus. The bounty of Vinicius will surpass
thy expectations, but only when Lygia is found,--that is, when thou shalt indicate to us her
hiding-place. Mercury must trust thee for the two heifers, though I am not astonished at him
for not wishing to do so; in this I recognize his acuteness."

"Listen to me, worthy lords. The discovery which I have made is great; for though I have not
found the maiden yet, I have found the way in which I must seek her. Ye have sent freedmen
and slaves throughout the city and into the country; has any one given you a clew? No! I alone
have given one. I tell you more. Among your slaves there may be Christians, of whom ye have
no knowledge, for this superstition has spread everywhere; and they, instead of aiding, will
betray you. It is unfortunate that they see me here; do thou therefore, noble Petronius, enjoin
silence on Eunice; and thou too, noble Vinicius, spread a report that I sell thee an ointment
which insures victory in the Circus to horses rubbed with it. I alone will search for her,
and single-handed I will find the fugitives; and do ye trust in me, and know that whatever
I receive in advance will be for me simply an encouragement, for I shall hope always for more,
and shall feel the greater certainty that the promised reward will not fail me. Ah, it is true!
As a philosopher I despise money, though neither Seneca, nor even Musonius, nor Cornutus despises
it, though they have not lost fingers in any one's defence, and are able themselves to write
and leave their names to posterity. M. Schroeter has observed a small twilight in the moon, such as
would arise from an atmosphere capable of reflecting the rays at the height of about one mile."
[446] Dr. Brinkley is inaccurate in saying that astronomers are agreed as to the lunar atmosphere.
Like students in every other department of inquiry, spiritual as well as physical, they fail
at present to see "eye to eye"; which is not surprising, seeing that the eye is so restricted,
and the object so remote.

Dr. Dick, whose productions have done much to popularize the study of the heavens, and to promote
its reverent pursuit, says: "On the whole it appears most probable that the moon is surrounded
with a fluid which serves the purpose of an atmosphere; although this atmosphere, as to its nature,
composition, and refractive power, may be very different from the atmosphere which surrounds
the earth. It forms no proof that the moon, or any of the planets, is destitute of an atmosphere,
because its constitution, its density, and its power of refracting the rays of light are different
from ours. An atmosphere may surround a planetary body, and yet its parts be so fine and transparent
that the rays of light, from a star or any other body, may pass through it without being in
the least obscured, or changing their direction. In our reasonings
on this subject, we too frequently proceed on the false principle,
that everything connected with other worlds must bear a resemblance
to those on the earth." 'And so I am weeping,' said the old man, 'for though I repeat,
Let the will of God be done, I, poor sinner, am not able to keep down my tears.' Then, as if
penetrated by a forewarning, I moistened my finger in the water and drew a fish for him. To
this he answered, 'My hope, too, is in Christ.' I asked him then, 'Hast thou confessed to me
by that sign?' 'I have,' said he; 'and peace be with thee.' I began then to draw him out, and
the honest old man told me everything. His master, that Pansa, is himself a freedman of the
great Pansa; and he brings stones by the Tiber to Rome, where slaves and hired persons unload
them from the boats, and carry them to buildings in the night time, so as not to obstruct movement
in the streets during daylight. Among these people many Christians work, and also his son;
as the work is beyond his son's strength, he wished to redeem him. But Pansa preferred to keep
both the money and the slave. While telling me this, he began again to weep; and I mingled
my tears with his,--tears came to me easily because of my kind heart, and the pain in my feet,
which I got from walking excessively. I began also to lament that as I had come from Naples
only a few days since, I knew no one of the brotherhood, and did not know where they assembled
for prayer. He wondered that Christians in Naples had not given me letters to their brethren
in Rome; but I explained to him that the letters were stolen from me on the road. [151] Among the
Arabians the moon was the great divinity, as may be learned from Pocock's Specimen Historiae
Arabum; Prideaux's Connection; Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire; and Sale's Preliminary
Discourse to his translation of the Koran. Tiele says: "The ancient religion of the Arabs rises
little higher than animistic polydaemonism.

The names Itah and Shamsh, the sun god, occur among all the Semitic peoples; Allât, or Alilât,
and Al-Uzza, as well as the triad of moon goddesses to which these last belong, are common to
several, and the deities which bear them are reckoned among the chief." [152] The Saracens called
the moon Cabar, the great; and its crescent is the religious symbol of the Turks to this day.


"Euricius. A poor, unfortunate old man! He reminded me of Glaucus, whom I defended from murderers,
and he touched me mainly by this."

"I believe that thou didst discover him, and wilt be able to make use of the acquaintance;
but thou hast given him no money. Thou hast not given him an as; dost understand me? Thou hast
not given anything."

"But I helped him to lift the bucket, and I spoke of his son with the greatest sympathy. Yes,
lord, what can hide before the penetration of Petronius? Well, I did not give him money, or
rather, I gave it to him, but only in spirit, in intention, which, had he been a real philosopher,
should have sufficed him. I gave it to him because I saw that such an act was indispensable
and useful; for think, lord, how this act has won all the Christians at once to me, what access
to them it has opened, and what confidence it has roused in them."

"True," said Petronius, "and it was thy duty to do it."

"For this very reason I have come to get the means to do it."

Petronius turned to Vinicius,--"Give command to count out to him five thousand sestertia, but
in spirit, in intention."

"I will give thee a young man," said Vinicius, "who will take the sum necessary; thou wilt
say to Euricius that the youth is thy slave, and thou wilt count out to the old man, in the
youth's presence, this money. They must regret.

She was passing through the chapel. Two scrubbing-women were straightening
the chairs, their backs turned to her.

"From all I hear," said one,
with a chuckle and a sly glance, "we'll be afther gettin' our invitations
soon." "Permit me, lord, to dedicate my work to thee; but permit
also that this evening I come only for the money, since Euricius told me that all the boats
had been unloaded, and that new ones would come from Ostia only after some days. Peace be with
you! Thus do Christians take farewell of one another. I will buy myself a slave woman,--that
is, I wanted to say a slave man. Fish are caught with a bait, and Christians with fish. Fax
vobiscum! pax! pax! pax!" 

It was de movin'est medicine!

Round our necks us wore asafetida sacks tied on strings soaked in
turpentine.

Dat was to keep diseases off of us.

"What does I 'member 'bout de war? Well, it was fit to fetch our freedom.
Marse Billy had a fine stallion. I left thee on a good trail, and full of hope; hence
I trust that thou hast either satisfied thy pleasant desires in the embraces of Lygia, or wilt
satisfy them before the real wintry wind from the summits of Soracte shall blow on the Campania.
Oh, my Vinicius! may thy preceptress be the golden goddess of Cyprus; be thou, on thy part,
the preceptor of that Lygian Aurora, who is fleeing before the sun of love. And remember always
that marble, though most precious, is nothing of itself, and acquires real value only when
the sculptor's hand turns it into a masterpiece. Be thou such a sculptor, carissime! To love
is not sufficient; one must know how to love; one must know how to teach love. Though the plebs,
too, and even animals, experience pleasure, a genuine man differs from them in this especially,
that he makes love in some way a noble art, and, admiring it, knows all its divine value, makes
it present in his mind, thus satisfying not his body merely, but his soul. More than once,
when I think here of the emptiness, the uncertainty, the dreariness of life, it occurs to me
that perhaps thou hast chosen better, and that not Cæsar's court, but war and love, are the
only objects for which it is worth while to be born and to live. 

What an idiot she was to give up four years of her life to this round of work and play and
pretence of living! Oh, to go back to Germany--to see Bertha and her mother again, and hear the
father's 'cello! Hermann had loved her so! He had said, so quietly and yet so surely: "But
thou wilt come back, my heart's own. And always I wait here for thee. Make me not wait long!"
He had seemed too quiet then--too slow and too easily content. She had wanted quicker, busier,
more individual life. People will hasten thither from Baiæ, from Pompeii, Puteoli, Cumæ, and Stabia; neither
applause nor crowns will be lacking, and that will be an encouragement for the proposed expedition
to Achæa.

"But the memory of the infant Augusta? Yes! we are bewailing her yet. We are singing hymns
of our own composition, so wonderful that the sirens have been hiding from envy in Amphitrite's
deepest caves. But the dolphins would listen to us, were they not prevented by the sound of
the sea. Our suffering is not allayed yet; hence we will exhibit it to the world in every form
which sculpture can employ, and observe carefully if we are beautiful in our suffering and
if people recognize this beauty. Oh, my dear! we shall die buffoons and comedians!

"All the Augustians are here, male and female, not counting ten thousand servants, and five
hundred she asses, in whose milk Poppæa bathes. At times even it is cheerful here. Calvia Crispinilla
is growing old. Time I got my things fix up to move and went to cook my dinner come de knockin'
four times. I knowed he'd be took sick pretty soon. He didn' 'low me to work. Dat was a good
husband! I had six chillun. He say: 'Honey, no! I workin' makin' enough to support you. All
I want you to do is keep dis house clean and me and my chillun, and I will pay you de five dollars
every week de white lady would pay you.' And he done dat, gimme five dollars every week for myself.

"A
white lady was crazy about my work, jus' her and her husband. I got up soon one morning, time
he left, and runned up dere and washed her clothes and ironed dem. Den I started back home
'bout noon.

I heared somethin' walkin' behind me. 'Bip! Bip!' I look round and didn' see nuttin'.
 Because he has conquered Armenia, he asks that it be left to him for Tiridates;
if not, he will not yield it in any case. Pure comedy! So we have decided on war. Corbulo will
receive power such as Pompeius Magnus received in the war with pirates. There was a moment,
however, when Nero hesitated. He seems afraid of the glory which Corbulo will win in case of
victory. It was even thought to offer the chief command to our Aulus. This was opposed by Poppæa,
for whom evidently Pomponia's virtue is as salt in the eye.

"Vatinius described to us a remarkable fight of gladiators, which is to take place in Beneventum. So
that was why they had comprehended so well and answered so readily! And yet she was too glad to be
annoyed at the slip. There were other things: her life was not a German class!
As the girls crowded out, one stopped by the desk. I asked him, by the way, as a
Jew, if Christians and Jews were the same. He answered that the Jews have an eternal religion,
but that Christians are a new sect risen recently in Judea; that in the time of Tiberius the
Jews crucified a certain man, whose adherents increase daily, and that the Christians consider
him as God. They refuse, it seems, to recognize other gods, ours especially. I cannot understand
what harm it would do them to recognize these gods.

