Thereupon the generals sacrificed, in the presence of the Arcadian seer, Arexion; for Silanus
the Ambraciot had chartered a vessel at Heraclea and made his escape ere this. Sacrificing
with a view to       13 departure, the victims proved unfavourable to them. Accordingly they
waited that day. Certain people were bold enough to say that Xenophon, out of his desire to
colonise the place, had persuaded the seer to say that the victims were unfavourable to departure.
Consequently he proclaimed by herald next morning that any one who liked should be present
at the sacrifice; or if he were a seer he was bidden to be present and help to inspect the
victims. Then he sacrificed, and there were numbers present; but though the sacrifice on the
question of departure was repeated as many as three times, the victims were persistently unfavourable.
Thereat the soldiers were in high dudgeon, for the provisions they had brought with them had
reached the lowest ebb, and there was no market to be had.

Consequently there was another meeting, and Xenophon spoke again: "Men," said he, "the victims
are, as you may see for yourselves, not yet favourable to the march; but meanwhile, I can see
for myself that you are in need of provisions; accordingly we must narrow the sacrifice to
the particular point." Some one got up and said: "Naturally enough the victims are unfavourable,
for, as I learnt from some one on a vessel which arrived here yesterday by accident, Cleander,
the governor at Byzantium, intends coming here with ships and men-of-war." Thereat they were
all in favour of stopping; but they must needs go out for provisions, and with this object
he again sacrificed three times, and the victims remained adverse. Things had now reached such
a pass that the men actually came to Xenophon's tent to proclaim that they had no provisions.
His sole answer was that he would not lead them out till the victims were favourable.

So again the next day he sacrificed; and nearly the whole army, so strong was the general anxiety,
flocked round the victims; and now the very victims themselves failed. So the generals, instead
of leading out the army, called the men together. Xenophon, as was incumbent on him, spoke:
"It is quite possible that the enemy are collected in a body, and we shall have to fight. If
we were to leave our baggage in the strong place" (pointing overhead) "and sally forth prepared
for battle, the victims might favour us." But the soldiers, on hearing      22 this proposal,
cried out, "No need to take us inside that place; better sacrifice with all speed." Now sheep
there were none any longer. So they purchased oxen from under a wagon and sacrificed; and Xenophon
begged Cleanor the Arcadian to superintend the sacrifice on his behalf, in case there might
be some change now. But even so there was no improvement.

Now Neon was general in place of Cheirisophus, and seeing the men suffering so cruelly from
want, he was willing to do them a good turn. So he got hold of some Heracleot or other who
said he knew of villages close by from which they could get provisions, and proclaimed by herald:
"If any one liked to come out and get provisions, be it known that he, Neon, would be their
leader." So out came the men with spears, and wine skins and sacks and other vessels--two thousand
strong in all. But when they had reached the villages and began to scatter for the purpose
of foraging, Pharnabazus's cavalry were the first to fall upon them. They had come to the aid
of the Bithynians, wishing, if possible, in conjunction with the latter, to hinder the Hellenes
from entering Phrygia. These troopers killed no less than five hundred of the men; the rest
fled for the lives up into the hill country.

News of the catastrophe was presently brought into camp by one of those who had escaped, and
Xenophon, seeing that the victims had not been favourable on that day, took a wagon bullock,
in the absence of other sacrificial beasts, offered it up, and started for the rescue, he and
the rest under thirty years of age to the last man. Thus they picked up the remnant of Neon's
party and returned to camp. It was now about sunset; and the Hellenes in deep despondency were
making their evening meal, when all of a sudden, through bush and brake, a party of Bithynians
fell upon the pickets, cutting down some and chasing the rest into camp. In the midst of screams
and shouts the Hellenes ran to their arms, one and all; yet to pursue or move the camp in the
night seemed hardly safe, for the ground was thickly grown with bush; all they could do was
to strengthen the outposts and keep watch under arms the livelong night.

V

And so they spent the night, but with day-dawn the generals led the     1 way into the natural
fastness, and the others picked up their arms and baggage and followed the lead. Before the
breakfast-hour arrived, they had fenced off with a ditch the only side on which lay ingress
into the place, and had palisaded off the whole, leaving only three gates. Anon a ship from
Heraclea arrived bringing barleymeal, victim animals, and wine.

Xenophon was up betimes, and made the usual offering before starting on an expedition, and
at the first victim the sacrifice was favourable. Just as the sacrifice ended, the seer, Arexion
the Parrhasian, caught sight of an eagle, which boded well, and bade Xenophon lead on. So they
crossed the trench and grounded arms. Then proclamation was made by herald for the soldiers
to breakfast and start on an expedition under arms; the mob of sutlers and the captured slaves
would be left in camp. Accordingly the mass of the troops set out. Neon alone remained; for
it seemed best to leave that general and his men to guard the contents of the camp. But when
the officers and soldiers had left them in the lurch, they were so ashamed to stop in camp
while the rest marched out, that they too set out, leaving only those above five-and-forty
years of age.

These then stayed, while the rest set out on the march. Before they had gone two miles, they
stumbled upon dead bodies, and when they had brought up the rear of the column in a line with
the first bodies to be seen, they began digging graves and burying all included in the column
from end to end. After burying the first batch, they advanced, and again bringing the rear
even with the first unburied bodies which appeared, they buried in the same way all which the
line of troops included. Finally, reaching the road that led out of the villages where the
bodies lay thick together, they collected them and laid them in a common grave.

It was now about midday, when pushing forward the troops up to the villages without entering
them, they proceeded to seize provisions, laying hands on everything they could set eyes on
under cover of their  7 lines; when suddenly they caught sight of the enemy cresting certain
hillocks in front of them, duly marshalled in line--a large body of cavalry and infantry. It
was Spithridates and Rhathines, sent by Pharnabazus with their force at their backs. As soon
as the enemy caught sight of the Hellenes, they stood still, about two miles distant. Then
Arexion the seer sacrificed, and at the first essay the victims were favourable. Whereupon
Xenophon addressed the other generals: "I would advise, sirs, that we should detach one or
more flying columns to support our main attack, so that in case of need at any point we may
have reserves in readiness to assist our main body, and the enemy, in the confusion of battle,
may find himself attacking the unbroken lines of troops not hitherto engaged." These views
approved themselves to all. "Do you then," said he, "lead on the vanguard straight at the enemy.
Do not let us stand parleying here, now that we have caught sight of him and he of us. I will
detach the hindmost companies in the way we have decided upon and follow you." After that they
quietly advanced, and he, withdrawing the rear-rank companies in three brigades consisting
of a couple of hundred men apiece, commissioned the first on the right to follow the main body
at the distance of a hundred feet. Samolas the Achaean was in command of this brigade. The
duty of the second, under the command of Pyrrhias the Arcadian, was to follow in the centre.
The last was posted on the left, with Phrasias, an Athenian, in command. As they advanced,
the vanguard reached a large and difficult woody glen, and halted, not knowing whether the
obstacle needed to be crossed or not. They passed down the word for the generals and officers
to come forward to the front. Xenophon, wondering what it was that stopped the march, and presently
hearing the above order passed along the ranks, rode up with all speed. As soon as they were
met, Sophaenetus, as the eldest general, stated his opinion that the question, whether a gully
of that kind ought to be crossed or not, was not worth discussing. Xenophon, with some ardour,
retorted: "You know, sirs, I have not been in the habit hitherto of introducing you to danger
which you might avoid. It is not your reputation for courage surely that is at stake, but your
14 safe return home. But now the matter stands thus: It is impossible to retire from this point
without a battle; if we do not advance against the enemy ourselves, he will follow us as soon
as we have turned our backs and attack us. Consider, then; is it better to go and meet the
foe with arms advanced, or with arms reversed to watch him as he assails us on our rear? You
know this at any rate, that to retire before an enemy has nothing glorious about it, whereas
attack engenders courage even in a coward. For my part, I would rather at any time attack with
half my men than retreat with twice the number. As to these fellows, if we attack them, I am
sure you do not really expect them to await us; though, if we retreat, we know for certain
they will be emboldened to pursue us. Nay, if the result of crossing is to place a difficult
gully behind us when we are on the point of engaging, surely that is an advantage worth seizing.
At least, if it were left to me, I would choose that everything should appear smooth and passable
to the enemy, which may invite retreat; but for ourselves we may bless the ground which teaches
us that except in victory we have no deliverance. It astonishes me that any one should deem
this particular gully a whit more terrible than any of the other barriers which we have successfully
passed. How impassable was the plain, had we failed to conquer their cavalry! how insurmountable
the mountains already traversed by us, with all their peltasts in hot pursuit at our heels!
Nay, when we have safely reached the sea, the Pontus will present a somewhat formidable gully,
when we have neither vessels to convey us away nor corn to keep us alive whilst we stop. But
we shall no sooner be there than we must be off again to get provisions. Surely it is better
to fight to-day after a good breakfast than to-morrow on an empty stomach. Sirs, the offerings
are favourable to us, the omens are propitious, the victims more than promising; let us attack
the enemy! Now that they have had a good look at us, these fellows must not be allowed to enjoy
their dinners or choose a camp at their own sweet will."

After that the officers bade him lead on. None gainsaid, and he led the way. His orders were
to cross the gully, where each man chanced to  22 find himself. By this method, as it seemed
to him, the troops would more quickly mass themselves on the far side than was possible, if
they defiled along (1) the bridge which spanned the gully. But once across he passed along
the line and addressed the troops: "Sirs, call to mind what by help of the gods you have already
done. Bethink you of the battles you have won at close quarters with the foe; of the fate which
awaits those who flee before their foes. Forget not that we stand at the very doors of Hellas.
Follow in the steps of Heracles, our guide, and cheer each the other onwards by name. Sweet
were it surely by some brave and noble word or deed, spoken or done this day, to leave the
memory of oneself in the hearts of those one loves."

 (1) Lit. "had they wound off thread by thread"; the metaphor is from
    unwinding a ball of wool.

These words were spoken as he rode past, and simultaneously he began leading on the troops
in battle line; and, placing the peltasts on either flank of the main body, they moved against
the enemy. Along the line the order had sped "to keep their spears at rest on the right shoulder
until the bugle signal; then lower them for the charge, slow march, and even pace, no one to
quicken into a run." Lastly, the watchword was passed, "Zeus the Saviour, Heracles our Guide."
The enemy waited their approach, confident in the excellence of his position; but as they drew
closer the Hellene light troops, with a loud alala! without waiting for the order, dashed against
the foe. The latter, on their side, came forward eagerly to meet the charge, both the cavalry
and the mass of the Bithynians; and these turned the peltasts. But when with counter-wave the
phalanx of the heavy infantry rapidly advancing, faced them, and at the same time the bugle
sounded, and the battle hymn rose from all lips, and after this a loud cheer rose, and at the
same instant they couched their spears;--at this conjuncture the enemy no longer welcomed them,
but fled. Timasion with his cavalry followed close, and, considering their scant numbers, they
did great execution. It was the left wing of the enemy, in a line with which the Hellene cavalry
were posted, that was so speedily scattered. I believe his collapse actually began with our childhood
nutrition. While in the Arctic all his foods came from cans. He also was working long hours in
extremely cramped quarters with no leave for months in a row, never going outside because of the
cold, or having the benefit of natural daylight.

When he was still in the acute stage of his illness (I was still a
teenager myself) I went to the hospital where my bother was being
held, and talked the attending psychiatrist into immediately discharging
him into my care.

The physician also agreed to refrain from giving him electroshock therapy, a commonly used treatment
for mental conditions in Canadian hospitals at that time. Somehow I knew the treatment they
were using was wrong.

I brought my brother home still on heavy doses of thorazine. The side effects of this drug
were so severe he could barely exist: blurred vision, clenched jaw, trembling hands, and restless
feet that could not be kept still. These are common problems with the older generation of psycho
tropic medications, generally controlled to some extent with still other drugs like cogentin (which
he was taking too).

My brother steadily reduced his tranquilizers until he was able to
think and do a few things.

On his own he started taking a lot of B vitamins and eating whole grains. I do not know exactly why
he did this, but I believe he was following his intuition. (I personally did not know enough
to suggest a natural approach at that time.) In any case after three months on vitamins and
an improved diet he no long needed any medication, and was delighted to be free of their side
effects. He remained somewhat emotionally fragile for a few more months but he soon returned to
work, and has had no mental trouble from that time to this day. This was the beginning of my interest
in mental illness, and my first exposure to the limitations of 'modern' psychiatry.

I always preferred self-discipline to being directed by others. So I took every advantage of having
a teacher for a mother and studied at home instead of being bored silly in a classroom. In Canada
of that era you didn't have to go to high school to enter university, you only had to pass the
written government entrance exams. At age 16, never having spent a single day in high school,
I passed the university entrance exams with a grade of 97 percent. At that point in my life
I really wanted to go to medical school and become a doctor, but I didn't have the financial
backing to embark on such a long and costly course of study, so I
settled on a four year nursing course at the University of Alberta,
with all my expenses paid in exchange for work at the university teaching
hospital.

At the start of my nurses training I was intensely curious about everything in the hospital:
birth, death, surgery, illness, etc. I found most births to be joyful, at least when everything
came out all right. Most people died very alone in the hospital, terrified if they were conscious,
and all seemed totally unprepared for death, emotionally or spiritually. None of the hospital
staff wanted to be with a dying person except me; most hospital staff were unable to confront
death any more bravely than those who were dying. So I made it a point of being at the death
bed. The doctors and nurses found it extremely unpleasant to have to deal with the preparation
of the dead body for the morgue; this chore usually fell to me also. I did not mind dead bodies.
They certainly did not mind me!

I had the most difficulty accepting surgery. There were times when surgery was clearly a life saving
intervention, particularly when the person had incurred a traumatic injury, but there were many
other cases when, though the knife was the treatment of choice, the results were disastrous.

Whenever
I think of surgery, my recollections always go to a man with cancer of the larynx. At that time
the University of Alberta had the most respected surgeons and cancer specialists in the country.
To treat cancer they invariably did surgery, plus radiation and chemotherapy to eradicate all
traces of cancerous tissue in the body, but they seemed to forget
there also was a human being residing in that very same cancerous
body.

This particularly unfortunate man came into our hospital as a whole human being, though sick
with cancer. He could still speak, eat, swallow, and looked normal. But after surgery he had no
larynx, nor esophagus, nor tongue, and no lower jaw.
 Now, one of the two whose persons were thus demanded--Agasias--had
been a friend to Xenophon throughout; and that was just why Dexippus was all the more anxious
to accuse him. In their perplexity the generals summoned a full meeting of the soldiers, and
some speakers were disposed to make very light of Cleander and set him at naught. But Xenophon
took a more serious view of the matter; he rose and addressed the meeting thus: "Soldiers,
I cannot say that I feel disposed to make light of this business, if Cleander be allowed to
go away, as he threatens to do, in his present temper towards us. There are Hellenic cities
close by; but then the Lacedaemonians are the lords of Hellas, and they can, any one of them,
carry out whatever they like in the cities. If then the first thing this Lacedaemonian does
is to close the gates of Byzantium, and next to pass an order to the other governors, city
by city, not to receive us because we are a set of lawless ruffians disloyal to the Lacedaemonians;
and if, further, this report of us should reach the ears of their admiral, Anaxibius, to stay
or to sail away will alike be difficult. Remember, the Lacedaemonians at the present time are
lords alike on land and on sea. For the sake then of a single man, or for two men's sake, it
is not right that the rest of us should be debarred from Hellas; but whatever they enjoin we
must obey. Do not the cities which gave us birth yield them obedience also? For my own part,
inasmuch as Dexippus, I believe, keeps telling Cleander that Agasias would never have done
this had not I, Xenophon, bidden him, I absolve you of all complicity, and Agasias too, if
Agasias himself states that I am in any way a prime mover in this matter. If I have set the
fashion of stone-throwing or any other sort of violence I condemn myself--I say that I deserve
the extreme penalty, and I will submit to undergo it. I  15 further say that if any one else
is accused, that man is bound to surrender himself to Cleander for judgement, for by this means
you will be absolved entirely from the accusation. But as the matter now stands, it is cruel
that just when we were aspiring to win praise and honour throughout Hellas, we are destined
to sink below the level of the rest of the world, banned from the Hellenic cities whose common
name we boast."

After him Agasias got up, and said, "I swear to you, sirs, by the gods and goddesses, verily
and indeed, neither Xenophon nor any one else among you bade me rescue the man. I saw an honest
man--one of my own company--being taken up by Dexippus, the man who betrayed you, as you know
full well. That I could not endure; I rescued him, I admit the fact. Do not you deliver me
up. I will surrender myself, as Xenophon suggests, to Cleander to pass what verdict on me he
thinks right. Do not, for the sake of such a matter, make foes of the Lacedaemonians; rather
God grant that (1) each of you may safely reach the goal of his desire. Only do you choose
from among yourselves and send with me to Cleander those who, in case of any omission on my
part, may by their words and acts supply what is lacking." Thereupon the army granted him to
choose for himself whom he would have go with him and to go; and he at once chose the generals.
After this they all set off to Cleander--Agasias and the generals and the man who had been
rescued by Agasias--and the generals spoke as follows: "The army has sent us to you, Cleander,
and this is their bidding: 'If you have fault to find with all, they say, you ought to pass
sentence on all, and do with them what seems best; or if the charge is against one man or two,
or possibly several, what they expect of these people is to surrender themselves to you for
judgement.' Accordingly, if you lay anything to the charge of us generals, here we stand at
your bar. Or do you impute the fault to some one not here? tell us whom. Short of flying in
the face of our authority, there is no one who will absent himself."

 (1) Reading with the best MSS., {sozoisthe}. Agasias ends his sentence
    with a prayer. Al. {sozesthe}, "act so that each," etc.

At this point Agasias stepped forward and said: "It was I, Cleander,    21 who rescued the
man before you yonder from Dexippus, when the latter was carrying him off, and it was I who
gave the order to strike Dexippus. My plea is that I know the prisoner to be an honest man.
As to Dexippus, I know that he was chosen by the army to command a fifty-oared galley, which
we had obtained by request from the men of Trapezus for the express purpose of collecting vessels
to carry us safely home. But this same Dexippus betrayed his fellow-soldiers, with whom he
had been delivered from so many perils, and made off into hiding like a runaway slave, whereby
we have robbed the Trapezuntines of their frigate, and must needs appear as knaves in their
eyes for this man's sake. As to ourselves, as far as he could, he has ruined us; for, like
the rest of us, he had heard how all but impossible it was for us to retreat by foot across
the rivers and to reach Hellas in safety. That is the stamp of man whom I robbed of his prey.
Now, had it been you yourself who carried him off, or one of your emissaries, or indeed any
one short of a runaway from ourselves, be sure that I should have acted far otherwise. Be assured
that if you put me to death at this time you are sacrificing a good, honest man for the sake
of a coward and a scamp."

When he had listened to these remarks, Cleander replied that if such had been the conduct of
Dexippus, he could not congratulate him. "But still," he added, turning to the generals, "were
Dexippus ever so great a scamp he ought not to suffer violence; but in the language of your
own demand he was entitled to a fair trial, and so to obtain his deserts. What I have to say
at present therefore is: leave your friend here and go your way, and when I give the order
be present at the trial. I have no further charge against the army or any one, since the prisoner
himself admits that he rescued the man." Then the man who had been rescued said: "In behalf
of myself, Cleander, if possibly you think that I was being taken up for some misdeed, it is
not so; I neither struck nor shot; I merely said, 'The sheep are public property;' for it was
a resolution of the soldiers that whenever the army went out as a body any booty privately
obtained was to be public property. That was all I said, and thereupon yonder fellow seized
me    28 and began dragging me off. He wanted to stop our mouths, so that he might have a share
of the things himself, and keep the rest for these buccaneers, contrary to the ordinance."
In answer to that Cleander said: "Very well, if that is your disposition you can stay behind
too, and we will take your case into consideration also."

Thereupon Cleander and his party proceeded to breakfast; but Xenophon collected the army in
assembly, and advised their sending a deputation to Cleander to intercede in behalf of the
men. Accordingly it was resolved to send some generals and officers with Dracontius the Spartan,
and of the rest those who seemed best fitted to go. The deputation was to request Cleander
by all means to release the two men. Accordingly Xenophon came and addressed him thus: "Cleander,
you have the men; the army has bowed to you and assented to do what you wished with respect
to these two members of their body and themselves in general. But now they beg and pray you
to give up these two men, and not to put them to death. Many a good service have these two
wrought for our army in past days. Let them but obtain this from you, and in return the army
promises that, if you will put yourself at their head and the gracious gods approve, they will
show you how orderly they are, how apt to obey their general, and, with heaven's help, to face
their foes unflinchingly. They make this further request to you, that you will present yourself
and take command of them and make trial of them. 'Test us ourselves,' they say, 'and test Dexippus,
what each of us is like, and afterwards assign to each his due.'" When Cleander heard these
things, he answered: "Nay, by the twin gods, I will answer you quickly enough. Here I make
you a present of the two men, and I will as you say present myself, and then, if the gods vouchsafe,
I will put myself at your head and lead you into Hellas. Very different is your language from
the tale I used to hear concerning you from certain people, that you wanted to withdraw the
army from allegiance to the Lacedaemonians."

After this the deputation thanked him and retired, taking with them the two men; then Cleander
sacrificed as a preliminary to marching and consorted friendlily with Xenophon, and the two
struck up an alliance.  35 When the Spartan saw with what good discipline the men carried out
their orders, he was still more anxious to become their leader. However, in spite of sacrifices
repeated on three successive days, the victims steadily remained unfavourable. So he summoned
the generals and said to them: "The victims smile not on me, they suffer me not to lead you
home; but be not out of heart at that. To you it is given, as it would appear, to bring your
men safe home. Forwards then, and for our part, whenever you come yonder, we will bestow on
you as warm a welcome as we may."

Then the soldiers resolved to make him a present of the public cattle, which he accepted, but
again gave back to them. So he sailed away; but the soldiers made division of the corn which
they had collected and of the other captured property, and commenced their homeward march through
the territory of the Bithynians.

At first they confined themselves to the main road; but not chancing upon anything whereby
they might reach a friendly territory with something in their pockets for themselves, they
resolved to turn sharp round, and marched for one day and night in the opposite direction.
By this proceeding they captured many slaves and much small cattle; and on the sixth day reached
Chrysopolis in Chalcedonia (2). Here they halted seven days while they disposed of their booty
by sale.

 (2) The name should be written "Calchedonia." The false form drove out
    the more correct, probably through a mispronunciation, based on a
    wrong derivation, at some date long ago. The sites of Chrysopolis
    and Calchedon correspond respectively to the modern Scutari and
    Kadikoi.

BOOK VII

 (In the earlier portion of the narrative will be found a
detailed history of the fortunes of the Hellenes during their
march up country with Cyrus down to the date of the battle;
and, subsequently to his death, until they reached the Euxine;
as also of all their doings in their efforts to escape from
the Euxine, partly by land marches and partly under sail by
sea, until they found themselves outside the mouth of the
Black Sea (south of the Bosphorus) at Chrysopolis in Asia.)

I

At this point Pharnabazus, who was afraid that the army might           1 undertake a campaign
against his satrapy, sent to Anaxibius, the Spartan high admiral, who chanced to be in Byzantium,
and begged him to convey the army out of Asia, undertaking to comply with his wishes in every
respect. Anaxibius accordingly sent to summon the generals and officers to Byzantium, and promised
that the soldiers should not lack pay for service, if they crossed the strait. The officers
said that they would deliberate and return an answer. Xenophon individually informed them that
he was about to quit the army at once, and was only anxious to set sail. Anaxibius pressed
him not to be in so great a hurry: "Cross over with the rest," he said, "and then it will be
time enough to think about quitting the army." This the other undertook to do.

Now Seuthes the Thracian sent Medosades and begged Xenophon to use his influence to get the
army across. "Tell Xenophon, if he will do his best for me in this matter, he will not regret
it." Xenophon answered: "The army is in any case going to cross; so that, as far as that is
concerned, Seuthes is under no obligation to me or to any one else;     6 but as soon as it
is once across, I personally shall be quit of it. Let Seuthes, therefore, as far as he may
deem consistent with prudence, apply to those who are going to remain and will have a voice
in affairs."

After this the whole body of troops crossed to Byzantium. But Anaxibius, instead of proceeding
to give pay, made proclamation that, "The soldiers were to take up their arms and baggage and
go forth," as if all he wished were to ascertain their numbers and bid them god-speed at the
same moment. The soldiers were not well pleased at that, because they had no money to furnish
themselves with provisions for the march; and they sluggishly set about getting their baggage
together. Xenophon meanwhile, being on terms of intimacy with the governor, Cleander, came
to pay his host a final visit, and bid him adieu, being on the point of setting sail. But the
other protested; "Do not do so, or else," said he, "you will be blamed, for even now certain
people are disposed to hold you to account because the army is so slow in getting under weigh."
The other answered, "Nay, I am not to blame for that. It is the men themselves, who are in
want of provisions; that is why they are out of heart at their exodus." "All the same," he
replied, "I advise you to go out, as if you intended to march with them, and when you are well
outside, it will be time enough to take yourself off." "Well then," said Xenophon, "we will
go and arrange all this with Anaxibius." They went and stated the case to the admiral, who
insisted that they must do as he had said, and march out, bag and baggage, by the quickest
road; and as an appendix to the former edict, he added, "Any one absenting himself from the
review and the muster will have himself to blame for the consequences." This was peremptory.
So out marched, the generals first, and then the rest; and now, with the exception of here
a man and there, they were all outside; it was a "clean sweep"; and Eteonicus stood posted
near the gates, ready to close them, as soon as the men were fairly out, and to thrust in the
bolt pin.

Then Anaxibius summoned the generals and captains, and addressed them: "Provisions you had
better get from the Thracian villages; you will     13 find plenty of barley, wheat, and other
necessaries in them; and when you have got them, off with you to the Chersonese, where Cyniscus
will take you into his service." Some of the soldiers overheard what was said, or possibly
one of the officers was the medium of communication; however it was, the news was handed on
to the army. As to the generals, their immediate concern was to try and gain some information
as to Seuthes: "Was he hostile or friendly? also, would they have to march through the Sacred
mountain (1), or round about through the middle of Thrace?"

 (1) So the mountain-range is named which runs parallel to the
    Propontis (Sea of Marmora) from lat. 41 degrees N. circa to lat.
    40 degrees 30'; from Bisanthe (Rhodosto) to the neck of the
    Chersonese (Gallipoli).

While they were discussing these points, the soldiers snatched up their arms and made a rush
full speed at the gates, with the intention of getting inside the fortification again. But
Eteonicus and his men, seeing the heavy infantry coming up at a run promptly closed the gates
and thrust in the bolt pin. Then the soldiers fell to battering the gates, exclaiming that
it was iniquitous to thrust them forth in this fashion into the jaws of their enemies. "If
you do not of your own accord open the gates," they cried, "we will split them in half"; and
another set rushed down to the sea, and so along the break-water and over the wall into the
city; while a third set, consisting of those few who were still inside, having never left the
city, seeing the affair at the gates, severed the bars with axes and flung the portals wide
open; and the rest came pouring in.

Xenophon, seeing what was happening, was seized with alarm lest the army betake itself to pillage,
and ills incurable be wrought to the city, to himself, and to the soldiers. Then he set off,
and, plunging into the throng, was swept through the gates with the crowd. The Byzantines no
sooner saw the soldiers forcibly rushing in than they left the open square, and fled, some
to the shipping, others to their homes, while those already indoors came racing out, and some
fell to dragging down their ships of war, hoping possibly to be safe on board these; while
there was not a soul who doubted but that the city was     19 taken, and that they were all
undone. Eteonicus made a swift retreat to the citadel. Anaxibius ran down to the sea, and,
getting on board a fisherman's smack, sailed round to the acropolis, and at once sent off to
fetch over the garrison troops from Chalcedon, since those already in the acropolis seemed
hardly sufficient to keep the men in check.

The soldiers, catching sight of Xenophon, threw themselves upon him, crying: "Now, Xenophon,
is the time to prove yourself a man. You have got a city, you have got triremes, you have got
money, you have got men; to-day, if you only chose, you can do us a good turn, and we will
make you a great man." He replied: "Nay, I like what you say, and I will do it all; but if
that is what you have set your hearts on, fall into rank and take up position at once." This
he said, wishing to quiet them, and so passed the order along the lines himself, while bidding
the rest to do the same: "Take up position; stand easy." But the men themselves, by a species
of self-marshalling, fell into rank, and were soon formed, the heavy infantry eight deep, while
the light infantry had run up to cover either wing. The Thracian Square, as it is called, is
a fine site for manouvering, being bare of buildings and level. As soon as the arms were stacked
and the men's tempers cooled, Xenophon called a general meeting of the soldiers, and made the
following speech:--

"Soldiers, I am not surprised at your wrath, or that you deem it monstrous treatment so to
be cheated; but consider what will be the consequences if we gratify our indignation, and in
return for such deception, avenge ourselves on the Lacedaemonians here present, and plunder
an innocent city. We shall be declared enemies of the Lacedaemonians and their allies; and
what sort of war that will be, we need not go far to conjecture. I take it, you have not forgotten
some quite recent occurrences. We Athenians entered into war against the Lacedaemonians and
their allies with a fleet consisting of not less than three hundred line-of-battle ships, including
those in dock as well as those afloat. We had vast treasures stored up in the city, and a yearly
income which, derived from home or foreign sources, amounted to no less than a thousand talents.
Our empire included all the         27 islands, and we were possessed of numerous cities both
in Asia and in Europe. 1, 1921. [2] Today we are not only in the Nuclear Age but also the Antibiotic
Age.

Unhappily, too, this is the Dark Age of Medicine--an age in which many of my colleagues, when
confronted with a patient, consult a volume which rivals the Manhattan telephone directory in
size. This book contains the names of thousands upon thousands of drugs used to alleviate the
distressing symptoms of a host of diseased states of the body. The doctor then decides which
pink or purple or baby-blue pill to prescribe for the patient. This is not, in my opinion,
the practice of medicine. Far too many of these new "miracle" drugs are introduced with fanfare
and then reveled as lethal in character, to be silently discarded for newer and more powerful
drugs. Dr. Henry Bieler: Food is Your Best Medicine; 1965.

I have two reasons for writing this book. One, to help educate the general public about the virtues
of natural medicine. The second, to encourage the next generation of natural healers. Especially
the second because it is not easy to become a natural hygienist; there is no school or college
or licensing board.

Most AMA-affiliated physicians follow predictable career paths, straight well-marked roads,
climbing through apprenticeships in established institutions to high financial rewards and
social status. Practitioners of natural medicine are not awarded equally high status, rarely
do we become wealthy, and often, naturopaths arrive at their profession
rather late in life after following the tangled web of their own inner
light. So I think it is worth a few pages to explain how I came to
practice a dangerous profession and why I have accepted the daily
risks of police prosecution and civil liability without possibility
of insurance. We know the meaning of discipline;
we turn our backs and go."

This resolution was passed, and they sent Hieronymus an Eleian, with two others, Eurylochus
an Arcadian and Philesius an Achaean, to deliver the message. So these set off on their errand.
But while the soldiers were still seated in conclave, Coeratadas, of Thebes,          33 arrived.
He was a Theban not in exile, but with a taste for generalship, who made it his business to
see if any city or nation were in need of his services. Thus, on the present occasion, he presented
himself, and begged to state that he was ready to put himself at their head, and lead them
into the Delta of Thrace (2), as it is called, where they would find themselves in a land of
plenty; but until they got there, he would provide them with meat and drink enough and to spare.
While they were still listening to this tale, the return message from Anaxibius came. His answer
was: "The discipline, they had spoken of, was not a thing they would regret; indeed he would
report their behaviour to the authorities at home; and for himself, he would take advice and
do the best he could for them."

 (2) The exact locality, so called, is not known; doubtless it lay
    somewhere between Byzantium and Salmydessus, possibly at Declus
    (mod. Derkos); or possibly the narrow portion of Thrace between
    the Euxine, Bosphorus, and Propontis went by this name. See note
    in Pretor ad. loc., and "Dict. Geog." "Thracia."

Thereupon the soldiers accepted Coeratadas as their general, and retired without the walls.
Their new general undertook to present himself to the troops next day with sacrificial beasts
and a soothsayer, with eatables also and drinkables for the army. Now, as soon as they were
gone out, Anaxibius closed the gates and issued a proclamation to the effect that "any of the
soldiers caught inside should be knocked down to the hammer and sold at once." Next day, Coeratadas
arrived with the victims and the soothsayer. A string of twenty bearers bearing barleymeal
followed at his heels, succeeded by other twenty carrying wine, and three laden with a supply
of olives, and two others carrying, the one about as much garlic as a single man could lift,
and the other a similar load of onions. These various supplies he set down, apparently for
distribution, and began to sacrifice.

Now Xenophon sent to Cleander, begging him to arrange matters so that he might be allowed to
enter the walls, with a view to starting from Byzantium on his homeward voyage. Cleander came,
and this is what he    39 said: "I have come; but I was barely able to arrange what you want.
Anaxibius insisted: 'It was not convenient that Xenophon should be inside while the soldiers
are close to the walls without; the Byzantines at sixes and sevens moreover; and no love lost
between the one party of them and the other.' Still, he ended by bidding you to come inside,
if you were really minded to leave the town by sea with himself." Accordingly Xenophon bade
the soldiers good-bye, and returned with Cleander within the walls.

To return to Coeratadas. The first day he failed to get favourable signs at the sacrifice,
and never a dole of rations did he make to the soldiers. On the second day the victims were
standing ready near the altar, and so was Coeratadas, with chaplet crowned, all ready to sacrifice,
when up comes Timasion the Dardanian, with Neon the Asinaean, and Cleanor of Orchomenus, forbidding
Coeratadas to sacrifice: "He must understand there was an end to his generalship, unless he
gave them provisions." The other bade them measure out the supplies, "Pray, dole them out."
But when he found that he had a good deal short of a single day's provisions for each man,
he picked up his paraphernalia of sacrifice and withdrew. As to being general, he would have
nothing more to say to it.

II

Now these five were left--Neon the Asinaean, Phryniscus the Achaean,    1 Philesius the Achaean,
Xanthicles the Achaean, Timasion the Dardanian--at the head of the army, and they pushed on
to some villages of the Thracians facing Byzantium, and there encamped. Now the generals could
not agree. Cleanor and Phryniscus wished to march to join Seuthes, who had worked upon their
feelings by presenting one with a horse and the other with a woman to wife. But Neon's object
was to come to the Chersonese: "When we are under the wing of the Lacedaemonians," he thought,
"I shall step to the front and command the whole army."

Timasion's one ambition was to cross back again into Asia, hoping to be reinstated at home
and end his exile. The soldiers shared the wishes of the last general. But, as time dragged
on, many of the men sold their arms at different places and set sail as best they could; others
(actually gave away their arms, some here, some there, and (1))   3 became absorbed in the
cities. One man rejoiced. This was Anaxibius, to whom the break-up of the army was a blessing.
"That is the way," he said to himself, "I can best gratify Pharnabazus."

 (1) The MSS. give the words so rendered--{oi de kai  (didontes ta opla
    kata tous khorous)}, which some critics emend {diadidontes},
    others bracket as suspected, others expunge.

But Anaxibius, while prosecuting his voyage from Byzantium, was met at Cyzicus by Aristarchus,
the new governor, who was to succeed Cleander at Byzantium; and report said that a new admiral,
Polus, if he had not actually arrived, would presently reach the Hellespont and relieve Anaxibius.
The latter sent a parting injunction to Aristarchus to be sure and sell all the Cyreian soldiers
he could lay hands on still lingering in Byzantium; for Cleander had not sold a single man
of them; on the contrary, he had made it his business to tend the sick and wounded, pitying
them, and insisting on their being received in the houses. Aristarchus changed all that, and
was no sooner arrived in Byzantium than he sold no less than four hundred of them. Meanwhile
Anaxibius, on his coasting voyage, reached Parium, and, according to the terms of their agreement,
he sent to Pharnabazus. But the latter, learning that Aristarchus was the new governor at Byzantim,
and that Anixibius had ceased to be admiral, turned upon him a cold shoulder, and set out concocting
the same measures concerning the Cyreian army with Aristarchus, as he had lately been at work
upon with Anaxibius.

Anaxibius thereupon summoned Xenophon and bade him, by every manner of means, sail to the army
with the utmost speed, and keep it together. "He was to collect the scattered fragments and
march them down to Perinthus, and thence convey them across to Asia without loss of time."
And herewith he put a thirty-oared galley at his service, and gave him a letter of authority
and an officer to accompany him, with an order to the Perinthians "to escort Xenophon without
delay on horseback to the army." So it was that Xenophon sailed across and eventually reached
the army. The soldiers gave him a joyous welcome, and would have been only too glad to cross
from Thrace into Asia under his leadership.

But Seuthes, hearing that Xenophon had arrived, sent Medosades again,   10 by sea to meet him,
and begged him to bring the army to him; and whatever he thought would make his speech persuasive,
he was ready to promise him. But the other replied, that none of these things were open to
him to do; and with this answer Medosades departed, and the Hellenes proceeded to Perinthus.
Here on arrival Neon withdrew his troops and encamped apart, having about eight hundred men;
while the remainder of the army lay in one place under the walls of Perinthus.

After this, Xenophon set himself to find vessels, so as to lose no time in crossing. But in
the interval Aristarchus, the governor from Byzantium, arrived with a couple of war-ships,
being moved to do so by Pharnabazus. To make doubly sure, he first forbade the skippers and
shipmasters to carry the troops across, and then he visited the camp and informed the soldiers
that their passage into Asia was forbidden. Xenophon replied that he was acting under the orders
of Anaxibius, who had sent him thither for this express purpose; to which Aristarchus retorted,
"For the matter of that, Anaxibius is no longer admiral, and I am governor in this quarter;
if I catch any of you at sea, I will sink you." With these remarks he retired within the walls
of Perinthus.

Next day, he sent for the generals and officers of the army. They had already reached the fortification
walls, when some one brought word to Xenophon that if he set foot inside, he would be seized,
and either meet some ill fate there or more likely be delivered up to Pharnabazus. On hearing
this Xenophon sent forward the rest of the party, but for himself pleaded that there was a
sacrifice which he wished to offer. In this way he contrived to turn back and consult the victims,
"Would the gods allow him to try and bring the army over to Seuthes?" On the one hand it was
plain that the idea of crossing over to Asia in the face of this man with his ships of war,
who meant to bar the passage, was too dangerous. Nor did he altogether like the notion of being
blocked up in the Chersonese with an army in dire need of everything; where, besides being
at the beck and call of the         15 governor of the place, they would be debarred from the
necessities of life.

While Xenophon was thus employed, the generals and officers came back with a message from Aristarchus,
who had told them they might retire for the present, but in the afternoon he would expect them.
The former suspicions of a plot had now ripened to a certainty. Xenophon meantime had ascertained
that the victims were favourable to his project. He personally, and the army as a whole, might
with safety proceed to Seuthes, they seemed to say. Accordingly, he took with him Polycrates,
the Athenian captain, and from each of the generals, not including Neon, some one man whom
they could in each case trust, and in the night they set off to visit the army of Seuthes,
sixty furlongs distant.

As they approached, they came upon some deserted watch-fires, and their first impression was
that Seuthes had shifted his position; but presently perceiving a confused sound (the voices
of Seuthes' people signalling to one another), the explanation dawned on him: Seuthes kept
his watch-fires kindled in front of, instead of behind, his night pickets, in order that the
outposts, being in the dark, might escape notice, their numbers and position thus being a mystery;
whilst any party approaching from the outside, so far from escaping notice, would, through
the glare of the fire, stand out conspicuously. Perceiving how matters stood, Xenophon sent
forward his interpreter, who was one of the party, and bade him inform Seuthes that Xenophon
was there and craved conference with him. The others asked if he were an Athenian from the
army yonder, and no sooner had the interpreter replied, "Yes, the same," than up they leapt
and galloped off; and in less time than it takes to tell a couple of hundred peltasts had come
up who seized and carried off Xenophon and those with him and brought them to Seuthes. The
latter was in a tower right well guarded, and there were horses round it in a circle, standing
all ready bitted and bridled; for his alarm was so great that he gave his horses their provender
during the day (2), and during the nights he kept watch and    21 ward with the brutes thus
bitted and bridled. It was stated in explanation that in old days an ancestor of his, named
Teres, had been in this very country with a large army, several of whom he had lost at the
hands of the native inhabitants, besides being robbed of his baggage train. The inhabitants
of the country are Thynians, and they are reputed to be far the most warlike set of fighters--especially
at night.

 (2) I.e. "instead of letting them graze."

When they drew near, Seuthes bade Xenophon enter, and bring with him any two he might choose.
As soon as they were inside, they first greeted one another warmly, and then, according to
the Thracian custom, pledged themselves in bowls of wine. There was further present at the
elbow of Seuthes, Medosades, who on all occasions acted as his ambassador-in-chief. Xenophon
took the initiative and spoke as follows: "You have sent to me, Seuthes, once and again. On
the first occasion you sent Medosades yonder, to Chalcedon, and you begged me to use my influence
in favour of the army crossing over from Asia. You promised me, in return for this conduct
on my part, various kindnesses; at least that is what Medosades stated"; and before proceeding
further he turned to Medosades and asked, "Is not that so?" The other assented. "Again, on
a second occasion, the same Medosades came when I had crossed over from Parium to rejoin the
army; and he promised me that if I would bring you the army, you would in various respects
treat me as a friend and brother. About 1983 Isabelle and I also began using Life Extension megavitamins
as a therapy against the aging process. Feeling so much better I began to find the incredibly
boring weeks of prophylactic fasting too difficult to motivate myself to do, and I stopped.
Since that time I fast only when acutely ill. Generally less than one week on water handles
any non-optimum health condition I've had since '84. I am only 54 years old as I write these
words, so I hope it will be many, many years before I find myself in the position where I have
to fast for an extended period to deal with a serious or life-threatening condition.

I am a kind of person the Spanish call autodidactico, meaning that I prefer to teach myself.
I had already learned the fine art of self-employment and general small-business practice that
way, as well as radio and electronic theory, typography and graphic design, the garden seed business,
horticulture, and agronomy. When Isabelle moved in with me she also brought most of Great Oak's
extensive library, including very hard to obtain copies of the works of the early hygienic doctors.
Naturally I studied her books intensely.

Isabelle also brought her medical practice into our house.

At first it was only a few loyal local clients who continued to consult with her on an out-patient
basis, but after a few years, the demands for residential care from people who were seriously
and sometimes life-threateningly sick grew irresistibly, and I found myself sharing our family
house with a parade of really sick people. True, I was not their doctor, but because her residential
clients became temporary parts of our family, I helped support and encourage our residents through
their fasting process. I'm a natural teacher (and how-to-do-it writer), so I found myself explaining
many aspects of hygienic medicine to Isabelle's clients, while having a first-hand opportunity
to observe for myself the healing process at work. Thus it was that I became the doctor's assistant
and came to practice second-hand hygienic medicine.

In 1994, when Isabelle had reached the age of 54, she began to think about passing on her life's
accumulation of healing wisdom by writing a book. She had no experience at writing for the popular
market, her only major writing being a Ph.D. dissertation. I on the other hand had published
seven books about vegetable gardening. And I grasped the essentials of her wisdom as well as
any non-practitioner could. So we took a summer off and rented a house in rural Costa Rica, where
I helped Isabelle put down her thoughts on a cheap word-processing typewriter. When we returned
to the States, I fired-up my "big-mac" and composed this manuscript into a rough book format
that was given to some of her clients to get what is trendily called these days, "feedback."

But
before we could completely finish her book, Isabelle became dangerously ill and after a long,
painful struggle with abdominal cancer, she died. After I resurfaced from the worst of my grief
and loss, I decided to finish her book. Fortunately, the manuscript needed little more than polishing.
I am telling the reader these things because many ghost-written books end up having little direct
connection with the originator of the thoughts. Not so in this case. And unlike many ghost writers,
I had a long and loving apprenticeship with the author. At every step of our colaboration on this
book I have made every effort to communicate Isabelle's viewpoints in the way she would speak,
not my own. Dr. Isabelle Moser was for many years my dearest friend.

 I have worked on this book to help her pass her understanding on.
    
    Many people consider death to be a complete invalidation of a healing
    arts practitioner. I don't. Coping with her own dicey health had
been a major motivator for Isabelle's interest in healing others.
She will tell you more about it in the chapters to come. Isabelle
had been fending off cancer since its first blow up when she was 26
years old.
    The Birds are about to charge the two Athenian intruders, when
    Epops, king of the Birds, formerly Tereus, king of Thrace, but
    long ago transformed into a hoopoe, intercedes in behalf of two
    men, {tes emes gunaikos onte suggene kai phuleta}, "who are of my
    lady's tribe and kin." As a matter of history, the Athenians had
    in the year B.C. 431 made alliance with Sitalces, king of the
    Odrysians (the son of Teres, the first founder of their empire),
    and made his son, Sadocus, an Athenian citizen. Cf. Thuc. ib.;
    Arist. Acharnians, 141 foll.

 (4) A cyzicene monthly is to be understood.

 (5) Bisanthe, one of the Ionic colonies founded by Samos, with the
    Thracian name Rhaedestus (now Rodosto), strongly placed so as to
    command the entrance into the Sacred mountain.

III

After listening to these proposals, they gave and accepted pledges of   1 good faith; and so
the deputation rode off. Before day they were back again in camp, and severally rendered a
report to those who sent them. At dawn Aristarchus again summoned the generals and officers,
but the latter resolved to have done with the visit to Aristarchus, and to summon a meeting
of the army. In full conclave the soldiers met, with the exception of Neon's men, who remained
about ten furlongs off. When they were met together Xenophon rose, and made the following announcement:
"Men, Aristarchus with his ships of war hinders us from sailing where we fain would go; it
is not even safe to set foot on      3 board a vessel. But if he hinders us here, he hastens
us there. 'Be off to the Chersonese,' says he, 'force a passage through the Sacred mountain.'
If we master it and succeed in getting to that place, he has something in store for us. He
promises that he will not sell you any more, as he did at Byzantium; you shall not be cheated
again; you shall have pay; he will no longer, as now, suffer you to remain in want of provisions.
That is his proposal. But Seuthes says that if you will go to him he will treat you well. What
you have now to consider is, whether you will stay to debate this question, or leave its settlement
till we have gone up into a land of provisions. If you ask me my opinion, it is this: Since
here we have neither money to buy, nor leave to take without money what we need, why should
we not go up into these villages where the right to help ourselves is conferred by might? There,
unhampered by the want of bare necessaries, you can listen to what this man and the other wants
of you and choose whichever sounds best. Let those," he added, "who agree to this, hold up
their hands." They all held them up. "Retire then," said he, "and get your kit together, and
at the word of command, follow your leader."

After this, Xenophon put himself at the head and the rest followed. Neon, indeed, and other
agents from Aristarchus tried to turn them from their purpose, but to their persuasions they
turned a deaf ear. They had not advanced much more than three miles, when Seuthes met them;
and Xenophon, seeing him, bade him ride up. He wished to tell him what they felt to be conducive
to their interests, and in the presence of as many witnesses as possible. As soon as he had
approached, Xenophon said: "We are going where the troops will have enough to live upon; when
we are there, we will listen to you and to the emissaries of the Laconian, and choose between
you both whatever seems best. If then you will lead us where provisions are to be got in plenty,
we shall feel indebted to you for your hospitality." And Seuthes answered: "For the matter
of that, I know many villages, close-packed and stocked with all kinds of provisions, just
far enough  9 off to give you a good appetite for your breakfasts." "Lead on then!" said Xenophon.
When they had reached the villages in the afternoon, the soldiers met, and Seuthes made the
following speech: "My request to you, sirs, is that you will take the field with me, and my
promise to you is that I will give every man of you a cyzicene, and to the officers and generals
at the customary rate; besides this I will honour those who show special merit. Food and drink
you shall get as now for yourselves from the country; but whatever is captured, I shall claim
to have myself, so that by distribution of it I may provide you with pay. Let them flee, let
them creep into hiding-places, we shall be able to pursue after them, we will track them out;
or if they resist, along with you we will endeavour to subdue them to our hands." Xenophon
inquired: "And how far from the sea shall you expect the army to follow you?" "Nowhere more
than seven days' journey," he answered, "and in many places less."

After this, permission was given for all who wished to speak, and many spoke, but ever to one
and the same tune: "What Seuthes said, was very right. It was winter, and for a man to sail
home, even if he had the will to do so, was impossible. On the other hand, to continue long
in a friendly country, where they must depend upon what they could purchase, was equally beyond
their power. If they were to wear away time and support life in a hostile country, it was safer
to do so with Seuthes than by themselves, not to speak of all these good things; but if they
were going to get pay into the bargain, that indeed was a godsend." To complete the proceedings,
Xenophon said: "If any one opposes the measure, let him state his views; if not, let the officer
put the proposition to the vote." No one opposed; they put it to the vote, and the resolution
was carried; and without loss of time, he informed Seuthes that they would take the field with him.

After this the troops messed in their separate divisions, but the generals and officers were
invited by Seuthes to dinner at a neighbouring village which was in his possession. When they
were at the doors, and on the point of stepping in to dinner, they were met by  16 a certain
Heracleides, of Maronea (1). He came up to each guest, addressing himself particularly to those
who, as he conjectured, ought to be able to make a present to Seuthes. He addressed himself
first to some Parians who were there to arrange a friendship with Medocus, the king of the
Odrysians, and were bearers of presents to the king and to his wife. Heracleides reminded them:
"Medocus is up country twelve days' journey from the sea; but Seuthes, now that he has got
this army, will be lord on the sea-coast; as your neighbour, then, he is the man to do you
good or do you ill. If you are wise, you will give him whatever he askes of you. On the whole,
it will be laid out at better interest than if you have it to Medocus, who lives so far off."
That was his mode of persuasion in their case. Next he came to Timasion the Dardanian, who,
some one had told him, was the happy possessor of certain goblets and oriental carpets. What
he said to him was: "It is customary when people are invited to dinner by Seuthes for the guests
to make him a present; now if he should become a great person in these parts, he will be able
to restore you to your native land, or to make you a rich man here." Such were the solicitations
which he applied to each man in turn whom he accosted. Presently he came to Xenophon and said:
"You are at once a citizen of no mean city, and with Seuthes also your own name is very great.
Maybe you expect to obtain a fort or two in this country, just as others of your countrymen
have done (2), and territory. It is only right and proper therefore that you should honour
Seuthes in the most magnificent style. Be sure, I give this advice out of pure friendliness,
for I know that the greater the gift that you are ready to bestow on him, the better the treatment
you will receive at his hands." Xenophon, on hearing this, was in a sad dilemma, for he had
brought with him, when he crossed from Parium, nothing but one boy and just enough to pay his
travelling expenses.

 (1) A Greek colony in Thrace. Among Asiatico-Ionian colonies were
    Abdera, founded by Teos, and Maroneia, celebrated for its wine,
    founded by Chios about 540 B.C.--Kiepert, "Man. Anct. Geog." viii.
    182.

 (2) Notably Alcibiades, who possessed two or three such fortresses.

As soon as the company, consisting of the most powerful Thracians       21 there present, with
the generals and captains of the Hellenes, and any embassy from a state which might be there,
had arrived, they were seated in a circle, and the dinner was served. Thereupon three-legged
stools were brought in and placed in front of the assembled guests. They were laden with pieces
of meat, piled up, and there were huge leavened-loaves fastened on to the pieces of meat with
long skewers. The tables, as a rule, were set beside the guests at intervals. That was the
custom; and Seuthes set the fashion of the performance. He took up the loaves which lay by
his side and broke them into little pieces, and then threw the fragments here to one and there
to another as seemed to him good; and so with the meat likewise, leaving for himself the merest
taste. Then the rest fell to following the fashion set them, those that is who had tables placed
beside them.

Now there was an Arcadian, Arystas by name, a huge eater; he soon got tired of throwing the
pieces about, and seized a good three-quarters loaf in his two hands, placed some pieces of
meat upon his knees, and proceeded to discuss his dinner. Then beakers of wine were brought
round, and every one partook in turn; but when the cupbearer came to Arystas and handed him
the bowl, he looked up, and seeing that Xenophon had done eating: "Give it him," quoth he,
"he is more at leisure. I have something better to do at present." Seuthes, hearing a remark,
asked the cupbearer what was said, and the cupbearer, who knew how to talk Greek, explained.
Then followed a peal of laughter.

When the drinking had advanced somewhat, in came a Thracian with a white horse, who snatched
the brimming bowl and said: "Here's a health to thee, O Seuthes! Let me present thee with this
horse. Mounted on him, thou shalt capture whom thou choosest to pursue, or retiring from battle,
thou shalt not dread the foe." He was followed by one who brought in a boy, and presented him
in proper style with "Here's a health to thee, O Seuthes!" A third had "clothes for his wife."
Timasion, the Dardanian, pledged Seuthes, and presented a silver bowl (3) and a carpet worth
ten minae. Gnesippus, an Athenian, got up    28 and said: "It was a good old custom, and a
fine one too, that those who had, should give to the king for honour's sake, but to those who
had not, the king should give; whereby, my lord," he added, "I too may one day have the wherewithal
to give thee gifts and honour." Xenophon the while was racking his brains what he was to do;
he was not the happier because he was seated in the seat next Seuthes as a mark of honour;
and Heracleides bade the cupbearer hand him the bowl. The wine had perhaps a little mounted
to his head; he rose, and manfully seized the cup, and spoke: "I also, Seuthes, have to present
you with myself and these my dear comrades to be your trusty friends, and not one of them against
his will. They are more ready, one and all, still more than I, to be your friends. Here they
are; they ask nothing from you in return, rather they are forward to labour in your behalf;
it will be their pleasure to bear the brunt of battle in voluntary service. With them, God
willing, you will gain vast territory; you will recover what was once your forefathers'; you
will win for yourself new lands; and not lands only, but horses many, and of men a multitude,
and many a fair dame besides. You will not need to seize upon them in robber fashion; it is
your friends here who, of their own accord, shall take and bring them to you, they shall lay
them at your feet as gifts." Up got Seuthes and drained with him the cup, and with him sprinkled
the last drops fraternally (4).

 (3) Or rather "saucer" ({phiale}).

 (4) For the Thracian custom, vide Suidas, s.v. {kataskedazein}.

At this stage entered musicians blowing upon horns such as they use for signal calls, and trumpeting
on trumpets, made of raw oxhide, tunes and airs, like the music of the double-octave harp (5).
Seuthes himself got up and shouted, trolling forth a war song; then he sprang from his place
and leapt about as though he would guard himself against a missile, in right nimble style.
Then came in a set of clowns and jesters.

 (5) Or, "magadis." This is said to have been one of the most perfect
    instruments. It comprised two full octaves, the left hand playing
    the same notes as the right an octave lower. Guhl and Koner, p.
    203, Engl. transl. See also "Dict. Antiq." "Musica"; and Arist.
    "Polit." xix. 18, {Dia ti e dia pason sumphonia adetai mone;
    magasizousi gar tauten, allen de oudemian}, i.e. "since no
    interval except the octave ({dia pason}) could be 'magidised' (the
    effect of any other is well known to be intolerable), therefore no
    other interval was employed at all."

But when the sun began to set, the Hellenes rose from their seats. It   33 was time, they said,
to place the night sentinels and to pass the watchword; further, they begged of Seuthes to
issue an order that none of the Thracians were to enter the Hellenic camp at night, "since
between your Thracian foes and our Thracian friends there might be some confusion." As they
sallied forth, Seuthes rose to accompany them, like the soberest of men. When they were outside,
he summoned the generals apart and said: "Sirs, our enemies are not aware as yet of our alliance.
If, therefore, we attack them before they take precautions not to be caught, or are prepared
to repel assault, we shall make a fine haul of captives and other stock." The generals fully
approved of these views, and bade him lead on. He answered: "Prepare and wait; as soon as the
right time comes I will be with you. I shall pick up the peltasts and yourselves, and with
the help of the gods, I will lead on." "But consider one point," urged Xenophon; "if we are
to march by night, is not the Hellenic fashion best? When marching in the daytime that part
of the army leads the van which seems best suited to the nature of the country to be traversed--heavy
or light infantry, or cavalry; but by night our rule is that the slowest arm should take the
lead. Thus we avoid the risk of being pulled to pieces: and it is not so easy for a man to
give his neighbour the slip without intending, whereas the scattered fragments of an army are
apt to fall foul of one another, and to cause damage or incur it in sheer ignorance." To this
Seuthes replied: "You reason well, and I will adopt your custom. I will furnish you with guides
chosen from the oldest experts of the country, and I will myself follow with the cavalry in
the rear; it will not take me long, if need be, to present myself at the front." Then, for
kinship's sake, they chose "Athenaia (6)" as their watchword. With this, they turned and sought
repose.

 (6) "Our Lady of Athens."

It was about midnight when Seuthes presented himself with his cavalry troopers armed with corselets,
and his light infantry under arms. As    40 soon as he had handed over to them the promised
guides, the heavy infantry took the van, followed by the light troops in the centre, while
the cavalry brought up the rear. At daybreak Seuthes rode up to the front. He complimented
them on their method: so often had he himself, while marching by night with a mere handful
of men, been separated with his cavalry from his infantry. "But now," said he, "we find ourselves
at dawn of day all happily together, just as we ought to be. Do you wait for me here," he proceeded,
"and recruit yourselves. I will take a look round and rejoin you." So saying he took a certain
path over hill and rode off. As soon as he had reached deep snow, he looked to see whether
there were footprints of human beings leading forward or in the opposite direction; and having
satisfied himself that the road was untrodden, back he came, exclaiming: "God willing, sirs,
it will be all right; we shall fall on the fellows, before they know where they are. I will
lead on with the cavalry; so that if we catch sight of any one, he shall not escape and give
warning to the enemy. Do you follow, and if you are left behind, keep to the trail of the horses.
Once on the other side of the mountains, we shall find ourselves in numerous thriving villages."

By the middle of the day he had already gained the top of the pass and looked down upon the
villages below. Back he came riding to the heavy infantry and said: "I will at once send off
the cavalry into the plain below, and the peltasts too, to attack the villages. Do you follow
with what speed you may, so that in case of resistance you may lend us your aid." Hearing this,
Xenophon dismounted, and the other asked: "Why do you dismount just when speed is the thing
we want?" The other answered: "But you do not want me alone, I am sure. The hoplites will run
all the quicker and more cheerily if I lead them on foot."

Thereupon Seuthes went off, and Timasion with him, taking the Hellene squadron of something
like forty troopers. Then Xenophon passed the order: the active young fellows up to thirty
years of age from the different companies to the front; and off with these he went himself,
bowling along (7); while Cleanor led the other Hellenes. When they had   46 reached the villages,
Seuthes, with about thirty troopers, rode up, exclaiming: "Well, Xenophon, this is just what
you said! the fellows are caught, but now look here. My cavalry have gone off unsupported;
they are scattered in pursuit, one here, one there, and upon my word, I am more than half afraid
the enemy will collect somewhere and do them a mischief. Some of us must remain in the villages,
for they are swarming with human beings." "Well then," said Xenophon, "I will seize the heights
with the men I have with me, and do you bid Cleanor extend his line along the level beside
the villages." When they had done so, there were enclosed--of captives for the slave market,
one thousand; of cattle, two thousand; and of other small cattle, ten thousand. For the time
being they took up quarters there.

 (7) {etropkhaze}, a favourite word with our author. Herodotus uses it;
    so does Aristot.; so also Polybius; but the Atticists condemn it,
    except of course in poetry.

IV

But the next day Seuthes burnt the villages to the ground; he left not  1 a single house, being
minded to inspire terror in the rest of his enemies, and to show them what they also were to
expect, if they refused obedience; and so he went back again. As to the booty, he sent off
Heracliedes to Perinthus to dispose of it, with a view to future pay for the soldiers. But
for himself he encamped with the Hellenes in the lowland country of the Thynians, the natives
leaving the flats and betaking themselves in flight to the uplands.

There was deep snow, and cold so intense that the water brought in for dinner and the wine
within the jars froze; and many of the Hellenes had their noses and ears frost-bitten. Now
they came to understand why the Thracians wear fox-skin caps on their heads and about their
ears; and why, on the same principle, they are frocked not only about the chest and bust but
so as to cover the loins and thighs as well; and why on horseback they envelop themselves in
long shawls which reach down to the feet, instead of the ordinary short rider's cloak. Seuthes
sent off some of the prisoners to the hills with a message to say that if they did not come
down to their homes, and live quietly and obey him, he would burn down their villages and their
corn, and leave them   5 to perish with hunger. Thereupon down they came, women and children
and the older men; the younger men preferred to quarter themselves in the villages on the skirts
of the hills. On discovering this, Seuthes bade Xenophon take the youngest of the heavy infantry
and join him on an expedition. They rose in the night, and by daybreak had reached the villages;
but the majority of the inhabitants made good their escape, for the hills were close at hand.
Those whom he did catch, Seuthes unsparingly shot down.

Now there was a certain Olynthian, named Episthenes; he was a great lover of boys, and seeing
a handsome lad, just in the bloom of youth, and carrying a light shield, about to be slain,
he ran up to Xenophon and supplicated him to rescue the fair youth. Xenophon went to Seuthes
and begged him not to put the boy to death. He explained to him the disposition of Episthenes;
how he had once enrolled a company, the only qualification required being that of personal
beauty; and with these handsome young men at his side there were none so brave as he. Seuthes
put the question, "Would you like to die on his behalf, Episthenes?" whereat the other stretched
out his neck, and said, "Strike, if the boy bids you, and will thank his preserver." Seuthes,
turning to the boy, asked, "Shall I smite him instead of you?" The boy shook his head, imploring
him to slay neither the one nor the other, whereupon Episthenes caught the lad in his arms,
exclaiming, "It is time you did battle with me, Seuthes, for my boy; never will I yield him
up," and Seuthes laughed: "what must be must," and so consented.

In these villages he decided that they must bivouac, so that the men on the mountains might
be still further deprived of subsistence. Stealthily descending he himself found quarters in
the plain; while Xenophon with his picked troops encamped in the highest village on the skirts
of the hills,; and the rest of the Hellenes hard by, among the highland Thracians (1), as they
are called.

 (1) Cf. "Highlanders."

After this, not many days had idly slipt away before the Thracians from the mountains came
down and wished to arrange with Seuthes for     12 terms of truce and hostages. Simultaneously
came Xenophon and informed Seuthes that they were camped in bad quarters, with the enemy next
door; "it would be pleasanter too," he added, "to bivouac in a strong position in the open,
than under cover on the edge of destruction." The other bade him take heart and pointed to
some of their hostages, as much as to say "Look there!" Parties also from the mountaineers
came down and pleaded with Xenophon himself, to help arrange a truce for them. This he agreed
to do, bidding them to pluck up heart, and assuring them that they would meet with no mischief,
if they yielded obedience to Seuthes. All their parleying, however, was, as it turned out,
merely to get a closer inspection of things. This happened in the day, and in the following
night the Thynians descended from the hill country and made an attack. In each case, the guide
was the master of the house attacked; otherwise it would have taxed their powers to discover
the houses in the dark, which, for the sake of their flocks and herds, were palisaded all round
with great stockades. As soon as they had reached the doors of any particular house, the attack
began, some hurling in their spears, others belabouring with their clubs, which they carried,
it was said, for the purpose of knocking off the lance points from the shaft. Others were busy
setting the place on fire; and they kept calling Xenophon by name: "Come out, Xenophon, and
die like a man, or we will roast you alive inside."

By this time too the flames were making their appearance through the roof, and Xenophon and
his followers were within, with their coats of mail on, and big shields, swords, and helmets.
Then Silanus, a Macistian (2), a youth of some eighteen years, signalled on the trumpet; and
in an instant, out they all leapt with their drawn swords, and the inmates of other quarters
as well. The Thracians took to their heels, according to their custom, swinging their light
shields round their backs. As they leapt over the stockade some were captured, hanging on the
top with their shields caught in the palings; others missed the way out, and so were slain;
and the Hellenes chased them hotly, till they were outside the village.

 (2) "Of Macistus," a town in the Triphylia near Scillus.

A party of Thynians turned back, and as the men ran past in bold        18 relief against a
blazing house, they let fly a volley of javelins, out of the darkness into the glare, and wounded
two captains, Hieronymus, an Euodean (3), and Theogenes, a Locrian. I'll discharge him.'

'Discharge him! What good would that do? Don't you think it would be better wisdom to teach him
better ways and keep him?'

'Well, there's something in that. What would you suggest?'

 
    'He insulted the old gentleman in presence of all these people. How
    would it do to have him come and apologise in their presence?'

'I'll
    have him here right off.

And I want to say this: If people would do as you've done, and report such things to me instead
of keeping mum and going off and blackguarding the road, you'd see a different state of things
pretty soon. I'm much obliged to you.'

The brakeman came and apologised. After he was gone the Major said:

'Now you see how simple and easy that was. The ordinary citizen would have accomplished nothing--the
brother-in-law of a directory can accomplish anything he wants to.'

'But are you really the brother-in-law of a director?'

'Always. Always when the public interests require it. I have a brother-in-law on all the boards--everywhere.
It saves me a world of trouble.'
'It is a good wide relationship.'

'Yes. I have over three hundred
of them.'

'Is the relationship never doubted by a conductor?'

'I
have never met with a case. It is the honest truth--I never have.'

'Why
didn't you let him go ahead and discharge the brakeman, in spite of
your favourite policy. You know he deserved it.'

The Major answered
with something which really had a sort of distant resemblance to impatience:

'If
you would stop and think a moment you wouldn't ask such a question
as that. Is a brakeman a dog, that nothing but dogs' methods will
do for him? He is a man and has a man's fight for life. And he always
has a sister, or a mother, or wife and children to support. Always--there
are no exceptions. When you take his living away from him you take
theirs away too--and what have they done to you? Nothing. And where
is the profit in discharging an uncourteous brakeman and hiring another
just like him? It's unwisdom. So to a man they gave in their adhesion
in that quarter of the country.

V

Crossing over in the direction of the Thracians above Byzantium, they   1
reached the Delta, as it is called. Here they were no longer in the
territory of the Maesades, but in the country of Teres the Odrysian
 (an ancient worthy (1)). Here Heracleides met them with the proceeds of
the spoil, and Seuthes picked out three pairs of mules (there were
only three, the other teams being oxen); then he summoned Xenophon and
bade him take them, and divide the rest between the generals and
officers, to which Xenophon replied that for himself, he was content
to receive his share another time, but added: "Make a present of these
to my friends here, the generals who have served with me, and to the
officers." So of the pairs of mules Timasion the Dardanian received
one, Cleanor the Orchomenian one, and Phryniscus the Achaean one. The
teams of oxen were divided among the officers. Then Seuthes proceeded
to remit pay due for the month already passed, but all he could give
was the equivalent of twenty days. Heracleides insisted that this was
all he had got by his trafficking. Whereupon Xenophon with some warmth
exclaimed: "Upon my word, Heracleides, I do not think you care for
Seuthes' interest as you should. If you did, you have been at pains to
bring back the full amount of the pay, even if you had had to raise a
loan to do so, and, if by no other means, by selling the coat off your
own back."

 (1) See above re previous Teres. The words "an ancient worthy" may
    possibly be an editor's or commentator's note.

What he said annoyed Heracleides, who was afraid of being ousted from the friendship of Seuthes,
and from that day forward he did his best to calumniate Xenophon before Seuthes. The soldiers,
on their side, laid the blame of course on Xenophon: "Where was their pay?" and Seuthes was
vexed with him for persistently demanding it for them. Up to this date he had frequently referred
to what he would do when he got to the seaboard again; how he intended to hand over to him
Bisanthe, Ganos, and Neontichos (2). But from this time forward he never mentioned one of them
again. The slanderous tongue of Heracleides had whispered him:--it was not safe to hand over
fortified  8 towns to a man with a force at his back.

 (2) For Bisanthe see above. Ganos, a little lower down the coast, with
    Neontichos once belonged to Alcibiades, if we may believe
    Cornelius Nepos, "Alc." vii. 4, and Plutarch, "Alc." c. 36. See
    above.

Consequently Xenophon fell to considering what he ought to do as regards marching any further
up the country; and Heracleides introduced the other generals to Seuthes, urging them to say
that they were quite as well able to lead the army as Xenophon, and promising them that within
a day or two they should have full pay for two months, and he again implored them to continue
the campaign with Seuthes. To which Timasion replied that for his part he would continue no
campaign without Xenophon; not even if they were to give him pay for five months; and what
Timasion said, Phryniscus and Cleanor repeated; the views of all three coincided.

Seuthes fell to upbraiding Heracleides in round terms. "Why had he not invited Xenophon with
the others?" and presently they invited him, but by himself alone. He, perceiving the knavery
of Heracleides, and that his object was to calumniate him with the other generals, presented
himself; but at the same time he took care to bring all the generals and the officers. After
their joint consent had been secured, they continued the campaign. Keeping the Pontus on their
right, they passed through the millet-eating (3) Thracians, as they are called, and reached
Salmydessus. This is a point at which many trading vessels bound for the Black Sea run aground
and are wrecked, owing to a sort of marshy ledge or sandbank which runs out for a considerable
distance into the sea (4). The Thracians, who dwell in these parts, have set up pillars as
boundary marks, and each set of them has the pillage of its own flotsom and jetsom; for in
old days, before they set up these landmarks, the wreckers, it is said, used freely to fall
foul of and slay one another. Here was a rich treasure trove, of beds and boxes     14 numberless,
with a mass of written books, and all the various things which mariners carry in their wooden
chests. Having reduced this district, they turned round and went back again. By this time the
army of Seuthes had grown to be considerably larger than the Hellenic army; for on the one
hand, the Odrysians flocked down in still larger numbers, and on the other, the tribes which
gave in their adhesion from time to time were amalgamated with his armament. They got into
quarters on the flat country above Selybria at about three miles (5) distance from the sea.
As to pay, not a penny was as yet forthcoming, and the soldiers were cruelly disaffected to
Xenophon, whilst Seuthes, on his side, was no longer so friendlily disposed. If Xenophon ever
wished to come face to face with him, want of leisure or some other difficulty always seemed
to present itself.

 (3) Or, "the Melinophagi."

 (4) See, for a description of this savage coast, Aesch. "Prom." vinc.
    726, etc.--

"{trakheia pontou Salmudesia gnathos ekhthroxenos nautaisi, metruia neon.}"

"The rugged Salmudesian jaw of the Black Sea, Inhospitable to sailors, stepmother of ships."

But the poet is at fault in his geography, since he connects "the Salmydesian jaw" with the
Thermodon.

 (5) Lit. "thirty stades." Selybria is about fourty-four miles from
    Byzantium, two-thirds of the way to Perinthus.

VI

At this date, when nearly two months had already passed, an embassy     1 arrived. These were
two agents from Thibron--Charminus, a Lacedaemonian, and Polynicus. They were sent to say that
the Lacedaemonians had resolved to open a campaign against Tissaphernes, and that Thibron,
who had set sail to conduct the war, was anxious to avail himself of the troops. He could guarantee
that each soldier should receive a daric a month as pay, the officers double pay, and the generals
quadruple. The Lacedaemonian emissaries had no sooner arrived than Heracleides, having learnt
that they had come in search of the Hellenic troops, goes off himself to Seuthes and says:
"The best thing that could have happened; the Lacedaemonians want these troops and you have
done with them, so that if you hand over the troops to them, you will do the Lacedaemonians
a good turn and will cease to be bothered for pay any more. The country will be quit of them
once and for ever."

On hearing this Seuthes bade him introduce the emissaries. As soon as they had stated that
the object of their coming was to treat for the Hellenic troops, he replied that he would willingly
give them up, that his one desire was to be the friend and ally of Lacedaemon. So he invited
them to partake of hospitality, and entertained them            3 magnificently; but he did
not invite Xenophon, nor indeed any of the other generals. Presently the Lacedaemonians asked:
"What sort of man is Xenophon?" and Seuthes answered: "Not a bad fellow in most respects; but
he is too much the soldiers' friend; and that is why it goes ill with him." They asked: "Does
he play the popular leader?" and Heracleides answered: "Exactly so." "Well then," said they,
"he will oppose our taking away the troops, will he not?" "To be sure he will," said Heracleides;
"but you have only to call a meeting of the whole body, and promise them pay, and little further
heed will they pay to him; they will run off with you." "How then are we to get them collected?"
they asked. "Early to-morrow," said Heracleides, "we will bring you to them; and I know," he
added once more, "as soon as they set eyes on you, they will flock to you with alacrity." Thus
the day ended.

The next day Seuthes and Heracleides brought the two Laconian agents to the army, and the troops
were collected, and the agents made a statement as follows: "The Lacedaemonians have resolved
on war with Tissaphernes, who did you so much wrong. By going with us therefore you will punish
your enemy, and each of you will get a daric a month, the officers twice that sum, and the
generals quadruple." The soldiers lent willing ears, and up jumped one of the Arcadians at
once, to find fault with Xenophon. Seuthes also was hard by, wishing to know what was going
to happen. He stood within ear shot, and his interpreter by his side; not but what he could
understand most of what was said in Greek himself. At this point the Arcadian spoke: "For the
matter of that, Lacedaemonians, we should have been by your sides long ago, if Xenophon had
not persuaded us and brought us hither. We have never ceased campaigning, night and day, the
dismal winter through, but he reaps the fruit of our toils. Seuthes has enriched him privately,
but deprives us of our honest earnings; so that, standing here as I do to address you first,
all I can say is, that if I might see the fellow stoned to death as a penalty for all the long
dance he has led us, I    10 should feel I had got my pay in full, and no longer grudge the
pains we have undergone." The speaker was followed by another and then another in the same
strain; and after that Xenophon made the following speech:--

"True is the old adage; there is nothing which mortal man may not expect to see. Here am I
being accused by you to-day, just where my conscience tells me that I have displayed the greatest
zeal on your behalf. Was I not actually on my road home when I turned back? Not, God knows,
because I learned that you were in luck's way, but because I heard that you were in sore straits,
and I wished to help you, if in any way I could. I returned, and Seuthes yonder sent me messenger
after messenger, and made me promise upon promise, if only I could persuade you to come to
him. Yet, as you yourselves will bear me witness, I was not to be diverted. Instead of setting
my hand to do that, I simply led you to a point from which, with least loss of time, I thought
you could cross into Asia. This I believed was the best thing for you, and you I knew desired it.

"But when Aristarchus came with his ships of war and hindered our passage across, you will
hardly quarrel with me for the step I then took in calling you together that we might advisedly
consider our best course. Having heard both sides--first Aristarchus, who ordered you to march
to the Chersonese, then Seuthes, who pleaded with you to undertake a campaign with himself--you
all proposed to go with Seuthes; and you all gave your votes to that effect. What wrong did
I commit in bringing you, whither you were eager to go? If, indeed, since the time when Seuthes
began to tell lies and cheat us about the pay, I have supported him in this, you may justly
find fault with me and hate me. But if I, who at first was most of all his friend, to-day am
more than any one else at variance with him, how can I, who have chosen you and rejected Seuthes,
in fairness be blamed by you for the very thing which has been the ground of quarrel between
him and me? But you will tell me, perhaps, that I get from Seuthes what is by right yours,
and that I deal subtly by you? But is it not clear that, if Seuthes has paid me anything, he
has at any rate not done so with    16 the intention of losing by what he gives me, whilst
he is still your debtor? If he gave to me, he gave in order that, by a small gift to me, he
might escape a larger payment to yourselves. But if that is what you really think has happened,
you can render this whole scheme of ours null and void in an instant by exacting from him the
money which is your due. It is clear, Seuthes will demand back from me whatever I have got
from him, and he will have all the more right to do so, if I have failed to secure for him
what he bargained for when I took his gifts. But indeed, I am far removed from enjoying what
is yours, and I swear to you by all the gods and goddesses that I have not taken even what
Seuthes promised me in private. He is present himself and listening, and he is aware in his
own heart whether I swear falsely. And what will surprise you the more, I can swear besides,
that I have not received even what the other generals have received, no, nor yet what some
of the officers have received. But how so? why have I managed my affairs no better? I thought,
sirs, the more I helped him to bear his poverty at the time, the more I should make him my
friend in the day of his power. Whereas, it is just when I see the star of his good fortune
rising, that I have come to divine the secret of his character.

"Some one may say, are you not ashamed to be so taken in like a fool? Yes, I should be ashamed,
if it had been an open enemy who had so deceived me. But, to my mind, when friend cheats friend,
a deeper stain attaches to the perpetrator than to the victim of deceit. Whatever precaution
a man may take against his friend, that we took in full. We certainly gave him no pretext for
refusing to pay us what he promised. We were perfectly upright in our dealings with him. We
did not dawdle over his affairs, nor did we shrink from any work to which he challenged us.

"But you will say, I ought to have taken security of him at the time, so that had he fostered
the wish, he might have lacked the ability to deceive. To meet that retort, I must beg you
to listen to certain things, which I should never have said in his presence, except for your
utter want of feeling towards me, or your extraordinary ingratitude. Try and recall the posture
of your affairs, when I         24 extricated you and brought you to Seuthes. Do you not recollect
how at Perinthus Aristarchus shut the gates in your faces each time you offered to approach
the town, and how you were driven to camp outside under the canopy of heaven? It was midwinter;
you were thrown upon the resources of a market wherein few were the articles offered for sale,
and scanty the wherewithal to purchase them. Yet stay in Thrace you must, for there were ships
of war riding at anchor in the bay, ready to hinder your passage across; and what did that
stay imply? It meant being in a hostile country, confronted by countless cavalry, legions of
light infantry. And what had we? A heavy infantry force certainly, with which we could have
dashed at villages in a body possibly, and seized a modicum of food at most; but as to pursuing
the enemy with such a force as ours, or capturing men or cattle, the thing was out of the question;
for when I rejoined you your original cavalry and light infantry divisions had disappeared.
In such sore straits you lay!

"Supposing that, without making any demands for pay whatever, I had merely won for you the
alliance of Seuthes--whose cavalry and light infantry were just what you needed--would you
not have thought that I had planned very well for you? I presume, it was through your partnership
with him and his that you were able to find such complete stores of corn in the villages, when
the Thracians were driven to take to their heels in such hot haste, and you had so large a
share of captives and cattle. Why! from the day on which his cavalry force was attached to
us, we never set eyes on a single foeman in the field, though up to that date the enemy with
his cavalry and his light infantry used undauntedly to hang on our heels, and effectually prevented
us from scattering in small bodies and reaping a rich harvest of provisions. But if he who
partly gave you this security has failed to pay in full the wages due to you therefrom, is
not that a terrible misfortune? So monstrous indeed that you think I ought not to go forth
alive (1).

 (1) I.e. the fate of a scape-goat is too good for me.

"But let me ask you, in what condition do you turn your backs on this   31 land to-day? Have
you not wintered here in the lap of plenty? Whatever you have got from Seuthes has been surplus
gain. Your enemies have had to meet the bill of your expenses, whilst you led a merry round
of existence, in which you have not once set eyes on the dead body of a comrade or lost one
living man. Again, if you have achieved any, (or rather many) noble deeds against the Asiatic
barbarian, you have them safe. And in addition to these to-day you have won for yourselves
a second glory. You undertook a campaign against the European Thracians, and have mastered
them. What I say then is, that these very matters which you make a ground of quarrel against
myself, are rather blessings for which you ought to show gratitude to heaven.

"Thus far I have confined myself to your side of the matter. Bear with me, I beg you, while
we examine mine. When I first essayed to part with you and journey homewards, I was doubly
blest. From your lips I had won some praise, and, thanks to you, I had obtained glory from
the rest of Hellas. I was trusted by the Lacedaemonians; else would they not have sent me back
to you. Whereas to-day I turn to go, calumniated before the Lacedaemonians by yourselves, detested
in your behalf by Seuthes, whom I meant so to benefit, by help of you, that I should find in
him a refuge for myself and for my children, if children I might have, in after time. And you
the while, for whose sake I have incurred so much hate, the hate of people far superior to
me in strength, you, for whom I have not yet ceased to devise all the good I can, entertain
such sentiments about me. Why? I am no renegade or runaway slave, you have got hold of. If
you carry out what you say, be sure you will have done to death a man who has passed many a
vigil in watching over you; who has shared with you many a toil and run many a risk in turn
and out of turn; who, thanks to the gracious gods! has by your side set up full many a trophy
over the barbarian; who, lastly, has strained every nerve in his body to protect you against
yourselves. And so it is, that to-day you can move freely, where you choose, by sea or by land,
and no one can say you nay; and you, on      37 whom this large liberty dawns, who are sailing
to a long desired goal, who are sought after by the greatest of military powers, who have pay
in prospect, and for leaders these Lacedaemonians, our acknowledged chiefs: now is the appointed
time, you think, to put me to a speedy death. But in the days of our difficulties it was very
different, O ye men of marvellous memory! No! in those days you called me 'father!' and you
promised you would bear me ever in mind, 'your benefactor.' Not so, however, not so ungracious
are those who have come to you to-day; nor, if I mistake not, have you bettered yourselves
in their eyes by your treatment of me."

With these words he paused, and Charminus the Lacedaemonian got up and said: "Nay, by the Twins,
you are wrong, surely, in your anger against this man; I myself can bear testimony in his favour.
When Polynicus and I asked Seuthes, what sort of a man he was? Seuthes answered:--he had but
one fault to find with him, that he was too much the soldiers' friend, which also was the cause
why things went wrong with him, whether as regards us Lacedaemonians or himself, Seuthes."

Upon that Eurylochus of Lusia, an Arcadian, got up and said (addressing the two Lacedaemonians),
"Yes, sirs; and what strikes me is that you cannot begin your generalship of us better than
by exacting from Seuthes our pay. Whether he like it or no, let him pay in full; and do not
take us away before."

Polycrates the Athenian, who was put forward by Xenophon, said: "If my eyes do not deceive
me, sirs, there stands Heracleides, yonder, the man who received the property won by our toil,
who took and sold it, and never gave back either to Seuthes or to us the proceeds of the sale,
but kept the money to himself, like the thief he is. If we are wise, we will lay hold of him,
for he is no Thracian, but a Hellene; and against Hellenes is the wrong he has committed."

When Heracleides heard these words, he was in great consternation; so he came to Seuthes and
said: "If we are wise we will get away from here out of reach of these fellows." So they mounted
their horses and were gone in a trice, galloping to their own camp. Subsequently         42
Seuthes sent Abrozelmes, his private interpreter, to Xenophon, begging him to stay behind with
one thousand heavy troops; and engaging duly to deliver to him the places on the seaboard,
and the other things which he had promised; and then, as a great secret, he told him, that
he had heard from Polynicus that if he once got into the clutches of the Lacedaemonians, Thibron
was certain to put him to death. Similar messages kept coming to Xenophon by letter or otherwise
from several quarters, warning him that he was calumniated, and had best be on his guard. Hearing
which, he took two victims and sacrificed to Zeus the King: "Whether it were better and happier
to stay with Seuthes on the terms proposed, or depart with the army?" The answer he received
was, "Depart."

VII

After this, Seuthes removed his camp to some considerable distance;     1 and the Hellenes
took up their quarters in some villages, selecting those in which they could best supply their
commissariat, on the road to the sea. Now these particular villages had been given by Seuthes
to Medosades. Accordingly, when the latter saw his property in the villages being expended
by the Hellenes, he was not over well pleased; and taking with him an Odrysian, a powerful
person amongst those who had come down from the interior, and about thirty mounted troopers,
he came and challenged Xenophon to come forth from the Hellenic host. He, taking some of the
officers and others of a character to be relied upon, came forward. Then Medosades, addressing
Xenophon, said: "You are doing wrong to pillage our villages; we give you fair warning--I,
in behalf of Seuthes, and this man by my side, who comes from Medocus, the king up country--to
begone out of the land. If you refuse, understand, we have no notion of handing it over to
you; but if you injure our country we will retaliate upon you as foes."

Xenophon, hearing what they had to say, replied: "Such language addressed to us by you, of
all people, is hard to answer. Yet for the sake of the young man with you, I will attempt to
do so, that at least he may learn how different your nature is from ours. We," he continued,
"before we were your friends, had the free run of this country, moving this way or that, as
it took our fancy, pillaging and   5 burning just as we chose; and you yourself, Medosades,
whenever you came to us on an embassy, camped with us, without apprehension of any foe. As
a tribe collectively you scarcely approached the country at all, or if you found yourselves
in it, you bivouacked with your horses bitted and bridled, as being in the territory of your
superiors. Presently you made friends with us, and, thanks to us, by God's help you have won
this country, out of which to-day you seek to drive us; a country which we held by our own
strength and gave to you. No hostile force, as you well know, was capable of expelling us.
It might have been expected of you personally to speed us on our way with some gift, in return
for the good we did you. Not so; even though our backs are turned to go, we are too slow in
our movements for you. You will not suffer us to take up quarters even, if you can help it,
and these words arouse no shame in you, either before the gods, or this Odrysian, in whose
eyes to-day you are man of means, though until you cultivated our friendship you lived a robber's
life, as you have told us. However, why do you address yourself to me? I am no longer in command.
Our generals are the Lacedaemonians, to whom you and yours delivered the army for withdrawal;
and that, without even inviting me to attend, you most marvellous of men, so that if I lost
their favour when I brought you the troops, I might now win their gratitude by restoring them."

As soon as the Odrysian had heard this statement, he exclaimed: "For my part, Medosades, I
sink under the earth for very shame at what I hear. If I had known the truth before, I would
never have accompanied you. As it is, I return at once. Never would King Medocus applaud me,
if I drove forth his benefactors." With these words, he mounted his horse and rode away, and
with him the rest of his horsemen, except four or five. But Medosades, still vexed by the pillaging
of the country, urged Xenophon to summon the two Lacedaemonians; and he, taking the pick of
his men, came to Charminus and Polynicus and informed them that they were summoned by Medosades;
probably they, like himself, would be warned to leave the country; "if so," he added,  14 "you
will be able to recover the pay which is owing to the army. You can say to them, that the army
has requested you to assist in exacting their pay from Seuthes, whether he like it or not;
that they have promised, as soon as they get this, cheerfully to follow you; that the demand
seems to you to be only just, and that you have accordingly promised not to leave, until the
soldiers have got their dues." More than likely, all that was wrong was that I was approaching
40; with the onset of middle age I would naturally have more aches and pains. 'Take some aspirin and
get used to it,' was his advice.

'It'll only get worse.'

Not satisfied with his dismal prognosis I asked an energetic old guy I knew named Paul, an '80-something
homesteader who was renowned for his organic garden and his good health. Paul referred me
to his doctor, Isabelle Moser, who at that time was running the Great Oaks School of Health,
a residential and out-patient spa nearby at Creswell, Oregon.

Dr. Moser had very different methods of analysis than the medicos, was warmly personal and
seemed very safe to talk to. She looked me over, did some strange magical thing she called
muscle testing and concluded that I still had a very strong constitution. If I would eliminate
certain "bad" foods from my diet, eliminate some generally healthful foods that, unfortunately,
I was allergic to, if I would reduce my alcohol intake greatly and take some food supplements, then
gradually my symptoms would abate. With the persistent application of a little self-discipline over
several months, maybe six months, I could feel really well again almost all the time and would
probably continue that way for many years to come. This was good news, though the need to apply personal
responsibility toward the solution of my problem seemed a little sobering.

But I could also see that Dr. Moser was obviously not telling me something. So I gently pressed
her for the rest. A little shyly, reluctantly, as though she were used to being rebuffed for making
such suggestions, Isabelle asked me if I had ever heard of fasting? "Yes," I said. "I had.
Once when I was about twenty and staying at a farm in Missouri, during a bad flu I actually
did fast, mainly because I was too sick to take anything but water for nearly one week."

"Why do you ask?" I demanded.

"If you would fast, you will start feeling really good as soon as the fast is over." she said.

"Fast?
How long?"

"Some have fasted for a month or even longer," she said. Then she observed my crestfallen expression
and added, "Even a couple of weeks would make an enormous difference."

It just so happened that I was in between set-up stages for a new
mail-order business I was starting and right then I did have a couple
of weeks when I was virtually free of responsibility.

I could also face the idea of not eating for a couple of weeks. "Okay!" I said somewhat impulsively.
"I could fast for two weeks. If I start right now maybe even three weeks, depending on how my schedule
works out."

So in short order I was given several small books about fasting to read at home and was mentally
preparing myself for several weeks of severe privation, my only sustenance to be water and herb tea
without sweetener. And then came the clinker.

"Have you ever heard of colonics?" she asked sweetly.

"Yes. Weird practice, akin to anal sex or something?"

"Not at all," she responded. "Colonics are essential during fasting or you will have spells when
you'll feel terrible. Only colonics make water fasting comfortable and safe."
Then followed some explanation about bowel cleansing (and another
little book to take home) and soon I was agreeing to get my body over
to her place for a colonic every two or three days during the fasting
period, the first colonic scheduled for the next afternoon. I'll spare
you a detailed description of my first fast with colonics; you'll
read about others shortly. In the end I withstood the boredom of water
fasting for 17 days. During the fast I had about 7 colonics. I ended
up feeling great, much trimmer, with an enormous rebirth of energy.
And when I resumed eating it turned out to be slightly easier to control
my dietary habits and appetites.

Thus began my practice of an annual
health-building water fast. Once a year, at whatever season it seemed
propitious, I'd set aside a couple of weeks to heal my body. While
fasting I'd slowly drive myself over to Great Oaks School for colonics
every other day. By the end of my third annual fast in 1981, Isabelle
and I had become great friends. About this same time Isabelle's relationship
with her first husband, Douglas Moser, had disintegrated. Some months
later, Isabelle and I became partners. And then we married.

My regular
fasts continued through 1984, by which time I had recovered my fundamental
organic vigor and had retrained my dietary habits. Shall they see our soldiers so disposed towards you that
a word on your part would suffice to keep them now, or if necessary would bring them back again
to-morrow? while others hearing from us a hundred stories in your praise, hasten to present
themselves at your desire? Or will you drive them to conclude adversely, that through mistrust
of what has happened now, no second set of soldiers will come to help you, for even these troops
of ours are more their friends than yours? And indeed it was not because they fell short of
us in numbers that they became your subjects, but from lack of proper leaders. There is a danger,
therefore, now lest they should choose as their protectors some of us who regard ourselves
as wronged by you, or even better men than us--the Lacedaemonians themselves; supposing our
soldiers undertake to serve with more enthusiasm, if the debt you owe to them be first exacted;
and the Lacedaemonians, who need their services, consent to this request. It is plain, at any
rate, that the Thracians, now prostrate at your feet, would display far more enthusiasm in
attacking, than in assisting you; for your mastery means their slavery, and your defeat their
liberty.

"Again, the country is now yours, and from this time forward you have to make provision for
what is yours; and how will you best secure it an immunity from ill? Either these soldiers
receive their dues and go, leaving a legacy of peace behind, or they stay and occupy an enemy's
country, whilst you endeavour, by aid of a still larger army, to open a new campaign and turn
them out; and your new troops will also need provisions. Or again, which will be the greater
drain on your purse? to pay off your present debt, or, with that still owing, to bid for more
troops, and of a better quality?

"Heracleides, as he used to prove to me, finds the sum excessive. But   35 surely it is a far
less serious thing for you to take and pay it back to-day than it would have been to pay the
tithe of it, before we came to you; since the limit between less and more is no fixed number,
but depends on the relative capacity of payer and recipient, and your yearly income now is
larger than the whole property which you possessed in earlier days.

"Well, Seuthes, for myself these remarks are the expression of friendly forethought for a friend.
They are expressed in the double hope that you may show yourself worthy of the good things
which the gods have given you, and that my reputation may not be ruined with the army. For
I must assure you that to-day, if I wished to injure a foe, I could not do so with this army.
Nor again, if I wished to come and help you, should I be competent to the task; such is the
disposition of the troops towards me. And yet I call you to witness, along with the gods who
know, that never have I received anything from you on account of the soldiers. Never to this
day have I, to my private gain, asked for what was theirs, nor even claimed the promises which
were made to myself; and I swear to you, not even had you proposed to pay me my dues, would
I have accepted them, unless the soldiers also had been going to receive theirs too; how could
I? How shameful it would have been in me, so to have secured my own interests, whilst I disregarded
the disastrous state of theirs, I being so honoured by them. Of course to the mind of Heracleides
this is all silly talk; since the one great object is to keep money by whatever means. That
is not my tenet, Seuthes. I believe that no fairer or brighter jewel can be given to a man,
and most of all a prince, than the threefold grace of valour, justice, and generosity. He that
possesses these is rich in the multitude of friends which surround him; rich also in the desire
of others to be included in their number. While he prospers, he is surrounded by those who
will rejoice with him in his joy; or if misfortune overtake him, he has no lack of sympathisers
to give him help. However, if you have failed to learn from my deeds that I was, heart and
soul, your friend; if my words are powerless to reveal the fact to-day, I would at least direct
your attention to what the         43 soldiers said; you were standing by and heard what those
who sought to blame me said. They accused me to the Lacedaemonians, and the point of their
indictment was that I set greater store by yourself than by the Lacedaemonians; but, as regards
themselves, the charge was that I took more pains to secure the success of your interests than
their own. They suggested that I had actually taken gifts from you. Was it, do you suppose,
because they detected some ill-will in me towards you that they made the allegation? Was it
not rather, that they had noticed my abundant zeal on your behalf?

"All men believe, I think, that a fund of kindly feeling is due to him from whom we accept
gifts. But what is your behaviour? Before I had ministered to you in any way, or done you a
single service, you welcomed me kindly with your eyes, your voice, your hospitality, and you
could not sate yourself with promises of all the fine things that were to follow. But having
once achieved your object, and become the great man you now are, as great indeed as I could
make you, you can stand by and see me degraded among my own soldiers! Well, time will teach
you--that I fully believe--to pay whatever seems to you right, and even without the lessons
of that teacher you will hardly care to see whose who have spent themselves in benefiting you,
become your accusers. Only, when you do pay your debt, I beg of you to use your best endeavour
to right me with the soldiers. Leave me at least where you found me; that is all I ask."

After listening to this appeal, Seuthes called down curses on him, whose fault it was, that
the debt had not long ago been paid, and, if the general suspicion was correct, this was Heracleides.
"For myself," said Seuthes, "I never had any idea of robbing you of your just dues. I will
repay." Then Xenophon rejoined: "Since you are minded to pay, I only ask that you will do so
through me, and will not suffer me on your account to hold a different position in the army
from what I held when we joined you." He replied: "As far as that goes, so far from holding
a less honoured position among your own men on my account, if you will stay with me, keeping
only a thousand heavy infantry, I will deliver to you the fortified places and everything I
promised." The other answered: "On these terms I may not accept them, only let us go   51 free."
"Nay, but I know," said Seuthes, "that it is safer for you to bide with me than to go away."
Then Xenophon again: "For your forethought I thank you, but I may not stay. Somewhere I may
rise to honour, and that, be sure, shall redound to your gain also." Thereupon Seuthes spoke:
"Of silver I have but little; that little, however, I give to you, one talent; but of beeves
I can give you six hundred head, and of sheep four thousand, and of slaves six score. These
take, and the hostages besides, who wronged you, and begone." Xenophon laughed and said: "But
supposing these all together do not amount to the pay; for whom is the talent, shall I say?
It is a little dangerous for myself, is it not? I think I had better be on the look-out for
stones when I return. You heard the threats?"

So for the moment he stayed there, but the next day Seuthes gave up to them what he had promised,
and sent an escort to drive the cattle. It is no surprise to me that considering her nutrient-poor,
fat-laden diet and stressful life, my mother eventually developed severe gall bladder problems.
Her degeneration caused progressively more and more severe pain until she had a cholecystectomy.
The gallbladder's profound deterioration had damaged her liver as well, seeming to her surgeon to
require the removal of half her liver. After this surgical insult she had to stop working and never
regained her health.
 Xenophon held aloof. In fact it was no secret that he was making his preparations
to return home, for as yet the vote of banishment had not been passed at Athens (1). But the
authorities in the camp came to him and begged him not to go away until he had conducted the
army to its destination, and handed it over to Thibron.

 (1) I.e. "at this moment the vote of banishment had not been passed
    which would prevent his return to Athens." The natural inference
    from these words is, I think, that the vote of banishment was
    presently passed, at any rate considerably earlier than the battle
    of Coronea in B.C. 394, five years and a half afterwards.

VIII

From this place they sailed across to Lampsacus, and here Xenophon was  1 met by Eucleides
the soothsayer, a Phliasian, the son of Cleagoras, who painted "the dreams (1)" in the Lycium.
Eucleides congratulated Xenophon upon his safe return, and asked him how much gold he had got?
and Xenophon had to confess: "Upon my word, I shall have barely enough to get home, unless
I sell my horse, and what I have about my person." The other could not credit the statement.
Now when the Lampsacenes sent gifts of hospitality to Xenophon, and he was sacrificing to Apollo,
he requested the presence of Eucleides; and the latter, seeing the victims, said: "Now I believe
what you said about having no money. But I am certain," he continued, "if it were ever to come,
there is an obstacle in the way. If nothing else, you are that obstacle yourself." Xenophon
admitted the force of that remark. Then the other: "Zeus Meilichios (2) is an obstacle to you,
I am sure," adding in another tone of voice, "have you tried sacrificing to that god, as I
was wont to sacrifice and offer whole burnt offerings for you at home?" Xenophon replied that
since he had been abroad, he had not sacrificed to that god. Accordingly Eucleides counselled
him to sacrifice in the old customary way: he was sure that his fortune would improve. The
next day Xenophon went on to Ophrynium and sacrificed, offering a holocaust of swine, after
the custom of his family, and the signs which he obtained were favourable. That very day Bion
and Nausicleides arrived laden with gifts for the army. I felt that the first diplomatic remark
he made in this place would bring down a landslide of ridicule upon him, and maybe something
worse; but before I could whisper to him and check him he had begun, and it was too late.
He said, in a level and dispassionate tone:

 
    'Conductor, you must put these swine out. I will help you.'
    

 I was not looking for that. In a flash the three roughs plunged at him.
    But none of them arrived. He delivered three such blows as one
    could not expect to encounter outside the prize-ring, and neither
of the men had life enough left in him to get up from where he fell.
The Major dragged them out and threw them off the car, and we got
under way again.

From that place they marched through the Troad, and, crossing Mount Ida, arrived at Antandrus,
and then pushed along the seaboard of Mysia to the plain of Thebe (3). Thence they made their
way through            8 Adramytium and Certonus (4) by Atarneus, coming into the plain of
the Caicus, and so reached Pergamus in Mysia.

 (3) Thebe, a famous ancient town in Mysia, at the southern foot of Mt.
    Placius, which is often mentioned in Homer ("Il." i. 366, vi. 397,
    xxii. 479, ii. 691). See "Dict. Geog." s.v. The name {Thebes
    pedion} preserves the site. Cf. above {Kaustrou pedion}, and such
    modern names as "the Campagna" or "Piano di Sorrento."

 (4) The site of Certonus is not ascertained. Some critics have
    conjectured that the name should be Cytonium, a place between
    Mysia and Lydia; and Hug, who reads {Kutoniou}, omits {odeusantes
    par 'Atanea}, "they made their way by Atarneus," as a gloss.

Here Xenophon was hospitably entertained at the house of Hellas, the wife of Gongylus the Eretrian
(5), the mother of Gorgion and Gongylus. From her he learnt that Asidates, a Persian notable,
was in the plain. "If you take thirty men and go by night, you will take him prisoner," she
said, "wife, children, money, and all; of money he has a store;" and to show them the way to
these treasures, she sent her own cousin and Daphnagoras, whom she set great store by. So then
Xenophon, with these two to assist, did sacrifice; and Basias, an Eleian, the soothsayer in
attendance, said that the victims were as promising as could be, and the great man would be
an easy prey. Accordingly, after dinner he set off, taking with him the officers who had been
his staunchest friends and confidants throughout; as he wished to do them a good turn. A number
of others came thrusting themselves on their company, to the number of six hundred, but the
officers repelled them: "They had no notion of sharing their portion of the spoil," they said,
"just as though the property lay already at their feet."

 (5) Cf. Thuc. i. 128; also "Hell." III. i. 6.

About midnight they arrived. The slaves occupying the precincts of the tower, with the mass
of goods and chattles, slipped through their fingers, their sole anxiety being to capture Asidates
and his belongings. So they brought their batteries to bear, but failing to take the tower
by assault (since it was high and solid, and well supplied with ramparts, besides having a
large body of warlike defenders), they endeavoured to undermine it. The wall was eight clay
bricks thick, but by daybreak the passage was effected and the wall undermined. At the first
gleam of light through the aperture, one of    14 the defendants inside, with a large ox-spit,
smote right through the thigh of the man nearest the hole, and the rest discharged their arrows
so hotly that it was dangerous to come anywhere near the passage; and what with their shouting
and kindling of beacon fires, a relief party at length arrived, consisting of Itabelius at
the head of his force, and a body of Assyrian heavy infantry from Comania, and some Hyrcanian
cavalry (6), the latter also being mercenaries of the king. Then the Major volunteered some
testimony for the defence. He said:

 'I saw it all. You gentlemen have not meant to exaggerate the circumstances,
but still that is what you have done. The boy has done nothing more
than all train-boys do.
    They are the Scirites of the Assyrian army who came over to Cyrus
    after the first battle. Their country is the fertile land touching
    the south-eastern corner of the Caspian. Cf. "Cyrop." IV. ii. 8,
    where the author (or an editor) appends a note on the present
    status of the Hyrcanians.

It was now high time to consider how they were to beat a retreat. So seizing all the cattle
and sheep to be had, with the slaves, they put them within a hollow square and proceed to drive
them off. Not that they had a thought to give to the spoils now, but for precaution's sake
and for fear lest if they left the goods and chattels behind and made off, the retreat would
rapidly degenerate into a stampede, the enemy growing bolder as the troops lost heart. For
the present then they retired as if they meant to do battle for the spoils. As soon as Gongylus
espied how few the Hellenes were and how large the attacking party, out he came himself, in
spite of his mother, with his private force, wishing to share in the action. Another too joined
in the rescue--Procles, from Halisarna and Teuthrania, a descendant of Damaratus. By this time
Xenophon and his men were being sore pressed by the arrows and slingstones, though they marched
in a curve so as to keep their shields facing the missiles, and even so, barely crossed the
river Carcasus, nearly half of them wounded. He has heard that whoever stretches himself out
on one of those rocks there and asks for a deathless life can have his wish. He laughs at the
tradition, but wants to make the trial anyway. The invisible Spirit of Life warns him!


The next day Xenophon sacrificed and led out the whole army under the   20 cover of night,
intending to pierce far into the heart of Lydia with a view to lulling to sleep the enemy's
alarm at his proxmity, and so in fact to put him off his guard. But Asidates, hearing that
Xenophon had again sacrificed with the intention of another attack, and was approaching with
his whole army, left his tower and took up quarters in some villages lying under the town of
Parthenium. Here Xenophon's party fell in with him, and took him prisoner, with his wife, his
children, his horses, and all that he had; and so the promise of the earlier victims was literally
fulfilled. After that they returned again to Pergamus, and here Xenophon might well thank God
with a warm heart, for the Laconians, the officers, the other generals, and the soldiers as
a body united to give him the pick of horses and cattle teams, and the rest; so that he was
now in a position himself to do another a good turn.

Meanwhile Thibron arrived and received the troops which he incorporated with the rest of his
Hellenic forces, and so proceeded to prosecute a war against Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus (7).

 (7) The MSS. add: "The following is a list of the governors of the
    several territories of the king which were traversed by us during
    the expedition: Artimas, governor of Lydia; Artacamas, of Phrygia;
    Mithridates, of Lycaonia and Cappadocia; Syennesis, of Cilicia;
    Dernes, of Phoenicia and Arabia; Belesys, of Syria and Assyria;
    Rhoparas, of Babylon; Arbacus, of Media; Tiribazus, of the
    Phasians and Hesperites. Then I began to experience more and
    more off days when I did not feel quite right. I thought I possessed
    an iron constitution. Although I grew a big food garden and ate
    mostly "vegetablitarian" I thought I could eat anything with impunity.
     The entire
    journey, ascent and descent, consisted of two hundred and fifteen
    stages = one thousand one hundred and fifty-five parasangs =
    thirty-four thousand six hundred and fifty stades. Computed in
    time, the length of ascent and descent together amounted to one
    year and three months." The annotator apparently computes the
    distance from Ephesus to Cotyora.