Forty of the wounded were placed upon pallets on the floor of a great public hall, and among
these was Henry.  There the ladies of Memphis came every day, with flowers, fruits, and dainties
and delicacies of all kinds, and there they remained and nursed the wounded. All the physicians
stood watches there, and all the medical students; and the rest of the town furnished money,
or whatever else was wanted. And Memphis knew how to do all these things well; for many a disaster
like the 'Pennsylvania's' had happened near her doors, and she was experienced, above all other
cities on the river, in the gracious office of the Good Samaritan'

The sight I saw when I entered that large hall was new and strange to me. Two long rows of
prostrate forms--more than forty, in all--and every face and head a shapeless wad of loose
raw cotton.  It was a gruesome spectacle. I watched there six days and nights, and a very melancholy
experience it was. There was one daily incident which was peculiarly depressing: this was the
removal of the doomed to a chamber apart.  It was done in order that the MORALE of the other
patients might not be injuriously affected by seeing one of their number in the death-agony.
The fated one was always carried out with as little stir as possible, and the stretcher was
always hidden from sight by a wall of assistants; but no matter: everybody knew what that cluster
of bent forms, with its muffled step and its slow movement meant; and all eyes watched it wistfully,
and a shudder went abreast of it like a wave.

I saw many poor fellows removed to the 'death-room,' and saw them no more afterward.  But I
saw our chief mate carried thither more than once. His hurts were frightful, especially his
scalds.  He was clothed in linseed oil and raw cotton to his waist, and resembled nothing human. Now
hard by was the forest, within two bowshots. It stretched full thirty leagues in length and
in breadth, and had wild beasts in it and snaky things. She was afraid that if she went into
it, these would kill her; and on the other hand she bethought her that if she were found there
she would be taken back to the town to be burned.

Here they sing.
Nicolette, that bright-faced may, Up the moat had won her way, And
to waymenting did fall, And on Jesu's name 'gan call:

"Father, King
of Majesty!  And now and then while these frenzies
possessed him, he would tear off handfuls of the cotton and expose his cooked flesh to view.
It was horrible. It was bad for the others, of course--this noise and these exhibitions; so
the doctors tried to give him morphine to quiet him.  But, in his mind or out of it, he would
not take it.  He said his wife had been killed by that treacherous drug, and he would die before
he would take it. He suspected that the doctors were concealing it in his ordinary medicines
and in his water--so he ceased from putting either to his lips. Once, when he had been without
water during two sweltering days, he took the dipper in his hand, and the sight of the limpid
fluid, and the misery of his thirst, tempted him almost beyond his strength; but he mastered
himself and threw it away, and after that he allowed no more to be brought near him.  Three
times I saw him carried to the death-room, insensible and supposed to be dying; but each time
he revived, cursed his attendants, and demanded to be taken back. He lived to be mate of a
steamboat again.

But he was the only one who went to the death-room and returned alive. Dr. Peyton, a principal
physician, and rich in all the attributes that go to constitute high and flawless character,
did all that educated judgment and trained skill could do for Henry; but, as the newspapers
had said in the beginning, his hurts were past help. On the evening of the sixth day his wandering
mind busied itself with matters far away, and his nerveless fingers 'picked at his coverlet.'
His hour had struck; we bore him to the death-room, poor boy.