The story is thus told in Holinshed's Chronicles. 'It happened that a certain gentleman named
Walter Ralegh, as he was upon a side holy day riding from his house to Exeter, overtook an
old woman going to the parish church of Saint Mary Clift, who had a pair of beads in her hands,
and asked her what she did with those beads. And entering into further speech with her concerning
religion which was reformed, and as then by order of law to be put in execution, he did persuade
with her that she should, as a good Christian woman and an obedient subject, yield thereunto;
saying further that there was a punishment by law appointed against her, and all such as would
not obey and follow the same, and which would be put in execution upon them. This woman nothing
liking, nor well digesting this matter, went forth to the parish church, where all the parishioners
were then at the service; and being impatient, and in an agony with the speeches before passed
between her and the gentleman, beginneth to upbraid in the open church very hard and unseemly
speeches concerning religion, saying that she was threatened by the gentleman, that, except
she would leave her beads, and give over holy bread and holy water, the gentlemen would burn
them out of their houses and spoil them, with many other speeches very false and untrue, and
whereof no talk at all had passed between the gentleman and her. Notwithstanding, she had not
so soon spoken but that she was believed, and in all haste like a sort of wasps they fling
out of the church, and get them to the town which is not far from thence, and there began to
intrench and fortify the town, sending abroad into the country round about the news aforesaid,
and of their doings in hand, flocking, and procuring as many as they could to come and to join
with them. But before they came into the town they overtook the gentleman Master Ralegh aforesaid,
and were in such a choler, and so fell in rages with him, that, if he had not shifted himself
into the chapel there, and had been rescued by certain mariners of Exmouth which came with
him, he had been in great danger of his life, and like to have been murdered. And albeit he
escaped for this time, yet it was not long before he fell into their hands, and by them was
imprisoned and kept in prison in the tower and church of Saint Sidwell, without the east gate
of the city of Exeter, during the whole time of the commotion, being many times threatened
to be executed to death.' He was not released till the battle of Clyst, called by Holinshed,
Clift, Heath, won on August 4, 1549, by Lords Grey and Bedford near the scene of his misadventure,
followed by a second victory on the next day, forced the Catholic insurgents to raise the siege
of Exeter, which they had been blockading since July 2.

He was no fair weather theologian. His Protestantism out-lived King Edward. He sympathized
with the demonstration in 1553 against the Spanish marriage. On the failure of the Devonshire
movement his cousin, Sir Peter Carew, the ringleader at Exeter, is stated in official depositions
to have effected his escape abroad through Walter Ralegh, whom he 'persuaded to convey him
in his bark' to France from Weymouth. The wording implies active and conscious intervention.
The strange thing is that he should not have been punished for complicity. Later in the reign
of Mary his wife exposed herself to similar peril, and similarly escaped. Foxe in his Acts
and Monuments relates that Agnes Prest, before she was brought to the stake in 1557 at Southernhay,
had been comforted in Exeter gaol by the visits of 'the wife of Walter Ralegh, a woman of noble
wit, and of good and goodly opinion.'

[Sidenote: Death and Burial.]

Unless that Walter was churchwarden of East Budleigh in 1561, and that a conveyance by him
of the Sidmouth Manor fish tithes proves him to have been alive in April, 1578, nothing more
is known of him. It has not been ascertained when he and Katherine died, though they are believed
to have been dead in 1584. The interest in the East Budleigh farm had by that time run out;
and it is surmised they had removed into Exeter, if they had not previously possessed a residence
there, perhaps by the Palace Gate. On the authority of a request by their son in 1603 to be
buried, if not at Sherborne, beside them in 'Exeter Church,' it has been concluded that they
were interred in the Cathedral. A monument erected to Katherine's son by her first marriage,
Sir John Gilbert, was long accepted as theirs. In fact no trace of their burial in any Exeter
church has been found. The present inclination of local archæologists seems to be to assume
that they were not buried at Exeter at all. It is hard to assent in the face of Ralegh's words.
At all events, nothing else of any kind is remembered of the pair; or could reasonably be expected
to have been remembered. History has told much more of them than of most country gentlemen
and their wives.

CHAPTER II.

IN SEARCH OF A CAREER (1552-1581).

[Sidenote: Ralegh's Birthplace.]

Walter, the second son by the third marriage of Walter Ralegh of Fardell and Hayes, was born
in the reign of Edward VI, it has been supposed, in 1552. The exact date is not beyond doubt;
for the registration of baptisms at East Budleigh was not begun till two or three years later.
If the inscription on the National Portrait Gallery picture, '1588, aetatis suae 34,' and that
on Zucchero's in the Dublin Gallery, 'aet. 44, 1598,' be correct, his birth must have been
not in 1552, but about 1554. A similar, or nearly similar, inference may be drawn from the
statement, on a miniature of him at Belvoir Castle, of his age as sixty-five in 1618. One local
writer, R. Izacke, has claimed the honour of his birthplace for a house in Exeter, adjoining
the Palace-gate. Probably the rumour points, as I have intimated, to its occupation at some
time or other by his parents. Another author asserts that he was born at Fardell. His own testimony,
'being born in that house,' is decisive in favour of his father's Budleigh home, a lonely,
one-storied, thatched, late Tudor farmhouse, not a manor-house, of moderate size, with gabled
wings, and a projecting central porch. Tradition has marked out the particular room in which
he was born, as on the upper floor at the west end, facing southwards. The house, which is
a mile west of East Budleigh church, and six from Exmouth, with the exception of some change
at the end of the east wing, probably retains its original character. After she had blessed her
sons therefore, they went forth into the forest. They each kept watch in turn, and sat on the
highest oak and looked towards the tower. When eleven days had passed
and the turn came to Benjamin, he saw that a flag was being raised.
The hollow in which it lies, among low hills, is on the verge of a tract of moorland; and Hayes
Wood rises close at hand. Through the oak wood to Budleigh Salterton Bay is two miles and a half.

[Sidenote: At Oxford.]

In this quiet spot Ralegh spent his boyhood, in circumstances not very unlike those of more
eminent county families with which his was connected. During the earlier half of the sixteenth
century the majority of the gentry were continually growing poorer, and a minority were growing
richer. The Raleghs, it is plain, had not met with the good fortune of the Russells, and others
of their rural peers. They were declining, if hardly in the degree represented subsequently.
But an ampler share of prosperity could not have made much difference in young Walter's prospects
or training. Three brothers were all before him in the succession to the patrimony. His birthright
could not have comprised more than the cadet's prescriptive portion of necessity and brains.
It is unfair to the natural curiosity of posterity that his extraordinary endowments in the
second respect are not traceable in anecdotes of his childhood. Naturally a local legend reports
him to have loved the society of adventurous mariners. Sir John Millais in his 'Boyhood of
Ralegh,' which was painted at Budleigh Salterton, has embodied it. In a narrative printed a
century after his death a general assertion of his fondness for books of voyages occurs. Otherwise
his boyish tastes and habits are wholly unknown. The name of his school has not been preserved.
The first accepted fact after his birth is his entrance, as a commoner, into Oriel College,
of which, says Anthony à Wood, his cousin, C. Champernoun, was a member. According to a statement
by Thomas Fuller, of which there is no corroboration either in the books of Christ Church,
or elsewhere, he belonged also to Christ Church, before or after his admission into Oriel.
For any details of his academical course, as for the dates of its commencement and close, posterity
is indebted to Wood, who remarks that he went up to Oriel 'in 1568, or thereabouts,' and, 'after
he had spent about three years in that house, left the University without a degree.' Wood declares
that 'his natural parts being strangely advanced by academical learning, under the care of
an excellent tutor, he became the ornament of the juniors, and was worthily esteemed a proficient
in oratory and philosophy.' It is exceedingly likely, Ralegh being Ralegh. At the same time,
particulars would have been welcome.

[Sidenote: Chronological difficulties.]

Lord Bacon has enshrined in his Apophthegms an example of Ralegh's wit at Oxford. A cowardly
fellow happened to be a very good archer. Having been grossly abused by another, he bemoaned
himself to Ralegh, and asked what he should do to repair the wrong that had been offered him.
'Why, challenge him,' answered Ralegh, 'to a match of shooting.' If the sarcasm is not very
keen its preservation in academical memory implies an impression of distinction in its author.
Perhaps as much may be said for another anecdote of his University career, for which John Aubrey
solemnly vouches, that he borrowed a gown at Oxford of one T. Child, and never restored it.
Bacon's anecdote, in any case, being contemporary testimony, answers the useful purpose of
confirming the reality of Ralegh's membership of the University, which otherwise would have
to be believed on the faith simply of vague tradition, and of Wood's hasty assertions. No evidence
indeed of Ralegh's connection with Oxford has ever been discovered in the College or University
papers and books, beyond the entry, a little below the name of C. Champernoun, of 'W. Rawley,'
in the list of members of Oriel, dated 1572. It is printed in Mr. Andrew Clark's valuable Oxford
Register. This W. Rawley must have been, like Champernoun, an undergraduate; for the name has
not the graduate's prefix of 'Mr' or 'Sr.' The presence of the name in the list, with that
of Champernoun, would be known to Wood. He may have built upon it the whole of his account
of the periods both of Ralegh's admission into Oriel, and his departure after some three years.
It would seem to him reasonable enough that Ralegh should have entered about 1568 at sixteen,
and be still in residence three or four years later. Unfortunately an interlude, put apparently
by Wood several years later, separates 1568 and 1572 in Ralegh's career. His academical course
cannot fill up the gap; and it at once renders the chronology of the Athenae impossible, and
that of the Oriel list hard to understand. Ralegh is known to have been out of England for
part, if not the whole, of 1569, and is believed with good cause to have remained abroad over
1572. There are ways of explaining the consequent discrepancies. The W. Rawley on the Oriel
list may have been, and probably was, our Walter Ralegh, retained among the number of undergraduates,
though he had ceased to reside. A century later the name of the Duke of Monmouth, who had resided
for a few months only, was kept on the Corpus books for many years. Again, to take and revise
Wood's reference, Ralegh may well have entered long before he was sixteen. If, having been,
in accordance with the common belief, born in 1552, he had, like his son Walter, gone up at
fourteen, he would, in 1569, have passed three years at Oxford. But at all events Wood is mistaken
in the assertion that he resided there about three years from 1568; for in 1569 he certainly
was campaigning in France. 

He went on and came to the town wherein stood the unfruitful tree,
and there too the watchman wanted an answer.

So he told him what he had heard from the devil: "Kill the mouse which is gnawing at its root,
and it will again bear golden apples."
 He collected
them chiefly from the West. Ralegh is said to have been among those who accepted his invitation;
'admodum adolescens,' writes Camden in the Annals, 'jam primum fatis monstratus.' He must have
quitted Oriel, perhaps in company with C. Champernoun, for the purpose. Generally it has been
supposed that he crossed the Channel with the rest of the troop. But there is some reason for
holding that he reached France earlier. The contingent entered the Huguenot camp on October
5, 1569, two days after the defeat at Moncontour. Ralegh alludes to himself in the History
of the World as of the beaten army. Praising Count Lewis of Nassau for his skilful conduct
of the Huguenot retreat, he remarks: 'Of which myself was an eye-witness, and was one of them
that had cause to thank him for it.' The passage proves that he was in the Huguenot camp after
Moncontour. Nothing in the remark is inconsistent with his earlier arrival, if there be, as
there is, evidence to support it. Elsewhere in the History he says: 'I remember it well, that,
when the Prince of Condé was slain after the battle of Jarnac,' the Huguenots consoled themselves
for his death. Jarnac was fought on March 13, 1669. If, then, the phrase, 'I remember,' refer
to Ralegh's personal experiences of Huguenot sentiment on the field, he must have joined the
army at least half a year before the retreat after Moncontour. The only way of avoiding that
conclusion is to take the violent course of supposing that he was recalling French criticisms
delivered some time after the actual event.

[Sidenote: Ferocities of Civil War.]

