Every library has its treasures, to show the present generation how beautiful an old book can
be which was produced in days when its production was not a mere publisher's speculation, but
the work of a scholar seeking to promote knowledge and advance the cause of Truth. And it does
not require much imagination for a student, in a building like Merton Library, to conjure up
the picture of his mediaeval predecessor, sitting on his hard wooden bench, with his chained
MSS. volume on the shelf above, and poring over the crabbed pages in the unwarmed, half-lighted
chamber.

Those only, it might be said, can properly reform the present who understand the past, and
it is perhaps the spirit of the Merton Library, at once old and new, which has inspired the
statesmen whom Merton has sent to take part in the government of Britain during the last half-century.
Lord Randolph Churchill, the founder of Tory democracy, his present-day successor in the same
role, Lord Birkenhead, and the ever young Lord Halsbury are men of the type which Walter de
Merton wished to train, "for the service of God in Church and State," men who champion the
existing order, but who are willing to develop and improve it on the old lines.

 ORIEL COLLEGE

    "Here at each coign of every antique street
     A memory hath taken root in stone,
     Here Raleigh shone."
                                      L. JOHNSON.

 [Plate VIII. Oriel College and St. Mary's Church]

It is a curious coincidence that three of the most troubled reigns of English history have
been marked by double college foundations in Oxford. That of Henry VI, in spite of constant
civil war, threatening or actual, saw the beginnings of All Souls' and of Magdalen; the short
and sad reign of Mary Tudor restored to Oxford Trinity and St. John's; and in an earlier century
the ministers of Edward II, the most unroyal of our Plantagenet kings, gave to Oxford Exeter
and Oriel. The king himself was graciously pleased to accept the honour of the latter foundation,
and his statue adorns the College Quad, along with that of Charles I, in whose day the whole
College was rebuilt. The front may be compared architecturally with those of Wadham and of
University, which date from about the same period (the first part of the seventeenth century),
when, under the fostering care of Archbishop Laud, Oxford increased greatly in numbers, in
learning, and in buildings. Though Oriel has neither the bold sweep of University nor the perfect
proportions of Wadham, it yet is a pleasing building, at least in its front.

Like New College, Oriel is dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, and, also like New College, the
name of "St. Mary's" early gave way to a popular nickname. The College at once on its foundation
received the gift of a tenement called "L'Oriole," which occupied its present site, and its
name has displaced the real style of the College in general use.

It is only fitting that, as in our picture, St. Mary's Church should be combined with Oriel,
for the founder was Vicar of St. Mary's, and the presentation to that living has ever since
been in the hands of the College. It was as a Fellow of Oriel that Newman became, in 1828,
Vicar of St. Mary's, from the pulpit of which, during thirteen years, he moulded all that was
best in the religious life of Oxford. The glorious spire of the church was still new when the
College was founded.

Oriel and its chapel are among the places for religious pilgrimage in Oxford. As Lincoln draws
from all parts of the world those who reverence the name of John Wesley, so the Oxford Movement
and the Anglican Revival had their starting-point, and for some time their centre, in Oriel.
The connection of the College with the Movement was not in either case a mere accident; the
Oxford Revival, at any rate, was profoundly influenced by the personality of Newman, and Newman,
both by attraction and by repulsion, was largely what Oriel made him. Among those who were
with him at the College were Archbishop Whately, whose Liberalism repelled him, Hawkins, the
Provost, whose views on "Tradition" began to modify the Evangelicalism in which he had been
brought up, Keble, whose /Christian Year/ did more for Church teaching in England than countless
sermons, Pusey, already famous for his learning and his piety, who was to give his name to
the Movement, and, slightly later, Church, afterwards Dean of St. Paul's, the historian of
the Movement, and Samuel Wilberforce, who, as Bishop of Oxford, was to show how profoundly
it would increase the influence of the English Church.

Such a combination of famous names at one time is hardly found in the history of any other
college, and it would be easy to add others hardly less known, who were also members of the
same body at that famous time. Hero-worshippers can still see the rooms where these great men
lived, and the Common Room in which they met and argued, in the days when Oxford did less teaching
and had more time for talking and for thinking than the busy, hurrying ways of the twentieth
century allow. But Oriel has many other associations besides those of the Oxford Movement.
Walter Raleigh, the most fascinating of Elizabethans, was a student there, and probably in
Oxford met the great historian of travel and discovery, Richard Hakluyt (a Christ Church man),
whose influence did so much to bring home to Oxford the wonders of the strange worlds beyond
the seas. It was probably also through his connection with Oriel that Raleigh made the acquaintance
of Harriot, who shared in his colonial ventures in Virginia, and who became the historian of
that foundation, so full of importance as the beginning of the new England across the Atlantic.
It was only fitting that the Raleigh of the nineteenth century, Cecil John Rhodes, should also
be an Oriel man, who was never weary of acknowledging what he owed to Oxford, and who showed
his faith in her by his works. The Rhodes' Foundation expends his millions in bringing scholars
to Oxford from the whole world; already its influence has been great during its twenty years
of existence; what it will be in the future, only the future can show. If Mr. Rhodes gave his
millions to the University, he gave his tens of thousands to his old College. The result on
the High Street is--to put it gently--not altogether happy; but perhaps time may soften the
lines of Mr. Champney's somewhat uninspired front, though it is not likely to quicken interest
in the statues of the obscure provosts which adorn it.

QUEEN'S COLLEGE

    "The building, parent of my young essays,
     Asks in return a tributary praise;
     Pillars sublime bear up the learned weight,
     And antique sages tread the pompous height."
                                          TICKELL.

Queens's is one of the six oldest colleges in Oxford, and is far on to celebrating its sexcentenary,
but it has purged itself of the Gothic leaven in its buildings more completely than any other
Oxford foundation. It does not even occupy its own old site, for the building originally lay
well back from the High Street. It was only the "civilities and kindnesses" of Provost Lancaster
which induced the Mayor and Corporation of Oxford, in 1709, to grant to Queen's College "for
1,000 years," "so much ground on the High Street as shall be requisite for making their intended
new building straight and uniform." And so the most important of "the streamlike windings of
the glorious street" was in part determined by a corrupt bargain between "a vile Whig" (as
Hearne calls this hated Provost) and a complaisant mayor. But much of the credit for the beauty
of this part of the High must also be given to the architect of University College (seen in
Plate IX on the left), who, whether by skill or by accident, combined at a most graceful angle
the two quads, erected with an interval of some eighty years between them (1634 and 1719).

A man must, indeed, be a Gothic purist who would wish away the stately front quadrangle of
Queen's, designed by Wren's favourite pupil, Hawkmoor, while the master himself is said to
be responsible for the chapel of the College, the most perfect basilican church in Oxford.

If Queen's has been revolutionary in its buildings, it has been singularly tenacious of old
customs. Its members still assemble at dinner to the sound of the trumpet (blown by a curious
arrangement /after/ grace has been said); it still keeps up the ancient and honoured custom
of bringing in the boar's head--"the chief service of this land"--for dinner on Christmas Day;
while on New Year's Day, the Bursar still, as has been done for nearly 600 years, bids his
guests "take this and be thrifty," as he hands each a "needle and thread," wherewith to mend
their academic hoods; the /aiguille et fil/ is probably a pun on the name of the founder, Robert
Eglesfield. The College at these festivities uses the loving, cup, given it by its founder,
perhaps the oldest piece of plate in constant use anywhere in Great Britain; five and a half
centuries of good liquor have stained the gold-mounted aurochs' horn to a colour of unrivalled
softness and beauty.

Robert Eglesfield was almoner of the good Queen Philippa, wife of Edward III, and, like Adam
de Brome, the founder of Oriel, he, too, commended his college to a royal patron. Ever since
his time, the "Queen's College" has been under the patronage of the Queen's consort of England,
and the connection has been duly acknowledged by many of them, especially by Henrietta Maria,
the evil genius of Charles I, and by Queen Caroline, the good genius of George II. Her present
Gracious Majesty, too, has recognized the college claim. The Queens Regnant have no obligations
to the college, but Queen Elizabeth gave it the seal it still uses, and good Queen Anne was
a liberal contributor to the rebuilding of the college in her day; her statue still adorns
the cupola on the front to the High.

 [Plate IX. High Street]

No doubt it was the royal connection which brought to Queen's, if tradition may be trusted,
two famous warrior princes, the Black Prince and Henry V; though it is at least doubtful whether
the Queen's poet, Thomas Tickell, Addison's flattering friend, had any authority for the picture
he gives of their college life. He describes them as:

    "Sent from the Monarch's to the Muses' Court,
     Their meals were frugal and their sleeps were short;
     To couch at curfew time they thought no scorn,
     And froze at matins every winters morn."

The College has an interesting portrait of the great Henry, which may be authentic; but that
of the Black Prince, which adorns the college hall, is known to have been painted from a handsome
Oxford butcher's boy, in the eighteenth century. While we condemn the lack of historic sense
in the Provost and Fellows of that day, we may at least acquit them of any intention of pacificist
irony in their choice of a model.

Queen's has had better poets than Tickell on its rolls, but, by a curious chance, the two most
eminent--Joseph Addison and William Collins--were both tempted away from their first college
by the superior wealth and attractions of Magdalen.

The old local connections which were such a marked feature in the statutes of founders, and
which so profoundly influenced Oxford down to the Commission of 1854, have been almost swept
away at other colleges; but at Queen's they have always been strongly maintained. It has been,
and is, emphatically, a north-country college. Not the least important factor in maintaining
this tradition has been the great benefaction of Lady Elizabeth Hastings, fondly and familiarly
known to all Queen's men as "Lady Betty." Steele wrote of her when young, that to "love her
was a liberal education"; this may have been flattery, but her bounty, at any rate, has given
a "liberal education" to hundreds of north-country men, who come up from the twelve schools
of her foundation to her college at Oxford.

It is interesting to note in Modern Oxford, attempts to re-establish those local connections,
which the wisdom of our ancestors established, and which the self-complacency of Victorian
reformers "vilely cast away."

NEW COLLEGE (1) FOUNDER AND BUILDINGS

    "There the kindly fates allowed
     Me too room, and made me proud,
     Prouder name I have not wist,
     With the name of Wykehamist."
                               L. JOHNSON.

 [Plate X. New College : The Entrance Gateway]

Among the "Founders" of Oxford colleges, three stand out pre-eminent --all three bishops of
Winchester and great public servants. If Wolsey has undisputed claims for first place, there
can be little doubt that, in spite of the great public services of Bishop Foxe, the Founder
of Corpus, the second place must be assigned to William of Wykeham, "sometime Lord High Chancellor
of England, the sole and munificent founder of the two St. Mary Winton colleges." Others, beside
Wykehamists, hear with pleasure the magnificent roll of the titles of the Founder of New College,
when one of his intellectual sons occupies the University pulpit, and gives thanks for "founders
and benefactors, such as were William of Wykeham."

In Oxford, without doubt, his great claim to be remembered will be held to be his college with
the school at Winchester, which he linked to it. But he was also a reformer and a champion
of Parliamentary privilege in the days when the "Good Parliament" set to work to check the
misgovernment of Edward III in his dotage, and, as an architect, he is equally famous as having
given to Windsor Castle its present shape, and as having secured the final triumph of the Perpendicular
style by his glorious nave at Winchester.

William of Wykeham is a very striking instance of what is too often Forgotten--viz., that in
the Mediaeval Church all professional men, and not simply spiritual pastors, found their work
and their reward in the ranks of the clergy. As "supervisor of the king's works," he earned
the royal favour, which, after sixteen years of service, rewarded him with the rich bishopric
of Winchester. Such a career and such a reward seem to modern ideas incongruous, even as they
did to John Wycliffe, his great contemporary, who complained of men being made bishops because
they were "wise in building castles." But many forms of service were needed to create England;
Wykeham and Wycliffe both have a place in the roll of its "Makers." At all events, if Wykeham
obtained his wealth by secular service, he spent it for the promoting of the welfare of the
Church, as he conceived it. The purpose of his two colleges was to remedy the shortness of
clergy in his day, and to assist the /militia clericalis/, which had been grievously reduced
/pestilentiis, guerris et aliis mundi miseriis/ (an obvious reference to the Black Death).

New College was planned on a scale of magnificence which far exceeded any of the earlier colleges.
It was emphatically the "New College," [1] and its foundation (it was opened in 1386) marks
the final triumph of the college system.

[1] The popular name has entirety displaced its official style. Rather more than a generation
ago, an historically minded Wykehamist tried to revive the proper style of his college, and
headed all his letters "The College, of St. Mary of Winchester, Oxford." The result was disastrous
for him; the replies came to the Vicar of St. Mary's, to St. Mary's Hall, to Winchester, anywhere
but to him; and very soon practical necessity overcame antiquarian, propriety.

Its Warden was to have a state corresponding to that of the great mitred abbots; the stables,
where he kept his six horses, on the south side of New College Lane (to be seen in Plate X
on the right), show, by their perfect masonry, how well the architect-bishop chose his materials
and how skilfully they were worked.

The entrance tower, in the centre of the picture, with its statues of the Blessed Virgin and
of the Founder in adoration below on her left, was the abode of the Warden; but his lodgings,
still the most magnificent home in Oxford, extended in both directions from the tower.

Behind this front lay Wykeham's Quad, nestling under the shadow of the towering chapel and
hall on the north side. Here also, as in the stables, the technical knowledge of the Founder
is seen; his "chambers," after more than 500 years, have still their old stone unrenewed; while
the third story, added 300 years later on (1674-5), has had to be entirely refaced.

But it is in the public buildings, and especially in the chapel, that the greatness of Wykeham,
as an architect, is best seen. In spite of the destructive fanaticism of the Reformation, and
the almost equally destructive "restorations" of the notorious Wyatt, and of Sir Gilbert Scott
(who inexcusably raised the height of the roof), the chapel still is indisputably the finest
in Oxford. And its glass may challenge a still wider field. The eight great windows in the
ante- chapel, dating from the Founder's time, rival the glories of the French cathedrals; the
windows of the chapel proper, whatever be thought of their artistic success, are a unique instance
of what English glass-makers could do in the eighteenth century; and Sir Joshua Reynolds' west
window (the outside of which is seen in the centre of the next picture) has at all events the
suffrages of the majority, who agree with Horace Walpole that it is "glorious," and that "the
sun shining through the transparencies has a magic effect." It must be added, however, that
Walpole soon changed his mind, and was very severe on Sir Joshua's "washy virtues," which have
been compared to "seven chambermaids."

Not the least interesting feature of the Founder's chapel is its detached bell-tower, seen
in the next picture, on the north side of the cloisters. He obtained leave to place this on
the city wall, a large section of which the College undertook to maintain-thus adding a permanent
charm to their own garden.

The magnificence of the Founder Bishop is well seen in his splendid crozier, bequeathed to
him by his college, and still preserved on the north side of the chapel. The results of his
work, for Oxford and for learning, will be briefly told of in the next chapter.

 [Plate XI. New College : The Tower]

NEW COLLEGE (2) HISTORY

    "Round thy cloisters, in moonlight,
     Branching dark, or touched with white:
     Round old chill aisles, where, moon-smitten,
     Blanches the Orate, written
     Under each worn old-world face."
                                       L. JOHHSON.

William of Wykeham's College had other marked features besides its magnificent scale. Previous
colleges had grown; at New College everything was organized from the first. As the great architectural
History of Cambridge says: "For the first time, chapel, hall, library, treasury, the Warden's
lodgings, a sufficient range of chambers, the cloister, the various domestic offices, are provided
for and erected without change of plan." The chapel especially gave the model for the T shape,
a choir and transepts without a nave, which has become the normal form in Oxford. The influence
of Wykeham's building plan may be traced elsewhere also--at Cambridge and even in Scotland.

In these well-planned buildings, definite arrangements were made for college instruction, as
opposed to the general teaching open to the whole University; special /informafores/ were provided,
who were to supervise the work of all scholars up to the age of sixteen. This marks the beginning
of the Tutorial System, which has ever since played so great a part in the intellectual life
of England's two old Universities.

Wykeham's scholars all came from Winchester, and were supposed to be /pauperes/, but as one
of the first, Henry Chichele, afterwards Henry V's Archbishop of Canterbury and the Founder
of All Souls', was a son of the Lord Mayor of London, it is obvious that the qualification
of "poverty" was interpreted with some laxity. It was not until the middle of the nineteenth
century that others than Wykehamists were admitted as scholars.

The fact that a mere boy was elected to a position which provided for him for life was not
calculated to stimulate subsequent intellectual activity, and Wykehamists themselves have been
among the first to say that the intellectual distinction of the great bishop's beneficiaries
has by no means corresponded to the magnificence of the foundation or the noble intentions
of the Founder. Antony Wood records in the seventeenth century that there was already an "ugly
proverb" as to New College men--"Golden scholars, silver Bachelors, leaden Masters, wooden
Doctors," "which is attributed," he goes on, "to their rich fellowships, especially to their
ease and good diet, in which I think they exceed any college else."

The nineteenth century has changed all this; the small and close college of pre-Commission
days has become one of the largest and most intellectual in the University; but Winchester
men in their Oxford college fully hold their own in every way against the scholars from the
world outside, who are now admitted to share with them the advantages of Wykeham's foundation.

The bishop's careful provision, however, of good teaching at his school and in his college
bore good fruit at first, whatever may have been the result later. If Corpus is especially
the college of the revival of learning, New College had prepared the way, and the first Englishman
to teach Greek in Oxford was the New College fellow, William Grocyn, whom Erasmus called the
"most upright and best of all Britons." From the same college, about the same time, came the
patron of Erasmus, Archbishop Warham, of whose saintly simplicity and love of learning he gives
so attractive a picture. Warham was not forgetful of his old college, and presented the beautiful
"linen fold" panelling which still adorns the hall.

At the time of the Reformation, New College was especially attached to the old form of the
faith, and it has been maintained that the dangerous lowness of the wicket entrance in the
Gate Tower was due to the deliberate purpose of the governing body, who resolved that everyone
who entered the college, however Protestant his views, should bow his head under the statue
of the Blessed Virgin above. At any rate, one New College man in the seventeenth century attributed
his perversion to "the lively memorials of Popery in statues and pictures in the gates and
in the chapel of New College."

Certain it is that under Elizabeth, after the purging of the college from its recusant fellows,
who contributed a large share of the Roman controversialists to the colleges of Louvain and
Douai, Wykeham's foundation sank, as has been said, into inglorious ease for two centuries.
Yet, during this period, it had the honour of producing two of the Seven Bishops who resisted
King James II's attack on the English Constitution--one of them the saintly hymn writer, Thomas
Ken. These were the words of Bishop Lowth, whose great work on /The Poetry of the Hebrews/
was delivered as lectures for the Chair of Poetry at Oxford.

The spirit of Oxford has never been better described, and even that bitter critic, the great
historian Gibbon, admits that Lowth practised what he preached, and that he was an ornament
to the University in its darkest period. Of the days of Reform a forerunner was found in Sydney
Smith, the witty Canon of St. Paul's.

The names of New College men famous for learning or for political success, during the last
half-century, are too recent to mention, but it is fitting to put on record that to New College
belongs the sad distinction of having the longest Roll of Honour in the late War. It has lost
about 250 of its sons, including four of the most distinguished young tutors in Oxford; History
and Philosophy, Scholarship and Natural Science are all of them the poorer for the premature
loss of Cheesman and Heath, Hunter and Geoffrey Smith; their names are familiar to everyone
in Oxford, and they would have been familiar some day to the world of scholars everywhere.
/Dis aliter visum est/.

LINCOLN COLLEGE

    "This is the chapel; here, my son,
       Thy father dreamed the dreams of youth,
     And heard the words, which, one by one,
       The touch of life has turned to truth."
                                       NEWBOLT.

 [Plate XII. Lincoln College : The Chapel Interior]

The name of Lincoln College recalls a fact familiar to all students of ecclesiastical history,
though surprising to the ordinary man-- viz., that Oxford, till the Reformation, was in the
great diocese of Lincoln, which stretched right across the Midlands from the Humber to the
Thames. This fact had an important bearing on the history of the University; its bishop was
near enough to help and protect, but not near enough to interfere constantly. Hence arose the
curious position of the Oxford Chancellor, the real head of the mediaeval University and still
its nominal head; though an ecclesiastical dignitary, and representing the Bishop, the Oxford
Chancellor was not a cathedral official, but the elect of the resident Masters of Arts. How
important this arrangement was for the independence of the University will be obvious.

The ecclesiastical position of Oxford is responsible also for the foundation of four of its
colleges; both Lincoln and Brasenose, colleges that touch each other, were founded by Bishops
of Lincoln; Foxe and Wolsey, too, though holding other sees later, ruled over the great midland
diocese.

Richard Fleming, the Bishop of Lincoln, who founded the college that bears the name of his
see, was in some ways a remarkable man. When resident in Oxford, he had been prominent among
the followers of John Wycliffe and had shared his reforming views; but he was alarmed at the
development of his master's teaching in the hands of disciples, and set himself to oppose the
movement which he had once favoured. He founded his "little college" with the express object
of training "theologians" "to defend the mysteries of the sacred page against those ignorant
laics, who profaned with swinish snouts its most holy pearls." It is curious that Lincoln's
great title to fame--and it is a very great one--is that its most distinguished fellow was
John Wesley, the Wycliffe of the eighteenth century.

The connection of Oxford and Lincoln College with Wesley and his movement is no accidental
one, based merely on the fact that he resided there for a certain time. Humanly speaking, Wesley's
connection with Lincoln was a determining factor in his spiritual and mental development, and
it was while he was there that his followers received the name of "Methodists," a name given
in scorn, but one which has become a thing of pride to millions. Wesley was a fellow of Lincoln
for nine years, from 1726 to 1735. During the most impressionable years of a man's life--he
was only twenty-three when he was elected fellow--he was developing his mental powers by an
elaborate course of studies, and his spiritual life by the careful use of every form of religious
discipline which the Church prescribed. A college, with its daily services and its life apart
from the world, rendered the practice of such discipline possible. It was because Wesley and
his followers, his brother Charles, George Whitefield and others, observed this discipline
so carefully that they obtained their nickname. It is with good reason that Lincoln Chapel
is visited by his disciples from all parts of the world; it has been little altered since his
time, his pulpit is still here, and the glass and the carving which make it very interesting,
if not beautiful, are those which he saw daily.

The chapel is the memorial of the devotion to Lincoln of another churchman, more successful
than Wesley from a worldly point of view, but now forgotten by all except professed students
of history. John Williams, Bishop of Lincoln from 1621 to 1641, was the last ecclesiastic who
"kept" the Great Seal of England. He had the misfortune to differ from Laud on the Church Question
of the day, and was prosecuted before the Star Chamber for subornation of perjury, and heavily
fined. There seems no doubt that he was guilty; but it was to advocacy of moderation and to
his dislike of the king's arbitrary rule that he owed the severity of his punishment. Whatever
his moral character, at all events he gave his college a beautiful little chapel, which is
often compared to the slightly older one at Wadham; that of Lincoln is much the less spacious
of the two, but in its wood carvings, at any rate, it is superior.

Lincoln had the ill-fortune, in the nineteenth century, to produce the writer of one of those
academic "Memoirs," which reveal, with a scholar's literary style, and also with a scholar's
bitterness, the intrigues and quarrels that from time to time arise within college walls. Mark
Pattison is likely to be remembered by the world in general because he is said to have been
the original of George Eliot's "Mr. Casaubon"; in Oxford he will be remembered not only for
the "Memoirs," but also as one who upheld the highest ideal of "Scholarship" when it was likely
to be forgotten, and who criticized the neglect of "research." The personal attacks were those
of a disappointed man; the criticisms, one-sided as they were, were certainly not unjustified.

A university should certainly exist to promote learning, and Mark Pattison, with all his unfairness,
certainly helped its cause in Oxford. But a university exists also for the promotion of friendships
among young men, and for the development of their social life. Of this duty, Oxford has never
been unmindful, and perhaps it is in small colleges like Lincoln that the flowers of friendship
best flourish. It is needless to make comparisons, for they flourish everywhere; but it is
appropriate to quote, when writing of one of the smaller Oxford colleges, the verses on this
subject of a recent Lincoln poet (now dead); they will come home to every Oxford man:

    "City of my loves and dreams,
     Lady throned by limpid streams;
     'Neath the shadow of thy towers,
     Numbered I my happiest hours.
     Here the youth became a man;
     Thought and reason here began.
     Ah! my friends, I thought you then
     Perfect types of perfect men:
     Glamour fades, I know not how,
     Ye have all your failings now,"

But Oxford friendships outlast the discovery that friends have "failings"; as Lord Morley,
who went to Lincoln in 1856, writes: "Companionship (at Oxford) was more than lectures"; a
friend's failure later (he refers to his contemporary, Cotter Morison's /Service of Man/) "could
not impair the captivating comradeship of his prime."

MAGDALEN COLLEGE (1) SITE AND BUILDINGS

    "Where yearly in that vernal hour
     The sacred city is in shades reclining,
     With gilded turrets in the sunrise shining:
     From sainted Magdalene's aerial tower
     Sounds far aloof that ancient chant are singing,
     And round the heart again those solemn memories bringing."
                                     ISAAC WILLIAMS.

Macaulay was too good a Cambridge man to appreciate an Oxford college at its full worth; but
he devotes one of his finest purple patches to the praise of Magdalen, ending, as is fitting,
"with the spacious gardens along the river side," which, by the way, are not "gardens." Antony
Wood praises Magdalen as "the most noble and rich structure in the learned world," with its
water walks as "delectable as the banks of Eurotas, where Apollo himself was wont to walk."
To go a century further back, the Elizabethan, Sir John Davies, wrote:

    "O honeyed Magdalen, sweete, past compare
     Of all the blissful heavens on earth that are."

Such praises could be multiplied indefinitely, and they are all deserved.

The good genius of Magdalen has been faithful to it throughout. The old picturesque buildings
on the High Street, taken over (1457) by the Founder, William of Waynflete, from the already
existing hospital of St. John, were completed by his munificence in the most attractive style
of English fifteenth century domestic architecture; Chapel and Hall, Cloisters and Founder's
Tower, all alike are among the most beautiful in Oxford. When classical taste prevailed, the
architectural purists of the eighteenth century were for sweeping almost all this away, and
had a plan prepared for making a great classic quad; but wiser counsels, or lack of funds,
thwarted this vandalistic design, and only the north side of the new quad was built, to give
Magdalen a splendid specimen of eighteenth century work, without prejudice to the old. And
in our own day, the genius of Bodley has raised in St. Swithun's Quad a building worthy of
the best days of Oxford, while the hideous plaster roof, with which the mischievous Wyatt had
marred the beauty of the hall, was removed, and a seemly oak roof put in its place. It is a
great thing to be thankful for, that one set of college buildings in Oxford, though belonging
to so many periods, has nothing that is not of the best.

But the great glory of Magdalen has not yet been mentioned. This is, without doubt, its bell
tower, which, standing just above the River Cherwell, is worthily seen, whether from near or
far. A most curious and interesting custom is preserved in connection with it. Every May morning,
at five o'clock (in Antony Wood's time the ceremony was an hour earlier), the choir mounts
the tower and sings a hymn, which is part of the college grace; in the eighteenth century,
however, the music was of a secular nature and lasted two hours. The ceremony has been made
the subject of a great picture by Holman Hunt, and has been celebrated in many poems; the sonnet
of Sir Herbert Warren, the present President, may be quoted as worthily expressing something
of what has been felt by many generations of Magdalen men:

    "Morn of the year, of day and May the prime,
     How fitly do we scale the steep dark stair,
     Into the brightness of the matin air,
     To praise with chanted hymn and echoing chime,
     Dear Lord of Light, thy  sublime,
     That stooped erewhile our life's frail weeds to wear!
     Sun, cloud and hill, all things thou fam'st so fair,
     With us are glad and gay, greeting the time.
     The College of the Lily leaves her sleep,
     The grey tower rocks and trembles into sound,
     Dawn-smitten Memnon of a happier hour;
     Through faint-hued fields the silver waters creep:
     Day grows, birds pipe, and robed anew and crowned,
     Green Spring trips forth to set the world aflower."

The tower was put to a far different use when, in the Civil War, it was the fortress against
an attack from the east, and stones were piled on its top to overwhelm any invader who might
force the bridge.

Tradition connects this tower with the name of Magdalen's greatest son, Thomas Wolsey, who
took his B.A. about 1486, at the age of fifteen, as he himself in his old age proudly told
his servant and biographer, Cavendish. Certainty he was first Junior and then Senior Bursar
for a time, while the tower was building, 1492-1504. But the scandal that he had to resign
his bursarship for misappropriation of funds in connection with the tower may certainly be
rejected.

On the right of Magdalen Bridge, looking at the tower, as we see it in the picture, stretches
Magdalen Meadow, round which run the famous water walks. The part of these on the north-west
side is especially connected with Joseph Addison, who was a fellow at Magdalen from 1697 to
1711. He was elected "demy" (at Magdalen, scholars bear this name) the first year (1689) after
the Revolution, when the fellows of Magdalen had been restored to their rights, so outrageously
invaded by King James. This "golden" election was famous in Magdalen annals, at once for the
number elected--seventeen--and for the fame of some of those elected. Besides the greatest
of English essayists, there were among the new "demies," a future archbishop, a future bishop,
and the high Tory, Henry Sacheverell, whose fiery but unbalanced eloquence overthrew the great
Whig Ministry, which had been the patron of his college contemporary.

Magdalen Meadow preserves still the well-beloved Oxford fritillaries, which are in danger of
being extirpated in the fields below Iffley by the crowds who gather them to sell in the Oxford
market.

Of the part of the College on the High Street, the most interesting
portion is the old stone pulpit (shown in Plate XIV). The connection
of this with the old Hospital of St. John is still marked by the
custom of having the University sermon here on St. John the Baptist's
Day; this was the invariable rule till the eighteenth century, and
the pulpit (Hearne says) was "all beset with boughs, by way of
allusion to St. John Baptist's preaching in the wilderness." Even as
early as Heame's time, however, a wet morning drove preacher and
audience into the chapel, and open-air sermons were soon given up
altogether, only to be revived (weather permitting) in our own day.
 The chapel lies to the left of the pulpit, and is known all the
world over for its music; there are three famous choirs in Oxford--
those of the Cathedral, of New College, and of Magdalen, and to the
last, as a rule, the palm is assigned.

MAGDALEN COLLEGE (2) HISTORY

    "Sing sweetly, blessed babes that suck the breast
     Of this sweet nectar-dropping Magdalen,
     Their praise in holy hymns, by whom ye feast,
     The God of gods and Waynflete, best of men,
     Sing in an union with the Angel's quires,
     Sith Heaven's your house."
                                        SIR J. DAVIES.

Magdalen College was founded by William of Waynflete, Bishop of Winchester, who had been a
faithful minister of Henry VI. He had served as both Master and Provost of the King's own college
at Eton (and also as Master of Winchester College before), and from Eton he brought the lilies
which still figure in the Magdalen shield. As a member of the Lancastrian party, he fell into
disgrace when the Yorkists triumphed, but he made his peace with Edward IV, whose statue stands
over the west door of the chapel, with those of St. Mary Magdalene, St. John the Baptist, St.
Swithun (Bishop of Winchester), and the Founder. And the Tudors were equally friendly to the
new foundation; Prince Arthur, Henry VIII's unfortunate elder brother, was a resident in Magdalen
on two occasions, and the College has still a splendid memorial of him in the great contemporary
tapestry, representing his marriage with Catharine of Aragon.

