We started down Black River quite early, under the direction of General York, to bring out
what stock could be reached.  Going down river a flat in tow was left in a central locality,
and from there men poled her back in the rear of plantations, picking up the animals wherever
found. In the loft of a gin-house there were seventeen head found, and after a gangway was
built they were led down into the flat without difficulty. Taking a skiff with the General,
your reporter was pulled up to a little house of two rooms, in which the water was standing
two feet on the floors. In one of the large rooms were huddled the horses and cows of the place,
while in the other the Widow Taylor and her son were seated on a scaffold raised on the floor.
One or two dug-outs were drifting about in the roam ready to be put in service at any time.
When the flat was brought up, the side of the house was cut away as the only means of getting
the animals out, and the cattle were driven on board the boat. General York, in this as in
every case, inquired if the family desired to leave, informing them that Major Burke, of 'The
Times-Democrat,' has sent the 'Susie' up for that purpose.  Mrs. Taylor said she thanked Major
Burke, but she would try and hold out.  The remarkable tenacity of the people here to their
homes is beyond all comprehension.  Just below, at a point sixteen miles from Troy, information
was received that the house of Mr. Tom Ellis was in danger, and his family were all in it.
We steamed there immediately, and a sad picture was presented.  Looking out of the half of
the window left above water, was Mrs. Ellis, who is in feeble health, whilst at the door were
her seven children, the oldest not fourteen years. One side of the house was given up to the
work animals, some twelve head, besides hogs.  In the next room the family lived, the water
coming within two inches of the bed-rail. The stove was below water, and the cooking was done
on a fire on top of it.  The house threatened to give way at any moment: one end of it was
sinking, and, in fact, the building looked a mere shell. As the boat rounded to, Mr. Ellis
came out in a dug-out, and General York told him that he had come to his relief; that 'The
Times-Democrat' boat was at his service, and would remove his family at once to the hills,
and on Monday a flat would take out his stock, as, until that time, they would be busy. Notwithstanding
the deplorable situation himself and family were in, Mr. Ellis did not want to leave.  He said
he thought he would wait until Monday, and take the risk of his house falling. The children
around the door looked perfectly contented, seeming to care little for the danger they were
in.  These are but two instances of the many. After weeks of privation and suffering, people
still cling to their houses and leave only when there is not room between the water and the
ceiling to build a scaffold on which to stand.  It seemed to be incomprehensible, yet the love
for the old place was stronger than that for safety.

After leaving the Ellis place, the next spot touched at was the Oswald place.  Here the flat
was towed alongside the gin-house where there were fifteen head standing in water; and yet,
as they stood on scaffolds, their heads were above the top of the entrance.  It was found impossible
to get them out without cutting away a portion of the front; and so axes were brought into
requisition and a gap made. After much labor the horses and mules were securely placed on the flat.

