A delusion which a candid study of past history must sooner or later ruthlessly dispel, and
which has not a shred of foundation in fact to support it. But we promised to point out WHY,
in spite of its absolute absurdity, these good men, like the Bishop of London, persist in repeating
and restating with ever-increasing vehemence that there has been no break in the continuity,
and that the present Church of England is one with the Church of St. Bede, of St. Dunstan,
of St. Anselm, of St. Thomas, and of other pre-Reformation heroes; though they must surely
know that there is not one amongst these glorious old Catholic saints who would not a thousand
times sooner have gone to the stake and been burnt alive, than have accepted the Thirty-nine
Articles, or than have joined the present Bishop of London in any of his religious services.
Why do Anglicans make such heroic efforts to connect their Church with the past? Why do they
advance an impossible theory? Why will they stubbornly affirm what history utterly denies?
Why do they assert, and with such emphasis, what no one but they themselves have the hardihood
to believe? Why? For precisely the same reason that will induce a drowning man to grasp at
a straw. In short, because even if they did not realise it before, they are now beginning to
see that their very position depends upon their being able to make out some sort of case for
continuity. And we're twenty now to the bad--no less! We must make it up on our flight to town. Clatter
and crash! That's the last train down, Flashing by with a steamy trail. Pile on the fuel!
We must not fail. At every mile we a minute must gain! Who is in charge of the clattering train?

Why,
flesh and blood, as a matter of course! You may talk of iron, and prate of force; But, after
all, and do what you can, The best--and cheapest--machine is Man! Impossible or not impossible; true or false, it is necessary for
their very existence, so that, just as a drowning man catches at a straw, though it cannot
possibly support him, so do these most unfortunate and hardly-pressed men clutch at and cling
to the hollow theory of continuity. Sometimes, when off their guard, and in a less cautious
mood, they will confess as much themselves. And what is more, we can provide our readers with
an instance of such a confession. Many will well remember a well-known and distinguished Anglican
divine, named Canon Malcolm MacColl. He died a few years ago, and we do not wish to say anything
against him. Well, he wrote to The Spectator in 1900. His letter may be seen in the issue of
22nd December for that year. In the course of this letter he makes the following admission:
he declares that "to concede that the Church of England starts from the reign of Henry VIII.
or Elizabeth is to surrender the whole ground of controversy with Rome. A Church," he continues,
"which cannot trace its origin beyond the sixteenth century is obviously not the Church which
Christ founded."

The late Anglican Canon MacColl is, of course, perfectly right, and his inference is strictly
logical. A Church, however highly respectable and however richly endowed, which came into existence
only 1,500 years after Christ, came into existence just 1,500 years too late, and cannot by
any intellectual manoeuvring or stretching of the imagination be identified with the one Church
established by Christ 1,500 years earlier. Consequently every member of the Anglican community
finds himself, nolens volens, impaled on the horns of a truly frightful dilemma. For either
he must frankly confess that his Church is not the Church of God, i.e., not the True Church,
which (human nature being what it is) he can hardly be expected to do; or else he must assert
that it goes back without any real break to the time of the Apostles; which though absolutely
untrue, is the only other alternative. In a word, he finds himself in a very tight corner.
He knows, unless he is able to persuade himself of the truth of continuity, the very ground
of his faith must slip from under his feet, and that he must give up pretending to be a member
of Christ's mystical body altogether.

No wonder there is consternation in the Anglican camp. No wonder that sermons are preached,
and history is re-edited and facts suppressed, and pamphlets are circulated to prove that black
is white and that bitterness is sweet, and that false is true. No wonder there are shows and
pageants and other attempts to prove the thing that is not. Poor deluded mortals! It is really
pitiable to witness such straining and such pulling at the cords; as though truth--solid, imperturbable,
eternal truth--could ever be dislodged or forced out of existence! No! They may disguise the
truth for a time, they may hide it for a brief period; just as a child, with a box of matches
and a handful of straw, may, for awhile, hide the eternal stars. It is Lucy going mad! She has
already shown signs of incipient insanity by calling Mr. HOWE, otherwise Bide-the-Bent, a
"holy Father,"--much to that excellent comedian's surprised content. Contract signed. Return of "Master."
Dénoûment must be seen to be appreciated.

Here McMERIVALE bids Sir WALTER good-bye, and finishes in his own way. Last scene of all, and the
loveliest. The earliest rays of the sun shining on the advancing tide! Caleb picks up all that
is left of "Master"--a feather!
 Why, even the old Catholic cathedrals with their holy-water stoups, their occasional
altars of stone, still remaining, their Lady chapels, and their niches for the images of the
saints, as ill befit the present occupiers, and their modern English services, as a Court dress
befits a clown.

