"And my chair is waiting here," said she, snatching an opportunity to pass him and to step
into the sedan, of which the door was invitingly open. It was not her chair, but one that stood
in solicitation of some passenger from the stage door; as was now shown by one of the chair-men
asking her for directions. She bade her maid hire a boy with a light, and lead the way afoot;
and told the chair-men to follow the maid. The chair door being then closed, and the men lifting
their burden, her orders were carried out.

Neither Philip nor I had yet thought it opportune to appear from our concealment, and now he
whispered that, for the avoidance of a scene before spectators, it would be best for him to
follow the chair, and accost her at her own door. I should watch Falconer to his abode, and
each of us should eventually go home independently of the other. Our relief to find that the
English captain's presence was against Madge's will, needed no verbal expression; it was sufficiently
manifest otherwise.

Before Philip moved out to take his place behind the little procession, Falconer, after a moment's
thought, walked rapidly past to his coach, and giving the driver and footman brief orders,
stepped into it. 'Twas now time for both Phil and me to be in motion, and we went down the
way together. The chair passed the coach, which immediately fell in behind it, the horses proceeding
at a walk.

"He intends to follow her," said I.

"Then we shall follow both," said Phil, "and await events. 'Tis no use forcing a scene in this
neighbourhood."

So Philip's quest and mine lay together, and we proceeded along the footway, a little to the
rear of the coach, which in turn was a little to the rear of the chair. Passing the side of
Drury Lane Theatre, the procession soon turned into Bow Street, and leaving Covent Garden Theatre
behind, presently resumed a Southwestward course, deflecting at St. Martin's Lane so as to
come at last into Gerrard Street, and turning thence Northward into Dean Street. Here the maid
led the chair-men along the West side of the way; but Philip and I kept the East side. At last
the girl stopped before a door with a pillared porch, and the carriers set down the chair.

Instantly Captain Falconer's footman leaped from the box of the coach, and, while the maid
was at the chair door to help her mistress, dashed into the porch and stood so as to prevent
any one's reaching the door of the house. The captain himself, springing out of the coach,
was at Madge's side as soon as she had emerged from the chair. Philip and I, gliding unseen
across the street, saw him hand something to the front chair-man which made that rascal open
his mouth in astonishnent--'twas, no doubt, a gold piece or two--and heard him say:

"You and your fellow, begone, and divide that among you. Quick! Vanish!"

The men obeyed with alacrity, bearing their empty chair past Phil and me toward Gerrard Street
at a run. The captain, by similar means, sent the boy with the light scampering off in the
opposite direction. Meanwhile, Philip and I having stopped behind a pillar of the next porch
for a moment's consultation, Madge was bidding the footman stand aside from before her door.
This we could see by the rays of a street lamp, which were at that place sufficient to make
a carried light not absolutely necessary.

"Come into the coach, madam," said Falconer, seizing one of her hands. "You remember my promise.
I swear I shall keep it though I hang for it! Don't make a disturbance and compel me to use
force, I beg. You see, the street is deserted."

"You scoundrel!" she answered. "If you really think you can carry me off, you're much--"

"Nay," he broke in, "actresses are carried off, and not always for the sake of being talked
about, neither! Fetch the maid, Richard--I wouldn't deprive a lady of her proper attendance.
Pray pardon this--you put me to it, madam!"

With which, he grasped her around the waist, lifted her as if she were a child, and started
with her toward the coach. The footman, a huge fellow, adopted similar measures with the waiting-woman,
who set up a shrill screaming that made needless any cries on Madge's part.

Philip and I dashed forward at this, and while I fell upon the footman, Phil staggered the
captain with a blow. As Falconer turned with an exclamation, to see by whom he was attacked,
Madge tore herself from his relaxed hold, ran to the house door, and set the knocker going
at its loudest. A second blow from Philip sent the captain reeling against his coach wheel.
I, meanwhile, had drawn the footman from the maid; who now joined her mistress and continued
shrieking at the top of her voice. The fellow, seeing his master momentarily in a daze, and
being alarmed by the knocking and screaming, was put at a loss. On a third occasion, it showed
me where it had strewn a number of little tickets about the floor, for doing which it had been
reproved previously. I cannot account for these facts, except by supposing the dog must have
a conscience."

"Very well, madam," cried Falconer through the coach door, before it closed with a bang, "but
I'll keep my word yet, I promise you!" Whereupon, the coach rolled away behind galloping horses.

Forgetting, in the moment's excitement, my intention of dogging the captain to his residence,
I accompanied Philip to the doorway, where stood Madge with her maid and a house servant. She
was waiting to thank her protectors, whom, in the rush and partial darkness, she had not yet
recognised. It was, indeed, far from her thoughts that we two, whom she had left so many years
before in America, should turn up at her side in London at such a moment.

We took off our hats, and bowed. Her face had already formed a smile of thanks, when we raised
our heads into the light from a candle the house servant carried. Madge gave a little startled
cry of joy, and looked from one to the other of us to make sure she was not under a delusion:
then fondly murmuring Phil's name and mine in what faint voice was left her, she made first
as if she would fall into his arms; but recollecting with a look of pain how matters stood
between them, she drew back, steadied herself against the door-post, and dropped her eyes from his.

"We should like to talk with you a little, my dear," said Phil gently. "May we come in?"

There was a gleam of new-lighted hope in her eyes as she looked up and answered tremulously:

"'Twill be a happiness--more than I dared expect."

We followed the servant with the candle up-stairs to a small drawing-room, in which a table
was set with bread, cheese, cold beef, and a bottle of claret.

"'Tis my supper," said Madge. "If I had known I should have such guests--you will do me the
honour, will you not?"

Her manner was so tentative and humble, so much that of one who scarce feels a right even to
plead, so different from that of the old petted and radiant Madge, that 'twould have taken
a harder man than Philip to decline. And so, when the servant had placed additional chairs,
down we sat to supper with Miss Warren, of Drury Lane Theatre, who had sent her maid to answer
the inquiries of the alarmed house concerning the recent tumult in the street.

CHAPTER XX.

We Intrude upon a Gentleman at a Coffee-house.

Little was eaten at that supper, to which we sat down in a constraint natural to the situation.
Philip was presently about to assume the burden of opening the conversation, when Madge abruptly
began:

"I make no doubt you recognised him, Bert--the man with the coach."

"Yes. Philip and I saw him outside the theatre."

"And followed him, in following you," added Philip. "We had intended--"

"You must not suppose--" she interrupted; but, after a moment's halt of embarrassment, left
the sentence unfinished, and made another beginning: "I never saw him or heard of him, after
I left New York, till I had been three years on the stage. Then, when the war was over, he
came back to London, and chanced to see me play at Drury Lane. He knew me in spite of my stage
name, and during that very performance I found him waiting in the greenroom. I had no desire
for any of his society, and told him so. But it seems that, finding me--admired, and successful
in the way I had resorted to, he could not be content till he regained my--esteem. If I had
shown myself friendly to him then, I should soon have been rid of him: but instead, I showed
a resolution to avoid him; and he is the kind of man who can't endure a repulse from a woman.
To say truth, he thinks himself invincible to 'em all, and when he finds one of 'em proof against
him, even though she may once have seemed--when she didn't know her mind--well, she is the
woman he must be pestering, to show that he's not to be resisted.

"And so, at last, to be rid of his plaguing, I went away from London, and took another stage
name, and acted in the country. Only Mr. and Mrs. Sheridan were in the secret of this: 'twas
Mr. Sheridan gave me letters to the country managers. That was in the Fall of '83. Well, I
heard after awhile that he too had gone into the country, to dance attendance on an old aunt,
whose heir he had got the chance of being, through his cousin's death. But I knew if I came
back to London he would hear of it, and then, sure, farewell to all my peace! He had continually
threatened to carry me off in a coach to some village by the Channel, and take me across to
France in a fishing-smack. When I declared I would ask the magistrates for protection, he said
they would laugh at me as a play-actress trying to make herself talked about. I took that to
be true, and so, as I've told you, I left London.

"Well, after more than two years, I thought he must have put me out of his mind, and so I returned,
and made my reappearance to-night. And, mercy on me!--there he was, waiting outside the theatre.
From his appearance, I suppose the aunt has died and he has come into the money. He followed
me home, as you saw; and for a moment, when he was carrying me toward the coach, I vow I had
a fear of being rushed away to a seaport, and taken by force, on some fisherman's boat, across
the Channel. And then, all of a sudden, 'twas as if you two had sprung out of the earth. Where
did you come from? How was it? Oh, tell me all--all the news! Poor Tom! I thought I should
die when I heard of his death. 'Twas--'twas Falconer told me--how he was killed in a skirmish
with the--What's the matter? Why do you look so? Isn't it true? I entreat--!"

"Did Falconer tell you Tom died that way?" I blurted out, hotly, ere Phil could check me.

"In truth, he did! How was it?" She had turned white as a sheet.

"'Twas Falconer killed him in a duel," said I, with indignation, "the very night after you sailed!"

"What, Fal--! A duel! My God, on my account, then! Oh, I never knew that! Oh, Tom--little Tom--the
dear little fellow--'twas I killed him!" She flung her head forward upon the table, and sobbed
wildly, so that I repented of my outspoken anger at Falconer's deception of her. For some minutes
her grief was pitiful to see. If ever there was the anguish of remorse, it was then. I sat
sobered, leaving it to Phil to apply comfort, which, when her outburst of tears had spent its
violence, he undertook to do.

"Well, well, Madge," said he, softly, "'tis done and past now, and not for us to recall. 'Twas
an honourable death, such as he would never have shrunk from; and he has long been past all
sorrow. The most of his life, while it lasted, was happy; and you could never have foreseen.
He will not be unavenged, take my word of that!"

But it was a long time ere Phil could restore her to composure. When he had done so, he asked
her what had become of Ned. Thereupon she told us all that I have recorded in a former chapter,
of their first days in London, and the events leading to her acceptance of Mr. Sheridan's offer.
After she had been acting for some time, under the name of Miss Warren, Ned chanced to come
to the play, and recognised her. He thereupon dogged her, in miserable plight, claiming some
return of the favours which he vowed he had lavished upon her. She put him upon a small pension,
but declared that if he molested her with further demands she would send him to jail for robbing
her. She had not seen him since; he had called regularly upon her man of business for his allowance,
until lately, when he had ceased to appear.

Of what had occurred before she turned actress, she told us all, I say; for the news of Tom's
real fate had put her into a state for withholding nothing. Never was confession more complete;
uttered as it was in a stricken voice, broken as it was by convulsive sobs, marked as it was
by falling tears, hesitations for phrases less likely to pain Philip, remorseful lowerings
of her eyes. She reverted, finally, to her acquaintance with Falconer in New York, and finished
with the words:

"But I protest I have never been guilty of the worst--the one thing--I swear it, Philip; before
God, I do!"

If any load was taken from Phil's mind by this, he refrained from showing it.

"I came in search of you," said he, in a low voice, "to see what I could do toward your happiness.
I knew that in your situation, a wife separated from her husband, dependent on heaven knew
what for a maintenance, you must have many anxious, distressful hours. If I had known where
to find you, I should have sent you money regularly from the first, and eased your mind with
a definite understanding. And now I wish to do this--nay, I will do it, for it is my right.
Whatever may have happened, you are still the Madge Faringfield I--I loved from the first;
nothing can make you another woman to me: and though you chose to be no longer my wife, 'tis
impossible that while I live I can cease to be your husband."

The corners of her lips twitched, but she recovered herself with a disconsolate sigh. "Chose
to be no longer your wife," she repeated. "Yes, it appeared so. I wanted to shine in the world.
I have shone--on the stage, I mean; but that's far from the way I had looked to. A woman in
my situation--a wife separated from her husband--can never shine as I had hoped to, I fancy.
But I've been admired in a way--and it hasn't made me happy. Admiration can't make a woman
happy if she has a deeper heart than her desire of admiration will fill. What is certain is that,
like Drayton (also a friend of his), he seems to have lived remote and afar from the miserable
quarrels and jealousies of his time; that, as has been already shown
by dates, he was a kind of English Fontenelle in his overlapping of
both ends of the great school of English poets; and that absolutely
no base personal gossip tarnishes his poetical fame.

The splendid sonnet of Keats testifies to the influence which his work long had on those Englishmen
who were unable to read Homer in the original.


She asked us, with a little stiffness of manner, when we had come to London; which led to our
relation, between us, of all that had passed since her departure from New York. She opened
her eyes at the news of our residence in Hampstead, and lost her embarrassment in her glad,
impulsive acceptance of my invitation to come and see us as soon as possible. While Philip
and she still kept their distance, as it were, I knew not how far to go in cordiality, or I
should have pressed her to come and live with us. She wept and laughed, at the prospect of
seeing Fanny and my mother, and declared they must visit her in town. And then her tongue faltered
as the thought returned of Falconer's probable interference with the quiet and safety of her
further residence in London; and her face turned anxious.

"'Faith! you need have no fear on that score," said Philip, quietly. "Where does he live?"

She did not know, but she named a club, and a tavern, from which he had dated importunate letters
to her before she left London.

"Well," said Philip, rising, "I shall see a lawyer to-morrow, and you may expect to hear from
him soon regarding the settlement I make upon you."

"You are too kind," she murmured. "I have no right to accept it of you."

"Oh, yes, you have. I am always your husband, I tell you; and you will have no choice but to
accept. I know not what income you get by acting; but this will suffice if you choose to leave
the stage."

"But you?" she replied faintly, rising. "Shall I not see--?"

"I shall leave England in a few days: I don't know how long I shall be abroad. But there will
be Bert, and Fanny, and Mrs. Russell--I know you may command them for anything." There was
an oppressive pause now, during which she looked at him wistfully, hoping he might at the last
moment ask her that, which he waited to give her a final opportunity of asking him. But neither
dared, for fear of the other's hesitation or refusal. And so, at length, with a good-bye spoken
in an unnatural voice on each side, the two exchanged a hand-clasp, and Philip left the room.
She stood pale and trembling, bereft of speech, while I told her that I should wait upon her
soon. Then I followed Philip down-stairs and to the street.

"I will stay to-night at Jack's tavern yonder," said he. "I can watch this house, in case that
knave should return to annoy her. Go you home--Fanny and your mother will be anxious. And come
for me to-morrow at the tavern, as early as you can. You may tell them what you see fit, at
home. That's all, I think--'tis very late. Good night!"

I sought a hackney-coach, and went home to relieve the fears of the ladies, occasioned by our
long absence. My news that Margaret was found (I omitted mention of Captain Falconer in my
account) put the good souls into a great flutter of joy and excitement, and they would have
it that they should go in to see her the first thing on the morrow, a resolution I saw no reason
to oppose. So I took them with me to town in the morning, left them at Madge's lodgings, and
was gone to join Philip ere the laughing and crying of their meeting with her was half-done.

As there was little chance to find Captain Falconer stirring early, Phil and I gave the forenoon
to his arrangements with his man of law at Lincoln's Inn. When these were satisfactorily concluded,
and a visit incidental to them had been made to a bank in the city, we refreshed ourselves
at the Globe tavern in Fleet Street, and then turned our faces Westward.

At the tavern that Madge had named, we learned where Falconer abode, but, proceeding to his
lodgings, found he had gone out. We looked in at various places whither we were directed; but
'twas not till late in the afternoon, that Philip caught sight of him writing a letter at a
table in the St. James Coffeehouse.

Philip recognised him from the view he had obtained the previous night; but, to make sure,
he nudged me to look. On my giving a nod of confirmation, Philip went to him at once, and said:

"Pray pardon my interrupting: you are Captain Falconer, I believe."

The captain looked up, and saw only Philip, for I stood a little to the rear of the former's elbow.

"I believe so, too, sir," he replied urbanely.

"Our previous meeting was so brief," said Philip, "that I doubt you did not observe my face
so as to recall it now."

"That must be the case," said the captain, "for I certainly do not remember having ever met you."

"And yet our meeting was no longer ago than last night--in Dean Street."

The captain's face changed: he gazed, half in astonishment, half in a dawning resentment.

"The deuce, sir! Have you intruded upon me to insult me?"

"'Faith, sir, I've certainly intruded upon you for no friendly purpose."

Falconer continued to gaze, in wonder as well as annoyance.

"Who the devil are you, sir?" he said at last.

"My name is Winwood, sir--Captain Winwood, late of the American army of Independence."

Falconer opened his eyes wide, parted his lips, and turned a little pale. At that moment, I
shifted my position; whereupon he turned, and saw me.

"And Russell, too!" said he. "Well, this is a--an odd meeting, gentlemen."

"Not a chance one," said Philip. "I have been some time seeking you."

"Well, well," replied the captain, recovering his self-possession. "I imagine I know your purpose,
sir."

"That will spare my explaining it. You will, of course, accommodate me?"

"Oh, yes; I see no way out of it. Gad, I'm the most obliging of men--Mr. Russell will vouch
for it."

"Then I beg you will increase the obligation by letting us despatch matters without the least
delay."

"Certainly, if you will have it so--though I abominate hurry in all things."

"To-morrow at dawn, I hope, will not be too soon for your preparations?"

"Why, no, I fancy not. Let me see. One moment, I pray."

He called a waiter, and asked:

"Thomas, is there any gentleman of my acquaintance in the house at present?"

"Oh, a score, sir. There's Mr. Hidsleigh hup-stairs, and--"

"Mr. Idsleigh will do. Ask him to grant me the favour of coming down for a minute." The waiter
hastened away. "Mr. Russell, of course, represents you, sir," the captain added, to Philip.

"Yes, sir; and you are the challenged party, of course."

"I thank you, sir. If Mr. Russell will wait, I will introduce my friend here, and your desire
for expedition may be carried out."

"I am much indebted, sir," said Philip; and requesting me to join him later at the tavern in
Dean Street, he took his leave.

When Mr. Idsleigh, a fashionable young buck whom I now recalled having once seen in the company
of Lord March, had presented himself, a very brief explanation on Falconer's part sufficed
to enlist his services as second; whereupon the captain desired affably that he might be allowed
to finish his letter, and Idsleigh and I retired to a compartment at the farther end of the
room. Idsleigh regarded me with disdainful indifference, and conducted his side of the preliminaries
in a bored fashion, as if the affair were of even less consequence than Falconer had pretended
to consider it. He set me down as a nobody, a person quite out of the pale of polite society,
and one whom it was proper to have done with in the shortest time, and with the fewest words,
possible. I was equally chary of speech, and it was speedily settled that our principals should
fight with small swords, at sunrise, at a certain spot in Hyde Park; and Idsleigh undertook
to provide a surgeon. He then turned his back on me, and walked over to Falconer, without the
slightest civility of leave-taking.

I went first in a hackney-coach to Hyde Park, to ascertain exactly the spot which Mr. Idsleigh
had designated. Having done so, I returned to Dean Street; and, in order that I might without
suspicion accompany Philip before daybreak, I called at Madge's lodgings, and suggested that
my mother and Fanny should pass the night in her house (in which I had observed there were
rooms to let) and take her to Hampstead the next day; while I should sleep at the tavern. This
plan was readily adopted. Thereupon, rejoining Philip, I went with him to the Strand, where
he engaged a post-chaise to be in waiting for him and me the next morning, for our flight in
the event of the duel having the fatal termination he desired.

"We'll take a hint from Captain Falconer's threat," said Phil: "ride post to Hastings, and
have the Doughty boys sail us across to France. You'd best write a letter this evening, to
leave at Madge's lodgings after the affair, explaining your departure, to Fanny and your mother.
Afterward, you can either send for them to come to France, or you can return to Hampstead when
the matter blows over. I might have spared you these inconveniences and risks, by getting another
second; but I knew you wouldn't stand that."

And there, indeed, he spoke the truth.

CHAPTER XXI.

The Last, and Most Eventful, of the History.

I took my mother and Fanny to the play that night, to see Madge act, and we three met her after
the performance and were driven to her lodgings with her. I then bade the ladies good-night,
with a secret tenderness arising from the possibility, unknown to them, that our parting then
might be for as many months as they supposed hours.

Returning to Philip at the tavern, I found he had passed the evening in writing letters; among
others, one for me to copy in my own name, to be left at Madge's lodgings in case of my having
to flee the country for awhile. It was so phrased that the result of the duel, whether in Philip's
death or his antagonist's, could be told by the insertion of a single line, after its occurrence.

Phil and I rose betimes the next morning, and went by hackney-coach, in the darkness, to a
place in the Oxford road, near Tyburn; where we left our conveyance waiting, and proceeded
afoot to the chosen spot in the Park.

No one was there when we arrived, and we paced to and fro together to keep in exercise, talking
in low voices, and beguiling our agitation by confining our thoughts to a narrow channel. The
sod was cool and soft to our tread, and the smell of the leaves was pleasant to our nostrils.
As the sky whitened above the silent trees, and the gray light penetrated to the grassy turf
at our feet, Phil quoted softly the line from Grey's Elegy in which the phrase of "incense-breathing
morn" occurs; and from that he went to certain parts of Milton's "L'Allegro" and then to Shakespeare's
songs, "When Daisies Pied" and "Under the Greenwood Tree."

"'Faith," said he, breaking off from the poetry, "'tis a marvel how content I feel! You would
not believe it, the serene happiness that has come over me. 'Tis easy to explain, though: I
have adjusted my affairs, provided for my wife, left nothing in confusion or disorder, and
am as ready for death as for life. I feel at last responsible to no one; free to accept whatever
fate I may incur; clear of burdens. The great thing, man, is to have one's debts paid, one's
obligations discharged: then death or life matters little, and the mere act of breathing fresh
air is a joy unspeakable."

We now descried the figures of Falconer, Idsleigh, and a third gentleman, approaching under
the trees. His first known work, The Shadow of Night, dates from 1594; and a reference of Meres's
shows that he was known for tragedy four years later. In 1613 he, Jonson (a constant friend
of his whose mutual fidelity refutes of itself the silly calumnies as to Jonson's enviousness,
for of Chapman only, among his colleagues, was he likely to be jealous), and Marston were partners
in the venture of Eastward Ho! which, for some real or fancied slight
on Scotland, exposed the authors to danger of the law.

 The formalities
between Mr. Idsleigh and me were as brief as possible. Falconer chose his sword with a pretence
of scarce looking at it, Philip gave his the usual examination, and the two men stood on guard.

There was a little wary play at first, while each sought an inkling of the other's method.
Then some livelier work, in which they warmed themselves and got their muscles into complete
facility, followed upon Phil's pretending to lose his guard. All this was but overture, and
it came to a stop for a short pause designed as preliminary to the real duel. Both were now
perspiring, and breathing into their lungs deep draughts of air. Falconer's expression showed
that he had recognised better fencing in Phil's work than he had thought to find; but Phil's
face conveyed no such surprise, for he had counted upon an adversary possessed of the first skill.

'Twas Falconer who began what we all felt was to be the serious part of the combat. Phil parried
the thrust neatly; made a feint, but, instantly recovering, availed himself of his opponent's
counter movement, and sank his point fair into Falconer's left breast. The English captain
tumbled instantly to the ground. The swiftness of the thing startled us. Idsleigh and his medical
companion stared in amazement, wondering that the fallen man should lie so still. It took a
second or two for that which their eyes had informed them, to penetrate to their understanding.
But Philip and I knew that the lunge had pierced the heart, and that the accomplished Lovelace
on the ground would charm no more women.

'Twas only when we were hastening back to our hackney-coach, that Philip trembled. Then for
a few moments his teeth chattered as if he were taken with a chill, and his face was deathly pale.

"'Tis terrible," he said, in an awed tone, "to kill a man this way. 'Tis not like in war. On
a morning like this, in the civil manner of gentlemen, to make of such a marvellous living,
thinking, feeling machine a poor heap of senseless flesh and bone that can only rot:--and all
in the time of a sword-thrust!"

"Tut!" said I, "the world is the better for the riddance. Think of Tom, and all else!"

"I know it," said Phil, conquering his weakness. "And such men know what they risk when they
break into the happiness of others. I could not have lived in peace while he lived. Well, that
is all behind us now. Yonder is our coach."

We got in, and were driven to the tavern in Dean Street. We there dismissed the coach, and
Philip started afoot for the inn, in the Strand, where our post-chaise was to be in readiness.
I was to join him there after completing the letter and leaving it at Madge's lodgings, Philip
using the mean time in attending to the posting of certain letters of his own. We had no baggage
to impede us, as we intended to purchase new wearables in France: we had, on the previous day,
provided ourselves with money and letters of credit. My affairs had been so arranged that neither
my wife nor my mother could be pecuniarily embarrassed by my absence. Philip's American passport,
used upon our former travels, was still in force and had been made to include a travelling
companion. So all was smoothed for our flight.

Taking my letter to the house in which Madge lived, I asked for her maid, telling the house
servant I would wait at the street door: for, as I did not wish to meet any of the three ladies,
I considered it safer to entrust the letter to Madge's own woman. The girl came down; but I
had no sooner handed her the letter, and told her what to do with it, than I heard Madge's
voice in the hall above. She had come out to see who wanted her maid, suspecting some trick
of Falconer's; and, leaning over the stair-rail, had recognised my voice.

"What is it, Bert? Why don't you come up?"

"I can't--I'm in haste," I blundered. "Good morning!"

"But wait! What's wrong? A moment, I entreat! Nay, you shall--!" And at that she came tripping
swiftly down the stairs. The maid, embarrassed, handed her the letter. Without opening it,
she advanced to me, while I was wildly considering the propriety of taking to my heels; and
demanded:

"What is it you had to write? Sure 'tis your own hand. Why can't you tell me?"

"Not so loud," I begged. "My mother and Fanny mustn't know till I am gone."

"Gone!" With this she tore open the letter, and seemed to grasp its general sense in a glance.
"A duel! I suspected--from what Philip said. Oh, my God, was he--?" She scanned the writing
wildly, but in her excitement it conveyed nothing to her mind.

"Captain Falconer will not annoy you again," I said, "and Philip and I must go to France for
awhile. Good-bye! Let mother and Fanny see the letter in half an hour."

"But wait--thank God, he's not hurt!--France, you say? How? Which road?"

She was holding my coat lapel, to make me stay and tell her. So I answered:

"By post to Hastings; there we shall get the Doughty boys to--"

At this, there broke in another voice from above stairs--that of Fanny:

"Is that Bert, Madge dear?"

"Tell her 'no,'" I whispered, appalled at thought of a leave-taking, explanations, weeping,
and delay. "And for God's sake, let me--ah, thank you! Read the letter--you shall hear from
us--God bless you all!"

The next moment I was speeding from the house, leaving Madge in a tumult of thoughts at the
door. I turned into Gerrard Street without looking back; and brisk walking soon brought me
to the Strand, where Philip himself was just ready to take the post-chaise.

"A strange thing delayed me," said he, as we forthwith took our seats in the vehicle; which
we had no sooner done than the postilions set the four horses going and our journey was begun.

"What was it?" I asked, willing to reserve the account of my interview with Madge till later.

"The most remarkable thing, for me to witness on this particular morning," he replied; and
told me the story as we rattled through Temple Bar and Fleet Street, on our way to the bridge
and the Surrey side. "After I left you, I don't know what it was that kept me from coming through
St. Martin's Lane to the Strand, and made me continue East instead. But something did; and
finally I turned to come through Bow Street. When I was nearly in front of the magistrate's
house, a post-chaise stopped before it, and a fellow got out whom I took to be a Bow Street
runner. Several people ran up to see if he had a prisoner in the chaise, and so the footway
was blocked; and I stopped to look on for a moment with the rest. A man called out to the constable,
'What you got, Bill?' The constable, who had turned around and reached into the chaise, stopped
to look at the speaker, and said, 'Nobody much--only the Soho Square assault and robbery--I
ran him down at Plymouth, waiting for a vessel--he had a mind to travel for his health.' The
constable grinned, and the other man said, 'Sure that's a hanging business, and no mistake!'"

"And so it is," said I, interrupting Philip. "I read of the affair at the time. A fellow named
Howard knocked down his landlady, robbed her money-box, and got away before she came to."

"Yes," Phil went on, "I remembered it, too. And I waited for a glimpse of the robber's face.
He stepped out, and the constable, with a comrade from inside the chaise, led him to where
they hold prisoners for examination. He was all mud-stained, dishevelled, and frowsy: for two
seconds, though he didn't notice me, I had a good view of him. And who do you think this Howard
really was?"

"Bless me, how should I know? My acquaintance among the criminal classes isn't what it might be."

"'Twas Ned Faringfield!" said Philip. "I should have known him anywhere--heavens, how little
a man's looks change, through all vicissitudes!"

"Well, upon my soul!" I exclaimed, in a chill. "Who'd have thought it? Yet hanging is what
we always predicted for him, in jest. That it should come so soon--for they'll make short work
of that case, 'tis certain."

