The young lady was found, pale, but very happy. "When he left me last night," she said, "my
mind was in a strange hubbub. He had told me that he loved me, and had asked me to marry him,
and my heart would not let me say anything but 'yes;' and yet, after he had gone, his wondrous
story came up before me as it had not come when he told it, having just told something else.
I did not sleep all night, thinking of it. I have read and pondered a great deal upon these
subjects, but have never been able to make up my mind whether or not to put faith in the strange
spiritual manifestations of which we are told. So I determined, a good while ago, not to consider
the matter at all. I could do nothing with it, and it would be better that I should let it
alone. To this same determination I came early this morning in the case of Mr. Kilbright. None
of us know what we may once have been, nor what we may become. All we know is what we are.
Mr. Kilbright may be mistaken as to what he was, but I know what he is. And to that man I give
myself as I am. I am perfectly satisfied with the present."

Mrs. Colesworthy enfolded her in an approbatory embrace, and hurried home to tell me about
it. "There now!" she exclaimed, "didn't I say that Lilian Budworth was a girl of good, sound
common-sense?"

"That is what you said," I answered, "but I must admit that I was afraid her common-sense would
interfere with her acceptance of his story. We had outside evidence in regard to it, but she
had only his simple statement."

"Which is quite enough, when a woman truly loves," said Mrs. Colesworthy.

When old Mr. Scott was informed what had happened, he put down his newspaper, took off his
spectacles, and smiled a strange, wide smile. "I have been reading," he said, "about a little
machine, or box, that you can talk into and then cork up and send by mail across the ocean
to anybody you know there. And then he can uncork it, and out will come all you have said in
your very words and voice, with the sniffles and sneezes that might have got in accidental.
So that if one of the Old Testament Egyptians that they've been diggin' up lately had had one
of these boxes with him it might have been uncorked and people could have heard in his own
voice just who he was and what was his personal opinion of Moses and his brother Aaron. Now,
when an old man like me has just come to know of a thing of this kind, it isn't for him to
have a word to say when he is told that Lilian Budworth is to be his step-grandmother; he must
take it in along with the other wonders."

As to Mr. Kilbright and his lady-love they troubled themselves about no wonders. Life was very
real to them, and very delightful; and they were happy. Despite her resolutions to give no
consideration whatever to her lover's previous existence, Miss Budworth did consider it a good
deal, and talked and thought about it, and at last came to understand and appreciate the fact
as thoroughly as did Mrs. Colesworthy and myself; and she learned much more of Mr. Kilbright's
former life than his modesty had allowed him to tell us. And some of these things she related
with much pride. He had been a soldier during the Revolution, having enlisted, at the age of
twenty-three, under General Sullivan, when his forces lay near Newport. He afterward followed
that commander in his Indian campaigns in Western New York, and served during the rest of the
war. It was when the army was in winter quarters in 1780 that Tatlow Munson painted his portrait
in payment of an old debt. Miss Budworth's glowing rendition of Mr. Kilbright's allusions to
some of the revolutionary incidents in which he had had a part, made us proud to shake hands
with a man who had fought for our liberties and helped to give us the independence which we
now enjoy.

Mr. Kilbright's business prospects soon began to look promising. As was quite natural, his
ideas upon some subjects were a little antiquated. But, although many of the changes and improvements
he saw about him met with no favor in his eyes, he had sense enough to take advantage of certain
modern progressive ideas, especially such as related to his profession of surveying. My introduction
of him as a friend from Bixbury helped him much in respect to patronage, and having devoted
all his spare time during the autumn and winter to study and the formation of business connections,
he secured enough profitable employment for the coming season to justify him in taking to himself
a wife; and his marriage with Miss Budworth was appointed for the middle of April.

It was about the end of March when I received a letter from Mr. Corbridge, the spiritualist
manager, in which he informed me that Dr. Hildstein, the German scientist, of whom he had previously
spoken to me, had set sail for America and would probably arrive in about ten days. "As soon
as possible after his arrival," wrote Mr. Corbridge, "we shall resume possession of the subject
of whom you have been kind enough to take charge during the time when we had no need of him.
He will then be dematerialized in order that we may cause him to manifest himself in our séances
whenever it may be desirable; but never, I may say, in the complete and perfect physical condition
to which he was unintentionally materialized the first time. I promised you that I would give
you at least three days' notice of our intention to resume work on this subject, and I have
now been much better than my word. I have written very plainly of our intentions, because we
wish you to understand exactly what we are going to do; and should we succeed in our proposed
experiment, which we certainly expect to do, we shall, probably, make public our whole action
in the affair, for this course would most greatly benefit both ourselves and our cause. It
will not be necessary for you to inform the subject of our intention, for our power over him
will be as great at one time and at one place as at another; and as his co-operation is not
in any way needful, you will see for yourself that it will be pleasanter for him not to concern
himself with what we are about to do."

When I had read this letter, I sat for half an hour with it open in my hands. It came upon
me like a shower of iced water. I had supposed that the spiritualists had utterly abandoned
their endeavors to dematerialize Mr. Kilbright. Therefore, the news of the revival of these
criminal intentions greatly shocked me. To be sure, the coming scientist might have no such
power as he pretended to possess, but this supposition did not comfort me. If the man had not
already had success in that sort of thing it is not likely that he would come over here to
attempt it now.

When I had sufficiently quieted my mental agitation I wrote instantly to Mr. Corbridge, and
in my letter I assumed a very confident tone. I told him that Mr. Kilbright's circumstances
had so changed that the intended action of the spiritualists in regard to him was now rendered
impossible. He had become an active member of society, had gone into business, and would be
married in April. The mere statement of these facts would, I felt quite certain--so I wrote--cause
the spiritualists to instantly relinquish all idea of carrying out their previous intention
in regard to this most estimable man. If, however, any inhuman craving for scientific investigation
should cause them to persist in their cruel and criminal designs, the utmost power of the law
should be invoked against them. "To take away human life," I wrote, "in a case like this is
murder, no matter how it is done, and should you take away Mr. Kilbright's life, or even attempt
it, you shall be indicted and punished for this cold-blooded and premeditated crime."

Before I had read this letter, I found it absolutely necessary for my peace of mind that I
should make my wife acquainted with the threatened danger, and confer with her as to what it
would be well to do. Of course, Mrs. Colesworthy was greatly shocked when I read her Corbridge's
letter, but she recovered courage sooner than I had done.

"It's all stuff and nonsense," she said. "The man is just as much alive as you and I are, and
I don't believe any human power can turn him into a spirit. They might kill him, but then he
would be a dead man and not a spiritual mist or vapor. I don't believe they even intend to
try to do anything of the kind. They merely wish you to hand him over to them so they can make
him work for them for little or no pay. They think, and with good reason, too, that by this
time you have taught him how to get along at the present day, and that he may now be of some
use to them."

I showed her the letter I had written, and she highly approved of it. "If I were you," she
said, "I would send that letter, and then I would not do another thing. Take my word for it,
you will never hear from those people again."

We resolved, of course, that we would say nothing to Mr. Kilbright or Lilian about this matter,
for it was unwise to needlessly trouble their minds; but we could not help talking about it
a great deal ourselves. In spite of the reassuring arguments which we continually thought of,
or spoke of to each other, we were troubled, anxious, and apprehensive.

"If we could only get them safely married," said Mrs. Colesworthy, "I should feel at ease.
Certainly those people would not do anything to him then."

"I don't believe they can do anything to him at all," I answered. "But how a marriage is going
to protect him I cannot imagine."

"Of course, you can't explain such things," said my wife, "but I do wish they were married
and settled."

Not long after this she came to me with a supposition. "Supposing," she said, "that those people
find it impossible to dematerialize him, they might do something which would be a great deal
worse."

"What could that possibly be?" I asked.

"They might materialize his first wife," said she, "and could anything be more dreadful than
that? I suppose that woman lived to a good old age, and to bring her forward now would be a
height of cruelty of which I believe those people to be fully capable."

"My dear," I exclaimed, "don't bring up any harrowing possibilities which no one but yourself
is likely to think of."

"I wish I could be sure of that," she said. "I have heard, but I don't know how true it is,
that spirits cannot be called up and materialized unless somebody wants them, and I don't suppose
there is anybody who wants the first Mrs. Kilbright. But these men might so work on Mr. Kilbright's
mind as to make him think that he ought to want her."

I groaned. "Dear me!" I said. "I suppose if they did that they would also bring up old Mr.
Scott's mother, and then we should have a united family."

"And a very funny one it would be," said my wife, smiling, notwithstanding her fears, "for
now I remember that old Mr. Scott told me that his grandmother died before she was sixty, but
that his mother lived to be seventy-five. Now, he is eighty, if he is a day, so there would
be a regular gradation of ages in the family, only it would run backward instead of in the
usual way. But, thinking it over, I don't believe the spiritualists will permanently bring
up any more of that family. If they did, they would have to support them, for they could not
ask old Mr. Scott to do it, who hasn't money enough to satisfy his descendants, and ought not
to be expected to support his ancestors."

My letter must have had a good deal of effect upon Mr. Corbridge, for in less than a week after
it was written he came into my office. He informed me that he and his associates were about
to give a series of séances in our town, but that he had come on before the others in order
to talk to me. "I am extremely sorry," he said, "to hear of this proposed marriage. We want
to do what is right and fair, and we have no desire that any act of ours shall create a widow."

"Then," I exclaimed, "you relinquish your design against Mr. Kilbright?"

"Not at all," said he. "We shall carry out our plan before our subject marries. If you choose
to hurry up matters and have the wedding take place before we are ready to proceed with our
dematerializing process, we shall be very sorry, but the blame must rest on you. You should
have had consideration enough for all parties to prevent any such complication as an engagement
to marry. As to what you said in your letter in regard to invoking the law against us, I attach
no weight whatever to that threat."

"You will find you have made a great mistake," said I, angrily, "when I have brought the law
to bear upon you, which now I shall not delay to do."

"You will merely bring ridicule upon yourself," he said, "if you assert that the man you wish
to protect is Amos Kilbright. We can prove by records, still to be seen in Bixbury, that said
person died in seventeen eighty-five. On the other hand, if you choose to assert that he is,
or was, anybody else, how are you going to prove it? All that you can say is that the person
you refer to came from, you knew not where, and has gone, you know not where. If you declare
that at one time he was a materialized spirit, you know very well how such a statement as that
would be received in a court of law. It will be much wiser to let it be supposed that the person
who has lately been seen about this town has run off to Canada, than to make any sort of legal
inquiry into the matter. If said person were really a man we could have nothing to do with
his disappearance, while if he were a materialized spirit the law would have nothing to do
with him."

I arose and paced the floor. There was entirely too much force in this man's arguments, but,
although I could not immediately answer him, his cool determination to persevere in his iniquitous
designs so angered me that I declared that he should be punished if I had to do it myself.

"Then you admit," he said, with a smile, "that the law cannot do it. The situation," he continued,
"is very plain to us. Although the law can take no cognizance of our action, the case will
be very different with all believers in spiritualism, and those who are interested in us. The
news that we have done this thing will spread through the spiritualistic circles of the world."

"Has your German arrived?" I asked, abruptly.

"Not yet," answered Corbridge, "but we expect him in a few days. He will come directly to this
town, because we wish to give him an opportunity of observing the subject in his present form
before beginning the dematerializing process."

"What refinement of cruelty!" I exclaimed.

"Oh, of course, the doctor will not make himself known," said Corbridge. "He will merely wish
to take a good look at the subject, and see for himself how perfect his materialization has
been. Then he will know just what work is before him."

And, so saying, Mr. Corbridge went away, leaving me too angry to speak, if, indeed, I could
have thought of anything which it would have been worth my while to say.

When Mrs. Colesworthy heard what Corbridge had said, she turned white. "They must be married
instantly!" she exclaimed. "I knew that was the only way."

