I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of the most fertile in the
world.  Sure enough, I found a volume entitled Ceylon and the Singhalese by H. C. Sirr, Esq.
Reentering the lounge, I first noted the bearings of Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished so
many different names.  It was located between latitude 5 degrees 55' and 9 degrees 49' north,
and between longitude 79 degrees 42' and 82 degrees 4' east of the meridian of Greenwich; its
length is 275 miles; its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference, 900 miles; its surface
area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a little smaller than that of Ireland.

Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.

The captain glanced at the chart.  Then, turning to me:

"The island of Ceylon," he said, "is famous for its pearl fisheries. Would you be interested,
Professor Aronnax, in visiting one of those fisheries?"

"Certainly, captain."

"Fine.  It's easily done.  Only, when we see the fisheries, we'll see no fishermen.  The annual
harvest hasn't yet begun. No matter.  I'll give orders to make for the Gulf of Mannar, and
we'll arrive there late tonight."

The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went out immediately.  Soon the Nautilus
reentered its liquid element, and the pressure gauge indicated that it was staying at a depth
of thirty feet.

With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar.  I found it by the 9th parallel
off the northwestern shores of Ceylon.  It was formed by the long curve of little Mannar Island.
To reach it we had to go all the way up Ceylon's west coast.

"Professor," Captain Nemo then told me, "there are pearl fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, the
seas of the East Indies, the seas of China and Japan, plus those seas south of the United States,
the Gulf of Panama and the Gulf of California; but it's off Ceylon that such fishing reaps
its richest rewards.  No doubt we'll be arriving a little early.  Fishermen gather in the Gulf
of Mannar only during the month of March, and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on
the lucrative harvest of these treasures from the sea. Each boat is manned by ten oarsmen and
ten fishermen. The latter divide into two groups, dive in rotation, and descend to a depth
of twelve meters with the help of a heavy stone clutched between their feet and attached by
a rope to their boat."

"You mean," I said, "that such primitive methods are still all that they use?"

"All," Captain Nemo answered me, "although these fisheries belong to the most industrialized
people in the world, the English, to whom the Treaty of Amiens granted them in 1802."

"Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman service in such work."

"Yes, since those poor fishermen can't stay long underwater. On his voyage to Ceylon, the Englishman
Percival made much of a Kaffir who stayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface,
but I find that hard to believe.  I know that some divers can last up to fifty-seven seconds,
and highly skillful ones to eighty-seven; but such men are rare, and when the poor fellows
climb back on board, the water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood. I believe
the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerate is thirty seconds, during which
they hastily stuff their little nets with all the pearl oysters they can tear loose. But these
fishermen generally don't live to advanced age: their vision weakens, ulcers break out on their
eyes, sores form on their bodies, and some are even stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor."

"Yes," I said, "it's a sad occupation, and one that exists only to gratify the whims of fashion.
But tell me, captain, how many oysters can a boat fish up in a workday?"

"About 40,000 to 50,000. It's even said that in 1814, when the English government went fishing
on its own behalf, its divers worked just twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters."

"At least," I asked, "the fishermen are well paid, aren't they?"

"Hardly, professor.  In Panama they make just $1.00 per week. In most places they earn only
a penny for each oyster that has a pearl, and they bring up so many that have none!"

"Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich! That's atrocious!"

"On that note, professor," Captain Nemo told me, "you and your companions will visit the Mannar
oysterbank, and if by chance some eager fisherman arrives early, well, we can watch him at work."

"That suits me, captain."

"By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren't afraid of sharks, are you?"

"Sharks?"  I exclaimed.

This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.

"Well?"  Captain Nemo went on.

"I admit, captain, I'm not yet on very familiar terms with that genus of fish."

"We're used to them, the rest of us," Captain Nemo answered. "And in time you will be too.
Anyhow, we'll be armed, and on our way we might hunt a man-eater or two.  It's a fascinating
sport. So, professor, I'll see you tomorrow, bright and early."

This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.

If you're invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say: "Oh good, I get to go
bear hunting tomorrow!"  If you're invited to hunt lions on the Atlas plains or tigers in the
jungles of India, you might say:  "Ha!  Now's my chance to hunt lions and tigers!" But if you're
invited to hunt sharks in their native element, you might want to think it over before accepting.

As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat were busy forming.

"Let's think this over," I said to myself, "and let's take our time. Hunting otters in underwater
forests, as we did in the forests of Crespo Island, is an acceptable activity.  But to roam
the bottom of the sea when you're almost certain to meet man-eaters in the neighborhood, that's
another story!  I know that in certain countries, particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes
don't hesitate to attack sharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also know
that many who face those fearsome animals don't come back alive.  Besides, I'm not a Negro,
and even if I were a Negro, in this instance I don't think a little hesitation on my part would
be out of place."

And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armed with multiple rows of
teeth and capable of cutting a man in half. I could already feel a definite pain around my
pelvic girdle. And how I resented the offhand manner in which the captain had extended his
deplorable invitation!  You would have thought it was an issue of going into the woods on some
harmless fox hunt!

"Thank heavens!"  I said to myself.  "Conseil will never want to come along, and that'll be
my excuse for not going with the captain."

As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom. Danger, however great, held a
perennial attraction for his aggressive nature.

I went back to reading Sirr's book, but I leafed through it mechanically. Between the lines
I kept seeing fearsome, wide-open jaws.

Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleeful air. Little did they know
what was waiting for them.

"Ye gods, sir!"  Ned Land told me.  "Your Captain Nemo--the devil take him--has just made us
a very pleasant proposition!"

"Oh!"  I said "You know about--"

"With all due respect to master," Conseil replied, "the Nautilus's commander has invited us,
together with master, for a visit tomorrow to Ceylon's magnificent pearl fisheries.  He did
so in the most cordial terms and conducted himself like a true gentleman."

"He didn't tell you anything else?"

"Nothing, sir," the Canadian replied.  "He said you'd already discussed this little stroll."

"Indeed," I said.  "But didn't he give you any details on--"

"Not a one, Mr. Naturalist.  You will be going with us, right?"

"Me?  Why yes, certainly, of course!  I can see that you like the idea, Mr. Land."

"Yes!  It will be a really unusual experience!"

"And possibly dangerous!"  I added in an insinuating tone.

"Dangerous?"  Ned Land replied.  "A simple trip to an oysterbank?"

Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn't seen fit to plant the idea of sharks in the minds of my companions.
For my part, I stared at them with anxious eyes, as if they were already missing a limb or
two. Should I alert them?  Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.

"Would master," Conseil said to me, "give us some background on pearl fishing?"

"On the fishing itself?"  I asked.  "Or on the occupational hazards that--"

"On the fishing," the Canadian replied.  "Before we tackle the terrain, it helps to be familiar
with it."

"All right, sit down, my friends, and I'll teach you everything I myself have just been taught
by the Englishman H. C. Sirr!"

Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian said to me:

"Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?"

"My gallant Ned," I replied, "for poets a pearl is a tear from the sea; for Orientals it's
a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it's a jewel they can wear on their fingers, necks,
and ears that's oblong in shape, glassy in luster, and formed from mother-of-pearl; for chemists
it's a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate with a little gelatin protein; and
finally, for naturalists it's a simple festering secretion from the organ that produces mother-of-pearl
in certain bivalves."

"Branch Mollusca," Conseil said, "class Acephala, order Testacea."

"Correct, my scholarly Conseil.  Now then, those Testacea capable of producing pearls include
rainbow abalone, turbo snails, giant clams, and saltwater scallops--briefly, all those that
secrete mother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, violet, or white substance lining
the insides of their valves."

"Are mussels included too?" the Canadian asked.

"Yes!  The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Saxony, Bohemia, and France."

"Good!" the Canadian replied.  "From now on we'll pay closer attention to 'em."

"But," I went on, "for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the pearl oyster Meleagrina margaritifera,
that valuable shellfish.  Pearls result simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular
shape. Either they stick to the oyster's shell, or they become embedded in the creature's folds.
On the valves a pearl sticks fast; on the flesh it lies loose.  But its nucleus is always some
small, hard object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which the mother-of-pearl
is deposited in thin, concentric layers over several years in succession."

"Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?"  Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy.  There are some shellfish that turn into real jewel coffers.  They even mention
one oyster, about which I remain dubious, that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks."

"150 sharks!"  Ned Land yelped.

"Did I say sharks?"  I exclaimed hastily.  "I meant 150 pearls. Sharks wouldn't make sense."

"Indeed," Conseil said.  "But will master now tell us how one goes about extracting these pearls?"

"One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick to the valves, fishermen even pull
them loose with pliers. But usually the shellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto
grass that covers the beaches.  Thus they die in the open air, and by the end of ten days they've
rotted sufficiently.  Next they're immersed in huge tanks of salt water, then they're opened
up and washed. At this point the sorters begin their twofold task.  First they remove the layers
of mother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry by the names legitimate silver, bastard
white, or bastard black, and these are shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms.
Then they remove the oyster's meaty tissue, boil it, and finally strain it, in order to extract
even the smallest pearls."

"Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?" Conseil asked.

"Not only on their size," I replied, "but also according to their shape, their water--in other
words, their color--and their orient-- in other words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes
them so delightful to the eye.  The finest pearls are called virgin pearls, or paragons; they
form in isolation within the mollusk's tissue. They're white, often opaque but sometimes of
opalescent transparency, and usually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones are made
into bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings, and since they're the most valuable, they're
priced individually. The other pearls that stick to the oyster's shell are more erratically
shaped and are priced by weight.  Finally, classed in the lowest order, the smallest pearls
are known by the name seed pearls; they're priced by the measuring cup and are used mainly
in the creation of embroidery for church vestments."

"But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size," the Canadian said.

"No, my friend.  That task is performed with eleven strainers, or sieves, that are pierced
with different numbers of holes. Those pearls staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty
holes are in the first order.  Those not slipping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800
holes are in the second order.  Finally, those pearls for which one uses strainers pierced
with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed pearls."

"How ingenious," Conseil said, "to reduce dividing and classifying pearls to a mechanical operation.
And could master tell us the profits brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?"

"According to Sirr's book," I replied, "these Ceylon fisheries are farmed annually for a total
profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters."

"Francs!"  Conseil rebuked.

"Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!"  I went on.  "But I don't think these fisheries bring in the
returns they once did. Similarly, the Central American fisheries used to make an annual profit
of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of King Charles V, but now they bring in only two-thirds
of that amount.  All in all, it's estimated that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return
for the whole pearl-harvesting industry."

"But," Conseil asked, "haven't certain famous pearls been quoted at extremely high prices?"

"Yes, my boy.  They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth 120,000 francs in our currency."

"I've even heard stories," the Canadian said, "about some lady in ancient times who drank pearls
in vinegar."

"Cleopatra," Conseil shot back.

"It must have tasted pretty bad," Ned Land added.

"Abominable, Ned my friend," Conseil replied.  "But when a little glass of vinegar is worth
1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price to pay."

"I'm sorry I didn't marry the gal," the Canadian said, throwing up his hands with an air of
discouragement.

"Ned Land married to Cleopatra?"  Conseil exclaimed.

"But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil," the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "and
it wasn't my fault the whole business fell through. I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée,
Kate Tender, but she married somebody else instead.  Well, that necklace cost me only $1.50,
but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor, its pearls were so big, they wouldn't have
gone through that strainer with twenty holes."

"My gallant Ned," I replied, laughing, "those were artificial pearls, ordinary glass beads
whose insides were coated with Essence of Orient."

"Wow!" the Canadian replied.  "That Essence of Orient must sell for quite a large sum."

"As little as zero!  It comes from the scales of a European carp, it's nothing more than a
silver substance that collects in the water and is preserved in ammonia.  It's worthless."

"Maybe that's why Kate Tender married somebody else," replied Mr. Land philosophically.

"But," I said, "getting back to pearls of great value, I don't think any sovereign ever possessed
one superior to the pearl owned by Captain Nemo."

"This one?"  Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glass case.

"Exactly.  And I'm certainly not far off when I estimate its value at 2,000,000 . . . uh . . ."

"Francs!"  Conseil said quickly.

"Yes," I said, "2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our captain was the effort to pick
it up."

"Ha!"  Ned Land exclaimed.  "During our stroll tomorrow, who says we won't run into one just
like it?"

"Bah!"  Conseil put in.

"And why not?"

"What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?"

"Here, no," Ned Land said.  "But elsewhere. . . ."

"Oh!  Elsewhere!"  Conseil put in, shaking his head.

"In fact," I said, "Mr. Land is right.  And if we ever brought back to Europe or America a
pearl worth millions, it would make the story of our adventures more authentic--and much more
rewarding."

"That's how I see it," the Canadian said.

"But," said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side of things, "is this pearl
fishing ever dangerous?"

"No," I replied quickly, "especially if one takes certain precautions."

"What risks would you run in a job like that?"  Ned Land said. "Swallowing a few gulps of salt
water?"

"Whatever you say, Ned."  Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo's carefree tone, I asked, "By
the way, gallant Ned, are you afraid of sharks?"

"Me?" the Canadian replied.  "I'm a professional harpooner! It's my job to make a mockery of them!"

"It isn't an issue," I said, "of fishing for them with a swivel hook, hoisting them onto the
deck of a ship, chopping off the tail with a sweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out
the heart, and tossing it into the sea."

"So it's an issue of . . . ?"

"Yes, precisely."

"In the water?"

"In the water."

"Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon!  You see, sir, these sharks are badly designed.  They
have to roll their bellies over to snap you up, and in the meantime . . ."

Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word "snap" that sent chills down the spine.

"Well, how about you, Conseil?  What are your feelings about these man-eaters?"

"Me?"  Conseil said.  "I'm afraid I must be frank with master."

Good for you, I thought.

"If master faces these sharks," Conseil said, "I think his loyal manservant should face them
with him!"

CHAPTER 3

A Pearl Worth Ten Million

NIGHT FELL.  I went to bed.  I slept pretty poorly.  Man-eaters played a major role in my dreams.
And I found it more or less appropriate that the French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic
roots in the word requiem.

The next day at four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by the steward whom Captain Nemo
had placed expressly at my service. I got up quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was waiting for me.

"Professor Aronnax," he said to me, "are you ready to start?"

"I'm ready."

"Kindly follow me."

"What about my companions, captain?"

"They've been alerted and are waiting for us."

"Aren't we going to put on our diving suits?"  I asked.

"Not yet.  I haven't let the Nautilus pull too near the coast, and we're fairly well out from
the Mannar oysterbank. But I have the skiff ready, and it will take us to the exact spot where
we'll disembark, which will save us a pretty long trek. It's carrying our diving equipment,
and we'll suit up just before we begin our underwater exploring."

Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led to the platform.  Ned and
Conseil were there, enraptured with the "pleasure trip" getting under way.  Oars in position,
five of the Nautilus's sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff, which was moored alongside.
The night was still dark. Layers of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view.
My eyes flew to the side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line covering three-quarters
of the horizon from southwest to northwest. Going up Ceylon's west coast during the night,
the Nautilus lay west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the mainland and Mannar Island.
Under these dark waters there stretched the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible field of pearls
more than twenty miles long.

Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of the skiff.  The longboat's
coxswain took the tiller; his four companions leaned into their oars; the moorings were cast
off and we pulled clear.

The skiff headed southward.  The oarsmen took their time. I watched their strokes vigorously
catch the water, and they always waited ten seconds before rowing again, following the practice
used in most navies.  While the longboat coasted, drops of liquid flicked from the oars and
hit the dark troughs of the waves, pitter-pattering like splashes of molten lead. Coming from
well out, a mild swell made the skiff roll gently, and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.

We were silent.  What was Captain Nemo thinking?  Perhaps that this approaching shore was too
close for comfort, contrary to the Canadian's views in which it still seemed too far away.
As for Conseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.

Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upper lines of the coast with
greater distinctness. Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a little toward the south. Five miles
still separated it from us, and its beach merged with the misty waters.  Between us and the
shore, the sea was deserted. Not a boat, not a diver.  Profound solitude reigned over this
gathering place of pearl fishermen.  As Captain Nemo had commented, we were arriving in these
waterways a month too soon.

At six o'clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique to tropical regions, which experience
no real dawn or dusk. The sun's rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon,
and the radiant orb rose swiftly.

I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees here and there.

The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the south. Captain Nemo stood up from
his thwart and studied the sea.

At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran because the bottom lay no more
than a meter down, and this locality was one of the shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish.
Instantly the skiff wheeled around under the ebb tide's outbound thrust.

"Here we are, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo then said. "You observe this confined bay? 
A month from now in this very place, the numerous fishing boats of the harvesters will gather,
and these are the waters their divers will ransack so daringly. This bay is felicitously laid
out for their type of fishing. It's sheltered from the strongest winds, and the sea is never
very turbulent here, highly favorable conditions for diving work. Now let's put on our underwater
suits, and we'll begin our stroll."

I didn't reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began to put on my heavy aquatic
clothes, helped by the longboat's sailors. Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as
well. None of the Nautilus's men were to go with us on this new excursion.

Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing, and straps fastened the air
devices onto our backs. As for the Ruhmkorff device, it didn't seem to be in the picture. Before
inserting my head into its copper capsule, I commented on this to the captain.

"Our lighting equipment would be useless to us," the captain answered me. "We won't be going
very deep, and the sun's rays will be sufficient to light our way.  Besides, it's unwise to
carry electric lanterns under these waves.  Their brightness might unexpectedly attract certain
dangerous occupants of these waterways."

I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.

"What about our weapons?"  I asked him.  "Our rifles?"

"Rifles!  What for?  Don't your mountaineers attack bears dagger in hand? And isn't steel surer
than lead?  Here's a sturdy blade. Slip it under your belt and let's be off."

I stared at my companions.  They were armed in the same fashion, and Ned Land was also brandishing
an enormous harpoon he had stowed in the skiff before leaving the Nautilus.

Then, following the captain's example, I let myself be crowned with my heavy copper sphere,
and our air tanks immediately went into action.

An instant later, the longboat's sailors helped us overboard one after the other, and we set
foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water. Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal.  We
followed him down a gentle slope and disappeared under the waves.

There the obsessive fears in my brain left me.  I became surprisingly calm again.  The ease
with which I could move increased my confidence, and the many strange sights captivated my
imagination.

The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves. The tiniest objects remained
visible.  After ten minutes of walking, we were in five meters of water, and the terrain had
become almost flat.

Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools of unusual fish from the genus
Monopterus, whose members have no fin but their tail.  I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine
eight-decimeter serpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines over its flanks,
could easily be confused with the conger eel. From the butterfish genus, whose oval bodies
are very flat, I observed several adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal fin like
a sickle, edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an excellent dish known by the name
"karawade"; then some sea poachers, fish belonging to the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies
are covered with scaly armor divided into eight lengthwise sections.

Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery mass more and more.  The
seafloor changed little by little. Its fine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway
of smooth crags covered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes. Among other specimens in these
two branches, I noted some windowpane oysters with thin valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod
unique to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with circular shells, awl-shaped
auger shells, some of those Persian murex snails that supply the Nautilus with such wonderful
dye, spiky periwinkles fifteen centimeters long that rose under the waves like hands ready
to grab you, turban snails with shells made of horn and bristling all over with spines, lamp
shells, edible duck clams that feed the Hindu marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the
species Pelagia panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma, magnificent sea
fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree forms in this ocean.

In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants, there raced legions of
clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged frog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded
triangle, robber crabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible parthenope crabs whose appearance
was repulsive to the eye. One animal no less hideous, which I encountered several times, was
the enormous crab that Mr. Darwin observed, to which nature has given the instinct and requisite
strength to eat coconuts; it scrambles up trees on the beach and sends the coconuts tumbling;
they fracture in their fall and are opened by its powerful pincers. Here, under these clear
waves, this crab raced around with matchless agility, while green turtles from the species
frequenting the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among the crumbling rocks.

Near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish, where pearl oysters reproduce
by the millions.  These valuable mollusks stick to rocks, where they're strongly attached by
a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving about. In this respect oysters are inferior
even to mussels, to whom nature has not denied all talent for locomotion.

The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly equal in size, has the
shape of a round shell with thick walls and a very rough exterior.  Some of these shells were
furrowed with flaky, greenish bands that radiated down from the top. These were the young oysters.
The others had rugged black surfaces, measured up to fifteen centimeters in width, and were
ten or more years old.

Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I saw that these mines were
genuinely inexhaustible, since nature's creative powers are greater than man's destructive
instincts. True to those instincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks
into a net he carried at his side.

But we couldn't stop.  We had to follow the captain, who headed down trails seemingly known
only to himself. The seafloor rose noticeably, and when I lifted my arms, sometimes they would
pass above the surface of the sea. Then the level of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably.
Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising like pyramids. In their dark crevices huge
crustaceans, aiming their long legs like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes,
while underfoot there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and annelid worms, whose
antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long.

Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a picturesque pile of rocks whose
smooth heights were completely hung with underwater flora.  At first this cave looked pitch-black
to me.  Inside, the sun's rays seemed to diminish by degrees. Their hazy transparency was nothing
more than drowned light.

Captain Nemo went in.  We followed him.  My eyes soon grew accustomed to this comparative gloom.
I distinguished the unpredictably contoured springings of a vault, supported by natural pillars
firmly based on a granite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscan architecture. Why
had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the depths of this underwater crypt?  I would
soon find out.

After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of a sort of circular pit. 
There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand indicated an object that I hadn't yet noticed.

It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam, a holy-water font that
could have held a whole lake, a basin more than two meters wide, hence even bigger than the
one adorning the Nautilus's lounge.

I approached this phenomenal mollusk.  Its mass of filaments attached it to a table of granite,
and there it grew by itself in the midst of the cave's calm waters.  I estimated the weight
of this giant clam at 300 kilograms.  Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat, and
you'd need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.

Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve's existence. This wasn't the first time
he'd paid it a visit, and I thought his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to
show us a natural curiosity.  I was mistaken.  Captain Nemo had an explicit personal interest
in checking on the current condition of this giant clam.

The mollusk's two valves were partly open.  The captain approached and stuck his dagger vertically
between the shells to discourage any ideas about closing; then with his hands he raised the
fringed, membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal's mantle.

