THE AMERICAN SENATOR

By Anthony Trollope

VOLUME I

CHAPTER I

Dillsborough

I never could understand why anybody should ever have begun to live at Dillsborough, or why
the population there should have been at any time recruited by new comers. That a man with
a family should cling to a house in which he has once established himself is intelligible.
The butcher who supplied Dillsborough, or the baker, or the ironmonger, though he might not
drive what is called a roaring trade, nevertheless found himself probably able to live, and
might well hesitate before he would encounter the dangers of a more energetic locality. But
how it came to pass that he first got himself to Dillsborough, or his father, or his grandfather
before him, has always been a mystery to me. The town has no attractions, and never had any.
It does not stand on a bed of coal and has no connection with iron. It has no water peculiarly
adapted for beer, or for dyeing, or for the cure of maladies. It is not surrounded by beauty
of scenery strong enough to bring tourists and holiday travellers. There is no cathedral there
to form, with its bishops, prebendaries, and minor canons, the nucleus of a clerical circle.
It manufactures nothing specially. It has no great horse fair, or cattle fair, or even pig
market of special notoriety. Every Saturday farmers and graziers and buyers of corn and sheep
do congregate in a sleepy fashion about the streets, but Dillsborough has no character of its
own, even as a market town. Its chief glory is its parish church, which is ancient and inconvenient,
having not as yet received any of those modern improvements which have of late become common
throughout England; but its parish church, though remarkable, is hardly celebrated. The town
consists chiefly of one street which is over a mile long, with a square or market-place in
the middle, round which a few lanes with queer old names are congregated, and a second small
open space among these lanes, in which the church stands. As you pass along the street north-west,
away from the railway station and from London, there is a steep hill, beginning to rise just
beyond the market-place. Up to that point it is the High Street, thence it is called Bullock's
Hill. Beyond that you come to Norrington Road,--Norrington being the next town, distant from
Dillsborough about twelve miles. Dillsborough, however, stands in the county of Rufford, whereas
at the top of Bullock's Hill you enter the county of Ufford, of which Norrington is the assize
town. The Dillsborough people are therefore divided, some two thousand five hundred of them
belonging to Rufford, and the remaining five hundred to the neighbouring county. This accident
has given rise to not a few feuds, Ufford being a large county, with pottery, and ribbons,
and watches going on in the farther confines; whereas Rufford is small and thoroughly agricultural.
The men at the top of Bullock's Hill are therefore disposed to think themselves better than
their fellow-townsfolks, though they are small in number and not specially thriving in their
circumstances.

At every interval of ten years, when the census is taken, the population of Dillsborough is
always found to have fallen off in some slight degree. For a few months after the publication
of the figures a slight tinge of melancholy comes upon the town. The landlord of the Bush Inn,
who is really an enterprising man in his way and who has looked about in every direction for
new sources of business, becomes taciturn for a while and forgets to smile upon comers; Mr.
Ribbs, the butcher, tells his wife that it is out of the question that she and the children
should take that long-talked-of journey to the sea-coast; and Mr. Gregory Masters, the well-known
old-established attorney of Dillsborough, whispers to some confidential friend that he might
as well take down his plate and shut up his house. But in a month or two all that is forgotten,
and new hopes spring up even in Dillsborough; Mr. Runciman at the Bush is putting up new stables
for hunting-horses, that being the special trade for which he now finds that there is an opening;
Mrs. Ribbs is again allowed to suggest Mare-Slocumb; and Mr. Masters goes on as he has done
for the last forty years, making the best he can of a decreasing business.

Dillsborough is built chiefly of brick, and is, in its own way, solid enough. The Bush, which
in the time of the present landlord's father was one of the best posting inns on the road,
is not only substantial, but almost handsome. A broad coach way, cut through the middle of
the house, leads into a spacious, well-kept, clean yard, and on each side of the coach way
there are bay windows looking into the street,--the one belonging to the commercial parlour,
and the other to the so-called coffee-room. But the coffee-room has in truth fallen away from
its former purposes, and is now used for a farmer's ordinary on market days, and other similar
purposes. Travellers who require the use of a public sitting-room must all congregate in the
commercial parlour at the Bush. So far the interior of the house has fallen from its past greatness.
But the exterior is maintained with much care. The brickwork up to the eaves is well pointed,
fresh, and comfortable to look at. In front of the carriage-way swings on two massive supports
the old sign of the Bush, as to which it may be doubted whether even Mr. Runciman himself knows
that it has swung there, or been displayed in some fashion, since it was the custom for the
landlord to beat up wine to freshen it before it was given to the customers to drink. The church,
too, is of brick--though the tower and chancel are of stone. The attorney's house is of brick,
which shall not be more particularly described now as many of the scenes which these pages
will have to describe were acted there; and almost the entire High Street in the centre of
the town was brick also.

But the most remarkable house in Dillsborough was one standing in a short thoroughfare called
Hobbs Gate, leading down by the side of the Bush Inn from the market-place to Church Square,
as it is called. As you pass down towards the church this house is on the right hand, and it
occupies with its garden the whole space between the market-place and Church Square. But though
the house enjoys the privilege of a large garden,--so large that the land being in the middle
of a town would be of great value were it not that Dillsborough is in its decadence,--still
it stands flush up to the street upon which the front door opens. It has an imposing flight
of stone steps guarded by iron rails leading up to it, and on each side of the door there is
a row of three windows, and on the two upper stories rows of seven windows. Over the door there
is a covering, on which there are grotesquely-formed, carved wooden faces; and over the centre
of each window, let into the brickwork, is a carved stone. There are also numerous underground
windows, sunk below the earth and protected by iron railings. Altogether the house is one which
cannot fail to attract attention; and in the brickwork is clearly marked the date, 1701,--not
the very best period for English architecture as regards beauty, but one in which walls and
roofs, ceilings and buttresses, were built more substantially than they are to-day. This was
the only house in Dillsborough which had a name of its own, and it was called Hoppet Hall,
the Dillsborough chronicles telling that it had been originally built for and inhabited by
the Hoppet family. The only Hoppet now left in Dillsborough is old Joe Hoppet, the ostler at
the Bush; and the house, as was well known, had belonged to some member of the Morton family
for the last hundred years at least. The garden and ground it stands upon comprise three acres,
all of which are surrounded by a high brick wall, which is supposed to be coeval with the house.
The best Ribston pippins,--some people say the only real Ribston pippins,--in all Rufford are
to be found here, and its Burgundy pears and walnuts are almost equally celebrated. There are
rumours also that its roses beat everything in the way of roses for ten miles round. But in
these days very few strangers are admitted to see the Hoppet Hall roses. The pears and apples
do make their way out, and are distributed either by Mrs. Masters, the attorney's wife, or
Mr. Runciman, the innkeeper. The present occupier of the house is a certain Mr. Reginald Morton,
with whom we shall also be much concerned in these pages, but whose introduction to the reader
shall be postponed for awhile.

The land around Dillsborough is chiefly owned by two landlords, of whom the greatest and richest
is Lord Rufford. He, however, does not live near the town, but away at the other side of the
county, and is not much seen in these parts unless when the hounds bring him here, or when,
with two or three friends, he will sometimes stay for a few days at the Bush Inn for the sake
of shooting the coverts. He is much liked by all sporting men, but is not otherwise very popular
with the people round Dillsborough. A landlord if he wishes to be popular should be seen frequently.
If he lives among his farmers they will swear by him, even though he raises his rental every
ten or twelve years and never puts a new roof to a barn for them. Lord Rufford is a rich man
who thinks of nothing but sport in all its various shapes, from pigeon-shooting at Hurlingham
to the slaughter of elephants in Africa; and though he is lenient in all his dealings, is not
much thought of in the Dillsborough side of the county, except by those who go out with the
hounds. At Rufford, where he generally has a full house for three months in the year and spends
a vast amount of money, he is more highly considered.

The other extensive landlord is Mr. John Morton, a young man, who, in spite of his position
as squire of Bragton, owner of Bragton Park, and landlord of the entire parishes of Bragton
and Mallingham, the latter of which comes close up to the confines of Dillsborough,--was at
the time at which our story begins, Secretary of Legation at Washington. As he had been an
absentee since he came of age, soon after which time he inherited the property, he had been
almost less liked in the neighbourhood than the lord. Indeed, no one in Dillsborough knew much
about him, although Bragton Hall was but four miles from the town, and the Mortons had possessed
the property and lived on it for the last three centuries. But there had been extravagance,
as will hereafter have to be told, and there had been no continuous residence at Bragton since
the death of old Reginald Morton, who had been the best known and the best loved of all the
squires in Rufford, and had for many years been master of the Rufford hounds. He had lived
to a very great age, and, though the great-grandfather of the present man, had not been dead
above twenty years. He was the man of whom the older inhabitants of Dillsborough and the neighbourhood
still thought and still spoke when they gave vent to their feelings in favour of gentlemen.
And yet the old squire in his latter days had been able to do little or nothing for them,--being
sometimes backward as to the payment of money he owed among them. But he had lived all his
days at Bragton Park, and his figure had been familiar to all eyes in the High Street of Dillsborough
and at the front entrance of the Bush. People still spoke of old Mr. Reginald Morton as though
his death had been a sore loss to the neighbourhood.

And there were in the country round sundry yeomen, as they ought to be called,--gentlemen-farmers
as they now like to style themselves,--men who owned some acres of land, and farmed these acres
themselves. Of these we may specially mention Mr. Lawrence Twentyman, who was quite the gentleman-farmer.
He possessed over three hundred acres of land, on which his father had built an excellent house.
The present Mr. Twentyman, Lawrence Twentyman, Esquire, as he was called by everybody, was
by no means unpopular in the neighbourhood. He not only rode well to hounds but paid twenty-five
pounds annually to the hunt, which entitled him to feel quite at home in his red coat. He generally
owned a racing colt or two, and attended meetings; but was supposed to know what he was about,
and to have kept safely the five or six thousand pounds which his father had left him. And
his farming was well done; for though he was, out-and-out, a gentleman-farmer, he knew how
to get the full worth in work done for the fourteen shillings a week which he paid to his labourers,--a
deficiency in which knowledge is the cause why gentlemen in general find farming so expensive
an amusement. He was a handsome, good-looking man of about thirty, and would have been a happy
man had he not been too ambitious in his aspirations after gentry. He had been at school for
three years at Cheltenham College, which, together with his money and appearance and undoubted
freehold property, should, he thought, have made his position quite secure to him; but, though
he sometimes called young Hampton of Hampton Wick "Hampton," and the son of the rector of Dillsborough
"Mainwaring," and always called the rich young brewers from Norrington "Botsey,"--partners
in the well-known firm of Billbrook & Botsey; and though they in return called him "Larry"
and admitted the intimacy, still he did not get into their houses. And Lord Rufford, when he
came into the neighbourhood, never asked him to dine at the Bush. And--worst of all,--some
of the sporting men and others in the neighbourhood, who decidedly were not gentlemen, also
called him "Larry." Mr. Runciman always did so. Twenty or twenty-five years ago Runciman had
been his father's special friend, before the house had been built and before the days at Cheltenham
College. Remembering this Lawrence was too good a fellow to rebuke Runciman; but to younger
men of that class he would sometimes make himself objectionable. There was another keeper of
hunting stables, a younger man, named Stubbings, living at Stanton Corner, a great hunting
rendezvous about four miles from Dillsborough; and not long since Twentyman had threatened
to lay his whip across Stubbings' shoulders if Stubbings ever called him "Larry" again. Stubbings,
who was a little man and rode races, only laughed at Mr. Twentyman who was six feet high, and
told the story round to all the hunt. Mr. Twentyman was more laughed at than perhaps he deserved.
A man should not have his Christian name used by every Tom and Dick without his sanction. But
the difficulty is one to which men in the position of Mr. Lawrence Twentyman are often subject.

Those whom I have named, together with Mr. Mainwaring the rector, and Mr. Surtees his curate,
made up the very sparse aristocracy of Dillsborough. The Hamptons of Hampton Wick were Ufford
men, and belonged, rather to Norrington than Dillsborough. The Botseys, also from Norrington,
were members of the U.R.U., or Ufford and Rufford United Hunt Club; but they did not much affect
Dillsborough as a town. Mr. Mainwaring, who has been mentioned, lived in another brick house
behind the church, the old parsonage of St. John's. There was also a Mrs. Mainwaring, but she
was an invalid. Their family consisted of one son, who was at Brasenose at this time. He always
had a horse during the Christmas vacation, and if rumour did not belie him, kept two or three
up at Oxford. Mr. Surtees, the curate, lived in lodgings in the town. He was a painstaking,
clever, young man, with aspirations in church matters, which were always being checked by his
rector. Quieta non movere was the motto by which the rector governed his life, and he certainly
was not at all the man to allow his curate to drive him into activity.

Such, at the time of our story, was the little town of Dillsborough.

CHAPTER II

The Morton Family

I can hardly describe accurately the exact position of the Masters family without first telling
all that I know about the Morton family; and it is absolutely essential that the reader should
know all the Masters family intimately. Mr. Masters, as I have said in the last chapter, was
the attorney in Dillsborough, and the Mortons had been for centuries past the squires of Bragton.

I need not take the reader back farther than old Reginald Morton. He had come to the throne
of his family as a young man, and had sat upon it for more than half a century. He had been
a squire of the old times, having no inclination for London seasons, never wishing to keep
up a second house, quite content with his position as quire of Bragton, but with considerable
pride about him as to that position. He had always liked to have his house full, and had hated
petty oeconomies. He had for many years hunted the county at his own expense, the amusement
at first not having been so expensive as it afterwards became. When he began the work, it had
been considered sufficient to hunt twice a week. Now the Rufford and Ufford hounds have four
days, and sometimes a bye. It went much against Mr. Reginald Morton's pride when he was first
driven to take a subscription.

But the temporary distress into which the family fell was caused not so much by his own extravagance
as by that of two sons, and by his indulgence in regard to them. He had three children, none
of whom were very fortunate in life. The eldest, John, married the daughter of a peer, stood
for Parliament, had one son, and died before he was forty, owing something over 20,000 pounds.
The estate was then worth 7,000 pounds a year. Certain lands not lying either in Bragton or
Mallingham were sold, and that difficulty was surmounted, not without a considerable diminution
of income. In process of time the grandson, who was a second John Morton, grew up and married,
and became the father of a third John Morton, the young man who afterwards became owner of
the property and Secretary of Legation at Washington. But the old squire outlived his son and
his grandson, and when he died had three or four great-grand-children playing about the lawns
of Bragton Park. The peer's daughter had lived, and had for many years drawn a dower from the
Bragton property, and had been altogether a very heavy incumbrance.

But the great trial of the old man's life, as also the great romance, had arisen from the career
of his second son, Reginald. Of all his children, Reginald had been the dearest to him. He
went to Oxford, and had there spent much money; not as young men now spend money, but still
to an extent that had been grievous to the old squire. But everything was always paid for Reginald.
It was necessary, of course, that he should have a profession, and he took a commission in
the army. As a young man he went to Canada. This was in 1829, when all the world was at peace,
and his only achievement in Canada was to marry a young woman who is reported to have been
pretty and good, but who had no advantages either of fortune or birth. She was, indeed, the
daughter of a bankrupt innkeeper in Montreal. Soon after this he sold out and brought his wife
home to Bragton. It was at this period of the squire's life that the romance spoken of occurred.
John Morton, the brother with the aristocratic wife, was ten or twelve years older than Reginald,
and at this time lived chiefly at Bragton when he was not in town. He was, perhaps, justified
in regarding Bragton as almost belonging to him, knowing as he did that it must belong to him
after his father's lifetime, and to his son after him. His anger against his brother was hot,
and that of his wife still hotter. He himself had squandered thousands, but then he was the
heir. Reginald, who was only a younger brother, had sold his commission. And then he had done
so much more than this! He had married a woman who was not a lady! John was clearly of opinion
that at any rate the wife should not be admitted into Bragton House. The old squire in those
days was not a happy man; he had never been very strong-minded, but now he was strong enough
to declare that his house-door should not be shut against a son of his,--or a son's wife, as
long as she was honest. Hereupon the Honourable Mrs. Morton took her departure, and was never
seen at Bragton again in the old squire's time. Reginald Morton came to the house, and soon
afterwards another little Reginald was born at Bragton Park. This happened as long ago as 1835,
twenty years before the death of the old squire.

But there had been another child, a daughter, who had come between the two sons, still living
in these days, who will become known to any reader who will have patience to follow these pages
to the end. She married, not very early in life, a certain Sir William Ushant, who was employed
by his country in India and elsewhere, but who found, soon after his marriage, that the service
of his country required that he should generally leave his wife at Bragton. As her father had
been for many years a widower, Lady Ushant became the mistress of the house.

But death was very busy with the Mortons. Almost every one died, except the squire himself
and his daughter, and that honourable dowager, with her income and her pride who could certainly
very well have been spared. When at last, in 1855, the old squire went, full of years, full
of respect, but laden also with debts and money troubles, not only had his son John, and his
grandson John, gone before him, but Reginald and his wife were both lying in Bragton Churchyard.

The elder branch of the family, John the great-grandson, and his little sisters, were at once
taken away from Bragton by the honourable grandmother. John, who was then about seven years
old, was of course the young squire, and was the owner of the property. The dowager, therefore,
did not undertake an altogether unprofitable burden. Lady Ushant was left at the house, and
with Lady Ushant, or rather immediately subject to her care, young Reginald Morton, who was
then nineteen years of age, and who was about to go to Oxford. But there immediately sprang
up family lawsuits, instigated by the honourable lady on behalf of her grandchildren, of which
Reginald Morton was the object. The old man had left certain outlying properties to his grandson
Reginald, of which Hoppet Hall was a part. For eight or ten years the lawsuit was continued,
and much money was expended. Reginald was at last successful, and became the undoubted owner
of Hoppet Hall; but in the meantime he went to Germany for his education, instead of to Oxford,
and remained abroad even after the matter was decided,-- living, no one but Lady Ushant knew
where, or after what fashion.

When the old squire died the children were taken away, and Bragton was nearly deserted. The
young heir was brought up with every caution, and, under the auspices of his grandmother and
her family, behaved himself very unlike the old Mortons. He was educated at Eton, after leaving
which he was at once examined for Foreign Office employment, and commenced his career with
great eclat. He had been made to understand clearly that it would be better that he should
not enter in upon his squirearchy early in life. The estate when he came of age had already
had some years to recover itself, and as he went from capital to capital, he was quite content
to draw from it an income which enabled him to shine with peculiar brilliance among his brethren.
He had visited Bragton once since the old squire's death, and had found the place very dull
and uninviting. He had no ambition whatever to be master of the U.R.U.; but did look forward
to a time when he might be Minister Plenipotentiary at some foreign court.

For many years after the old man's death, Lady Ushant, who was then a widow, was allowed to
live at Bragton. She was herself childless, and being now robbed of her great-nephews and nieces,
took a little girl to live with her, named Mary Masters. It was a very desolate house in those
days, but the old lady was careful as to the education of the child, and did her best to make
the home happy for her. Some two or three years before the commencement of this story there
arose a difference between the manager of the property and Lady Ushant, and she was made to
understand, after some half-courteous manner, that Bragton house and park would do better without
her. There would be no longer any cows kept, and painters must come into the house, and there
were difficulties about fuel. She was not turned out exactly; but she went and established
herself in lonely lodgings at Cheltenham. Then Mary Masters, who had lived for more than a
dozen years at Bragton, went back to her father's house in Dillsborough.

Any reader with an aptitude for family pedigrees will now understand that Reginald, Master
of Hoppet Hall, was first cousin to the father of the Foreign Office paragon, and that he is
therefore the paragon's first cousin once removed. The relationship is not very distant, but
the two men, one of whom was a dozen years older than the other, had not seen each other for
more than twenty years,--at a time when one of them was a big boy, and the other a very little
one; and during the greater part of that time a lawsuit had been carried on between them in
a very rigorous manner. It had done much to injure both, and had created such a feeling of
hostility that no intercourse of any kind now existed between them.

It does not much concern us to know how far back should be dated the beginning of the connection
between the Morton family and that of Mr. Masters, the attorney; but it is certain that the
first attorney of that name in Dillsborough became learned in the law through the patronage
of some former Morton. The father of the present Gregory Masters, and the grandfather, had
been thoroughly trusted and employed by old Reginald Morton, and the former of the two had
made his will. Very much of the stewardship and management of the property had been in their
hands, and they had thriven as honest men, but as men with a tolerably sharp eye to their own
interests. The late Mr. Masters had died a few years before the squire, and the present attorney
had seemed to succeed to these family blessings. But the whole order of things became changed.
Within a few weeks of the squire's death Mr. Masters found that he was to be entrusted no further
with the affairs of the property, but that, in lieu of such care, was thrown upon him the task
of defending the will which he had made against the owner of the estate. His father and grandfather
had contrived between them to establish a fairly good business, independently of Bragton, which
business, of course, was now his. As far as reading went, and knowledge, he was probably a
better lawyer than either of them; but he lacked their enterprise and special genius, and the
thing had dwindled with him. It seemed to him, perhaps not unnaturally, that he had been robbed
of an inheritance. He had no title deeds, as had the owners of the property; but his ancestors
before him, from generation to generation, had lived by managing the Bragton property. They
had drawn the leases, and made the wills, and collected the rents, and had taught themselves
to believe that a Morton could not live on his land without a Masters. Now there was a Morton
who did not live on his land, but spent his rents elsewhere without the aid of any Masters,
and it seemed to the old lawyer that all the good things of the world had passed away. He had
married twice, his first wife having, before her marriage, been well known at Bragton Park.
When she had died, and Mr. Masters had brought a second wife home, Lady Ushant took the only
child of the mother, whom she had known as a girl, into her own keeping, till she also had
been compelled to leave Bragton. Then Mary Masters had returned to her father and stepmother.

The Bragton Park residence is a large, old-fashioned, comfortable house, but by no means a
magnificent mansion. The greater part of it was built one hundred and fifty years ago, and
the rooms are small and low. In the palmy days of his reign, which is now more than half a
century since, the old squire made alterations, and built new stables and kennels, and put
up a conservatory; but what he did then has already become almost old-fashioned now. What he
added he added in stone, but the old house was brick. He was much abused at the time for his
want of taste, and heard a good deal about putting new cloth as patches on old rents; but,
as the shrubs and ivy have grown up, a certain picturesqueness has come upon the place, which
is greatly due to the difference of material. The place is somewhat sombre, as there is no
garden close to the house. There is a lawn, at the back, with gravel walks round it; but it
is only a small lawn; and then divided from the lawn by a ha-ha fence, is the park. The place,
too, has that sad look which always comes to a house from the want of a tenant. Poor Lady Ushant,
when she was there, could do little or nothing. A gardener was kept, but there should have
been three or four gardeners. The man grew cabbages and onions, which he sold, but cared nothing
for the walks or borders. Whatever it may have been in the old time, Bragton Park was certainly
not a cheerful place when Lady Ushant lived there. In the squire's time the park itself had
always been occupied by deer. Even when distress came he would not allow the deer to be sold.
But after his death they went very soon, and from that day to the time of which I am writing,
the park has been leased to some butchers or graziers from Dillsborough.

The ground hereabouts is nearly level, but it falls away a little and becomes broken and pretty
where the river Dill runs through the park, about half a mile from the house. There is a walk
called the Pleasance, passing down through shrubs to the river, and then crossing the stream
by a foot-bridge, and leading across the fields towards Dillsborough. This bridge is, perhaps,
the prettiest spot in Bragton, or, for that matter, anywhere in the county round; but. even
here there is not much of beauty to be praised. It is here, on the side of the river away from
the house, that the home meet of the hounds used to be held; and still the meet at Bragton
Bridge is popular in the county.

CHAPTER III

The Masters Family

At six o'clock one November morning, Mr. Masters, the attorney, was sitting at home with his
family in the large parlour of his house, his office being on the other side of the passage
which cut the house in two and was formally called the hall. Upstairs, over the parlour, was
a drawing-room; but this chamber, which was supposed to be elegantly furnished, was very rarely
used. Mr. and Mrs. Masters did not see much company, and for family purposes the elegance of
the drawing-room made it unfit. It added, however, not a little to the glory of Mrs. Masters'
life. The house itself was a low brick building in the High Street, at the corner where the
High Street runs into the market-place, and therefore, nearly opposite to the Bush. It had
none of the elaborate grandeur of the inn nor of the simple stateliness of Hoppet Hall, but,
nevertheless, it maintained the character of the town and was old, substantial, respectable,
and dark.

"I think it a very spirited thing of him to do, then," said Mrs. Masters.

"I don't know, my dear. Perhaps it is only revenge."

"What have you to do with that? What can it matter to a lawyer whether it's revenge or anything
else? He's got the means, I suppose?"

"I don't know, my dear."

"What does Nickem say?"

"I suppose he has the means," said Mr. Masters, who was aware that if he told his wife a fib
on the matter, she would learn the truth from his senior clerk, Mr. Samuel Nickem. Among the
professional gifts which Mr. Masters possessed, had not been that great gift of being able
to keep his office and his family distinct from each other. His wife always knew what was going
on, and was very free with her advice; generally tendering it on that side on which money was
to be made, and doing so with much feminine darkness as to right or wrong. His Clerk, Nickem,
who was afflicted with no such darkness, but who ridiculed the idea of scruple in an attorney,
often took part against him. It was the wish of his heart to get rid of Nickem; but Nickem
would have carried business with him and gone over to some enemy, or, perhaps have set up in
some irregular manner on his own bottom; and his wife would have given him no peace had he
done so, for she regarded Nickem as the mainstay of the house.

"What is Lord Rufford to you?" asked Mrs. Masters.

"He has always been very friendly."

"I don't see it at all. You have never had any of his money. I don't know that you are a pound
richer by him."

"I have always gone with the gentry of the county."

"Fiddlesticks! Gentry! Gentry are very well as long as you can make a living out of them. You
could afford to stick up for gentry till you lost the Bragton property." This was a subject
that was always sore between Mr. Masters and his wife. The former Mrs. Masters had been a lady--the
daughter of a neighbouring clergyman; and had been much considered by the family at Bragton.
The present Mrs. Masters was the daughter of an ironmonger at Norrington, who had brought a
thousand pounds with her, which had been very useful. No doubt Mr. Masters' practice had been
considerably affected by the lowliness of his second marriage. People who used to know the
first Mrs. Masters, such as Mrs. Mainwaring, and the doctor's wife, and old Mrs. Cooper, the
wife of the vicar of Mallingham, would not call on the second Mrs. Masters. As Mrs. Masters
was too high-spirited to run after people who did not want her, she took to hating gentry instead.

"We have always been on the other side," said the old attorney, "I and my father and grandfather
before me."

"They lived on it and you can't. If you are going to say that you won't have any client that
isn't a gentleman, you might as well put up your shutters at once."

"I haven't said so. Isn't Runciman my client?" "He always goes with the gentry. He a'most thinks
he's one of them himself."

"And old Nobbs, the greengrocer. But it's all nonsense. Any man is my client, or any woman,
Who can come and pay me for business that is fit for me to do."

"Why isn't this fit to be done? If the man's been damaged, why shouldn't he be paid?"

"He's had money offered him."

"If he thinks it ain't enough, who's to say that it is,--unless a jury?" said Mrs. Masters,
becoming quite eloquent. "And how's a poor man to get a jury to say that, unless he comes to
a lawyer? Of course, if you won't have it, he'll go to Bearside. Bearside won't turn him away."
Bearside was another attorney, an interloper of about ten years' standing, whose name was odious
to Mr. Masters.

"You don't know anything about it, my dear," said he, aroused at last to anger.

"I know you're letting anybody who likes take the bread out of the children's mouths." The
children, so called, were sitting round the table and could not but take an interest in the
matter. The eldest was that Mary Masters, the daughter of the former wife, whom Lady Ushant
had befriended, a tall girl, with dark brown hair, so dark as almost to be black, and large,
soft, thoughtful grey eyes. We shall have much to say of Mary Masters, and can hardly stop
to give an adequate description of her here. The others were Dolly and Kate, two girls aged
sixteen and fifteen. The two younger "children" were eating bread and butter and jam in a very
healthy manner, but still had their ears wide open to the conversation that was being held.
The two younger girls sympathised strongly with their mother. Mary, who had known much about
the Mortons, and was old enough to understand the position which her grandfather had held in
reference to the family, of course leaned in her heart to her father's side. But she was wiser
than her father, and knew that in such discussions her mother often showed a worldly wisdom
which, in their present circumstances, they could hardly afford to disregard, unpalatable through
it might be.

Mr. Masters disliked these discussions altogether, but he disliked them most of all in presence
of his children. He looked round upon them in a deprecatory manner, making a slight motion
with his hand and bringing his head down on one side, and then he gave a long sigh. If it was
his intention to convey some subtle warning to his wife, some caution that she alone should
understand, he was deceived. The "children" all knew what he meant quite as well as did their
mother.

"Shall we go out, mamma?" asked Dolly. "Finish your teas, my dears," said Mr. Masters, who
wished to stop the discussion rather than to carry it on before a more select audience.

"You've got to make up your mind to-night," said Mrs. Masters, "and you'll be going over to
the Bush at eight"

"No, I needn't. He is to come on Monday. I told Nickem I wouldn't see him to-night; nor, of
course, to-morrow."

"Then he'll go to Bearside."

"He may go to Bearside and be --! Oh, Lord! I do wish you'd let me drop the business for a
few minutes when I am in here. You don't know anything about it. How should you?"

"I know that if I didn't speak you'd let everything slip through your fingers. There's Mr.
Twentyman. Kate, open the door."

Kate, who was fond of Mr. Twentyman, rushed up, and opened the front door at once. In saying
so much of Kate, I do not mean it to be understood that any precocious ideas of love were troubling
that young lady's bosom. Kate Masters was a jolly bouncing schoolgirl of fifteen, who was not
too proud to eat toffy, and thought herself still a child. But she was very fond of Lawrence
Twentyman, who had a pony that she could ride, and who was always good-natured to her. All
the family liked Mr. Twentyman,--unless it might be Mary, who was the one that he specially
liked himself. And Mary was not altogether averse to him, knowing him to be good-natured, manly,
and straightforward. But Mr. Twentyman had proposed to her, and she had certainly not accepted
him. This, however, had broken none of the family friendship. Every one in the house, unless
it might be Mary herself, hoped that Mr. Twentyman might prevail at last. The man was worth
six or seven hundred a year, and had a good house, and owed no one a shilling. He was handsome,
and about the best-tempered fellow known. Of course they all desired that he should prevail
with Mary. "I wish that I were old enough, Larry, that's all!" Kate had said to him once, laughing.
"I wouldn't have you, if you were ever laughing." "I wouldn't have you, if you were ever so
old," Larry had replied; "you'd want to be out hunting every day." That will show the sort
of terms that Larry was on with his friend Kate. He called at the house every Saturday with
the declared object of going over to the club that was held that evening in the parlour at
the Bush, whither Mr. Masters also always went. It was understood at home that Mr. Masters
should attend this club every Saturday from eight till eleven, but that he was not at any other
time to give way to the fascinations of the Bush. On this occasion, and we may say on almost
every Saturday night, Mr. Twentyman arrived a full hour before the appointed time. The reason
of his doing so was of course well understood, and was quite approved by Mrs. Masters. She
was not, at any rate as yet, a cruel stepmother; but still, if the girl could be transferred
to so eligible a home as that which Mr. Twentyman could give her, it would be well for all parties.

When he took his seat he did not address himself specially to the lady of his love. I don't
know how a gentleman is to do so in the presence of her father, and mother, and sisters. Saturday
after Saturday he probably thought that some occasion would arise; but, if his words could
have been counted, it would have been found that he addressed fewer to her than to any one
in the room.

"Larry," said his special friend Kate, "am I to have the pony at the Bridge meet?"

"How very free you are, Miss!" said her mother.

"I don't know about that," said Larry. "When is there to be a meet at the Bridge? I haven't heard."

"But I have. Tony Tuppett told me that they would be there this day fortnight." Tony Tuppett
was the huntsman of the U.R.U.

"That's more than Tony can know. He may have guessed it."

"Shall I have the pony if he has guessed right?"

Then the pony was promised; and Kate, trusting in Tony Tuppett's sagacity, was happy.

"Have you heard of all this about Dillsborough Wood?" asked Mrs. Masters. The attorney shrank
at the question, and shook himself uneasily in his chair.

"Yes; I've heard about it," said Larry.

"And what do you think about it? I don't see why Lord Rufford is to ride over everybody because
he's a lord." Mr. Twentyman scratched his head. Though a keen sportsman himself, he did not
specially like Lord Rufford,--a fact which had been very well known to Mrs. Masters. But, nevertheless,
this threatened action against the nobleman was distasteful to him. It was not a hunting affair,
or Mr. Twentyman could not have doubted for a moment. It was a shooting difficulty, and as
Mr. Twentyman had never been asked to fire a gun on the Rufford preserves, it was no great
sorrow to him that there should be such a difficulty. But the thing threatened was an attack
upon the country gentry and their amusements, and Mr. Twentyman was a country gentleman who
followed sport. Upon the whole his sympathies were with Lord Rufford.

"The man is an utter blackguard, you know," said Larry. "Last year he threatened to shoot the
foxes in Dillsborough Wood."

"No!" said Kate, quite horrified.

"I'm afraid he's a bad sort of fellow all round," said the attorney.

"I don't see why he shouldn't claim what he thinks due to him," said Mrs. Masters.

"I'm told that his lordship offered him seven-and-six an acre for the whole of the two fields,"
said the gentleman-farmer.

"Goarly declares," said Mrs. Masters, "that the pheasants didn't leave him four bushels of
wheat to the acre."

Goarly was the man who had proposed himself as a client to Mr. Masters, and who was desirous
of claiming damages to the amount of forty shillings an acre for injury, done to the crops
on two fields belonging to himself which lay adjacent to Dillsborough Wood, a covert belonging
to Lord Rufford, about four miles from the town, in which both pheasants and foxes were preserved
with great care.

"Has Goarly been to you?" asked Twentyman.

Mr. Masters nodded his head. "That's just it," said Mrs. Masters. "I don't see why a man isn't
to go to law if he pleases--that is, if he can afford to pay for it. I have nothing to say
against gentlemen's sport; but I do say that they should run the same chance as others. And
I say it's a shame if they're to band themselves together and make the county too hot to hold
any one as doesn't like to have his things ridden over, and his crops devoured, and his fences
knocked to Jericho. I think there's a deal of selfishness in sport and a deal of tyranny."

"Oh, Mrs. Masters!" exclaimed Larry.

"Well, I do. And if a poor man,--or a man whether he's poor or no," added Mrs. Masters, correcting
herself, as she thought of the money which this man ought to have in order that he might pay
for his lawsuit,--"thinks himself injured, it's nonsense to tell me that nobody should take
up his case. It's just as though the butcher wouldn't sell a man a leg of mutton because Lord
Rufford had a spite against him. Who's Lord Rufford?"

"Everybody knows that I care very little for his lordship," said' Mr. Twentyman.

"Nor I; and I don't see why Gregory should. If Goarly isn't entitled to what he wants he won't
get it; that's all. But let it be tried fairly."

Hereupon Mr. Masters took up his hat and left the room, and Mr. Twentyman followed him, not
having yet expressed any positive opinion on the delicate matter submitted to his judgment.
Of course, Goarly was a brute. Had he not threatened to shoot foxes? But, then, an attorney
must live by lawsuits, and it seemed to Mr. Twentyman that an attorney should not stop to inquire
whether a new client is a brute or not.

CHAPTER IV

The Dillsborough Club

The club, so called at Dillsborough, was held every Saturday evening in a back parlour at the
Bush, and was attended generally by seven or eight members. It was a very easy club. There
was no balloting, and no other expense attending it other than that of paying for the liquor
which each man chose to drink. Sometimes, about ten o'clock, there was a little supper, the
cost of which was defrayed by subscription among those who partook of it. It was one rule of
the club, or a habit, rather, which had grown to be a rule, that Mr. Runciman might introduce
into it any one he pleased. I do not know that a similar privilege was denied to any one else;
but as Mr. Runciman had a direct pecuniary advantage in promoting the club, the new-comers
were generally ushered in by him. When the attorney and Twentyman entered the room Mr. Runciman
was seated as usual in an arm-chair at the corner of the fire nearest to the door, with the
bell at his right hand. He was a hale, good-looking man about fifty, with black hair, now turning
grey at the edges, and a clean-shorn chin. He had a pronounced strong face of his own, one
capable of evincing anger and determination when necessary, but equally apt for smiles or,
on occasion, for genuine laughter. He was a masterful but a pleasant man, very civil to customers
and to his friends generally while they took him the right way; but one who could be a Tartar
if he were offended, holding an opinion that his position as landlord of an inn was one requiring
masterdom. And his wife was like him in everything,--except in this, that she always submitted
to him. He was a temperate man in the main; but on Saturday nights he would become jovial,
and sometimes a little quarrelsome. When this occurred the club would generally break itself
up and go home to bed, not in the least offended. Indeed Mr. Runciman was the tyrant of the
club, though it was held at his house expressly with the view of putting money into his pocket.
Opposite to his seat was another arm-chair,--not so big as Mr. Runciman's, but still a soft
and easy chair, which was always left for the attorney. For Mr. Masters was a man much respected
through all Dillsborough, partly on his own account, but more perhaps for the sake of his father
and grandfather. He was a round-faced, clean-shorn man, with straggling grey hair, who always
wore black clothes and a white cravat. There was something in his appearance which recommended
him among his neighbours, who were disposed to say he "looked the gentleman;" but a stranger
might have thought his cheeks to be flabby and his mouth to be weak.

Making a circle, or the beginning of a circle, round the fire, were Nupper, the doctor,--a
sporting old bachelor doctor who had the reputation of riding after the hounds in order that
he might be ready for broken bones and minor accidents; next to him, in another arm-chair,
facing the fire, was Ned Botsey, the younger of the two brewers from Norrington, who was in
the habit during the hunting season of stopping from Saturday to Monday at the Bush, partly
because the Rufford hounds hunted on Saturday and Monday and on those days seldom met in the
Norrington direction, and partly because he liked the sporting conversation of the Dillsborough
Club. He was a little man, very neat in his attire, who liked to be above his company, and
fancied that he was so in Mr. Runciman's parlour. Between him and the attorney's chair was
Harry Stubbings, from Stanton Corner, the man who let out hunters, and whom Twentyman had threatened
to thrash. His introduction to the club had taken place lately, not without some opposition;
but Runciman had set his foot upon that, saying that it was "all d-- nonsense." He had prevailed,
and Twentyman had consented to meet the man; but there was no great friendship between them.
Seated back on the sofa was Mr. Ribbs, the butcher, who was allowed into the society as being
a specially modest man. His modesty, perhaps, did not hinder him in an affair of sheep or bullocks,
nor yet in the collection of his debts; but at the club he understood his position, and rarely
opened his mouth to speak. When Twentyman followed the attorney into the room there was a vacant
chair between Mr. Botsey and Harry Stubbings; but he would not get into it, preferring to seat
himself on the table at Botsey's right hand.

"So Goarly was with you, Mr. Masters," Mr. Runciman began as soon as the attorney was seated.
It was clear that they had all been talking about Goarly and his law-suit, and that Goarly
and the law-suit would be talked about very generally in Dillsborough.

"He was over at my place this evening," said the attorney.

"You are not going to take his case up for him, Mr. Masters?" said young Botsey. "We expect
something better from you than that."

Now Ned Botsey was rather an impudent young man, and Mr. Masters, though he was mild enough
at home, did not like impudence from the world at large. "I suppose, Mr. Botsey," said he,
"that if Goarly were to go to you for a barrel of beer you'd sell it to him?"

"I don't know whether I should or not. I dare say my people would. But that's a different thing."

"I don't see any difference at all. You're not very particular as to your customers, and I
don't ask you any questions about them. Ring the bell, Runciman, please." The bell was rung,
and the two newcomers ordered their liquor.

It was quite right that Ned Botsey should be put down. Every one in the room felt that. But
there was something in the attorney's tone which made the assembled company feel that he had
undertaken Goarly's case; whereas, in the opinion of the company, Goarly was a scoundrel with
whom Mr. Masters should have had nothing to do. The attorney had never been a sporting man
himself, but he had always been, as it were, on that side.

"Goarly is a great fool for his pains," said the doctor. "He has had a very fair offer made
him, and, first or last, it'll cost him forty pounds."

"He has got it into his head," said the landlord, "that he can sue Lord Rufford for his fences.
Lord Rufford is not answerable for his fences."

"It's the loss of crop he's going for," said Twentyman.

"How can there be pheasants to that amount in Dillsborough Wood," continued the landlord, "when
everybody knows that foxes breed there every year? There isn't a surer find for a fox in the
whole county. Everybody knows that Lord Rufford never lets his game stand in the way of foxes."

Lord Rufford was Mr. Runciman's great friend and patron and best customer, and not a word against
Lord Rufford was allowed in that room, though elsewhere in Dillsborough ill-natured things
were sometimes said of his lordship. Then there came on that well-worn dispute among sportsmen,
whether foxes and pheasants are or are not pleasant companions to each other. Every one was
agreed that, if not, then the pheasants should suffer, and that any country gentleman who allowed
his gamekeeper to entrench on the privileges of foxes in order that pheasants might be more
abundant, was a "brute" and a "beast," and altogether unworthy to live in England. Larry Twentyman
and Ned Botsey expressed an opinion that pheasants were predominant in Dillsborough Wood, while
Mr. Runciman, the doctor, and Harry Stubbings declared loudly that everything that foxes could
desire was done for them in that Elysium of sport.

"We drew the wood blank last time we were there," said Larry. "Don't you remember, Mr. Runciman,
about the end of last March?"

"Of course I remember," said the landlord. "Just the end of the season, when two vixens had
litters in the wood! You don't suppose Bean was going to let that old butcher, Tony, find a
fox in Dillsborough at that time." Bean was his lordship's head gamekeeper in that part of
the country. "How many foxes had we found there during the season?"

"Two or three," suggested Botsey.

"Seven!" said the energetic landlord; "seven, including cub-hunting,--and killed four! If you
kill four foxes out of an eighty-acre wood, and have two litters at the end of the season,
I don't think you have much to complain of."

"If they all did as well as Lord Rufford, you'd have more foxes than you'd know what to do
with," said the doctor.

Then this branch of the conversation was ended by a bet of a new hat between Botsey and the
landlord as to the finding of a fox in Dillsborough Wood when it should next be drawn; as to
which, when the speculation was completed, Harry Stubbings offered Mr. Runciman ten shillings
down for his side of the bargain.

But all this did not divert the general attention from the important matter of Goarly's attack.
"Let it be how it will," said Mr. Runciman, "a fellow like that should be put down." He did
not address himself specially to Mr. Masters, but that gentleman felt that he was being talked at.

"Certainly he ought," said Dr. Nupper. "If he didn't feel satisfied with what his lordship
offered him, why couldn't he ask his lordship to refer the matter to a couple of farmers who
understood it?"

"It's the spirit of the thing," said Mr. Ribbs, from his place on the sofa. "It's a hodious
spirit."

"That's just it, Mr. Ribbs," said Harry Stubbings. "It's all meant for opposition. Whether
it's shooting or whether it's hunting, it's all one. Such a chap oughtn't to be allowed to
have land. I'd take it away from him by Act of Parliament. It's such as him as is destroying
the country."

"There ain't many of them hereabouts, thank God!" said the landlord.

"Now, Mr. Twentyman," said Stubbings, who was anxious to make friends with the gentleman-farmer,
"you know what land can do, and what land has done, as well as any man. What would you say
was the real damage done to them two wheat-fields by his lordship's game last autumn? You saw
the crops as they were growing, and you know what came off the land."

"I wouldn't like to say."

"But if you were on your oath, Mr. Twentyman?

"Was there more than seven-and-sixpence an acre lost?"

"No, nor five shillings," said Runciman.

"I think Goarly ought to take his lordship's offer--if you mean that," said Twentyman.

Then there was a pause, during which more drink was brought in, and pipes were re-lighted.
Everybody wished that Mr. Masters might be got to say that he would not take the case, but
there was a delicacy about asking him. "If I remember right he was in Rufford Gaol once," said
Runciman.

"He was let out on bail and then the matter was hushed up somehow," said the attorney.

"It was something about a woman," continued Runciman. "I know that on that occasion he came
out an awful scoundrel."

"Don't you remember," asked Botsey, "how he used to walk up and down the covert-side with a
gun, two years ago, swearing he would shoot the fox if he broke over his land?"

"I heard him say it, Botsey," said Twentyman. "It wouldn't have been the first fox he's murdered,"
said the doctor.

"Not by many," said the landlord.

"You remember that old woman near my place?" said Stubbings. "It was he that put her up to
tell all them lies about her turkeys. I ran it home to him! A blackguard like that! Nobody
ought to take him up."

"I hope you won't, Mr. Masters;" said the doctor. The doctor was as old as the attorney, and
had known him for many years. No one else could dare to ask the question.

"I don't suppose I shall, Nupper," said the attorney from his chair. It was the first word
he had spoken since he had put down young Botsey. "It wouldn't just suit me; but a man has
to judge of those things for himself."

Then there was a general rejoicing, and Mr. Runciman stood broiled bones, and ham and eggs,
and bottled stout for the entire club; one unfortunate effect of which unwonted conviviality
was that Mr. Masters did not get home till near twelve o'clock. That was sure to cause discomfort;
and then he had pledged himself to decline Goarly's business.

CHAPTER V

Reginald Morton

We will now go back to Hoppet Hall and its inhabitants. When the old squire died he left by
his will Hoppet Hall and certain other houses in Dillsborough, which was all that he could
leave, to his grandson Reginald Morton. Then there arose a question whether this property also
was not entailed. The former Mr. Masters, and our friend of the present day, had been quite
certain of the squire's power to do what he liked with it; but others had been equally certain
on the other side, and there had been a lawsuit. During that time Reginald Morton had been
forced to live on a very small allowance. His aunt, Lady Ushant, had done what little she could
for him, but it had been felt to be impossible that he should remain at Bragton, which was
the property of the cousin who was at law with him. From the moment of his birth the Honourable
Mrs. Morton, who was also his aunt by marriage, had been his bitter enemy. He was the son of
an innkeeper's daughter, and according to her theory of life, should never even have been noticed
by the real Mortons. And this honourable old lady was almost equally adverse to Lady Ushant,
whose husband had simply been a knight, and who had left nothing behind him. Thus Reginald
Morton had been friendless since his grandfather died, and had lived in Germany, nobody quite
knew how. During the entire period of this law-suit Hoppet Hall had remained untenanted.

When the property was finally declared to belong to Reginald Morton, the Hall, before it could
be used, required considerable repair. But there was other property. The Bush Inn belonged
to Reginald Morton, as did the house in which Mr. Masters lived, and sundry other smaller tenements
in the vicinity. There was an income from these of about five hundred pounds a year. Reginald,
who was then nearly thirty years of age, came over to England, and stayed for a month or two
at Bragton with his aunt, to the infinite chagrin of the old dowager. The management of the
town property was entrusted to Mr. Masters, and Hoppet Hall was repaired. At this period Mr.
Mainwaring had just come to Dillsborough, and having a wife with some money and perhaps quite
as much pretension, had found the rectory too small, and had taken the Hall on a lease for
seven years. When this was arranged Reginald Morton again went to Germany, and did not return
till the lease had run out. By that time Mr. Mainwaring, having spent a little money, found
that the rectory would be large enough for his small family. Then the Hall was again untenanted
for awhile, till, quite suddenly, Reginald Morton returned to Dillsborough, and took up his
permanent residence in his own house.

It soon became known that the new-comer would not add much to the gaiety of the place. The
only people whom he knew in Dillsborough were his own tenants, Mr. Runciman and Mr. Masters,
and the attorney's eldest daughter. During those months which he had spent with Lady Ushant
at Bragton, Mary had been living there, then a child of twelve years old; and, as a child,
had become his fast friend. With his aunt he had, continually corresponded, and partly at her
instigation, and partly from feelings of his own, he had at once gone to the attorney's house.
This was now two years since, and he had found in his old playmate a beautiful young woman,
in his opinion very unlike the people with whom she lived. For the first twelvemonths he saw
her occasionally,--though not indeed very often. Once or twice he had drunk tea at the attorney's
house, on which occasions the drawing-room upstairs had been almost as grand as it was uncomfortable.
Then the attentions of Larry Twentyman began to make themselves visible, infinitely to Reginald
Morton's disgust. Up to that time he had no idea of falling in love with the girl himself.
Since he had begun to think on such subjects at all he had made up his mind that he would not
marry. He was almost the more proud of his birth by his father's side, because he had been
made to hear so much of his mother's low position. He had told himself a hundred times that
under no circumstances could he marry any other than a lady of good birth. But his own fortune
was small, and he knew himself well enough to be sure that he would not marry for money. He
was now nearly forty years of age and had never yet been thrown into the society of any one
that had attracted him. He was sure that he would not marry. And yet when he saw that Mr. Twentyman
was made much of and flattered by the whole Masters family, apparently because he was regarded
as an eligible husband for Mary, Reginald Morton was not only disgusted, but personally offended.
Being a most unreasonable man he conceived a bitter dislike to poor Larry, who, at any rate,
was truly in love, and was not looking too high in desiring to marry the portionless daughter
of the attorney. But Morton thought that the man ought to be kicked and horsewhipped, or, at
any rate, banished into some speechless exile for his presumption.

With Mr. Runciman he had dealings, and in some sort friendship. There were two meadows attached
to Hoppet Hall, fields lying close to the town, which were very suitable for the landlord's
purposes. Mr. Mainwaring had held them in his own hands, taking them up from Mr. Runciman,
who had occupied them while the house was untenanted, in a manner which induced Mr. Runciman
to feel that it was useless to go to church to hear such sermons as those preached by the rector.
But Morton had restored the fields, giving them rent free, on condition that he should be supplied
with milk and butter. Mr. Runciman, no doubt, had the best of the bargain, as he generally
had in all bargains; but he was a man who liked to be generous when generously treated. Consequently
he almost overdid his neighbour with butter and cream, and occasionally sent in quarters of
lamb and sweetbreads to make up the weight. I don't know that the offerings were particularly
valued; but friendship was engendered. Runciman, too, had his grounds for quarrelling with
those who had taken up the management of the Bragton property after the squire's death, and
had his own antipathy to the Honourable Mrs. Morton and her grandson, the Secretary of Legation.
When the law-suit was going on he had been altogether on Reginald Morton's side. It was an
affair of sides, and quite natural that Runciman and the attorney should be friendly with the
new-comer at Hoppet Hall, though there were very few points of personal sympathy between them.

Reginald Morton was no sportsman, nor was he at all likely to become a member of the Dillsborough
Club. It was currently reported of him in the town that he had never sat on a horse or fired
off a gun. As he had been brought up as a boy by the old squire this was probably an exaggeration,
but it is certain that at this period of his life he had given up any aptitudes in that direction
for which his early training might have suited him. He had brought back with him to Hoppet
Hall many cases of books which the ignorance of Dillsborough had magnified into an enormous
library, and he was certainly a sedentary, reading man. There was already a report in the town
that he was engaged in some stupendous literary work, and the men and women generally looked
upon him as a disagreeable marvel of learning. Dillsborough of itself was not bookish, and
would have regarded any one known to have written an article in a magazine almost as a phenomenon.

He seldom went to church, much to the sorrow of Mr. Surtees, who ventured to call at the house
and remonstrate with him. He never called again. And though it was the habit of Mr. Surtees'
life to speak as little ill as possible of any one, he was not able to say any good of Mr.
Morton. Mr. Mainwaring, who would never have troubled himself though his parishioner had not
entered a place of worship once in a twelvemonth, did say many severe things against his former
landlord. He hated people who were unsocial and averse to dining out, and who departed from
the ways of living common among English country gentlemen. Mr. Mainwaring was, upon the whole,
prepared to take the other side.

Reginald Morton, though he was now nearly forty, was a young looking handsome man, with fair
hair, cut short, and a light beard, which was always clipped. Though his mother had been an
innkeeper's daughter in Montreal he had the Morton blue eyes and the handsome well-cut Morton
nose. He was nearly six feet high, and strongly made, and was known to be a much finer man
than the Secretary of Legation, who was rather small, and supposed to be not very robust.

Our lonely man was a great walker, and had investigated every lane and pathway, and almost
every hedge within ten miles of Dillsborough before he had resided there two years; but his
favourite rambles were all in the neighbourhood of Bragton. As there was no one living in the
house,--no one but the old housekeeper who had lived there always,--he was able to wander about
the place as he pleased. On the Tuesday afternoon, after the meeting of the Dillsborough Club
which has been recorded, he was seated, about three o'clock, on the rail of the foot-bridge
over the Dil, with a long German pipe hanging from his mouth. He was noted throughout the whole
country for this pipe, or for others like it, such a one usually being in his mouth as he wandered
about. The amount of tobacco which he had smoked since his return to these parts, exactly in
that spot, was considerable, for there he might have been found at some period of the afternoon
at least three times a week. He would sit on this rail for half an hour looking down at the
sluggish waters of the little river, rolling the smoke out of his mouth at long intervals,
and thinking perhaps of the great book which he was supposed to be writing. As he sat there
now, he suddenly heard voices and laughter, and presently three girls came round the corner
of the hedge, which, at this spot, hid the Dillsborough path,--and he saw the attorney's three
daughters.

"It's Mr. Morton," said Dolly in a whisper.

"He's always walking about Bragton," said Kate in another whisper. "Tony Tuppett says that
he's the Bragton ghost"

"Kate," said Mary, also in a low voice, "you shouldn't talk so much about what you hear from
Tony Tuppett."

"Bosh!" said Kate, who knew that she could not be scolded in the presence of Mr. Morton.

He came forward and shook hands with them all, and took off his hat to Mary. "You've walked
a long way, Miss Masters," he said.

"We don't think it far. I like sometimes to come and look at the old place."

"And so do I. I wonder whether you remember how often I've sat you on this rail and threatened
to throw you into the river?"

"I remember very well that you did threaten me once, and that I almost believed that you would
throw me in."

"What had she done that was naughty, Mr. Morton?" asked Kate.

"I don't think she ever did anything naughty in those days. I don't know whether she has changed
for the worse since."

"Mary is never naughty now," said Dolly. "Kate and I are naughty, and it's very much better
fun than being good."

"The world has found out that long ago, Miss Dolly; only the world is not quite so candid in
owning it as you are. Will you come and walk round the house, Miss Masters? I never go in,
but I have no scruples about the paths and park."

At the end of the bridge leading into the shrubbery there was a stile, high indeed, but made
commodiously with steps, almost like a double stair case, so that ladies could pass it without
trouble. Mary had given her assent to the proposed walk, and was in the act of putting out
her hand to be helped over the stile, when Mr. Twentyman appeared at the other side of it.

"If here isn't Larry!" said Kate.

Morton's face turned as black as thunder, but he immediately went back across the bridge, leading
Mary with him. The other girls, who had followed him on to the bridge, had of course to go
back also.

Mary was made very unhappy by the meeting. Mr. Morton would of course think that it had been
planned, whereas by Mary herself it had been altogether unexpected. Kate, when the bridge was
free, rushed over it and whispered something to Larry. The meeting had indeed been planned
between her and Dolly and the lover, and this special walk had been taken at the request of
the two younger girls.

Morton stood stock still, as though he expected that Twentyman would pass by. Larry hurried
over the bridge, feeling sure that the meeting with Morton had been accidental and thinking
that he would pass on towards the house.

Larry was not at all ashamed of his purpose, nor was he inclined to give way and pass on. He
came up boldly to his love, and shook hands with her with a pleasant smile. "If you are walking
back to Dillsborough," he said, "maybe you'll let me go a little way with you?"

"I was going round the house with Mr. Morton," she said timidly.

"Perhaps I can join you?" said he, bobbing his head at the other man.

"If you intended to walk back with Mr. Twentyman--," began Morton.

"But I didn't," said the poor girl, who in truth understood more of it all than did either
of the two men. "I didn't expect him, and I didn't expect you. It's a pity I can't go both
ways, isn't it?" she added, attempting to appear cheerful.

"Come back, Mary," said Kate; "we've had walking enough, and shall be awfully tired before
we get home."

Mary had thought that she would like extremely to go round the house with her old friend and
have a hundred incidents of her early life called to her memory. The meeting with Reginald
Morton had been altogether pleasant to her. She had often felt how much she would have liked
it had the chance of her life enabled her to see more frequently one whom as a child she had
so intimately known. But at the moment she lacked the courage to walk boldly across the bridge,
and thus to rid herself of Lawrence Twentyman. She had already perceived that Morton's manner
had rendered it impossible that her lover should follow them. "I am afraid I must go home,"
she said. It was the very thing she did not want to do,--this going home with Lawrence Twentyman;
and yet she herself said that she must do it,--driven to say so by a nervous dread of showing
herself to be fond of the other man's company.

"Good afternoon to you," said Morton very gloomily, waving his hat and stalking across the bridge.

CHAPTER VI

Not in Love

Reginald Morton, as he walked across the bridge towards the house, was thoroughly disgusted
with all the world. He was very angry with himself, feeling that he had altogether made a fool
of himself by his manner. He had shown himself to be offended, not only by Mr. Twentyman, but
by Miss Masters also, and he was well aware, as he thought of it all, that neither of them
had given him any cause of offence. If she chose to make an appointment for a walk with Mr.
Lawrence Twentyman and to keep it, what was that to him? His anger was altogether irrational,
and he knew that it was so. What right had he to have an opinion about it if Mary Masters should
choose to like the society of Mr. Twentyman? It was an affair between her and her father and
mother in which he could have no interest; and yet he had not only taken offence, but was well
aware that he had shown his feeling.

Nevertheless, as to the girl herself, he could not argue himself out of his anger. It was grievous
to him that he should have gone out of his way to ask her to walk with him just at the moment
when she was expecting this vulgar lover,--for that she had expected him he felt no doubt.
Yet he had heard her disclaim any intention of walking with the man! But girls are sly, especially
when their lovers are concerned. It made him sore at heart to feel that this girl should be
sly, and doubly sore to think that she should have been able to love such a one as Lawrence
Twentyman.

As he roamed about among the grounds this idea troubled him much. He assured himself that he
was not in love with her himself, and that he had no idea of falling in love with her; but
it sickened him to think that a girl who had been brought up by his aunt, who had been loved
at Bragton, whom he had liked, who looked so like a lady, should put herself on a par with
such a wretch as that. In all this he was most unjust to both of them. He was specially unjust
to poor Larry, who was by no means a wretch. His costume was not that to which Morton had been
accustomed in Germany, nor would it have passed without notice in Bond Street. But it was rational
and clean. When he came to the bridge to meet his sweetheart he had on a dark-green shooting
coat, a billicock hat, brown breeches, and gaiters nearly up to his knees. I don't know that
a young man in the country could wear more suitable attire. And he was a well-made man, just
such a one as, in this dress, would take the eye of a country girl. There was a little bit
of dash about him, just a touch of swagger, which better breeding might have prevented. But
it was not enough to make him odious to an unprejudiced observer. I could fancy that an old
lady from London, with an eye in her head for manly symmetry, would have liked to look at Larry,
and would have thought that a girl in Mary's position would be happy in having such a lover,
providing that his character was good and his means adequate. But Reginald Morton was not an
old woman, and to his eyes the smart young farmer with his billicock hat, not quite straight
on his head, was an odious thing to behold. He exaggerated the swagger, and took no notice
whatever of the well-made limbs. And then this man had proposed to accompany him, had wanted
to join his party, had thought it possible that a flirtation might be carried on in his presence!
He sincerely hated the man. But what was he to think of such a girl as Mary Masters when she
could bring herself to like the attentions of such a lover?

He was very cross with himself because he knew how unreasonable was his anger. Of one thing
only could he assure himself,--that he would never again willingly put himself in Mary's company.
What was Dillsborough and the ways of its inhabitants to him? Why should he so far leave the
old fashions of his life as to fret himself about an attorney's daughter in a little English
town? And yet he did fret himself, walking rapidly, and smoking his pipe a great deal quicker
than was his custom.

When he was about to return home he passed the front of the house, and there, standing at the
open door, he saw Mrs. Hopkins, the housekeeper, who had in truth been waiting for him. He
said a good-natured word to her, intending to make his way on without stopping, but she called
him back. "Have you heard the news, Mr. Reginald?" she said.

"I haven't heard any news this twelvemonth," he replied.

"Laws, that is so like you, Mr. Reginald. The young squire is to be here next week."

"Who is the young squire? I didn't know there was any squire now."

"Mr. Reginald!"

"A squire as I take it, Mrs. Hopkins, is a country gentleman who lives on his own property.
Since my grandfather's time no such gentleman has lived at Bragton."

"That's true, too, Mr. Reginald. Any way Mr. Morton is coming down next week."

"I thought he was in America."

"He has come home, for a turn like,--and is staying up in town with the old lady." The old
lady always meant the Honourable Mrs. Morton.

"And is the old lady coming down with him?"

"I fancy she is, Mr. Reginald. He didn't say as much, but only that there would be three or
four, a couple of ladies he said, and perhaps more. So I am getting the east bedroom, with
the dressing-room, and the blue room for her ladyship." People about Bragton had been accustomed
to call Mrs. Morton her ladyship. "That's where she always used to be. Would you come in and
see, Mr. Reginald?"

"Certainly not, Mrs. Hopkins. If you were asking me into a house of your own, I would go in
and see all the rooms and chat with you for an hour; but I don't suppose I shall ever go into
this house again unless things change very much indeed."

"Then I'm sure I hope they will change, Mr. Reginald." Mrs. Hopkins had known Reginald Morton
as a boy growing up into manhood, had almost been present at his birth, and had renewed her
friendship while he was staying with Lady Ushant; but of the present squire, as she called
him, she had seen almost nothing, and what she had once remembered of him had now been obliterated
by an absence of twenty years. Of course she was on Reginald's side in the family quarrel,
although she was the paid servant of the Foreign Office paragon.

"And they are to be here next week. What day next week, Mrs. Hopkins?" Mrs. Hopkins didn't
know on what day she was to expect the visitors, nor how long they intended to stay. Mr. John
Morton had said in his letter that he would send his own man down two days before his arrival,
and that was nearly all that he had said.

Then Morton started on his return walk to Dillsborough, again taking the path across the bridge.
"Ah!" he said to himself with a shudder as he crossed the stile, thinking of his own softened
feelings as he had held out his hand to help Mary Masters, and then of his revulsion of feeling
when she declared her purpose of walking home with Mr. Twentyman. And he struck the rail of
the bridge with his stick as though he were angry with the place altogether. And he thought
to himself that he would never come there any more, that he hated the place, and that he would
never cross that bridge again.

Then his mind reverted to the tidings he had heard from Mrs. Hopkins. What ought he to do when
his cousin arrived? Though there had been a long lawsuit, there had been no actual declared
quarrel between him and the heir. He had, indeed, never seen the heir for the last twenty years,
nor had they ever interchanged letters. There had been no communication whatever between them,
and therefore there could hardly be a quarrel. He disliked his cousin; nay, almost hated him;
he was quite aware of that. And he was sure also that he hated that Honourable old woman worse
than any one else in the world, and that he always would do so. He knew that the Honourable
old woman had attempted to drive his own mother from Bragton, and of course he hated her. But
that was no reason why he should not call on his cousin. He was anxious to do what was right.
He was specially anxious that blame should not be attributed to him. What he would like best
would be that he might call, might find nobody at home,--and that then John Morton should not
return the courtesy. He did not want to go to Bragton as a guest; he did not wish to be in
the wrong himself; but he was by no means equally anxious that his cousin should keep himself
free from reproach.

The bridge path came out on the Dillsborough road just two miles from the town, and Morton,
as he got over the last stile, saw Lawrence Twentyman coming towards him on the road. The man,
no doubt, had gone all the way into Dillsborough with the girls, and was now returning home.
The parish of Bragton lies to the left of the high road as you go into the town from Rufford
and the direction of London, whereas Chowton Farm, the property of Mr. Twentyman, is on the
right of the road, but in the large parish of St. John's, Dillsborough. Dillsborough Wood lies
at the back of Larry Twentyman's land, and joining on to Larry's land and also to the wood
is the patch of ground owned by "that scoundrel Goarly". Chowton Farm gate opens on to the
high road, so that Larry was now on his direct way home. As soon as he saw Morton he made up
his mind to speak to him. He was quite sure from what had passed between him and the girls,
on the road home, that he had done something wrong. He was convinced that he had interfered
in some ill-bred way, though he did not at all know how. Of Reginald Morton he was not in the
least jealous. He, too, was of a jealous temperament, but it had never occurred to him to join
Reginald Morton and Mary Masters together. He was very much in love with Mary, but had no idea
that she was in any way above the position which she might naturally hold as daughter of the
Dillsborough attorney. But of Reginald Morton's attributes and scholarship and general standing
he had a mystified appreciation which saved him from the pain of thinking that such a man could
be in love with his sweetheart. As he certainly did not wish to quarrel with Morton, having
always taken Reginald's side in the family disputes, he thought that he would say a civil word
in passing, and, if possible, apologise. When Morton came up he raised his hand to his head
and did open his mouth, though not pronouncing any word very clearly. Morton looked at him
as grim as death, just raised his hand, and then passed on with a quick step. Larry was displeased;
but the other was so thoroughly a gentleman,--one of the Mortons, and a man of property in
the county,--that he didn't even yet wish to quarrel with him. "What the deuce have I done?"
said he to himself as he walked on--"I didn't tell her not to go up to the house. If I offered
to walk with her what was that to him?" It must be remembered that Lawrence Twentyman was twelve
years younger than Reginald Morton, and that a man of twenty-eight is apt to regard a man of
forty as very much too old for falling in love. It is a mistake which it will take him fully
ten years to rectify, and then he will make a similar mistake as to men of fifty. With his
awe for Morton's combined learning and age, it never occurred to him to be jealous.

Morton passed on rapidly, almost feeling that he had been a brute. But what business had the
objectionable man to address him? He tried to excuse himself, but yet he felt that he had been
a brute, and had so demeaned himself in reference to the daughter of the Dillsborough attorney!
He would teach himself to do all he could to promote the marriage. He would give sage advice
to Mary Masters as to the wisdom of establishing herself,--having not an hour since made up
his mind that he would never see her again! He would congratulate the attorney and Mrs. Masters.
He would conquer the absurd feeling which at present was making him wretched. He would cultivate
some sort of acquaintance with the man, and make the happy pair a wedding present. But, yet,
what "a beast" the man was, with that billicock hat on one side of his head, and those tight
leather gaiters.

As he passed through the town towards his own house, he saw Mr. Runciman standing in front
of the hotel. His road took him up Hobbs gate, by the corner of the Bush; but Runciman came
a little out of the way to meet him. "You have heard the news?" said the innkeeper.

"I have heard one piece of news."

"What's that, sir?"

"Come,--you tell me yours first"

"The young squire is coming down to Bragton next week."

"That's my news too. It is not likely that there should be two matters of interest in Dillsborough
on the same day."

"I don't know why Dillsborough should be worse off than any other place, Mr. Morton; but at
any rate the squire's coming."

"So Mrs. Hopkins told me. Has he written to you?"

"His coachman or his groom has; or perhaps he keeps what they call an ekkery. He's much too
big a swell to write to the likes of me. Lord bless me,--when I think of it, I wonder how many
dozen of orders I've had from Lord Rufford under his own hand. 'Dear Runcimam, dinner at eight;
ten of us; won't wait a moment. Yours R.' I suppose Mr. Morton would think that his lordship
had let himself down by anything of that sort?"

"What does my cousin want?"

"Two pair of horses,--for a week certain, and perhaps longer, and two carriages. How am I to
let anyone have two pair of horses for a week certain,--and perhaps longer? What are other
customers to do? I can supply a gentleman by the month and buy horses to suit; or I can supply
him by the job. But I guess Mr. Morton don't well know how things are managed in this country.
He'll have to learn.

"What day does he come?"

"They haven't told me that yet, Mr. Morton."

CHAPTER VII

The Walk Home

Mary Masters, when Reginald Morton had turned his back upon her at the bridge, was angry with
herself and with him, which was reasonable; and very angry also with Larry Twentyman, which
was unreasonable. As she had at once acceded to Morton's proposal that they should walk round
the house together, surely he should not have deserted her so soon. It had not been her fault
that the other man had come up. She had not wanted him. But she was aware that when the option
had in some sort been left to herself, she had elected to walk back with Larry. She knew her
own motives and her own feelings, but neither of the men would understand them. Because she
preferred the company of Mr. Morton, and had at the moment feared that her sisters would have
deserted her had she followed him, therefore she had declared her purpose of going back to
Dillsborough, in doing which she knew that Larry and the girls would accompany her. But of
course Mr, Morton would think that she had preferred the company of her recognised admirer.
It was pretty well known in Dillsborough that Larry was her lover. Her stepmother had spoken
of it very freely; and Larry himself was a man who did not keep his lights hidden under a bushel.
"I hope I've not been in the way, Mary," said Mr. Twentyman, as soon as Morton was out of hearing.

"In the way of what?"

"I didn't think there was any harm in offering to go up to the house with you if you were going."

"Who has said there was any harm?" The path was only broad enough for one and she was walking
first. Larry was following her and the girls were behind him.

"I think that Mr. Morton is a very stuck-up fellow," said Kate, who was the last.

"Hold your tongue, Kate," said Mary. "You don't know what you are talking about"

"I know as well as any one when a person is good-natured. What made him go off in that hoity-toity
fashion? Nobody had said anything to him."

"He always looks as though he were going to eat somebody," said Dolly.

"He shan't eat me," said Kate.

Then there was a pause, during which they all went along quickly, Mary leading the way. Larry
felt that he was wasting his opportunity; and yet hardly knew how to use it, feeling that the
girl was angry with him.

"I wish you'd say, Mary, whether you think that I did anything wrong?"

"Nothing wrong to me, Mr. Twentyman."

"Did I do anything wrong to him?"

"I don't know how far you may be acquainted with him. He was proposing to go somewhere, and
you offered to go with him."

"I offered to go with you," said Larry, sturdily. "I suppose I'm sufficiently acquainted with you."

"Quite so," said Mary.

"Why should he be so proud? I never said an uncivil word to him. He's nothing to me. If he
can do without me, I'm sure that I can do without him."

"Very well indeed, I should think."

"The truth is, Mary--"

"There has been quite enough said about it, Mr. Twentyman."

"The truth is, Mary, I came on purpose to have a word with you." Hearing this, Kate rushed
on and pulled Larry by the tail of his coat.

"How did you know I was to be there?" demanded Mary sharply.

"I didn't know. I had reason to think you perhaps might be there. The girls I knew had been
asking you to come as far as the bridge. At any rate I took my chance. I'd seen him some time
before, and then I saw you."

"If I'm to be watched about in that way," said Mary angrily, "I won't go out at all."

"Of course I want to see you. Why shouldn't I? I'm all fair and above board;--ain't I? Your
father and mother know all about it. It isn't as though I were doing anything clandestine."
He paused for a reply, but Mary walked on in silence. She knew quite well that he was warranted
in seeking her, and that nothing but a very positive decision on her part could put an end
to his courtship. At the present moment she was inclined to be very positive, but he had hardly
as yet given her an opportunity of speaking out. "I think you know, Mary, what it is that I
want." They were now at a rough stile which enabled him to come close up to her and help her.
She tripped over the stile with a light step and again walked on rapidly. The field they were
in enabled him to get up to her side, and now if ever was his opportunity. It was a long straggling
meadow which he knew well, with the Dill running by it all the way,--or rather two meadows
with an open space where there had once been a gate. He had ridden through the gap a score
of times, and knew that at the further side of the second meadow they would come upon the high
road. The fields were certainly much better for his purpose than the road. "Don't you think,
Mary, you could say a kind word to me?"

"I never said anything unkind."

"You can't think ill of me for loving you better than all the world."

"I don't think ill of you at all. I think very well of you."

"That's kind."

"So I do. How can I help thinking well of you, when I've never heard anything but good of you?"

"Then why shouldn't you say at once that you'll have me, and make me the happiest man in all
the county?"

"Because--"

"Well!"

"I told you before, Mr. Twentyman, and that ought to have been enough. A young woman doesn't
fall in love with every man that she thinks well of. I should like you as well as all the rest
of the family if you would only marry some other girl,"

"I shall never do that."

"Yes you will;--some day."

"Never. I've set my heart upon it, and I mean to stick to it. I'm not the fellow to turn about
from one girl to another. What I want is the girl I love. I've money enough and all that kind
of thing of my own."

"I'm sure you're disinterested, Mr. Twentyman."

"Yes, I am. Ever since you've been home from Bragton it has been the same thing, and when I
felt that it was so, I spoke up to your father honestly. I haven't been beating about the bush,
and I haven't done anything that wasn't honourable." They were very near the last stile now.
"Come, Mary, if you won't make me a promise, say that you'll think of it"

"I have thought of it, Mr. Twentyman, and I can't make you any other answer. I dare say I'm
very foolish."

"I wish you were more foolish. Perhaps then you wouldn't be so hard to please."

"Whether I'm wise or foolish, indeed, indeed, it's no good your going on. Now we're on the
road. Pray go back home, Mr. Twentyman."

"It'll be getting dark in a little time."

"Not before we're in Dillsborough. If it were ever so dark we could find our way home by ourselves.
Come along, Dolly."

Over the last stile he had stayed a moment to help the younger girl, and as he did so Kate
whispered a word in his ear. "She's angry because she couldn't go up to the house with that
stuck-up fellow." It was a foolish word; but then Kate Masters had not had much experience
in the world. Whether overcome by Mary's resolute mode of speaking, or aware that the high
road would not suit his purpose, he did turn back as soon as he had seen them a little way
on their return towards the town. He had not gone half a mile before he met Morton, and had
been half-minded to make some apology to him. But Morton had denied him the opportunity, and
he had walked on to his own house,--low in spirits indeed, but still with none of that sorest
of agony which comes to a lover from the feeling that his love loves some one else. Mary had
been very decided with him,--more so he feared than before; but still he saw no reason why
he should not succeed at last. Mrs. Masters had told him that Mary would certainly give a little
trouble in winning, but would be the more worth the winner's trouble when won. And she had
certainly shown no preference for any other young man about the town. There had been a moment
when he had much dreaded Mr. Surtees. Young clergymen are apt to be formidable rivals, and
Mr. Surtees had certainly made some overtures of friendship to Mary Masters. But Larry had
thought that he had seen that these overtures had not led to much, and then that fear had gone
from him. He did believe that Mary was now angry because she had not been allowed to walk about
Bragton with her old friend Mr. Morton. It had been natural that she should like to do so.
It was the pride of Mary's life that she had been befriended by the Mortons and Lady Ushant.
But it did not occur to him that he ought to be jealous of Mr. Morton,--though it had occurred
to Kate Masters.

There was very little said between the sisters on their way back to the town. Mary was pretty
sure now that the two girls had made the appointment with Larry, but she was unwilling to question
them on the subject. Immediately on their arrival at home they heard the great news. John Morton
was coming to Bragton with a party of ladies and gentlemen. Mrs. Hopkins had spoken of four
persons. Mrs. Masters told Mary that there were to be a dozen at least, and that four or five
pairs of horses and half a dozen carriages had been ordered from Mr. Runciman. "He means to
cut a dash when he does begin," said Mrs. Masters.

"Is he going to stay, mother?"

"He wouldn't come down in that way if it was only for a few days I suppose. But what they will
do for furniture I don't know."

"There's plenty of furniture, mother."

"A thousand years old. Or for wine, or fruit, or plate."

"The old plate was there when Lady Ushant left."

"People do things now in a very different way from what they used. A couple of dozen silver
forks made quite a show on the old squire's table. Now they change the things so often that
ten dozen is nothing. I don't suppose there's a bottle of wine in the cellar."

"They can get wine from Cobbold, mother."

"Cobbold's wine won't go down with them I fancy. I wonder what servants they're bringing."

When Mr. Masters came in from his office the news was corroborated. Mr. John Morton was certainly
coming to Bragton. The attorney had still a small unsettled and disputed claim against the
owner of the property, and he had now received by the day mail an answer to a letter which
he had written to Mr. Morton, saying that that gentleman would see him in the course of the
next fortnight.

CHAPTER VIII

The Paragon's Party at Bragton

There was certainly a great deal of fuss made about John Morton's return to the home of his
ancestors,--made altogether by himself and those about him, and not by those who were to receive
him. On the Thursday in the week following that of which we have been speaking, two carriages
from the Bush met the party at the Railway Station and took them to Bragton. Mr. Runciman,
after due consideration, put up with the inconsiderate nature of the order given, and supplied
the coaches and horses as required,--consoling himself no doubt with the reflection that he
could charge for the unreasonableness of the demand in the bill. The coachman and butler had
come down two days before their master, so that things might be in order. Mrs. Hopkins learned
from the butler that though the party would at first consist only of three, two other very
august persons were to follow on the Saturday,--no less than Lady Augustus Trefoil and her
daughter Arabella. And Mrs. Hopkins was soon led to imagine, though no positive information
was given to her on the subject, that Miss Trefoil was engaged to be married to their Master.
"Will he live here altogether, Mr, Tankard?" Mrs. Hopkins asked. To this question Mr. Tankard
was able to give a very definite answer. He was quite sure that Mr. Morton would not live anywhere
altogether. According to Mr. Tankard's ideas, the whole foreign policy of England depended
on Mr. John Morton's presence in some capital, either in Europe, Asia, or America,--upon Mr.
Morton's presence, and of course upon his own also. Mr. Tankard thought it not improbable that
they might soon be wanted at Hong Kong, or some very distant place, but in the meantime they
were bound to be back at Washington very shortly. Tankard had himself been at Washington, and
also before that at Lisbon, and could tell Mrs. Hopkins how utterly unimportant had been the
actual ministers at those places, and how the welfare of England had depended altogether on
the discretion and general omniscience of his young master,--and of himself. He, Tankard, had
been the only person in Washington who had really known in what order Americans should go out
to dinner one after another. Mr. Elias Gotobed, who was coming, was perhaps the most distinguished
American of the day, and was Senator for Mickewa.

"Mickey war!" said poor Mrs. Hopkins,--"that's been one of them terrible American wars we used
to hear of." Then Tankard explained to her that Mickewa was one of the Western States and Mr.
Elias Gotobed was a great Republican, who had very advanced opinions of his own respecting
government, liberty, and public institutions in general. With Mr. Morton and the Senator was
coming the Honourable Mrs. Morton. The lady had her lady's maid,--and Mr, Morton had his own
man; so that there would be a great influx of persons.

Of course there was very much perturbation of spirit. Mrs. Hopkins, after that first letter,
the contents of which she had communicated to Reginald Morton, had received various despatches
and been asked various questions. Could she find a cook? Could she find two housemaids? And
all these were only wanted for a time. In her distress she went to Mrs. Runciman, and did get
assistance. "I suppose he thinks he's to have the cook out of my kitchen?" Runciman had said.
Somebody, however, was found who said she could cook, and two girls who professed that they
knew how to make beds. And in this way an establishment was ready before the arrival of the
Secretary of Legation and the great American Senator. Those other. questions of wine and plate
and vegetables had, no doubt, settled themselves after some fashion.

John Morton had come over to England on leave of absence for four months, and had brought with
him the Senator from Mickewa. The Senator had never been in England before, and was especially
anxious to study the British Constitution and to see the ways of Britons with his own eyes.
He had only been a fortnight in London before this journey down to the county had been planned.
Mr. Gotobed wished to see English country life and thought that he could not on his first arrival
have a better opportunity. It must be explained also that there was another motive, for this
English rural sojourn. Lady Augustus Trefoil, who was an adventurous lady, had been travelling
in the United States with her daughter, and had there fallen in with Mr. John Morton. Arabella
Trefoil was a beauty, and a woman of fashion, and had captivated the Paragon. An engagement
had been made, subject to various stipulations; the consent of Lord Augustus in the first place,--as
to which John Morton who only understood foreign affairs was not aware, as he would have been
had he lived in England, that Lord Augustus was nobody. Lady Augustus had spoken freely as
to settlements, value of property, life insurance and such matters; and had spoken firmly,
as well as freely, expressing doubt as to the expediency of such an engagement;--all of which
had surprised Mr. Morton considerably, for the young lady had at first been left in his hands
with almost American freedom. And now Lady Augustus and her daughter were coming down on a
visit of inspection. They had been told, as had the Senator, that things would be in the rough.
The house had not been properly inhabited for nearly a quarter of a century. The Senator had
expressed himself quite contented. Lady Augustus had only hoped that everything would be made
as comfortable as possible for her daughter. I don't know what more could have been done at
so short a notice than to order two carriages, two housemaids, and a cook.

A word or two must also be said of the old lady who made one of the party. The Honourable Mrs.
Morton was now seventy, but no old lady ever showed less signs of advanced age. It is not to
be understood from this that she was beautiful;---but that she was very strong. What might
be the colour of her hair, or whether she had any, no man had known for many years. But she
wore so perfect a front that some people were absolutely deluded. She was very much wrinkled;--
but as there are wrinkles which seem to come from the decay of those muscles which should uphold
the skin, so are there others which seem to denote that the owner has simply got rid of the
watery weaknesses of juvenility. Mrs. Morton's wrinkles were strong wrinkles. She was thin,
but always carried herself bolt upright, and would never even lean back in her chair. She had
a great idea of her duty, and hated everybody who differed from her with her whole heart. She
was the daughter of a Viscount, a fact which she never forgot for a single moment, and which
she thought gave her positive superiority to all women who were not the daughters of Dukes
or Marquises, or of Earls. Therefore, as she did not live much in the fashionable world, she
rarely met any one above herself. Her own fortune on her marriage had been small, but now she
was a rich woman. Her husband had been dead nearly half a century and during the whole of that
time she had been saving money. To two charities she gave annually five pounds per annum each.
Duty demanded it, and the money was given. Beyond that she had never been known to spend a
penny in charity. Duty, she had said more than once, required of her that she do something
to repair the ravages made on the Morton property by the preposterous extravagance of the old
squire in regard to the younger son, and that son's--child. In her anger she had not hesitated
on different occasions to call the present Reginald a bastard, though the expression was a
wicked calumny for which there was no excuse. Without any aid of hers the Morton property had
repaired itself. There had been a minority of thirteen or fourteen years, and since that time
the present owner had not spent his income. But John Morton was not himself averse to money,
and had always been careful to maintain good relations with his grandmother. She had now been
asked down to Bragton in order that she might approve, if possible, of the proposed wife. It
was not likely that she should approve absolutely of anything; but to have married without
an appeal to her would have been to have sent the money flying into the hands of some of her
poor paternal cousins. Arabella Trefoil was the granddaughter of a duke, and a step had so
far been made in the right direction. But Mrs. Morton knew that Lord Augustus was nobody, that
there would be no money, and that Lady Augustus had been the daughter of a banker, and that
her fortune had been nearly squandered.

The Paragon was not in the least afraid of his American visitor, nor, as far as the comforts
of his house were concerned, of his grandmother. Of the beauty, and her mother he did stand
in awe;-- but he had two days in which to look to things before they would come. The train
reached the Dillsborough Station at half-past three, and the two carriages were there to meet
them. "You will understand, Mr. Gotobed," said the old lady, "that my grandson has nothing
of his own established here as yet." This little excuse was produced by certain patches and
tears in the cushions and linings of the carriages. Mr. Gotobed smiled and bowed and declared
that everything was "fixed convenient" Then the Senator followed the old lady into one carriage;
Mr. Morton followed alone into the other; and they were driven away to Bragton.

When Mrs. Hopkins had taken the old lady up to her room Mr. Morton asked the Senator to walk
round the grounds. Mr. Gotobed, lighting an enormous cigar of which he put half down his throat
for more commodious and quick consumption, walked on to the middle of the drive, and turning
back looked up at the house, "Quite a pile," he said, observing that the offices and outhouses
extended a long way to the left till they almost joined other buildings in which were the stables
and coach-house.

"It's a good-sized house;"--said the owner; "nothing very particular, as houses are built now-a-days."

"Damp; I should say?"

"I think not. I have never lived here much myself; but I have not heard that it is considered so."

"I guess it's damp. Very lonely;--isn't it?"

"We like to have our society inside, among ourselves, in the country."

"Keep a sort of hotel-like?" suggested Mr. Gotobed. "Well, I don't dislike hotel life, especially
when there are no charges. How many servants do you want to keep up such a house as that?"

Mr. Morton explained that at present he knew very little about it himself, then led him away
by the path over the bridge, and turning to the left showed him the building which had once
been the kennels of the Rufford hounds, "All that for dogs!" exclaimed Mr. Gotobed.

"All for dogs," said Morton. "Hounds, we generally call them."

"Hounds are they? Well; I'll remember; though 'dogs' seems to me more civil. How many used
there to be?"

"About fifty couple, I think."

"A hundred dogs! No wonder your country gentlemen burst up so often. Wouldn't half-a-dozen
do as well,--except for the show of the thing?"

"Half-a-dozen hounds couldn't hunt a fox, Mr. Gotobed."

"I guess half-a-dozen would do just as well, only for the show. What strikes me, Mr. Morton,
on visiting this old country is that so much is done for show."

"What do you say to New York, Mr. Gotobed?"

"There certainly are a couple of hundred fools in New York, who, having more money than brains,
amuse themselves by imitating European follies. But you won't find that through the country,
Mr. Morton. You won't find a hundred dogs at an American planter's house when ten or twelve
would do as well."

"Hunting is not one of your amusements."

"Yes it is. I've been a hunter myself. I've had nothing to eat but what I killed for a month
together. That's more than any of your hunters can say. A hundred dogs to kill one fox!"

"Not all at the same time, Mr. Gotobed."

"And you have got none now?"

"I don't hunt myself."

"And does nobody hunt the foxes about here at present?" Then Morton explained that on the Saturday
following the U.R.U. hounds, under the mastership of that celebrated sportsman Captain Glomax,
would meet at eleven o'clock exactly at the spot on which they were then standing, and that
if Mr. Gotobed would walk out after breakfast he should see the whole paraphernalia, including
about half a hundred "dogs," and perhaps a couple of hundred men on horseback. "I shall be
delighted to see any institution of this great country," said Mr. Gotobed, "however much opposed
it may be to my opinion either of utility or rational recreation." Then, having nearly eaten
up one cigar, he lit another preparatory to eating it, and sauntered back to the house.

Before dinner that evening there were a few words between the Paragon and his grandmother.
"I'm afraid you won't like my American friend," he said.

"He is all very well, John. Of course an American member of Congress can't be an English gentleman.
You, in your position, have to be civil to such people. I dare say I shall get on very well
with Mr. Gotobed."

"I must get somebody to meet him."

"Lady Augustus and her daughter are coming."

"They knew each other in Washington. And there will be so many ladies."

"You could ask the Coopers from Mallingham," suggested the lady.

"I don't think they would dine out. He's getting very old."

"And I'm told the Mainwarings at Dillsborough are very nice people," said Mrs. Morton, who
knew that Mr. Mainwaring at any rate came from a good family.

"I suppose they ought to call first. I never saw them in my life. Reginald Morton, you know,
is living at Hoppet Hall in Dillsborough."

"You don't mean to say you wish to ask him to this house?"

"I think I ought. Why should I take upon myself to quarrel with a man I have not seen since
I was a child, and who certainly is my cousin?"

"I do not know that he is your cousin; nor do you."

John Morton passed by the calumny which he had heard before, and which he knew that it was
no good for him to attempt to subvert. "He was received here as one of the family, ma'am."

"I know he was; and with what result?"

"I don't think that I ought to turn my back upon him because my great-grandfather left property
away from me to him. It would give me a bad name in the county. It would be against me when
I settle down to live here. I think quarrelling is the most foolish thing a man can do,--especially
with his own relations."

"I can only say this, John;--let me know if he is coming, so that I may not be called upon
to meet him. I will not eat at table with Reginald Morton." So saying the old lady, in a stately
fashion, stalked out of the room.

CHAPTER IX

The Old Kennels

On the next morning Mrs. Morton asked her grandson what he meant to do with reference to his
suggested invitation to Reginald. "As you will not meet him of course I have given up the idea,"
he said. The "of course" had been far from true. He had debated the matter very much with himself.
He was an obstinate man, with something of independence in his spirit. He liked money, but
he liked having his own way too. The old lady looked as though she might live to be a hundred,--and
though she might last only for ten years longer, was it worth his while to be a slave for that
time? And he was by no means sure of her money, though he should be a slave. He almost made
up his mind that he would ask Reginald Morton. But then the old lady would be in her tantrums,
and there would be the disagreeable necessity of making an explanation to that inquisitive
gentleman Mr. Elias Gotobed.

"I couldn't have met him, John; I couldn't indeed. I remember so well all that occurred when
your poor infatuated great-grandfather would have that woman into the house! I was forced to
have my meals in my bedroom, and to get myself taken away as soon as I could get a carriage
and horses. After all that I ought not to be asked to meet the child."

"I was thinking of asking old Mr. Cooper on Monday. I know she doesn't go out. And perhaps
Mr. Mainwaring wouldn't take it amiss. Mr. Puttock, I know, isn't at home; but if he were,
he couldn't come." Mr. Puttock was the rector of Bragton, a very rich living, but was unfortunately
afflicted with asthma.

"Poor man. I heard of that; and he's only been here about six years. I don't see why Mr. Mainwaring
should take it amiss at all. You can explain that you are only here a few days. I like to meet
clergymen. I think that it is the duty of a country gentleman to ask them to his house. It
shows a proper regard for religion. By-the-bye, John, I hope that you'll see that they have
a fire in the church on Sunday." The Honourable Mrs. Morton always went to church, and had
no doubt of her own sincerity when she reiterated her prayer that as she forgave others their
trespasses, so might she be forgiven hers. As Reginald Morton had certainly never trespassed
against her perhaps there was no reason why her thoughts should be carried to the necessity
of forgiving him.

The Paragon wrote two very diplomatic notes, explaining his temporary residence and expressing
his great desire to become acquainted with his neighbours. Neither of the two clergymen were
offended, and both of them promised to eat his dinner on Monday. Mr. Mainwaring was very fond
of dining out, and would have gone almost to any gentleman's house. Mr. Cooper had been enough
in the neighbourhood to have known the old squire, and wrote an affectionate note expressing
his gratification at the prospect of renewing his acquaintance with the little boy whom he
remembered. So the party was made up for Monday. John Morton was very nervous on the matter,
fearing that Lady Augustus would think the land to be barren.

The Friday passed by without much difficulty. The Senator was driven about, and everything
was inquired into. One or two farm houses were visited, and the farmers' wives were much disturbed
by the questions asked them. "I don't think they'd get a living in the States," was the Senator's
remark after leaving one of the homesteads in which neither the farmer nor his wife had shown
much power of conversation. "Then they're right to stay where they are," replied Mr. Morton,
who in spite of his diplomacy could not save himself from being nettled. "They seem to get
a very good living here, and they pay their rent punctually."

On the Saturday morning the hounds met at the "Old Kennels," as the meet was always called,
and here was an excellent opportunity of showing to Mr. Gotobed one of the great institutions
of the country. It was close to the house and therefore could be reached without any trouble,
and as it was held on Morton's own ground, he could do more towards making his visitor understand
the thing than might have been possible elsewhere. When the hounds moved the carriage would
be ready to take them about the roads, and show them as much as could be seen on wheels.

Punctually at eleven John Morton and his American guest were on the bridge, and Tony Tuppett
was already occupying his wonted place, seated on a strong grey mare that had done a great
deal of work, but would live,--as Tony used to say,--to do a great deal more. Round him the
hounds were clustered,--twenty-three couple in all,-- some seated on their haunches, some standing
obediently still, while a few moved about restlessly, subject to the voices and on one or two
occasions to a gentle administration of thong from the attendant whips. Four or five horsemen
were clustering round, most of them farmers, and were talking to Tony. Our friend Mr. Twentyman
was the only man in a red coat who had yet arrived, and with him, on her brown pony, was Kate
Masters, who was listening with all her ears to every word that Tony said.

"That, I guess, is the Captain you spoke of," said the Senator pointing to Tony Tuppett.

"Oh no;--that's the huntsman. Those three men in caps are the servants who do the work."

"The dogs can't be brought out without servants to mind them! They're what you call gamekeepers."
Morton was explaining that the men were not gamekeepers when Captain Glomax himself arrived,
driving a tandem. There was no road up to the spot, but on hunt mornings,--or at any rate when
the meet was at the old kennels,-- the park-gates were open so that vehicles could come up
on the green sward.

"That's Captain Glomax, I suppose," said Morton. "I don't know him, but from the way he's talking
to the huntsman you may be sure of it"

"He is the great man, is he? All these dogs belong to him?"

"Either to him or the hunt"

"And he pays for those servants?"

"Certainly."

"He is a very rich man, I suppose." Then Mr. Morton endeavoured to explain the position of
Captain Glomax. He was not rich. He was no one in particular--except that he was Captain Glomax;
and his one attribute was a knowledge of hunting. He didn't keep the "dogs" out of his own
pocket. He received 2,000 pounds a year from the gentlemen of the county, and he himself only
paid anything which the hounds and horses might cost over that. "He's a sort of upper servant
then?" asked the Senator.

"Not at all. He's the greatest man in the county on hunting days."

"Does he live out of it?"

"I should think not."

"It's a deal of trouble, isn't it?"

"Full work for an active man's time, I should say." A great many more questions were asked
and answered, at the end of which the Senator declared that he did not quite understand it,
but that as far as he saw he did not think very much of Captain Glomax.

"If he could make a living out of it I should respect him," said the Senator;--" though it's
like knife-grinding or handling arsenic, an unwholesome sort of profession."

"I think they look very nice," said Morton, as one or two well-turned-out young men rode up
to the place.

"They seem to me to have thought more about their breeches than anything else," said the Senator.
"But if they're going to hunt why don't they hunt? Have they got a fox with them?" Then there
was a further explanation.

At this moment there was a murmur as of a great coming arrival, and then an open carriage with
four post-horses was brought at a quick trot into the open space. There were four men dressed
for hunting inside, and two others on the box. They were all smoking, and all talking. It was
easy to see that they did not consider themselves the least among those who were gathered together
on this occasion. The carriage was immediately surrounded by grooms and horses, and the ceremony
of disencumbering themselves of great coats and aprons, of putting on spurs and fastening hat-strings
was commenced. Then there were whispered communications from the grooms, and long faces under
some of the hats. This horse hadn't been fit since last Monday's run, and that man's hack wasn't
as it should be. A muttered curse might have been heard from one gentleman as he was told,
on jumping from the box, that Harry Stubbings hadn't sent him any second horse to ride. "I
didn't hear nothing about it till yesterday, Captain," said Harry Stubbings, "and every foot
I had fit to come out was bespoke." The groom, however, who heard this was quite aware that
Mr. Stubbings did not wish to give unlimited credit to the Captain, and he knew also that the
second horse was to have carried his master the whole day, as the animal which was brought
to the meet had been ridden hard on the previous Wednesday. At all this the Senator looked
with curious eyes, thinking that he had never in his life seen brought together a set of more
useless human beings.

"That is Lord Rufford," said Morton, pointing to a stout, ruddy-faced, handsome man of about
thirty, who was the owner of the carriage.

"Oh, a lord. Do the lords hunt, generally?"

"That's as they like it."

"Senators with us wouldn't have time for that," said the Senator.

"But you are paid to do your work."

"Everybody from whom work is expected should be paid. Then the work will be done, or those
who pay will know the reason why."

"I must speak to Lord Rufford," said Morton. "If you'll come with me, I'll introduce you."
The Senator followed willingly enough and the introduction was made while his lordship was
still standing by his horse. The two men had known each other in London, and it was natural
that Morton, as owner of the ground, should come out and speak to the only man who knew him.
It soon was spread about that the gentleman talking to Lord Rufford was John Morton, and many
who lived in the county came up to shake hands with him, To some of these the Senator was introduced
and the conversation for a few minutes seemed to interrupt the business on hand. "I am sorry
you should be on foot, Mr. Gotobed," said the lord.

"And I am sorry that I cannot mount him," said Mr. Morton.

"We can soon get over that difficulty if he will allow me to offer him a horse."

The Senator looked as though he would almost like it, but he didn't quite like it. "Perhaps
your horse might kick me off, my lord."

"I can't answer for that; but he isn't given to kicking, and there he is, if you'll get on
him." But the Senator felt that the exhibition would suit neither his age nor position, and
refused.

"We'd better be moving," said Captain Glomax. "I suppose, Lord Rufford, we might as well trot
over to Dillsborough Wood at once. I saw Bean as I came along and he seemed to wish we should
draw the wood first." Then there was a little whispering between his lordship and the Master
and Tony Tuppett. His lordship thought that as Mr. Morton was there the hounds might as well
be run through the Bragton spinnies. Tony made a wry face and shook his head. He knew that
though the Old Kennels might be a very good place for meeting there was no chance of finding
a fox at Bragton. And Captain Glomax, who, being an itinerary master, had no respect whatever
for a country gentleman who didn't preserve, also made a long face and also shook his head.
But Lord Rufford, who knew the wisdom of reconciling a newcomer in the county to foxhunting,
prevailed and the hounds and men were taken round a part of Bragton Park.

"What if t' old squire 've said if he'd 've known there hadn't been a fox at Bragton for more
nor ten year?" This remark was made by Tuppett to Mr. Runciman who was riding by him. Mr. Runciman
replied that there was a great difference in people. "You may say that, Mr. Runciman. It's
all changes. His lordship's father couldn't bear the sight of a hound nor a horse and saddle.
Well;--I suppose I needn't gammon any furder. We'll just trot across to the wood at once"

"They haven't begun yet as far as I can see," said Mr. Gotobed standing up in the carriage.

"They haven't found as yet," replied Morton.

"They must go on till they find a fox? They never bring him with them?" Then there was an explanation
as to bagged foxes, Morton not being very conversant with the subject he had to explain. "And
if they shouldn't find one all day?"

"Then it'll be a blank."

"And these hundred gentlemen will go home quite satisfied with themselves?"

"No; they'll go home quite dissatisfied."

"And have paid their money and given their time for nothing? Do you know it doesn't seem to
me the most heart-stirring thing in the world. Don't they ride faster than that?" At this moment
Tony with the hounds at his heels was trotting across the park at a huntsman's usual pace from
covert to covert. The Senator was certainly ungracious. Nothing that he saw produced from him
a single word expressive of satisfaction.

Less than a mile brought them to the gate and road leading up to Chowton Farm. They passed
close by Larry Twentyman's door, and not a few, though it was not yet more than half-past eleven,
stopped to have a glass of Larry's beer. When the hounds were in the neighbourhood Larry's
beer was always ready. But Tony and his attendants trotted by with eyes averted, as though
no thought of beer was in their minds. Nothing had been done, and a huntsman is not entitled
to beer till he has found a fox. Captain Glomax followed with Lord Rufford and a host of others.
There was plenty of way here for carriages, and half a dozen vehicles passed through Larry's
farmyard. Immediately behind the house was a meadow, and at the bottom of the meadow a stubble
field, next to which was the ditch and bank which formed the bounds of Dillsborough Wood. Just
at this side of the gate leading into the stubble-field there was already a concourse of people
when Tony arrived near it with the hounds, and immediately there was a holloaing and loud screeching
of directions, which was soon understood to mean that the hounds were at once to be taken away!
The Captain rode on rapidly, and then sharply gave his orders. Tony was to take the hounds
back to Mr. Twentyman's farmyard as fast as he could, and shut them up in a barn. The whips
were put into violent commotion. Tony was eagerly at work. Not a hound was to be allowed near
the gate. And then, as the crowd of horsemen and carriages came on, the word "poison" was passed
among them from mouth to mouth!

"What does all this mean?" said the Senator.

"I don't at all know. I'm afraid there's something wrong," replied Morton.

"I heard that man say `poison'. They have taken the dogs back again." Then the Senator and
Morton got out of the carriage and made their way into the crowd. The riders who had grooms
on second horses were soon on foot, and a circle was made, inside which there was some object
of intense interest. In the meantime the hounds had been secured in one of Mr. Twentyman's barns.

What was that object of interest shall be told in the next chapter.

CHAPTER X

Goarly's Revenge

The Senator and Morton followed close on the steps of Lord Rufford and Captain Glomax and were
thus able to make their way into the centre of the crowd. There, on a clean sward of grass,
laid out as carefully as though he were a royal child prepared for burial, was--a dead fox.
"It's pi'son, my lord; it's pi'son to a moral," said Bean, who as keeper of the wood was bound
to vindicate himself, and his master, and the wood. "Feel of him, how stiff he is." A good
many did feel, but Lord Rufford stood still and looked at the poor victim in silence. "It's
easy knowing how he come by it," said Bean.

The men around gazed into each other's faces with a sad tragic air, as though the occasion
were one which at the first blush was too melancholy for many words. There was whispering here
and there and one young farmer's son gave a deep sigh, like a steam-engine beginning to work,
and rubbed his eyes with the back of his hand. "There ain't nothin' too bad,--nothin," said
another,--leaving his audience to imagine whether he were alluding to the wretchedness of the
world in general or to the punishment which was due to the perpetrator of this nefarious act.
The dreadful word "vulpecide" was heard from various lips with an oath or two before it. "It
makes me sick of my own land, to think it should be done so near," said Larry Twentyman, who
had just come up. Mr. Runciman declared that they must set their wits to work not only to find
the criminal but to prove the crime against him, and offered to subscribe a couple of sovereigns
on the spot to a common fund to be raised for the purpose. "I don't know what is to be done
with a country like this," said Captain Glomax, who, as an itinerant, was not averse to cast
a slur upon the land of his present sojourn.

"I don't remember anything like it on my property before," said the lord, standing up for his
own estate and the county at large.

"Nor in the hunt," said young Hampton. "Of course such a thing may happen anywhere. They had
foxes poisoned in the Pytchley last year."

"It shows a d-- bad feeling somewhere," said the Master.

"We know very well where the feeling is," said Bean who had by this time taken up the fox,
determined not to allow it to pass into any hands less careful than his own.

"It's that scoundrel, Goarly," said one of the Botseys. Then there was an indignant murmur
heard, first of all from two or three and then running among the whole crowd. Everybody knew
as well as though he had seen it that Goarly had baited meat with strychnine and put it down
in the wood. "Might have pi'soned half the pack!" said Tony Tuppett, who had come up on foot
from the barn where the hounds were still imprisoned, and had caught hold in an affectionate
manner of a fore pad of the fox which Bean had clutched by the two hind legs. Poor Tony Tuppett
almost shed tears as he looked at the dead animal, and thought what might have been the fate
of the pack. "It's him, my lord," he said, "as we run through Littleton gorse Monday after
Christmas last, and up to Impington Park where he got away from us in a hollow tree. He's four
year old," added Tony, looking at the animal's mouth, "and there warn't a finer dog fox in
the county."

"Do they know all the foxes?" asked the Senator. In answer to this, Morton only shook his head,
not feeling quite sure himself how far a huntsman's acquaintance in that line might go, and
being also too much impressed by the occasion for speculative conversation.

"It's that scoundrel Goarly" had been repeated again and again; and then on a sudden Goarly
himself was seen standing on the further hedge of Larry's field with a gun in his hand. He
was not at this time above two hundred yards from them, and was declared by one of the young
farmers to be grinning with delight. The next field was Goarly's, but the hedge and ditch belonged
to Twentyman. Larry rushed forward as though determined to thrash the man, and two or three
followed him. But Lord Rufford galloped on and stopped them. "Don't get into a row with a fellow
like that," he said to Twentyman.

"He's on my land, my lord," said Larry impatiently.

"I'm on my own now, and let me see who'll dare to touch me," said Goarly jumping down.

"You've put poison down in that wood," said Larry.

"No I didn't; but I knows who did. It ain't I as am afeard for my young turkeys" Now it was
well known that old Mrs. Twentyman, Larry's mother, was fond of young turkeys, and that her
poultry-yard had suffered. Larry, in his determination to be a gentleman, had always laughed
at his mother's losses. But now to be accused in this way was terrible to his feelings! He
made a rush as though to jump over the hedge, but Lord Rufford again intercepted him. "I didn't
think, Mr. Twentyman, that you'd care for what such a fellow as that might say." By this time
Lord Rufford was off his horse, and had taken hold of Larry.

"I'll tell you all what it is," screamed Goarly, standing just at the edge of his own field,--"if
a hound comes out of the wood on to my land, I'll shoot him. I don't know nothing about p'isoning,
though I dare say Mr. Twentyman does. But if a hound comes on my land, I'll shoot him,--open,
before you all" There was, however, no danger of such a threat being executed on this day,
as of course no hound would be allowed to go into Dillsborough Wood.

Twentyman was reluctantly brought back into the meadow where the horses were standing, and
then a consultation was held as to what they should do next. There were some who thought that
the hounds should be taken home for the day. It was as though some special friend of the U.R.U.
had died that morning, and that the spirits of the sportsmen were too dejected for their sport.
Others, with prudent foresight, suggested that the hounds might run back from some distant
covert to Dillsborough, and that there should be no hunting till the wood had been thoroughly
searched. But the strangers, especially those who had hired horses, would not hear of this;
and after considerable delay it was arranged that the hounds should be trotted off as quickly
as possible to Impington Gorse, which was on the other side of Impington Park, and fully five
miles distant. And so they started, leaving the dead fox in the hands of Bean the gamekeeper.

"Is this the sort of thing that occurs every day?" asked the Senator as he got back into the
carriage.

"I should fancy not," answered Morton. "Somebody has poisoned a fox, and I don't think that
that is very often done about here."

"Why did he poison him?"

"To save his fowls I suppose."

"Why shouldn't he poison him if the fox takes his fowls? Fowls are better than foxes."

"Not in this country," said Morton.

"Then I'm very glad I don't live here," said Mr. Gotobed. "These friends of yours are dressed
very nicely and look very well,--but a fox is a nasty animal. It was that man standing up on
the bank;-- wasn't it?" continued the Senator, who was determined to understand it all to the
very bottom, in reference to certain lectures which he intended to give on his return to the
States,--and perhaps also in the old country before he left it.

"They suspect him."

"That man with the gun! One man against two hundred! Now I respect that man;--I do with all
my heart."

"You'd better not say so here, Mr. Gotobed."

"I know how full of prejudice you all air',--but I do respect him. If I comprehend the matter
rightly, he was on his own land when we saw him."

"Yes;--that was his own field."

"And they meant to ride across it whether he liked it or no?"

"Everybody rides across everybody's land out hunting."

"Would they ride across your park, Mr. Morton, if you didn't let them?"

"Certainly they would,--and break down all my gates if I had them locked, and pull down my
park palings to let the hounds through."

"And you could get no compensation?"

"Practically I could get none. And certainly I should not try. The greatest enemy to hunting
in the whole county would not be foolish enough to make the attempt"

"Why so?"

"He would get no satisfaction, and everybody would hate him."

"Then I respect that man the more. What is that man's name?" Morton hadn't heard the name,
or had forgotten it. "I shall find that man out, and have some conversation with him, Mr. Morton.
I respect that man, Mr. Morton. He's one against two hundred, and he insists upon his rights.
Those men standing round and wiping their eyes, and stifled with grief because a fox had been
poisoned, as though some great patriot had died among them in the service of his country, formed
one of the most remarkable phenomena, Sir, that ever I beheld in any country. When I get among
my own people in Mickewa and tell them that, they won't believe me, sir."

In the meantime the cavalcade was hurrying away to Impington Gorse, and John Morton, feeling
that he had not had an opportunity as yet of showing his American friend the best side of hunting,
went with them. The five miles were five long miles, and as the pace was not above seven miles
an hour, nearly an hour was occupied. There was therefore plenty of opportunity for the Senator
to inquire whether the gentlemen around him were as yet enjoying their sport. There was an
air of triumph about him as to the misfortunes of the day, joined to a battery of continued
raillery, which made it almost impossible for Morton to keep his temper. He asked whether it
was not at any rate better than trotting a pair of horses backwards and forwards over the same
mile of road for half the day, as is the custom in the States. But the Senator, though he did
not quite approve of trotting matches, argued that there was infinitely more of skill and ingenuity
in the American pastime. "Everybody is so gloomy," said the Senator, lighting his third cigar.
"I've been watching that young man in pink boots for the last half hour, and he hasn't spoken
a word to any one."

"Perhaps he's a stranger," said Morton.

"And that's the way you treat him!"

It was past two when the hounds were put into the gorse, and certainly no one was in a very
good humour. A trot of five miles is disagreeable, and two o'clock in November is late for
finding a first fox; and then poisoning is a vice that may grow into a habit! There was a general
feeling that Goarly ought to be extinguished, but an idea that it might be difficult to extinguish
him. The whips, nevertheless, cantered on to the corner of the covert, and Tony put in his
hounds with a cheery voice. The Senator remarked that the gorse was a very little place,--for
as they were on the side of an opposite hill they could see it all. Lord Rufford, who was standing
by the carriage, explained to him that it was a favourite resort of foxes, and difficult to
draw as being very close. "Perhaps they've poisoned him too," said the Senator. It was evident
from his voice that had such been the case, he would not have been among the mourners. "The
blackguards are not yet thick enough in our country for that," said Lord Rufford, meaning to
be sarcastic.

Then a whimper was heard from a hound,--at first very low, and then growing into a fuller sound.
"There he is," said young Hampton. "For heaven's sake get those fellows away from that side,
Glomax." This was uttered with so much vehemence that the Senator looked up in surprise. Then
the Captain galloped round the side of the covert, and, making use of some strong language,
stopped the ardour of certain gentlemen who were in a hurry to get away on what they considered
good terms. Lord Rufford, Hampton, Larry Twentyman and others sat stock-still on their horses,
watching the gorse. Ned Botsey urged himself a little forward down the hill, and was creeping
on when Captain Glomax asked him whether he would be so-- --obliging kind as to remain where
he was for half a minute. Fred took the observations in good part and stopped his horse. "Does
he do all that cursing and swearing for the 2,000 pounds?" asked the Senator.

The fox traversed the gorse back from side to side and from corner to corner again and again.
There were two sides certainly at which he might break, but though he came out more than once
he could not be got to go away.

"They'll kill him now before he breaks," said the elder Botsey.

"Brute!" exclaimed his brother.

"They're hot on him now," said Hampton. At this time the whole side of the hill was ringing
with the music of the hounds.

"He was out then, but Dick turned him," said Larry. Dick was one of the whips.

"Will you be so kind, Mr. Morton," asked the Senator, "as to tell me whether they're hunting
yet? They've been at it for three hours and a half, and I should like to know when they begin
to amuse themselves."

Just as he had spoken there came from Dick a cry that he was away. Tony, who had been down
at the side of the gorse, at once jumped into it, knowing the passage through. Lord Rufford,
who for the last five or six minutes had sat perfectly still on his horse, started down the
hill as though he had been thrown from a catapult. There was a little hand-gate through which
it was expedient to pass, and in a minute a score of men were jostling for the way, among whom
were the two Botseys, our friend Runciman, and Larry Twentyman, with Kate Masters on the pony
close behind him. Young Hampton jumped a very nasty fence by the side of the wicket, and Lord
Rufford followed him. A score of elderly men, with some young men among them too, turned back
into a lane behind them, having watched long enough to see that they were to take the lane
to the left, and not the lane to the right. After all there was time enough, for when the men
had got through the hand-gate the hounds were hardly free of the covert, and Tony, riding up
the side of the hill opposite, was still blowing his horn. But they were off at last, and the
bulk of the field got away on good terms with the hounds. "Now they are hunting," said Mr.
Morton to the Senator.

"They all seemed to be very angry with each other at that narrow gate"

"They were in a hurry, I suppose."

"Two of them jumped over the hedge. Why didn't they all jump? How long will it be now before
they catch him?"

"Very probably they may not catch him at all."

"Not catch him after all that! Then the man was certainly right to poison that other fox in
the wood. How long will they go on?"

"Half an hour perhaps."

"And you call that hunting! Is it worth the while of all those men to expend all that energy
for such a result? Upon the whole, Mr. Morton, I should say that it is one of the most incomprehensible
things that I have ever seen in the course of a rather long and varied life. Shooting I can
understand, for you have your birds. Fishing I can understand, as you have your fish. Here
you get a fox to begin with, and are all broken-hearted. Then you come across another, after
riding about all day, and the chances are you can't catch him!"

"I suppose," said Mr. Morton angrily, "the habits of one country are incomprehensible to the
people of another. When I see Americans loafing about in the bar-room of an hotel, I am lost
in amazement."

"There is not a man you see who couldn't give a reason for his being there. He has an object
in view, though perhaps it may be no better than to rob his neighbour. But here there seems
to be no possible motive."

CHAPTER XI

From Impington Gorse

The fox ran straight from the covert through his well-known haunts to Impington Park, and as
the hounds were astray there for two or three minutes there was a general idea that he too
had got up into a tree,--which would have amused the Senator very much had the Senator been
there. But neither had the country nor the pace been adapted to wheels, and the Senator and
the Paragon were now returning along the road towards Bragton. The fox had tried his old earths
at Impington High wood, and had then skulked back along the outside of the covert. Had not
one of the whips seen him he would have been troubled no further on that day, a fact, which
if it could have been explained to the Senator in all its bearings, would greatly have added
to his delight. But Dick viewed him; and with many holloas and much blowing of horns, and prayers
from Captain Glomax that gentlemen would only be so good as to hold their tongues, and a full-tongued
volley of abuse from half the field against an unfortunate gentleman who rode after the escaping
fox before a hound was out of the covert, they settled again to their business. It was pretty
to see the quiet ease and apparent nonchalance and almost affected absence of bustle of those
who knew their work,--among whom were especially to be named young Hampton, and the elder Botsey,
and Lord Rufford, and, above all, a dark-visaged, long-whiskered, sombre, military man who
had been in the carriage with Lord Rufford, and who had hardly spoken a word to any one the
whole day. This was the celebrated Major Caneback, known to all the world as one of the dullest
men and best riders across country that England had ever produced. But he was not so dull but
that he knew how to make use of his accomplishment, so as always to be able to get a mount
on a friend's horses. If a man wanted to make a horse, or to try a horse, or to sell a horse,
or to buy a horse, he delighted to put Major Caneback up. The Major was sympathetic and made
his friend's horses, and tried them, and sold them. Then he would take his two bottles of wine,--of
course from his friend's cellar,--and when asked about the day's sport would be oracular in
two words, "Rather slow," "Quick spurt," "Goodish thing," "Regularly mulled," and such like.
Nevertheless it was a great thing to have Major Caneback with you. To the list of those who
rode well and quietly must in justice be added our friend Larry Twentyman, who was in truth
a good horseman. And he had three things to do which it was difficult enough to combine. He
had a young horse which he would have liked to sell; he had to coach Kate Masters on his pony;
and he desired to ride like Major Caneback.

From Impington Park they went in a straight line to Littleton Gorse skirting certain small
woods which the fox disdained to enter. Here the pace was very good, and the country was all
grass. It was the very cream of the U.R.U; and could the Senator have read the feelings of
the dozen leading men in the run, he would have owned that they were for the time satisfied
with their amusement. Could he have read Kate Master's feelings he would have had to own that
she was in an earthly Paradise. When the pony paused at the big brook, brought his four legs
steadily down on the brink as though he were going to bathe, then with a bend of his back leaped
to the other side, dropping his hind legs in and instantly recovering them, and when she saw
that Larry had waited just a moment for her, watching to see what might be her fate, she was
in heaven. "Wasn't it a big one, Larry?" she asked in her triumph. "He did go in behind!" "Those
cats of things always do it somehow," Larry replied darting forward again and keeping the Major
well in his eye. The brook had stopped one or two, and tidings came up that Ned Botsey had
broken his horse's back. The knowledge of the brook had sent some round by the road,--steady
riding men such as Mr. Runciman and Doctor Nupper. Captain Glomax had got into it and came
up afterwards wet through, with temper by no means improved. But the glory of the day had been
the way in which Lord Rufford's young bay mare, who had never seen a brook before, had flown
over it with the Major on her back, taking it, as Larry afterwards described, "just in her
stride, without condescending to look at it. I was just behind the Major, and saw her do it"
Larry understood that a man should never talk of his own place in a run, but he didn't quite
understand that neither should he talk of having been close to another man who was supposed
to have had the best of it. Lord Rufford, who didn't talk much of these things, quite understood
that he had received full value for his billet and mount in the improved character of his mare.

Then there, was a little difficulty at the boundary fence of Impington Hall Farm. The Major
who didn't know the ground, tried it at an impracticable place, and brought his mare down.
But she fell at the right side, and he was quick enough in getting away from her, not to fall
under her in the ditch. Tony Tuppet, who knew every foot of that double ditch and bank, and
every foot in the hedge above, kept well to the left and crept through a spot where one ditch
ran into the other, intersecting of the fence. Tony, like a knowing huntsman as he was, rode
always for the finish and not for immediate glory. Both Lord Rufford and Hampton, who in spite
of their affected nonchalance were in truth rather riding against one another, took it all
in a fly, choosing a lighter spot than that which the Major had encountered. Larry had longed
to follow them, or rather to take it alongside of them, but was mindful at last of Kate and
hurried down the ditch to the spot which Tony had chosen and which was now crowded by horsemen.
"He would have done it as well as the best of them," said Kate, panting for breath.

"We're all right," said Larry. "Follow me. Don't let them hustle you out. Now, Mat, can't you
make way for a lady half a minute?" Mat growled, quite understanding the use which was being
made of Kate Masters; but he did give way and was rewarded with a gracious smile. "You are
going uncommon well, Miss Kate," said Mat, "and I won't stop you." "I am so much obliged to
you, Mr. Ruggles," said Kate, not scrupling for a moment to take the advantage offered her.
The fox had turned a little to the left, which was in Larry's favour, and the Major was now
close to him, covered on one side with mud, but still looking as though the mud were all right.
There are some men who can crush their hats, have their boots and breeches full of water, and
be covered with dirt from their faces downwards, and yet look as though nothing were amiss,
while, with others, the marks of a fall are always provocative either of pity or ridicule.
"I hope you're not hurt, Major Caneback," said Larry, glad of the occasion to speak to so distinguished
an individual. The Major grunted as he rode on, finding no necessity here even for his customary
two words. Little accidents, such as that, were the price he paid for his day's entertainment.

As they got within view of Littleton Gorse Hampton, Lord Rufford, and Tony had the best of
it, though two or three farmers were very close to them. At this moment Tony's mind was much
disturbed, and he looked round more than once for Captain Glomax. Captain Glomax had got into
the brook, and had then ridden down to the high road which ran here near to them and which,
as he knew, ran within one field of the gorse. He had lost his place and had got a ducking
and was a little out of humour with things in general. It had not been his purpose to go to
Impington on this day, and he was still, in his mind, saying evil things of the U.R.U. respecting
that poisoned fox. Perhaps he was thinking, as itinerant masters often must think, that it
was very hard to have to bear so many unpleasant things for a poor 2,000 pounds a year, and
meditating, as he had done for the last two seasons, a threat that unless the money were increased,
he wouldn't hunt the country more than three times a week. As Tony got near to the gorse and
also near to the road he managed with infinite skill to get the hounds off the scent, and to
make a fictitious cast to the left as though he thought the fox had traversed that way. Tony
knew well enough that the fox was at that moment in Littleton Gorse;--but he knew also that
the gorse was only six acres, that such a fox as he had before him wouldn't stay there two
minutes after the first hound was in it, and that Dillsborough Wood, which to his imagination
was full of poison,-- would then be only a mile and a half before him. Tony, whose fault was
a tendency to mystery,--as is the fault of most huntsmen,-- having accomplished his object
in stopping the hounds, pretended to cast about with great diligence. He crossed the road and
was down one side of a field and along another, looking anxiously for the Captain. "The fox
has gone on to the gorse," said the elder Botsey; "what a stupid old pig he is;"--meaning that
Tony Tuppet was the pig.

"He was seen going on," said Larry, who had come across a man mending a drain.

"It would be his run of course," said Hampton, who was generally up to Tony's wiles, but who
was now as much in the dark as others. Then four or five rode up to the huntsman and told him
that the fox had been seen heading for the gorse. Tony said not a word but bit his lips and
scratched his head and bethought himself what fools men might be even though they did ride
well to hounds. One word of explanation would have settled it all, but he would not speak that
word till he whispered it to Captain Glomax.

In the meantime there was a crowd in the road waiting to see the result of Tony's manoeuvres.
And then, as is usual on such occasions, a little mild repartee went about,--what the sportsmen
themselves would have called "chaff." Ned Botsey came up, not having broken his horse's back
as had been rumoured, but having had to drag the brute out of the brook with the help of two
countrymen, and the Major was asked about his fall till he was forced to open his mouth. "Double
ditch; mare fell; matter of course." And then he got himself out of the crowd, disgusted with
the littleness of mankind. Lord Rufford had been riding a very big chestnut horse, and had
watched the anxious struggles of Kate Masters to hold her place. Kate, though fifteen, and
quite up to that age in intelligence and impudence, was small and looked almost a child. "That's
a nice pony of yours, my dear," said the Lord. Kate, who didn't quite like being called "my
dear," but who knew that a lord has privileges, said that it was a very good pony. "Suppose
we change," said his lordship. "Could you ride my horse?" "He's very big," said Kate. "You'd
look like a tom-tit on a haystack," said his lordship. "And if you got on my pony, you'd look
like a haystack on a tom-tit," said Kate. Then it was felt that Kate Masters had had the best
of that little encounter. "Yes;--I got one there," said Lord Rufford, while his friends were
laughing at him.

At length Captain Glomax was seen in the road and Tony was with him at once, whispering in
his ear that the hounds if allowed to go on would certainly run into Dillsborough Wood. "D--
the hounds," muttered the Captain; but he knew too well what he was about to face so terrible
a danger. "They're going home," he said as soon as he had joined Lord Rufford and the crowd.

"Going home!" exclaimed a pink-coated young rider of a hired horse which had been going well
with him; and as he said so he looked at his watch.

"Unless you particularly wish me to take the hounds to some covert twenty miles off," answered
the sarcastic Master.

"The fox certainly went on to Littleton," said the elder Botsey.

"My dear fellow," said the Captain, "I can tell you where the fox went quite as well as you
can tell me. Do allow a man to know what he's about some times."

"It isn't generally the custom here to take the hounds off a running fox," continued Botsey,
who subscribed 50 pounds, and did not like being snubbed.

"And it isn't generally the custom to have fox-coverts poisoned," said the Captain, assuming
to himself the credit due to Tony's sagacity. "If you wish to be Master of these hounds I haven't
the slightest objection, but while I'm responsible you must allow me to do my work according
to my own judgment" Then the thing was understood and Captain Glomax was allowed to carry off
the hounds and his ill-humour without another word.

But just at that moment, while the hounds and the master, and Lord Rufford and his friends,
were turning back in their own direction, John Morton came up with his carriage and the Senator.
"Is it all over?" asked the Senator.

"All over for to-day," said Lord Rufford. "Did you catch the animal?"

"No, Mr. Gotobed; we couldn't catch him. To tell the truth we didn't try; but we had a nice
little skurry for four or five miles."

"Some of you look very wet" Captain Glomax and Ned Botsey were standing near the carriage;
but the Captain as soon as he heard this, broke into a trot and followed the hounds.

"Some of us are very wet," said Ned. "That's part of the fun."

"Oh;--that's part of the fun. You found one fox dead and you didn't kill another because you
didn't try. Well; Mr. Morton, I don't think I shall take to fox hunting even though they should
introduce it in Mickewa. "What's become of the rest of the men?"

"Most of them are in the brook," said Ned Botsey as he rode on towards Dillsborough.

Mr. Runciman was also there and trotted on homewards with Botsey, Larry, and Kate Masters.
"I think I've won my bet," said the hotel-keeper.

"I don't see that at all. We didn't find in Dillsborough Wood."

"I say we did find in Dillsborough Wood. We found a fox though unfortunately the poor brute
was dead."

"The bet's off I should say. What do you say, Larry?"

Then Runciman argued his case at great length and with much ability. It had been intended that
the bet should be governed by the fact whether Dillsborough Wood did or did not contain a fox
on that morning. He himself had backed the wood, and Botsey had been strong in his opinion
against the wood. Which of them had been practically right? Had not the presence of the poisoned
fox shown that he was right? "I think you ought to pay," said Larry.

"All right," said Botsey riding on, and telling himself that that was what came from making
a bet with a man who was not a gentleman.

"He's as unhappy about that hat," said Runciman, "as though beer had gone down a penny a gallon."

CHAPTER XII

Arabella Trefoil

On the Sunday the party from Bragton went to the parish church,-- and found it very cold. The
duty was done by a young curate who lived in Dillsborough, there being no house in Bragton
for him. The rector himself had not been in the church for the last six months, being an invalid.
At present he and his wife were away in London, but the vicarage was kept up for his use. The
service was certainly not alluring. It was a very wet morning and the curate had ridden over
from Dillsborough on a little pony which the rector kept for him in addition to the 100 pounds
per annum paid for his services. That he should have got over his service quickly was not a
matter of surprise,--nor was it wonderful that there should have been no soul-stirring matter
in his discourse as he had two sermons to preach every week and to perform single-handed all
the other clerical duties of a parish lying four miles distant from his lodgings. Perhaps had
he expected the presence of so distinguished a critic as the Senator from Mickewa he might
have done better. As it was, being nearly wet through and muddy up to his knees, he did not
do the work very well. When Morton and his friends left the church and got into the carriage
for their half-mile drive home across the park, Mrs. Morton was the first to speak. "John,"
she said, "that church is enough to give any woman her death. I won't go there any more."

"They don't understand warming a church in the country," said John apologetically.

"Is it not a little too large for the congregation?" asked the Senator.

The church was large and straggling and ill arranged, and on this particular Sunday had been
almost empty. There was in it an harmonium which Mrs. Puttock played when she was at home,
but in her absence the attempt made by a few rustics to sing the hymns had not been a musical
success. The whole affair had been very sad, and so the Paragon had felt it who knew,--and
was remembering through the whole service, how these things are done in transatlantic cities.

"The weather kept the people away I suppose," said Morton.

"Does that gentleman generally draw large congregations?" asked the persistent Senator.

"We don't go in for drawing congregations here." Under the cross-examination of his guest the
Secretary of Legation almost lost his diplomatic good temper. "We have a church in every parish
for those who choose to attend it"

"And very few do choose," said the Senator. "I can't say that they're wrong." There seemed
at the moment to be no necessity to carry the disagreeable conversation any further as they
had now reached the house. Mrs. Morton immediately went up-stairs, and the two gentlemen took
themselves to the fire in the so-called library, which room was being used as more commodious
than the big drawing-room. Mr. Gotobed placed himself on the rug with his back to the fire
and immediately reverted to the Church. "That gentleman is paid by tithes I suppose."

"He's not the rector. He's a curate."

"Ah;--just so. He looked like a curate. Doesn't the rector do anything?"

Then Morton, who was by this time heartily sick of explaining, explained the unfortunate state
of Mr. Puttock's health, and the conversation was carried on till gradually the Senator learned
that Mr. Puttock received 800 pounds a year and a house for doing nothing, and that he paid
his deputy 100 pounds a year with the use of a pony. "And how long will that be allowed to
go on, Mr. Morton?" asked the Senator.

To all these inquiries Morton found himself compelled not only to answer, but to answer the
truth. Any prevarication or attempt at mystification fell to the ground at once under the Senator's
tremendous powers of inquiry. It had been going on for four years, and would probably go on
now till Mr. Puttock died. "A man of his age with the asthma may live for twenty years," said
the Senator who had already learned that Mr. Puttock was only fifty. Then he ascertained that
Mr. Puttock had not been presented to, or selected for the living on account of any peculiar
fitness;--but that he had been a fellow of Rufford at Oxford till he was forty-five, when he
had thought it well to marry and take a living. "But he must have been asthmatic then?" said
the Senator.

"He may have had all the ailments endured by the human race for anything I know," said the
unhappy host.

"And for anything the bishop cared as far as I can see," said the Senator. "Well now, I guess,
that couldn't occur in our country. A minister may turn out badly with us as well as with you.
But we don't appoint a man without inquiry as to his fitness,--and if a man can't do his duty
he has to give way to some one who can. If the sick man took the small portion of the stipend
and the working man the larger, would not better justice be done, and the people better served?"

"Mr. Puttock has a freehold in the parish."

"A freehold possession of men's souls! The fact is, Mr. Morton, that the spirit of conservatism
in this country is so strong that you cannot bear to part with a shred of the barbarism of
the middle ages. And when a rag is sent to the winds you shriek with agony at the disruption,
and think that the wound will be mortal." As Mr. Gotobed said this he extended his right hand
and laid his left on his breast as though he were addressing the Senate from his own chair.
Morton, who had offered to entertain the gentleman for ten days, sincerely wished that he were
doing so.

On the Monday afternoon the Trefoils arrived. Mr. Morton, with his mother and both the carriages,
went down to receive them,--with a cart also for luggage, which was fortunate, as Arabella
Trefoil's big box was very big indeed, and Lady Augustus, though she was economical in most
things, had brought a comfortable amount of clothes. Each of them had her own lady's maid,
so that the two carriages were necessary. How it was that these ladies lived so luxuriously
was a mystery to their friends, as for some time past they had enjoyed no particular income
of their own. Lord Augustus had spent everything that came to his hand, and the family owned
no house at all. Nevertheless Arabella Trefoil was to be seen at all parties magnificently
dressed, and never stirred anywhere without her own maid. It would have been as grievous to
her to be called on to live without food as to go without this necessary appendage. She was
a big, fair girl whose copious hair was managed after such a fashion that no one could guess
what was her own and what was purchased. She certainly had fine eyes, though I could never
imagine how any one could look at them and think it possible that she should be in love. They
were very large, beautifully blue, but never bright; and the eyebrows over them were perfect.
Her cheeks were somewhat too long and the distance from her well-formed nose, to her upper
lip too great. Her mouth was small and her teeth excellent. But the charm of which men spoke
the most was the brilliance of her complexion. If, as the ladies said, it was all paint, she,
or her maid, must have been a great artist. It never betrayed itself to be paint. But the beauty
on which she prided herself was the grace of her motion. Though she was tall and big she never
allowed an awkward movement to escape from her. She certainly did it very well. No young woman
could walk across an archery ground with a finer step, or manage a train with more perfect
ease, or sit upon her horse with a more complete look of being at home there. No doubt she
was slow, but though slow she never seemed to drag. Now she was, after a certain fashion, engaged
to marry John Morton and perhaps she was one of the most unhappy young persons in England.

She had long known that it was her duty to marry, and especially her duty to marry well. Between
her and her mother there had been no reticence on this subject. With worldly people in general,
though the worldliness is manifest enough and is taught by plain lessons from parents to their
children, yet there is generally some thin veil even among themselves, some transparent tissue
of lies, which, though they never quite hope to deceive each other, does produce among them
something of the comfort of deceit. But between Lady Augustus and her daughter there had for
many years been nothing of the kind. The daughter herself had been too honest for it. "As for
caring about him, mamma," she had once said, speaking of a suitor, "of course I don't. He is
nasty, and odious in every way. But I have got to do the best I can, and what is the use of
talking about such trash as that?" Then there had been no more trash between them.

It was not John Morton whom Arabella Trefoil had called nasty and odious. She had had many
lovers, and had been engaged to not a few, and perhaps she liked John Morton as well as any
of them, except one. He was quiet, and looked like a gentleman, and was reputed for no vices.
Nor did she quarrel with her fate in that he himself was not addicted to any pleasures. She
herself did not care much for pleasure. But she did care to be a great lady,--one who would
be allowed to swim out of rooms before others, one who could snub others, one who could show
real diamonds when others wore paste, one who might be sure to be asked everywhere even by
the people who hated her. She rather liked being hated by women and did not want any man to
be in love with her,--except as far as might be sufficient for the purpose of marriage. The
real diamonds and the high rank would not be hers with John Morton. She would have to be content
with such rank as is accorded to Ministers at the Courts at which they are employed. The fall
would be great from what she had once expected,--and therefore she was miserable. There had
been a young man, of immense wealth, of great rank, whom at one time she really had fancied
that she had loved; but just as she was landing her prey, the prey had been rescued from her
by powerful friends, and she had been all but broken-hearted. Mr. Morton's fortune was in her
eyes small, and she was beginning to learn that he knew how to take care of his own money.
Already there had been difficulties as to settlements, difficulties as to pin-money, difficulties
as to residence, Lady Augustus having been very urgent. John Morton, who had really been captivated
by the beauty of Arabella, was quite in earnest; but there were subjects on which he would
not give way. He was anxious to put his best leg foremost so that the beauty might be satisfied
and might become his own, but there was a limit beyond which he would not go. Lady Augustus
had more than once said to her daughter that it would not do; and then there would be all the
weary work to do again!

Nobody seeing the meeting on the platform would have imagined that Mr. Morton and Miss Trefoil
were lovers,--and as for Lady Augustus it would have been thought that she was in some special
degree offended with the gentleman who had come to meet her. She just gave him the tip of her
fingers and then turned away to her maid and called for the porters and made herself particular
and disagreeable. Arabella vouchsafed a cold smile, but then her smiles were always cold. After
that she stood still and shivered. "Are you cold?" asked Morton. She shook her head and shivered
again. "Perhaps you are tired?" Then she nodded her head. When her maid came to her in some
trouble about the luggage, she begged that she "might not be bothered;" saying that no doubt
her mother knew all about it. "Can I do anything?" asked Morton. "Nothing at all I should think,"
said Miss Trefoil. In the meantime old Mrs. Morton was standing by as black as thunder--for
the Trefoil ladies had hardly noticed her.

The luggage turned up all right at last,--as luggage always does, and was stowed away in the
cart. Then came the carriage arrangement. Morton had intended that the two elder ladies should
go together with one of the maids, and that he should put his love into the other, which having
a seat behind could accommodate the second girl without disturbing them in the carriage. But
Lady Augustus had made some exception to this and had begged that her daughter might be seated
with herself. It was a point which Morton could not contest out there among the porters and
drivers, so that at last he and his grandmother had the phaeton together with the two maids
in the rumble. "I never saw such manners in all my life," said the Honourable Mrs. Morton,
almost bursting with passion.

"They are cold and tired, ma'am."

"No lady should be too cold or too tired to conduct herself with propriety. No real lady is
ever so."

"The place is strange to them, you know."

"I hope with all my heart that it may never be otherwise than strange to them."

When they arrived at the house the strangers were carried into the library and tea was of course
brought to them. The American Senator was there, but the greetings were very cold. Mrs. Morton
took her place and offered her hospitality in the most frigid manner. There had not been the
smallest spark of love's flame shown as yet, nor did the girl as she sat sipping her tea seem
to think that any such spark was wanted. Morton did get a seat beside her and managed to take
away her muff and one of her shawls, but she gave them to him almost as she might have done
to a servant. She smiled indeed, but she smiled as some women smile at everybody who has any
intercourse with them. "I think perhaps Mrs. Morton will let us go up-stairs," said Lady Augustus.
Mrs. Morton immediately rang the bell and prepared to precede the ladies to their chambers.
Let them be as insolent as they would she would do what she conceived to be her duty. Then
Lady Augustus stalked out of the room and her daughter swum after her. "They don't seem to
be quite the same as they were in Washington," said the Senator.

John Morton got up and left the room without making any reply. He was thoroughly unhappy. What
was he to do for a week with such a houseful of people? And then, what was he to do for all
his life if the presiding spirit of the house was to be such a one as this? She was very beautiful--certainly.
So he told himself; and yet as he walked round the park he almost repented of what he had done.
But after twenty minutes fast walking he was able to convince himself that all the fault on
this occasion lay with the mother. Lady Augustus had been fatigued with her journey and had
therefore made everybody near her miserable.

CHAPTER XIII

At Bragton

When the ladies went up-stairs the afternoon was not half over and they did not dine till past
seven. As Morton returned to the house in the dusk he thought that perhaps Arabella might make
some attempt to throw herself in his way. She had often done so when they were not engaged,
and surely she might do so now. There was nothing to prevent her coming down to the library
when she had got rid of her travelling clothes, and in this hope he looked into the room. As
soon as the door was open the Senator, who was preparing his lecture in his mind, at once asked
whether no one in England had an apparatus for warming rooms such as was to be found in every
well-built house in the States. The Paragon hardly vouchsafed him a word of reply, but escaped
up-stairs trusting that he might meet Miss Trefoil on the way. He was a bold man and even ventured
to knock at her door;--but there was no reply, and, fearing the Senator, he had to betake himself
to his own privacy. Miss Trefoil had migrated to her mother's room, and there, over the fire,
was holding a little domestic conversation. "I never saw such a barrack in my life," said Lady
Augustus.

"Of course, mamma, we knew that we should find the house such as it was left a hundred years
ago. He told us that himself."

"He should have put something in it to make it at any rate decent before we came in."

"What's the use if he's to live always at foreign courts?"

"He intends to come home sometimes, I suppose, and, if he didn't, you would." Lady Augustus
was not going to let her daughter marry a man who could not give her a home for at any rate
a part of the year. "Of course he must furnish the place and have an immense deal done before
he can marry. I think it is a piece of impudence to bring one to such a place as this."

"That's nonsense, mamma, because he told us all about it"

"The more I see of it all, Arabella, the more sure I am that it won't do."

"It must do, mamma."

"Twelve hundred a year is all that he offers, and his lawyer says that he will make no stipulation
whatever as to an allowance."

"Really, mamma, you might leave that to me."

"I like to have everything fixed, my dear,--and certain."

"Nothing really ever is certain. While there is anything to get you may be sure that I shall
have my share. As far as money goes I'm not a bit afraid of having the worst of it,--only there
will be so very little between us."

"That's just it."

"There's no doubt about the property, mamma."

"A nasty beggarly place!"

"And from what everybody says he's sure to be a minister or ambassador or something of that sort."

"I've no doubt he will. And where'll he have to go to? To Brazil, or the West Indies, or some
British Colony," said her ladyship showing her ignorance of the Foreign Office service. "That
might be very well. You could stay at home. Only where would you live? He wouldn't keep a house
in town for you. Is this the sort of place you'd like?"

"I don't think it makes any difference where one is," said Arabella disgusted.

"But I do,--a very great difference. It seems to me that he's altogether under the control
of that hideous old termagant. Arabella, I think you'd better make up your mind that it won't do."

"It must do," said Arabella.

"You're very fond of him it seems."

"Mamma, how you do delight to torture me;--as if my life weren't bad enough without your making
it worse."

"I tell you, my dear, what I'm bound to. tell you--as your mother. I have my duty to do whether
it's painful or not."

"That's nonsense, mamma. You know it is. That might have been all very well ten years ago."

"You were almost in your cradle, my dear."

"Psha! cradle! I'll tell you what it is, mamma. I've been at it till I'm nearly broken down.
I must settle somewhere;--or else die;--or else run away. I can't stand this any longer and
I won't. Talk of work,--men's work! What man ever has to work as I do? I wonder which was the
hardest part of that work, the hairdressing and painting and companionship of the lady's maid
or the continual smiling upon unmarried men to whom she had nothing to say and for whom she
did not in the least care! I can't do it any more, and I won't. As for Mr. Morton, I don't
care that for him. You know I don't. I never cared much for anybody, and shall never again
care at all."

"You'll find that will come all right after you are married."

"Like you and papa, I suppose."

"My dear, I had no mother to take care of me, or I shouldn't have married your father."

"I wish you hadn't, because then I shouldn't be going to marry Mr. Morton. But, as I have got
so far, for heaven's sake let it go on. If you break with him I'll tell him everything and
throw myself into his hands." Lady Augustus sighed deeply. "I will, mamma. It was you spotted
this man, and when you said that you thought it would do, I gave way. He was the last man in
the world I should have thought of myself."

"We had heard so much about Bragton!"

"And Bragton is here. The estate is not out of elbows."

"My dear, my opinion is that we've made a mistake. He's not the sort of man I took him to be.
He's as hard as a file."

"Leave that to me, mammal"

"You are determined then?"

"I think I am. At any rate let me look about me. Don't give him an opportunity of breaking
off till I have made up my mind. I can always break off if I like it. No one in London has
heard of the engagement yet. Just leave me alone for this week to see what I think about it"
Then Lady Augustus threw herself back in her chair and went to sleep, or pretended to do so.

A little after half-past seven she and her daughter, dressed for dinner, went down to the library
together. The other guests were assembled there, and Mrs. Morton was already plainly expressing
her anger at the tardiness of her son's guests. The Senator had got hold of Mr. Mainwaring
and was asking pressing questions as to church patronage,--a subject not very agreeable to
the rector of St. John's, as his living had been bought for him with his wife's money during
the incumbency of an old gentleman of seventy-eight. Mr. Cooper, who was himself nearly that
age and who was vicar of Mallingham, a parish which ran into Dillsborough and comprehended
a part of its population, was listening to these queries with awe, and perhaps with some little
gratification, as he had been presented to his living by the bishop after a curacy of many
years. "This kind of things, I believe, can be bought and sold in the market," said the Senator,
speaking every word with absolute distinctness. But as he paused for an answer the two ladies
came in and the conversation was changed. Both the clergymen were introduced to Lady Augustus
and her daughter, and Mr. Mainwaring at once took refuge under the shadow of the ladies' title.

Arabella did not sit down, so that Morton had an opportunity of standing near to his love.
"I suppose you are very tired," he said.

"Not in the least." She smiled her sweetest as she answered him,-- but yet it was not very
sweet. "Of course we were tired and cross when we got out of the train. People always are;
aren't they?"

"Perhaps ladies are."

"We were. But all that about the carriages, Mr. Morton, wasn't my doing. Mamma had been talking
to me so much that I didn't know whether I was on my head or my heels. It was very good of
you to come and meet us, and I ought to have been more gracious." In this way she made her
peace, and as she was quite in earnest,--doing a portion of the hard work of her life,--she
continued to smile as sweetly as she could. Perhaps he liked it;--but any man endowed with
that power of appreciation which we call sympathy, would have felt it to be as cold as though
it had come from a figure on a glass window.

The dinner was announced. Mr. Morton was honoured with the hand of Lady Augustus. The Senator
handed the old lady into the dining-room and Mr. Mainwaring the younger lady,--so that Arabella
was sitting next to her lover. It had all been planned by Morton and acceded to by his grandmother.
Mr. Gotobed throughout the dinner had the best of the conversation, though Lady Augustus had
power enough to snub him on more than one occasion. "Suppose we were to allow at once," she
said, "that everything is better in the United States than anywhere else, shouldn't we get
along easier?"

"I don't know that getting along easy is what we have particularly got in view," said Mr. Gotobed,
who was certainly in quest of information.

"But it is what I have in view, Mr. Gotobed;--so if you please we'll take the pre-eminence
of your country for granted." Then she turned to Mr. Mainwaring on the other side. Upon this
the Senator addressed himself for a while to the table at large and had soon forgotten altogether
the expression of the lady's wishes.

"I believe you have a good many churches about here," said Lady Augustus trying to make conversation
to her neighbour.

"One in every parish, I fancy," said Mr. Mainwaring, who preferred all subjects to clerical
subjects. "I suppose London is quite empty now."

"We came direct from the Duke's," said Lady Augustus, "and did not even sleep in town;--but
it is empty." The Duke was the brother of Lord Augustus, and a compromise had been made with
Lady Augustus, by which she and her daughter should be allowed a fortnight every year at the
Duke's place in the country, and a certain amount of entertainment in town.

"I remember the Duke at Christchurch," said the parson. "He and I were of the same par. He
was Lord Mistletoe then. Dear me, that was a long time ago. I wonder whether he remembers being
upset out of a trap with me one day after dinner. I suppose we had dined in earnest. He has
gone his way, and I have gone mine, and I've never seen him since. Pray remember me to him."
Lady Augustus said she would, and did entertain some little increased respect for the clergyman
who could boast that he had been tipsy in company with her worthy brother-in-law.

Poor Mr. Cooper did not get on very well with Mrs. Morton. All his remembrances of the old
squire were eulogistic and affectionate. Hers were just the reverse. He had a good word to
say for Reginald Morton,--to which she would not even listen. She was willing enough to ask
questions about the Mallingham tenants;--but Mr. Cooper would revert back to the old days,
and so conversation was at an end.

Morton tried to make himself agreeable to his left-hand neighbour, trying also very hard to
make himself believe that he was happy in his immediate position. How often in the various
amusements of the world is one tempted to pause a moment and ask oneself whether one really
likes it! He was conscious that he was working hard, struggling to be happy, painfully anxious
to be sure that he was enjoying the luxury of being in love. But he was not at all contented.
There she was, and very beautiful she looked; and he thought that he could be proud of her
if she sat at the end of his table;--and he knew that she was engaged to be his wife. But he
doubted whether she was in love with him; and he almost doubted sometimes whether he was very
much in love with her. He asked her in so many words what he should do to amuse her. Would
she like to ride with him, as if so he would endeavour to get saddle-horses. Would she like
to go out hunting? Would she be taken round to see the neighbouring towns, Rufford and Norrington?
"Lord Rufford lives somewhere near Rufford?" she asked. Yes; he lived at Rufford Hall, three
or four miles from the town. Did Lord Rufford hunt? Morton believed that he was greatly given
to hunting. Then he asked Arabella whether she knew the young lord. She had just met him, she
said, and had only asked the question because of the name. "He is one of my neighbours down
here," said Morton;--"but being always away of course I see nothing of him." After that Arabella
consented to be taken out on horseback to see a meet of the hounds although she could not hunt.
"We must see what we can do about horses," he said. She however professed her readiness to
go in the carriage if a saddle-horse could not be found.

The dinner party I fear was very dull. Mr. Mainwaring perhaps liked it because he was fond
of dining anywhere away from home. Mr. Cooper was glad once more to see his late old friend's
old dining-room. Mr. Gotobed perhaps obtained some information. But otherwise the affair was
dull. "Are we to have a week of this?" said Lady Augustus when she found herself up-stairs.

"You must, mamma, if we are to stay till we go to the Gores. Lord Rufford is here in the neighbourhood."

"But they don't know each other."

"Yes they do;--slightly. I am to go to the meet someday and he'll be there."

"It might be dangerous."

"Nonsense, mamma! And after all you've been saying about dropping Mr. Morton!"

"But there is nothing so bad as a useless flirtation."

"Do I ever flirt? Oh, mamma, that after so many years you shouldn't know me! Did you ever see
me yet making myself happy in any way? What nonsense you talk!" Then without waiting for, or
making, any apology, she walked off to her own room.

CHAPTER XIV

The Dillsborough Feud

"It's that nasty, beastly, drunken club," said Mrs. Masters to her unfortunate husband on the
Wednesday morning. It may perhaps be remembered that the poisoned fox was found on the Saturday,
and it may be imagined that Mr. Goarly had risen in importance since that day. On the Saturday
Bean with a couple of men employed by Lord Rufford, had searched the wood, and found four or
five red herrings poisoned with strychnine. There had been no doubt about the magnitude of
the offence. On the Monday a detective policeman, dressed of course in rustic disguise but
not the less known to every one in the place, was wandering about between Dillsborough and
Dillsborough Wood and making futile inquiries as to the purchase of strychnine,--and also as
to the purchase of red herrings. But every one knew, and such leading people as Runciman and
Dr. Nupper were not slow to declare, that Dillsborough was the only place in England in which
one might be sure that those articles had not been purchased. And on the Tuesday it began to
be understood that Goarly had applied to Bearside, the other attorney, in reference to his
claim against Lord Rufford's pheasants. He had contemptuously refused the 7s. 6d. an acre offered
him, and put his demand at 40s. As to the poisoned fox and the herrings and the strychnine
Goarly declared that he didn't care if there were twenty detectives in the place. He stated
it to be his opinion that Larry Twentyman had put down the poison. It was all very well, Goarly
said, for Larry to be fond of gentlemen and to ride to hounds, and make pretences;--but Larry
liked his turkeys as well as anybody else, and Larry had put down the poison. In this matter
Goarly overreached himself. No one in Dillsborough could be brought to believe that. Even Harry
Stubbings was ready to swear that he should suspect himself as soon. But nothing was clearer
than this,--that Goarly was going to make a stand against the hunt and especially against Lord
Rufford. He had gone to Bearside and Bearside had taken up the matter in a serious way. Then
it became known very quickly that Bearside had already received money, and it was surmised
that Goarly had some one at his back. Lord Rufford had lately ejected from a house of his on
the other side of the county a discontented litigious retired grocer from Rufford, who had
made some money and had set himself up in a pretty little residence with a few acres of land.
The man had made himself objectionable and had been dispossessed. The man's name was Scrobby;
and hence had come these sorrows. This was the story that had already made itself known in
Dillsborough on the Tuesday evening. But up to that time not a tittle of evidence had come
to light as to the purchase of the red herrings or the strychnine. All that was known was the
fact that had not Tony Tuppett stopped the hounds before they reached the wood, there must
have been a terrible mortality. "It's that nasty, beastly, drunken club," said Mrs. Masters
to her husband. Of course it was at this time known to the lady that her husband had thrown
away Goarly's business and that it had been transferred to Bearside. It was also surmised by
her, as it was by the town in general, that Goarly's business would come to considerable dimensions;--just
the sort of case as would have been sure to bring popularity if carried through, as Nickem,
the senior clerk, would have carried it. And as soon as Scrobby's name was heard by Mrs. Masters,
there was no end to the money in the lady's imagination to which this very case might not have
amounted.

"The club had nothing to do with it, my dear."

"What time did you come home on Saturday night;--or Sunday morning I mean? Do you mean to tell
me you didn't settle it there?"

"There was no nastiness, and no beastliness, and no drunkenness about it. I told you before
I went that I wouldn't take it"

"No;--you didn't. How on earth are you to go on if you chuck the children's bread out of their
mouths in that way?"

"You won't believe me. Do you ask Twentyman what sort of a man Goarly is." The attorney knew
that Larry was in great favour with his wife as being the favoured suitor for Mary's hand,
and had thought that this argument would be very strong.

"I don't want Mr. Twentyman to teach me what is proper for my family,--nor yet to teach you
your business. Mr. Twentyman has his own way of living. He brought home Kate the other day
with hardly a rag of her sister's habit left. She don't go out hunting any more."

"Very well, my dear."

"Indeed for the matter of that I don't see how any of them are to do anything. What'll Lord
Rufford do for you?"

"I don't want Lord Rufford to do anything for me." The attorney was beginning to have his spirit
stirred within him.

"You don't want anybody to do anything, and yet you will do nothing yourself, just because
a set of drinking fellows in a tap-room, which you call a club--"

"It isn't a tap-room."

"It's worse, because nobody can see what you're doing. I know how it was. You hadn't the pluck
to hold to your own when Runciman told you not" There was a spice of truth in this which made
it all the more bitter. "Runciman knows on which side his bread is buttered. He can make his
money out of these swearing-tearing fellows. He can send in his bills, and get them paid too.
And it's all very well for Larry Twentyman to be hobbing and nobbing with the likes of them
Botseys. But for a father of a family like you to be put off his business by what Mr. Runciman
says is a shame."

"I shall manage my business as I think fit," said the attorney.

"And when we're all in the poor-house what'll you do then?" said Mrs. Masters,--with her handkerchief
out at the spur of the moment. Whenever she roused her husband to a state of bellicose ire
by her taunts she could always reduce him again by her tears. Being well aware of this he would
bear the taunts as long as he could, knowing that the tears would be still worse. He was so
soft-hearted that when she affected to be miserable, he could not maintain the sternness of
his demeanour and leave her in her misery. "When everything has gone away from us, what are
we to do? My little bit of money has disappeared ever so long." Then she sat herself down in
her chair and had a great cry. It was useless for him to remind her that hitherto she had never
wanted anything for herself or her children. She was resolved that everything was going to
the dogs because Goarly's case had been refused. "And what will all those sporting men do for
you?" she repeated. "I hate the very name of a gentleman;--so I do. I wish Goarly had killed
all the foxes in the county. Nasty vermin! What good are the likes of them?"

Nickem, the senior clerk, was at first made almost as unhappy as Mrs. Masters by the weak decision
to which his employer had come, and had in the first flush of his anger resolved to leave the
office. He was sure that the case was one which would just have suited him. He would have got
up the evidence as to the fertility of the land, the enormous promise of crop, and the ultimate
absolute barrenness, to a marvel. He would have proved clouds of pheasants. And then Goarly's
humble position, futile industry, and general poverty might have been contrasted beautifully
with Lord Rufford's wealth, idleness, and devotion to sport. Anything above the 7s. 6d. an
acre obtained against the lord would have been a triumph, and he thought that if the thing
had been well managed, they might probably have got 15s. And then, in such a case, Lord Rufford
could hardly have taxed the costs. It was really suicide for an attorney to throw away business
so excellent as this. And now it had gone to Bearside whom Nickem remembered as a junior to
himself when they were both young hobbledehoys at Norrington,--a dirty, blear-eyed, pimply-faced
boy who was suspected of purloining halfpence out of coat-pockets. The thing was very trying
to Nat Nickem. But suddenly, before that Wednesday was over, another idea had occurred to him,
and he was almost content. He knew Goarly, and he had heard of Scrobby and Scrobby's history
in regard to the tenement at Rufford. As he could not get Goarly's case why should he not make
something of the case against Goarly? That detective was merely eking out his time and having
an idle week among the public-houses. If he could set himself up as an amateur detective he
thought that he might perhaps get to the bottom of it all. It is not a bad thing to be concerned
on the same side with a lord when the lord is in earnest. Lord Rufford was very angry about
the poison in the covert and would probably be ready to pay very handsomely for having the
criminal found and punished. The criminal of course was Goarly. Nickem did not doubt that for
a moment, and would not have doubted it whichever side he might have taken. Nickem did not
suppose that any one for a moment really doubted Goarly's guilt. But to his eyes such certainty
amounted to nothing, if evidence of the crime were not forthcoming. He probably felt within
his own bosom that the last judgment of all would depend in some way on terrestrial evidence,
and was quite sure that it was by such that a man's conscience should be affected. If Goarly
had so done the deed as to be beyond the possibility of detection, Nickem could not have brought
himself to regard Goarly as a sinner. As it was he had considerable respect for Goarly;--but
might it not be possible to drop down upon Scrobby? Bearside with his case against the lord
would be nowhere, if Goarly could be got to own that he had been suborned by Scrobby to put
down the poison. Or, if in default of this, any close communication could be proved between
Goarly and Scrobby,--Scrobby's injury and spirit of revenge being patent,--then too Bearside
would not have much of a case. A jury would look at that question of damages with a very different
eye if Scrobby's spirit of revenge could be proved at the trial, and also the poisoning, and
also machinations between Scrobby and Goarly.

Nickem was a little red-haired man about forty, who wrote a good flourishing hand, could endure
an immense amount of work, and drink a large amount of alcohol without being drunk. His nose
and face were all over blotches, and he looked to be dissipated and disreputable. But, as he
often boasted, no one could say that "black was the white of his eye;"--by which he meant to
insinuate that he had not been detected in anything dishonest and that he was never too tipsy
to do his work. He was a married man and did not keep his wife and children in absolute comfort;
but they lived, and Mr. Nickem in some fashion paid his way.

There was another clerk in the office, a very much younger man, named Sundown, and Nickem could
not make his proposition to Mr. Masters till Sundown had left the office. Nickem himself had
only matured his plans at dinner time and was obliged to be reticent, till at six o'clock Sundown
took himself off. Mr. Masters was, at the moment, locking his own desk, when Nickem winked
at him to stay. Mr. Masters did stay, and Sundown did at last leave the office.

"You couldn't let me leave home for three days?" said Nickem. "There ain't much a doing."

"What do you want it for?"

"That Goarly is a great blackguard, Mr. Masters."

"Very likely. Do you know anything about him?"

Nickem scratched his head and rubbed his chin. "I think I could manage to know something."

"In what way?"

"I don't think I'm quite prepared to say, sir. I shouldn't use your name of course. But they're
down upon Lord Rufford, and if you could lend me a trifle of 30s., sir, I think I could get
to the bottom of it. His lordship would be awful obliged to any one who could hit it off"

Mr. Masters did give his clerk leave for three days, and did advance him the required money.
And when he suggested in a whisper that perhaps the circumstance need not be mentioned to Mrs.
Masters, Nickem winked again and put his fore-finger to the side of his big carbuncled nose.

That evening Larry Twentyman came in, but was not received with any great favour by Mrs. Masters.
There was growing up at this moment in Dillsborough the bitterness of real warfare between
the friends and enemies of sport in general, and Mrs. Masters was ranking herself thereby among
the enemies. Larry was of course one of the friends. But unhappily there was a slight difference
of sentiment even in Larry's own house, and on this very morning old Mrs. Twentyman had expressed
to Mrs. Masters a feeling of wrong which had gradually risen from the annual demolition of
her pet broods of turkeys. She declared that for the last three years every turkey poult had
gone, and that at last she was beginning to feel it. "It's over a hundred of 'em they've had,
and it is wearing," said the old woman. Larry had twenty times begged her to give up the rearing
turkeys, but her heart had been too high for that. "I don't know why Lord Rufford's foxes are
to be thought of always, and nobody is to think about your poor mother's poultry," said Mrs.
Masters, lugging the subject in neck and heels.

"Has she been talking to you, Mrs. Masters, about her turkeys?"

"Your mother may speak to me I suppose if she likes it, without offence to Lord Rufford."

"Lord Rufford has got nothing to do with it"

"The wood belongs to him," said Mrs. Masters.

"Foxes are much better than turkeys anyway," said Kate Masters.

"If you don't hold your tongue, miss, you'll be sent to bed. The wood belongs to his lordship,
and the foxes are a nuisance."

"He keeps the foxes for the county, and where would the county be without them?" began Larry.
"What is it brings money into such a place as this?"

"To Runciman's stables and Harry Stubbings and the like of them. What money does it bring in
to steady honest people?"

"Look at all the grooms," said Larry.

"The impudentest set of young vipers about the place," said the lady.

"Look at Grice's business." Grice was the saddler.

"Grice indeed! What's Grice?"

"And the price of horses?"

"Yes;--making everything dear that ought to be cheap. I don't see and I never shall see and
I never will see any good in extravagant idleness. As for Kate she shall never go out hunting
again. She has torn Mary's habit to pieces. And shooting is worse. Why is a man to have a flock
of voracious cormorants come down upon his corn fields? I'm The American Senator, all in favour
of Goarly, and so, I tell you, Mr. Twentyman." After this poor Larry went away, finding that
he had no opportunity for saying a word to Mary Masters.

CHAPTER XV

A fit Companion,--for me and my Sisters

On that same Wednesday Reginald Morton had called at the attorney's house, had asked for Miss
Masters, and had found her alone. Mrs. Masters at the time had been out, picking up intelligence
about the great case, and the two younger girls had been at school. Reginald, as he walked
home from Bragton all alone on that occasion when Larry had returned with Mary, was quite sure
that he would never willingly go into Mary's presence again. Why should he disturb his mind
about such a girl,--one who could rush into the arms of such a man as Larry Twentyman? Or,
indeed, why disturb his mind about any girl? That was not the manner of life which he planned
for himself. After that he shut himself up for a few days and was not much seen by any of the
Dillsborough folk. But on this Wednesday he received a letter, and,--as he told himself, merely
in consequence of that letter,--he called at the attorney's house and asked for Miss Masters.

He was shown up into the beautiful drawing-room, and in a few minutes Mary came to him. "I
have brought you a letter from my aunt," he said.

"From Lady Ushant? I am so glad."

"She was writing to me and she put this under cover. I know what it contains. She wants you
to go to her at Cheltenham for a month."

"Oh, Mr. Morton!"

"Would you like to go?"

"How should I not like to go? Lady Ushant is my dearest, dearest friend. It is so very good
of her to think of me."

"She talks of the first week in December and wants you to be there for Christmas."

"I don't at all know that I can go, Mr. Morton"

"Why not go?"

"I'm afraid mamma will not spare me." There were many reasons. She could hardly go on such
a visit without some renewal of her scanty wardrobe, which perhaps the family funds would not
permit. And, as she knew very well, Mrs. Masters was not at all favourable to Lady Ushant.
If the old lady had altogether kept Mary it might have been very well; but she had not done
so and Mrs. Masters had more than once said that that kind of thing must be all over;--meaning
that Mary was to drop her intimacy with high-born people that were of no real use. And then
there was Mr. Twentyman and his suit. Mary had for some time felt that her step-mother intended
her to understand that her only escape from home would be by becoming Mrs. Twentyman. "I don't
think it will be possible, Mr. Morton."

"My aunt will be very sorry."

"Oh,--how sorry shall I be! It is like having another little bit of heaven before me."

Then he said what he certainly should not have said. "I thought, Miss Masters, that your heaven
was all here."

"What do you mean by that, Mr. Morton?" she asked blushing up to her hair. Of course she knew
what he meant, and of course she was angry with him. Ever since that walk her mind had been
troubled by ideas as to what he would think about her, and now he was telling her what he thought.

"I fancied that you were happy here without going to see an old woman who after all has not
much amusement to offer to you."

"I don't want any amusement."

"At any rate you will answer Lady Ushant?"

"Of course I shall answer her."

"Perhaps you can let me know. She wishes me to take you to Cheltenham. I shall go for a couple
of days, but I shall not stay longer. If you are going perhaps you would allow me to travel
with you."

"Of course it would be very kind; but I don't suppose that I shall go. I am sure Lady Ushant
won't believe that I am kept away from her by any pleasure of my own here. I can explain it
all to her and she will understand me." She hardly meant to reproach him. She did not mean
to assume an intimacy sufficient for reproach. But he felt that she had reproached him. "I
love Lady Ushant so dearly that I would go anywhere to see her if I could."

"Then I think it could be managed. Your father----"

"Papa does not attend much to us girls. It is mamma that manages all that. At any rate, I will
write to Lady Ushant, and will ask papa to let you know"

Then it seemed as though there were nothing else for him but to go;--and yet he wanted to say
some other word. If he had been cruel in throwing Mr. Twentyman in her teeth, surely he ought
to apologize. "I did not mean to say anything to offend you."

"You have not offended me at all, Mr. Morton."

"If I did think that,--that----"

"It does not signify in the least. I only want Lady Ushant to understand that if I could possibly
go to her I would rather do that than anything else in the world. Because Lady Ushant is kind
to me I needn't expect other people to be so." Reginald Morton was of course the "other people."

Then he paused a moment. "I did so long," he said, "to walk round the old place with you the
other day before these people came there, and I was so disappointed when you would not come
with me."

"I was coming."

"But you went back with--that other man"

"Of course I did when you showed so plainly that you didn't want him to join you. What was
I to do? I couldn't send him away. Mr. Twentyman is a very intimate friend of ours, and very
kind to Dolly and Kate."

"I wished so much to talk to you about the old days."

"And I wish to go for your aunt, Mr. Morton; but we can't all of us have what we wish. Of course
I saw that you were very angry, but I couldn't help that. Perhaps it was wrong in Mr. Twentyman
to offer to walk with you."

"I didn't say so at all."

"You looked it at any rate, Mr. Morton. And as Mr. Twentyman is a friend of ours--"

"You were angry with me."

"I don't say that. But as you were too grand for our friend of course you were too grand for us."

"That is a very unkind way of putting it. I don't think I am grand. A man may wish to have
a little conversation with a very old friend without being interrupted, and yet not be grand.
I dare say Mr. Twentyman is just as good as I am."

"You don't think that, Mr. Morton"

"I believe him to be a great deal better, for he earns his bread, and takes care of his mother,
and as far as I know does his duty thoroughly."

"I know the difference, Mr. Morton, and of course I know how you feel it. I don't suppose that
Mr. Twentyman is a fit companion for any of the Mortons, but for all that he may be a fit companion
for me,--and my sisters." Surely she must have said this with the express object of declaring
to him that in spite of the advantages of her education she chose to put herself in the ranks
of the Twentymans, Runcimans and such like. He had come there ardently wishing that she might
be allowed to go to his aunt, and resolved that he would take her himself if it were possible.
But now he almost thought that she had better not go. If she had made her election, she must
be allowed to abide by it. If she meant to marry Mr. Twentyman what good could she get by associating
with his aunt or with him? And had she not as good as told him that she meant to marry Mr.
Twentyman? She had at any rate very plainly declared that she regarded Mr. Twentyman as her
equal in rank. Then he took his leave without any further explanation. Even if she did go to
Cheltenham he would not take her.

After that he walked straight out to Bragton. He was of course altogether unconscious what
grand things his cousin John had intended to do by him, had not the Honourable old lady interfered;
but he had made up his mind that duty required him to call at the house. So he walked by the
path across the bridge and when he came out on the gravel road near the front door he found
a gentleman smoking a cigar and looking around him. It was Mr. Gotobed who had just returned
from a visit which he had made, the circumstances of which must be narrated in the next chapter.
The Senator lifted his hat and remarked that it was a very fine afternoon. Reginald lifted
his hat and assented. "Mr. Morton, Sir, I think is out with the ladies, taking a drive."

"I will leave a card then."

"The old lady is at home, sir, if you wish to see her," continued the Senator following Reginald
up to the door.

"Oh, Mr. Reginald, is that you?" said old Mrs. Hopkins taking the card. "They are all out,--except
herself." As he certainly did not wish to see "herself," he greeted the old woman and left
his card.

"You live in these parts, sir?" asked the Senator.

"In the town yonder."

"Because Mr. Morton's housekeeper seems to know you."

"She knows me very well as I was brought up in this house. Good morning to you."

"Good afternoon to you, sir. Perhaps you can tell me who lives in that country residence,--what
you call a farm-house,--on the other side of the road." Reginald said that he presumed the
gentleman was alluding to Mr. Twentyman's house.

"Ah, yes,--I dare say. That was the name I heard up there. You are not Mr. Twentyman, sir?"

"My name is Morton"

"Morton is it;--perhaps my friend's;--ah--ah,--yes." He didn't like to say uncle because Reginald
didn't look old enough, and he knew he ought not to say brother, because the elder brother
in England would certainly have had the property.

"I am Mr. John Morton's cousin."

"Oh;--Mr. Morton's cousin. I asked whether you were the owner of that farm-house because I
intruded just now by passing through the yards, and I would have apologized. Good afternoon
to you, sir." Then Reginald having thus done his duty returned home.

Mary Masters when she was alone was again very angry with herself. She knew thoroughly how
perverse she had been when she declared that Larry Twentyman was a fit companion for herself,
and that she had said it on purpose to punish the man who was talking to her. Not a day passed,
or hardly an hour of a day, in which she did not tell herself that the education she had received
and the early associations of her life had made her unfit for the marriage which her friends
were urging upon her. It was the one great sorrow of her life. She even repented of the good
things of her early days because they had given her a distaste for what might have otherwise
been happiness and good fortune. There had been moments in which she had told herself that
she ought to marry Larry Twentyman and adapt herself to the surroundings of her life. Since
she had seen Reginald Morton frequently, she had been less prone to tell herself so than before;
and yet to this very man she had declared her fitness for Larry's companionship!

CHAPTER XVI

Mr. Gotobed's Philanthropy

Mr. Gotobed, when the persecutions of Goarly were described to him at the scene of the dead
fox, had expressed considerable admiration for the man's character as portrayed by what he
then heard. The man,--a poor man too and despised in the land, was standing up for his rights,
all alone, against the aristocracy and plutocracy of the county. He had killed the demon whom
the aristocracy and plutocracy worshipped, and had appeared there in arms ready to defend his
own territory,--one against so many, and so poor a man against men so rich! The Senator had
at once said that he would call upon Mr. Goarly, and the Senator was a man who always carried
out his purposes. Afterwards, from John Morton, and from others who knew the country better
than Morton, he learned further particulars. On the Monday and Tuesday he fathomed,--or nearly
fathomed,--that matter of the 7s. 6d. an acre. He learned at any rate that the owner of the
wood admitted a damage done by him to the corn and had then, himself, assessed the damage without
consultation with the injured party; and he was informed also that Goarly was going to law
with the lord for a fuller compensation. He liked Goarly for killing the fox, and he liked
him more for going to law with Lord Rufford.

He declared openly at Bragton his sympathy with the man and his intention of expressing it.
Morton was annoyed and endeavoured to persuade him to leave the man alone; but in vain. No
doubt had he expressed himself decisively and told his friend that he should be annoyed by
a guest from his house taking part in such a matter, the Senator would have abstained and would
merely have made one more note as to English peculiarities and English ideas of justice; but
Morton could not bring himself to do this. "The feeling of the country will be altogether against
you," he had said, hoping to deter the Senator. The Senator had replied that though the feeling
of that little bit of the country might be against him he did not believe that such would be
the case with the feeling of England generally. The ladies had all become a little afraid of
Mr. Gotobed and hardly dared to express an opinion. Lady Augustus did say that she supposed
that Goarly was a low vulgar fellow, which of course strengthened the Senator in his purpose.

The Senator on Wednesday would not wait for lunch but started a little before one with a crust
of bread in his pocket to find his way to Goarly's house. There was no difficulty in this as
he could see the wood as soon as he had got upon the high road. He found Twentyman's gate and
followed directly the route which the hunting party had taken, till he came to the spot on
which the crowd had been assembled. Close to this there was a hand-gate leading into Dillsborough
wood, and standing in the gateway was a man. The Senator thought that this might not improbably
be Goarly himself, and asked the question, "Might your name be Mr. Goarly, sir?"

"Me Goarly!" said the man in infinite disgust. "I ain't nothing of the kind,--and you knows
it" That the man should have been annoyed at being taken for Goarly, that man being Bean the
gamekeeper who would willingly have hung Goarly if he could, and would have thought it quite
proper that a law should be now passed for hanging him at once, was natural enough. But why
he should have told the Senator that the Senator knew he was not Goarly it might be difficult
to explain. He probably at once regarded the Senator as an enemy, as a man on the other side,
and therefore as a cunning knave who would be sure to come creeping about on false pretences.
Bean, who had already heard of Bearside and had heard of Scrobby in connection with this matter,
looked at the Senator very hard. He knew Bearside. The man certainly was not the attorney,
and from what he had heard of Scrobby be didn't think he was Scrobby. The man was not like
what in his imagination Scrobby would be. He did not know what to make of Mr. Gotobed,--who
was a person of an imposing appearance, tall and thin, with a long nose and look of great acuteness,
dressed in black from head to foot, but yet not looking quite like an English gentleman. He
was a man to whom Bean in an ordinary way would have been civil,--civil in a cold guarded way;
but how was he to be civil to anybody who addressed him as Goarly?

"I did not know it," said the Senator. "As Goarly lives near here I thought you might be Goarly.
When I saw Goarly he had a gun, and you have a gun. Can you tell me where Goarly lives?"

"Tother side of the wood," said Bean pointing back with his thumb. "He never had a gun like
this in his hand in all his born days."

"I dare say not, my friend. I can go through the wood I guess;" for Bean had pointed exactly
over the gateway.

"I guess you can't then," said Bean. The man who, like other gamekeepers, lived much in the
company of gentlemen, was ordinarily a civil courteous fellow, who knew how to smile and make
things pleasant. But at this moment he was very much put out. His covert had been found full
of red herrings and strychnine, and his fox had been poisoned. He had lost his guinea on the
day of the hunt, the guinea which would have been his perquisite had they found a live fox
in his wood. And all this was being done by such a fellow as Goarly! And now this abandoned
wretch was bringing an action against his Lordship and was leagued with such men as Scrobby
and Bearside! It was a dreadful state of things! How was it likely that he should give a passage
through the wood to anybody coming after Goarly? "You're on Mr. Twentyman's land now, as I
dare say you know."

"I don't know anything about it"

"Well; that wood is Lord Rufford's wood."

"I did know as much as that, certainly."

"And you can't go into it."

"How shall I find Mr. Goarly's house?"

"If you'll get over that there ditch you'll be on Mister Goarly's land and that's all about
it" Bean as he said this put a strongly ironical emphasis on the term of respect and then turned
back into the wood.

The Senator made his way down the fence to the bank on which Goarly had stood with his gun,
then over into Goarly's field, and so round the back of the wood till he saw a small red brick
house standing perhaps four hundred yards from the covert, just on the elbow of a lane. It
was a miserable-looking place with a pigsty and a dung heap and a small horse-pond or duck-puddle
all close around it. The stack of chimneys seemed to threaten to fall, and as he approached
from behind he could see that the two windows opening that way were stuffed with rags. There
was a little cabbage garden which now seemed to be all stalks, and a single goose waddling
about the duck-puddle. The Senator went to the door, and having knocked, was investigated by
a woman from behind it. Yes, this was Goarly's house. What did the gentleman want? Goarly was
at work in the field. Then she came out, the Senator having signified his friendly intentions,
and summoned Goarly to the spot.

"I hope I see you well, sir," said the Senator putting out his hand as Goarly came up dragging
a dung-York behind him.

Goarly rubbed his hand on his breeches before he gave it to be shaken and declared himself
to be "pretty tidy, considering."

"I was present the other day, Mr. Goarly, when that dead fox was exposed to view."

"Was you, sir?"

"I was given to understand that you had destroyed the brute."

"Don't you believe a word on it then," said the woman interposing. "He didn't do nothing of
the kind. Who ever seed him a' buying of red herrings and p'ison?"

"Hold your jaw," said Goarly,--familiarly. "Let 'em prove it. I don't know who you are, sir;
but let 'em prove it"

"My name, Mr. Goarly, is Elias Gotobed. I am an American citizen, and Senator for the State
of Mickewa." Mr. and Mrs. Goarly shook their heads at every separate item of information tendered
to them. "I am on a visit to this country and am at present staying at the house of my friend,
Mr. John Morton."

"He's the gentl'man from Bragton, Dan."

"Hold your jaw, can't you?" said the husband. Then he touched his hat to the Senator intending
to signify that the Senator might, if he pleased, continue his narrative.

"If you did kill that fox, Mr. Goarly, I think you were quite right to kill him." Then Goarly
winked at him, "I cannot imagine that even the laws of England could justify a man in perpetuating
a breed of wild animals that are destructive to his neighbours' property."

"I could shoot 'un; not a doubt about that, Mister. I could shoot 'un; and I wull."

"Have a care, Dan," whispered Mrs. Goarly.

"Hold your jaw,--will ye? I could shoot 'un, Mister. I don't rightly know about p'ison."

"That fox we saw was poisoned I suppose," said the Senator carelessly.

"Have a care, Dan;--have a care!" whispered the wife.

"Allow me to assure both of you," said the Senator, "that you need fear nothing from me. I
have come quite as a friend."

"Thank 'ee, sir," said Goarly again touching his hat.

"It seems to me," said the Senator, "that in this matter a great many men are leagued together
against you."

"You may say that, sir. I didn't just catch your name, sir."

"My name is Gotobed;--Gotobed; Elias Gotobed, Senator from the State of Mickewa to the United
States Congress." Mrs. Goarly who understood nothing of all these titles, and who had all along
doubted, dropped a suspicious curtsey. Goarly, who understood a little now, took his hat altogether
off. He was very much puzzled but inclined to think that if he managed matters rightly, profit
might be got out of this very strange meeting. "In my country, Mr. Goarly, all men are free
and equal."

"That's a fine thing, sir."

"It is a fine thing, my friend, if properly understood and properly used. Coming from such
a country I was shocked to see so many rich men banded together against one who I suppose is
not rich."

"Very far from it," said the woman.

"It's my own land, you know," said Goarly who was proud of his position as a landowner. "No
one can't touch me on it, as long as the rates is paid. I'm as good a man here,"--and he stamped
his foot on the ground,--"as his Lordship is in that there wood."

This was the first word spoken by the Goarlys that had pleased the Senator, and this set him
off again. "Just so;--and I admire a man that will stand up for his own rights. I am told that
you have found his Lordship's pheasants destructive to your corn."

"Didn't leave him hardly a grain last August," said Mrs. Goarly.

"Will you hold your jaw, woman, or will you not?" said the man turning round fiercely at her.
"I'm going to have the law of his Lordship, sir. What's seven and six an acre? There's that
quantity of pheasants in that wood as'd eat up any mortal thing as ever was grooved. Seven
and six!"

"Didn't you propose arbitration?"

"I never didn't propose nothin'. I've axed two pound, and my lawyer says as how I'll get it.
What I sold come off that other bit of ground down there. Wonderful crop! And this 'd've been
the same. His Lordship ain't nothin' to me, Mr. Gotobed."

"You don't approve of hunting, Mr. Goarly."

"Oh, I approves if they'd pay a poor man for what harm they does him. Look at that there goose."
Mr. Gotobed did look at the goose. "There's nine and twenty they've tuk from me, and only left
un that." Now Mrs. Goarly's goose was well known in those parts. It was declared that she was
more than a match for any fox in the county, but that Mrs. Goarly for the last two years had
never owned any goose but this one.

"The foxes have eaten there all?" asked the Senator.

"Every mortal one."

"And the gentlemen of the hunt have paid you nothing."

"I had four half-crowns once," said the woman.

"If you don't send the heads you don't get it," said the man, "and then they'll keep you waiting
months and months, just for their pleasures. Who's a going to put up with that? I ain't."

"And now you're going to law?"

"I am,--like a man. His Lordship ain't nothin' to me. I ain't afeard of his Lordship."

"Will it cost you much?"

"That's just what it will do, sir," said the woman.

"Didn't I tell you, hold your jaw?"

"The gentleman was going to offer to help us a little, Dan."

"I was going to say that I am interested in the case, and that you have all my good wishes.
I do not like to offer pecuniary help."

"You're very good, sir; very good. This bit of land is mine; not a doubt of it;--but we're
poor, sir."

"Indeed we is," said the woman. "What with taxes and rates, and them foxes as won't let me
rear a head of poultry and them brutes of birds as eats up the corn, I often tells him he'd
better sell the bit o' land and just set up for a public."

"It belonged to my feyther and grandfeyther," said Goarly.

Then the Senator's heart was softened again and he explained at great length that he would
watch the case and if he saw his way clearly, befriend it with substantial aid. He asked about
the attorney and took down Bearside's address. After that he shook hands with both of them,
and then made his way back to Bragton through Mr. Twentyman's farm.

Mr. and Mrs. Goarly were left in a state of great perturbation of mind. They could not in the
least make out among themselves who the gentleman was, or whether he had come for good or evil.
That he called himself Gotobed Goarly did remember, and also that he had said that he was an
American. All that which had referred to senatorial honours and the State of Mickewa had been
lost upon Goarly. The question of course arose whether he was not a spy sent out by Lord Rufford's
man of business, and Mrs. Goarly was clearly of opinion that such had been the nature of his
employment. Had he really been a friend, she suggested, he would have left a sovereign behind
him. "He didn't get no information from me," said Goarly.

"Only about Mr. Bearside."

"What's the odds of that? They all knows that. Bearside! Why should I be ashamed of Bearside?
I'll do a deal better with Bearside than I would with that old woman, Masters."

"But he took it down in writing, Dan."

"What the d--'s the odds in that?"

"I don't like it when they puts it down in writing."

"Hold your jaw," said Goarly as he slowly shouldered the dung-fork to take it back to his work.
But as they again discussed the matter that night the opinion gained ground upon them that
the Senator had been an emissary from the enemy.

CHAPTER XVII

Lord Rufford's Invitation

On that same Wednesday afternoon when Morton returned with the ladies in the carriage he found
that a mounted servant had arrived from Rufford Hall with a letter and had been instructed
to wait for an answer. The man was now refreshing himself in the servants' hall. Morton, when
he had read the letter, found that it required some consideration before he could answer it.
It was to the following purport. Lord Rufford had a party of ladies and gentlemen at Rufford
Hall, as his sister, Lady Penwether, was staying with him. Would Mr. Morton and his guests
come over to Rufford Hall on Monday and stay till Wednesday? On Tuesday there was to be a dance
for the people of the neighbourhood. Then he specified, as the guests invited, Lady Augustus
and her daughter and Mr. Gotobed,-- omitting the honourable Mrs. Morton of whose sojourn in
the county he might have been ignorant. His Lordship went on to say that he trusted the abruptness
of the invitation might be excused on account of the nearness of their neighbourhood and the
old friendship which had existed between their families. He had had, he said, the pleasure
of being acquainted with Lady Augustus and her daughter in London and would be proud to see
Mr. Gotobed at his house during his sojourn in the county. Then he added in a postscript that
the hounds met at Rufford Hall on Tuesday and that he had a horse that carried a lady well
if Miss Trefoil would like to ride him. He could also put up a horse for Mr. Morton.

This was all very civil, but there was something in it that was almost too civil. There came
upon Morton a suspicion, which he did not even define to himself, that the invitation was due
to Arabella's charms. There were many reasons why he did not wish to accept it. His grandmother
was left out and he feared that she would be angry. He did not feel inclined to take the American
Senator to the lord's house, knowing as he did that the American Senator was interfering in
a ridiculous manner on behalf of Goarly. And he did not particularly wish to be present at
Rufford Hall with the Trefoil ladies. Hitherto he had received very little satisfaction from
their visit to Bragton,--so little that he had been more than once on the verge of asking Arabella
whether she wished to be relieved from her engagement. She had never quite given him the opportunity.
She had always been gracious to him in a cold, disagreeable, glassy manner,--in a manner that
irked his spirit but still did not justify him in expressing anger. Lady Augustus was almost
uncivil to him, and from time to time said little things which were hard to bear; but he was
not going to marry Lady Augustus, and could revenge himself against her by resolving in his
own breast that he would have as little as possible to do with her after his marriage., That
was the condition of his mind towards them, and in that condition he did not want to take them
to Lord Rufford's house. Their visit to him would be over on Monday, and it would he thought
be better for him that they should then go on their way to the Gores as they had proposed.

But he did not like to answer the letter by a refusal without saying a word to his guests on
the subject. He would not object to ignore the Senator, but he was afraid that if nothing were
to be said to Arabella she would hear of it hereafter and would complain of such treatment.
He therefore directed that the man might be kept waiting while he consulted the lady of his
choice. It was with difficulty that he found himself alone with her,--and then only by sending
her maid in quest of her. He did get her at last into his own sitting-room and then, having
placed her in a chair near the fire, gave her Lord Rufford's letter to read. "What can it be,"
said she looking up into his face with her great inexpressive eyes, "that has required all
this solemnity?" She still looked up at him and did not even open the letter.

"I did not like to answer that without showing it to you. I don't suppose you would care to go."

"Go where?"

"It is from Lord Rufford,--for Monday."

"From Lord Rufford!"

"It would break up all your plans and your mother's, and would probably be a great bore."

Then she did read the letter, very carefully and very slowly, weighing every word of it as
she read it. Did it mean more than it said? But though she read it slowly and carefully and
was long before she made him any answer, she had very quickly resolved that the invitation
should be accepted. It would suit her very well to know Lady Penwether. It might possibly suit
her still better to become intimate with Lord Rufford. She was delighted at the idea of riding
Lord Rufford's horse. As her eyes dwelt on the paper she, too, began to think that the invitation
had been chiefly given on her account. At any rate she would go. She had understood perfectly
well from the first tone of her lover's voice that he did not wish to subject her to the allurements
of Rufford Hall. She was clever enough, and could read it all. But she did not mean to throw
away a chance for the sake of pleasing him. She must not at once displease him by declaring
her purpose strongly, and therefore, as she slowly continued her reading, she resolved that
she would throw the burden upon her mother. "Had I not better show this to mamma?" she said.

"You can if you please. You are going to the Gores on Monday."

"We could not go earlier; but we might put it off for a couple of days if we pleased. Would
it bore you?"

"I don't mind about myself. I'm not a very great man for dances."

"You'd sooner write a report,--wouldn't you,--about the products of the country?"

"A great deal sooner," said the Paragon.

"But you see we haven't all of us got products to write about. I don't care very much about
it myself;--but if you don't mind I'll ask mamma." Of course he was obliged to consent, and
merely informed her as she went off with the letter that a servant was waiting for an answer.

"To go to Lord Rufford's!" said Lady Augustus.

"From Monday till Wednesday, mamma. Of course we must go:"

"I promised poor Mrs. Gore."

"Nonsense, mamma! The Gores can do very well without us. That was only to be a week and we
can still stay out our time. Of course this has only been sent because we are here."

"I should say so. I don't suppose Lord Rufford would care to know Mr. Morton. Lady Penwether
goes everywhere; doesn't she?"

"Everywhere. It would suit me to a `t' to get on to Lady Penwether's books. But, mamma, of
course it's not that. If Lord Rufford should say a word it is so much easier to manage down
in the country than up in London. He has 40,000 pounds a year, if he has a penny."

"How many girls have tried the same thing with him! But I don't mind. I've always said that
John Morton and Bragton would not do?"

"No, mamma; you haven't. You were the first to say they would do."

"I only said that if there were nothing else--"

"Oh, mamma, how can you say such things! Nothing else,--as if he were the last man! You said
distinctly that Bragton was 7,000 pounds a year, and that it would do very well. You may change
your mind if you like; but it's no good trying to back out of your own doings."

"Then I have changed my mind."

"Yes,--without thinking what I have to go through. I'm not going to throw myself at Lord Rufford's
head so as to lose my chance here;-- but we'll go and see how the land lies. Of course you'll
go, mamma."

"If you think it is for your advantage, my dear."

"My advantage! It's part of the work to be done and we may as well do it. At any rate I'll
tell him to accept. We shall have this odious American with us, but that can't be helped."

"And the old woman?"

"Lord Rufford doesn't say anything about her. I don't suppose he's such a muff but what he
can leave his grandmother behind for a couple of days." Then she went back to Morton and told
him that her mother was particularly anxious to make the acquaintance of Lady Penwether and
that she had decided upon going to Rufford Hall. "It will be a very nice opportunity," said
she, "for you to become acquainted with Lord Rufford."

Then he was almost angry. "I can make plenty of such opportunities for myself, when I want
them," he said. "Of course if you and Lady Augustus like it, we will go. But let it stand on
its right bottom."

"It may stand on any bottom you please."

"Do you mean to ride the man's horse?"

"Certainly I do. I never refuse a good offer. Why shouldn't I ride the man's horse? Did you
never hear before of a young lady borrowing a gentleman's horse?"

"No lady belonging to me will ever do so, unless the gentleman be a very close friend indeed."

"The lady in this case does not belong to you, Mr. Morton, and therefore, if you have no other
objection, she will ride Lord Rufford's horse. Perhaps you will not think it too much trouble
to signify the lady's acceptance of the mount in your letter." Then she swam out of the room
knowing that she left him in anger. After that he had to find Mr. Gotobed. The going was now
decided on as far as he was concerned, and it would make very little difference whether the
American went or not,--except that his letter would have been easier to him in accepting the
invitation for three persons than for four. But the Senator was of course willing. It was the
Senator's object to see England, and Lord Rufford's house would be an additional bit of England.
The Senator would be delighted to have an opportunity of saying what he thought about Goarly
at Lord Rufford's table. After that, before this weary letter could be written, he was compelled
to see his grandmother and explain to her that she had been omitted.

"Of course, ma'am, they did not know that you were at Bragton, as you were not in the carriage
at the 'meet.'"

"That's nonsense, John. Did Lord Rufford suppose that you were entertaining ladies here without
some one to be mistress of the house? Of course he knew that I was here. I shouldn't have gone;--
you may be sure of that. I'm not in the habit of going to the houses of people I don't know.
Indeed I think it's an impertinence in them to ask in that way. I'm surprised that you would
go on such an invitation."

"The Trefoils knew them."

"If Lady Penwether knew them why could not Lady Penwether ask them independently of us? I don't
believe they ever spoke to Lady Penwether in their lives. Lord Rufford and Miss Trefoil may
very likely be London acquaintances. He may admire her and therefore choose to have her at
his ball. I know nothing about that. As far as I am concerned he's quite welcome to keep her."

All this was not very pleasant to John Morton. He knew already that his grandmother and Lady
Augustus hated each other, and said spiteful things not only behind each other's backs, but
openly to each other's faces. But now he had been told by the girl who was engaged to be his
wife that she did not belong to him; and by his grandmother, who stood to him in the place
of his mother, that she wished that this girl belonged to some one else! He was not quite sure
that he did not wish it himself. But, even were it to be so, and should there be reason for
him to be gratified at the escape, still he did not relish the idea of taking the girl himself
to the other man's house. He wrote the letter, however, and dispatched it. But even the writing
of it was difficult and disagreeable. When various details of hospitality have been offered
by a comparative stranger a man hardly likes to accept them all. But in this case he had to
do it. He would be delighted, he said, to stay at Rufford Hall from the Monday to the Wednesday;--Lady
Augustus and Miss Trefoil would also be delighted; and so also would Mr. Gotobed be delighted.
And Miss Trefoil would be further delighted to accept Lord Rufford's offer of a horse for the
Tuesday. As for himself, if he rode at all, a horse would come for him to the meet. Then he
wrote another note to Mr. Harry Stubbings, bespeaking a mount for the occasion.

On that evening the party at Bragton was not a very pleasant one. "No doubt you are intimate
with Lady Penwether, Lady Augustus," said Mrs. Morton. Now Lady Penwether was a very fashionable
woman whom to know was considered an honour.

"What makes you ask, ma'am?" said Lady Augustus.

"Only as you were taking your daughter to her brother's house, and as he is a bachelor."

"My dear Mrs. Morton, really you may leave me to take care of myself and of my daughter too.
You have lived so much out of the world for the last thirty years that it is quite amusing."

"There are some persons' worlds that it is a great deal better for a lady to be out of," said
Mrs. Morton. Then Lady Augustus put up her hands, and turned round, and affected to laugh,
of all which things Mr. Gotobed, who was studying English society, made notes in his own mind.

"What sort of position does that man Goarly occupy here?" the Senator asked immediately after
dinner.

"No position at all," said Morton.

"Every man created holds some position as I take it. The land is his own."

"He has I believe about fifty acres."

"And yet he seems to be in the lowest depth of poverty and ignorance."

"Of course he mismanages his property and probably drinks."

"I dare say, Mr. Morton. He is proud of his rights, and talked of his father and his grandfather,
and yet I doubt whether you would find a man so squalid and so ignorant in all the States.
I suppose he is injured by having a lord so near him."

"Quite the contrary if he would be amenable."

"You mean if he would be a creature of the lord's. And why was that other man so uncivil to
me;--the man who was the lord's gamekeeper?"

"Because you went there as a friend of Goarly."

"And that's his idea of English fair play?" asked the Senator with a jeer.

"The truth is, Mr. Gotobed," said Morton endeavouring to explain it all, "you see a part only
and not the whole. That man Goarly is a rascal."

"So everybody says."

"And why can't you believe everybody?"

"So everybody says on the lord's side. But before I'm done I'll find out what people say on
the other side. I can see that he is ignorant and squalid; but that very probably is the lord's
fault. It may be that he is a rascal and that the lord is to blame for that too. But if the
lord's pheasants have eaten up Goarly's corn, the lord ought to pay for the corn whether Goarly
be a rascal or not" Then John Morton made up his mind that he would never ask another American
Senator to his house.

CHAPTER XVIII

The Attorney's Family is disturbed

On that Wednesday evening Mary Masters said nothing to any of her family as to the invitation
from Lady Ushant. She very much wished to accept it. Latterly, for the last month or two, her
distaste to the kind of life for which her stepmother was preparing her, had increased upon
her greatly. There bad been days in which she had doubted whether it might not be expedient
that she should accept Mr. Twentyman's offer. She believed no ill of him. She thought him to
be a fine manly young fellow with a good heart and high principles. She never asked herself
whether he were or were not a gentleman. She had never even inquired of herself whether she
herself were or were not especially a lady. But with all her efforts to like the man,--because
she thought that by doing so she would relieve and please her father,--yet he was distasteful
to her; and now, since that walk home with him from Bragton Bridge, he was more distasteful
than ever. She did not tell herself that a short visit, say for a month, to Cheltenham, would
prevent his further attentions, but she felt that there would be a temporary escape. I do not
think that she dwelt much on the suggestion that Reginald Morton should be her companion on
the journey, but the idea of such companionship, even for a short time, was pleasant to her.
If he did this surely then he would forgive her for having left him at the bridge. She had
much to think of before she could resolve how she should tell her tidings. Should she show
the letter first to her stepmother or to her father? In the ordinary course of things in that
house the former course would be expected. It was Mrs. Masters who managed everything affecting
the family. It was she who gave permission or denied permission for every indulgence. She was
generally fair to the three girls, taking special pride to herself for doing her duty by her
stepdaughter;--but on this very account she was the more likely to be angry if Mary passed
her by on such an occasion as this and went to her father. But should her stepmother have once
refused her permission, then the matter would have been decided against her. It would be quite
useless to appeal from her stepmother to her father; nor would such an appeal come within the
scope of her own principles. The Mortons, and especially Lady Ushant, had been her father's
friends in old days and she thought that perhaps she might prevail in this case if she could
speak to her father first. She knew well what would be the great, or rather the real objection.
Her mother would not wish that she should be removed so long from Larry Twentyman. There might
be difficulties about her clothes, but her father, she knew would be kind to her.

At last she made up her mind that she would ask her father. He was always at his office-desk
for half an hour in the morning, before the clerks had come, and on the following day, a minute
or two after he had taken his seat, she knocked at the door. He was busy reading a letter from
Lord Rufford's man of business, asking him certain questions about Goarly and almost employing
him to get up the case on Lord Rufford's behalf. There was a certain triumph to him in this.
It was not by his means that tidings had reached Lord Rufford of his refusal to undertake Goarly's
case. But Runciman, who was often allowed by his lordship to say a few words to him in the
hunting-field, had mentioned the circumstance. "A man like Mr. Masters is better without such
a blackguard as that," the Lord had said. Then Runciman had replied, "No doubt, my Lord; no
doubt. But Dillsborough is a poor place, and business is business, my Lord." Then Lord Rufford
had remembered it, and the letter which the attorney was somewhat triumphantly reading had
been the consequence.

"Is that you, Mary? What can I do for you, my love?"

"Papa, I want you to read this." Then Mr. Masters read the letter. "I should so like to go."

"Should you, my dear?"

"Oh yes! Lady Ushant has been so kind to me, all my life! And I do so love her!"

"What does mamma say?"

"I haven't asked mamma."

"Is there any reason why you shouldn't go?"

Of that one reason,--as to Larry Twentyman,--of course she would say nothing. She must leave
him to discuss that with her mother. "I should want some clothes, papa; a dress, and some boots,
and a new hat, and there would be money for the journey and a few other things." The attorney
winced, but at the same time remembered that something was due to his eldest child in the way
of garments and relaxation. "I never like to be an expense, papa."

"You are very good about that, my dear. I don't see why you shouldn't go. It's very kind of
Lady Ushant. I'll talk to mamma." Then Mary went away to get the breakfast, fearing that before
long there would be black looks in the house.

Mr. Masters at once went up to his wife, having given himself a minute or two to calculate
that he would let Mary have twenty pounds for the occasion,--and made his proposition. "I never
heard of such nonsense in my life," said Mrs. Masters.

"Nonsense,--my dear! Why should it be nonsense?"

"Cocking her up with Lady Ushant! What good will Lady Ushant do her? She's not going to live
with ladies of quality all her life."

"Why shouldn't she live with ladies?"

"You know what I mean, Gregory. The Mortons have dropped you, for any use they were to you,
long ago, and you may as well make up your mind to drop them. You'll go on hankering after
gentlefolks till you've about ruined yourself."

When he remembered that he had that very morning received a commission from Lord Rufford he
thought that this was a little too bad. But he was not now in a humour to make known to her
this piece of good news. "I like to feel that she has got friends," he said, going back to
Mary's proposed visit.

"Of course she has got friends, if she'll only take up with them as she ought to do. Why does
she go on shilly-shallying with that young man, instead of closing upon it at once? If she
did that she wouldn't want such friends as Lady Ushant. Why did the girl come to you with all
this instead of asking me?"

"There would be a little money wanted."

"Money! Yes, I dare say. It's very easy to want money but very hard to get it. If you send
clients away out of the office with a flea in their ear I don't see how she's to have all manner
of luxuries. She ought to have come to me"

"I don't see that at all, my dear."

"If I'm to look after her she shall be said by me;--that's all. I've done for her just as I
have for my own and I'm not going to have her turn up her nose at me directly she wants anything
for herself. I know what's fit for Mary, and it ain't fit that she should go trapesing away
to Cheltenham, doing nothing in that old woman's parlour, and losing her chances for life.
Who is to suppose that Larry Twentyman will go on dangling after her in this way, month after
month? The young man wants a wife, and of course he'll get one."

"You can't make her marry the man if she don't like him."

"Like him! She ought to be made to like him. A young man well off as he is, and she without
a shilling! All that comes from Ushanting." It never occurred to Mrs. Masters that perhaps
the very qualities that had made poor Larry so vehemently in love with Mary had come from her
intercourse with Lady Ushant. "If I'm to have my way she won't go a yard on the way to Cheltenham."

"I've told her she may go," said Mr. Masters, whose mind was wandering back to old days,--to
his first wife, and to the time when he used to be an occasional guest in the big parlour at
Bragton. He was always ready to acknowledge to himself that his present wife was a good and
helpful companion to him and a careful mother to his children; but there were moments in which
he would remember with soft regret a different phase of his life. Just at present he was somewhat
angry, and resolving in his own mind that in this case he would have his own way.

"Then I shall tell her she mayn't," said Mrs. Masters with a look of dogged determination.

"I hope you will do nothing of the kind, my dear. I've told her that she shall have a few pounds
to get what she wants, and I won't have her disappointed." After that Mrs. Masters bounced
out of the room, and made herself very disagreeable indeed over the tea-things.

The whole household was much disturbed that day. Mrs. Masters said nothing to Mary about Lady
Ushant all the morning, but said a great deal about other things. Poor Mary was asked whether
she was not ashamed to treat a young man as she was treating Mr. Twentyman. Then again it was
demanded of her whether she thought it right that all the house should be knocked about for
her. At dinner Mrs. Masters would hardly speak to her husband but addressed herself exclusively
to Dolly and Kate. Mr. Masters was not a man who could, usually, stand this kind of thing very
long and was accustomed to give up in despair and then take himself off to the solace of his
office-chair. But on the present occasion he went through his meal like a Spartan, and retired
from the room without a sign of surrender. In the afternoon about five o'clock Mary watched
her opportunity and found him again alone. It was incumbent on her to reply to Lady Ushant.
Would it not be better that she should write and say how sorry she was that she could not come?
"But I want you to go," said he.

"Oh, papa;--I cannot bear to cause trouble."

"No, my dear; no; and I'm sure I don't like trouble myself. But in this case I think you ought
to go. What day has she named?" Then Mary declared that she could not possibly go so soon as
Lady Ushant had suggested, but that she could be ready by the 18th of December. "Then write
and tell her so, my dear, and I will let your mother know that it is fixed." But Mary still
hesitated, desiring to know whether she had not better speak to her mother first. "I think
you had better write your letter first,"--and then he absolutely made her write it in the office
and give it to him to be posted. After that he promised to communicate to Reginald Morton what
had been done.

The household was very much disturbed the whole of that evening. Poor Mary never remembered
such a state of things, and when there had been any difference of opinion, she had hitherto
never been the cause of it. Now it was all owing to her! And things were said so terrible that
she hardly knew how to bear them. Her father had promised her the twenty pounds, and it was
insinuated that all the comforts of the family must be stopped because of this lavish extravagance.
Her father sat still and bore it, almost without a word. Both Dolly and Kate were silent and
wretched. Mrs. Masters every now and then gurgled in her throat, and three or four times wiped
her eyes. "I'm better out of the way altogether," she said at last, jumping up and walking
towards the door as though she were going to leave the room,--and the house, for ever.

"Mamma," said Mary, rising from her seat, "I won't go. I'll write and tell Lady Ushant that
I can't do it."

"You're not to mind me," said Mrs. Masters. "You're to do what your papa tells you. Everything
that I've been striving at is to be thrown away. I'm to be nobody, and it's quite right that
your papa should tell you so."

"Dear mamma, don't talk like that," said Mary, clinging hold of her stepmother.

"Your papa sits there and won't say a word," said Mrs. Masters, stamping her foot.

"What's the good of speaking when you go on like that before the children?" said Mr. Masters,
getting up from his chair. "I say that it's a proper thing that the girl should go to see the
old friend who brought her up and has been always kind to her,--and she shall go." Mrs. Masters
seated herself on the nearest chair and leaning her head against the wall, began to go into
hysterics. "Your letter has already gone, Mary; and I desire you will write no other without
letting me know." Then he left the room and the house,--and absolutely went over to the Bush.
This latter proceeding was, however, hardly more than a bravado; for he merely took the opportunity
of asking Mrs. Runciman a question at the bar, and then walked back to his own house, and shut
himself up in the office.

On the next morning he called on Reginald Morton and told him that his daughter had accepted
Lady Ushant's invitation, but could not go till the 18th. "I shall be proud to take charge
of her," said Reginald. "And as for the change in the  day it will suit me all the better."
So that was settled.

On the next day, Friday, Mrs. Masters did not come down to breakfast, but was waited upon up-stairs
by her own daughters. This with her was a most unusual circumstance. The two maids were of
opinion that such a thing had never occurred before, and that therefore Master must have been
out half the night at the public-house although they had not known it. To Mary she would hardly
speak a word. She appeared at dinner and called her husband Mr. Masters when she helped him
to stew. All the afternoon she averred that her head was splitting, but managed to say many
very bitter things about gentlemen in general, and expressed a vehement hope that that poor
man Goarly would get at least a hundred pounds. It must be owned, however, that at this time
she had heard nothing of Lord Rufford's commission to her husband. In the evening Larry came
in and was at once told the terrible news. "Larry," said Kate, "Mary is going away for a month."

"Where are you going, Mary?" asked the lover eagerly.

"To Lady Ushant's, Mr. Twentyman."

"For a month!"

"She has asked me for a month," said Mary.

"It's a regular fool's errand," said Mrs. Masters. "It's not done with my consent, Mr. Twentyman.
I don't think she ought to stir from home till things are more settled."

"They can be settled this moment as far as I am concerned," said Larry standing up.

"There now," said Mrs. Masters. At this time Mr. Masters was not in the room. "If you can make
it straight with Mr. Twentyman I won't say a word against your going away for a month."

"Mamma, you shouldn't!" exclaimed Mary.

"I hate such nonsense. Mr. Twentyman is behaving honest and genteel. What more would you have?
Give him an answer like a sensible girl."

"I have given him an answer and I cannot say anything more," said Mary as she left the room.

CHAPTER XIX

"Who valued the Geese?"

Before the time had come for the visit to Rufford Hall Mr. Gotobed had called upon Bearside
the attorney and had learned as much as Mr. Bearside chose to tell him of the facts of the
case. This took place on the Saturday morning and the interview was on the whole satisfactory
to the Senator. But then having a theory of his own in his head, and being fond of ventilating
his own theories, he explained thoroughly to the man the story which he wished to hear before
the man was called upon to tell his story. Mr. Bearside of course told it accordingly. Goarly
was a very poor man, and very ignorant; was perhaps not altogether so good a member of society
as he might have been; but no doubt he had a strong case against the lord. The lord, so said
Mr. Bearside, had fallen into a way of paying a certain recompense in certain cases for crops
damaged by game; and having in this way laid down a rule for himself did not choose to have
that rule disturbed. "Just feudalism!" said the indignant Senator. "No better, nor yet no worse
than that, sir," said the attorney who did not in the least know what feudalism was. "The strong
hand backed by the strong rank and the strong purse determined to have its own way!" continued
the Senator. "A most determined man is his lordship," said the attorney. Then the Senator expressed
his hope that Mr. Bearside would be able to see the poor man through it, and Mr. Bearside explained
to the Senator that the poor man was a very poor man indeed, who had been so unfortunate with
his land that he was hardly able to provide bread for himself and his children. He went so
far as to insinuate that he was taking up this matter himself solely on the score of charity,
adding that as he could not of course afford to be money out of pocket for expenses of witnesses,
etc, he did not quite see how he was to proceed. Then the Senator made certain promises. He
was, he said, going back to London in the course of next week, but he did not mind making himself
responsible to the extent of fifty dollars if the thing were carried on, bona fide, to a conclusion.
Mr. Bearside declared that it would of course be bona fide, and asked the Senator for his address.
Would Mr. Gotobed object to putting his name to a little docket certifying to the amount promised?
Mr. Gotobed gave an address, but thought that in such a matter as that his word might be trusted.
If it were not trusted then the offer might fall to the ground. Mr. Bearside was profuse in
his apologies and declared that the gentleman's word was as good as his bond.

Mr. Gotobed made no secret of his doings. Perhaps he had a feeling that he could not justify
himself in so strange a proceeding without absolute candour. He saw Mr. Mainwaring in the street
as he left Bearside's office and told him all about it. "I just want, sir, to see what'll come
of it"

"You'll lose your fifty dollars, Mr. Gotobed, and only cause a little vexation to a high-spirited
young nobleman."

"Very likely, sir. But neither the loss of my dollars, nor Lord Rufford's slight vexation will
in the least disturb my rest. I'm not a rich man, sir, but I should like to watch the way in
which such a question will be tried and brought to a conclusion in this aristocratic country.
I don't quite know what your laws may be, Mr. Mainwaring."

"Just the same as your own, Mr. Gotobed, I take it"

"We have no game laws, sir. As I was saying I don't understand your laws, but justice is the
same everywhere. If this great lord's game has eaten up the poor man's wheat the great lord
ought to pay for it."

"The owners of game pay for the damage they do three times over," said the parson, who was
very strongly on that side of the question. "Do you think that such men as Goarly would be
better off if the gentry were never to come into the country at all?"

"Perhaps, Mr. Mainwaring, I may think that there would be no Goarlys if there were no Ruffords.
That, however, is a great question which cannot be argued on this case. All we can hope here
is that one poor man may have an act of justice done him though in seeking for it he has to
struggle against so wealthy a magnate as Lord Rufford."

"What I hope is that he may be found out," replied Mr. Mainwaring with equal enthusiasm, "and
then he will be in Rufford gaol before long. That's the justice I look for. Who do you think
put down the poison in Dillsborough wood?"

"How was it that the poor woman lost all her geese?" asked the Senator.

"She was paid for a great many more than she lost, Mr. Gotobed."

"That doesn't touch upon the injustice of the proceeding. Who assessed the loss, sir? Who valued
the geese? Am I to keep a pet tiger in my garden, and give you a couple of dollars when he
destroys your pet dog, and think myself justified because dogs as a rule are not worth more
than two dollars each? She has a right to her own geese on her own ground."

"And Lord Rufford, sir, as I take it," said Runciman, who had been allowed to come up and hear
the end of the conversation, "has a right to his own foxes in his own coverts."

"Yes,--if he could keep them there, my friend. But as it is the nature of foxes to wander away
and to be thieves, he has no such right."

"Of course, sir, begging your pardon," said Runciman, "I was speaking of England." Runciman
had heard of the Senator Gotobed, as indeed had all Dillsborough by this time.

"And I am speaking of justice all the world over," said the Senator slapping his hand upon
his thigh. "But I only want to see. It may be that England is a country in which a poor man
should not attempt to hold a few acres of land."

On that night the Dillsborough club met as usual and, as a matter of course, Goarly and the
American Senator were the subjects chiefly discussed. Everybody in the room knew,--or thought
that he knew,--that Goarly was a cheating fraudulent knave, and that Lord Rufford was, at any
rate, in this case acting properly. They all understood the old goose, and were aware, nearly
to a bushel, of the amount of wheat which the man had sold off those two fields. Runciman knew
that the interest on the mortgage had been paid, and could only have been paid out of the produce;
and Larry Twentyman knew that if Goarly took his 7s. 6d. an acre he would be better off than
if the wood had not been there. But yet among them all they didn't quite see how they were
to confute the Senator's logic. They could not answer it satisfactorily, even among themselves;
but they felt that if Goarly could be detected in some offence, that would confute the Senator.
Among themselves it was sufficient to repeat the well-known fact that Goarly was a rascal;
but with reference to this aggravating, interfering, and most obnoxious American it would be
necessary to prove it.

"His Lordship has put it into Masters's hands, I'm told," said the doctor. At this time neither
the attorney nor Larry Twentyman were in the room.

"He couldn't have done better," said Runciman, speaking from behind a long clay pipe.

"All the same he was nibbling at Goarly," said Ned Botsey.

"I don't know that he was nibbling at Goarly at all, Mr. Botsey," said the landlord. "Goarly
came to him, and Goarly was refused. What more would you have?"

"It's all one to me," said Botsey; "only I do think that in a sporting county like this the
place ought to be made too hot to hold a blackguard like that. If he comes out at me with his
gun I'll ride over him. And I wouldn't mind riding over that American too."

"That's just what would suit Goarly's book," said the doctor.

"Exactly what Goarly would like," said Harry Stubbings.

Then Mr. Masters and Larry entered the room. On that evening two things had occurred to the
attorney. Nickem had returned, and had asked for and received an additional week's leave of
absence. He had declined to explain accurately what he was doing but gave the attorney to understand
that he thought that he was on the way to the bottom of the whole thing. Then, after Nickem
had left him, Mr. Masters had a letter of instructions from Lord Rufford's steward. When he
received it, and found that his paid services had been absolutely employed on behalf of his
Lordship, he almost regretted the encouragement he had given to Nickem. In the first place
he might want Nickem. And then he felt that in his present position he ought not to be a party
to anything underhand. But Nickem was gone, and he was obliged to console himself by thinking
that Nickem was at any rate employing his intellect on the right side. When he left his house
with Larry Twentyman he had told his wife nothing about Lord Rufford. Up to this time he and
his wife had not as yet reconciled their difference, and poor Mary was still living in misery.
Larry, though he had called for the attorney, had not sat down in the parlour, and had barely
spoken to Mary. "For gracious sake, Mr. Twentyman, don't let him stay in that place there half
the night," said Mrs. Masters. "It ain't fit for a father of a family."

"Father never does stay half the night," said Kate, who took more liberties in that house than
any one else.

"Hold your tongue, miss. I don't know whether it wouldn't be better
for you, Mr. Twentyman, if you were not there so often yourself."
 Poor Larry felt this to be hard. He was not even engaged as
yet, and as far as he could see was not on the way to be engaged.
In such condition surely his possible mother-in-law could have no
right to interfere with him. He condescended to make no reply, but
crossed the passage and carried the attorney off with him.

"You've heard what that American gentleman has been about, Mr. Masters?" asked the landlord.

"I'm told he's been with Bearside."

"And has offered to pay his bill for him if he'll carry on the business for Goarly. Whoever
heard the like of that?"

"What sort of a man is he?" asked the doctor. "A great man in his own country everybody says,"
answered Runciman. "I wish he'd stayed there. He comes over here and thinks he understands
everything just as though he had lived here all his life. Did you say gin cold, Larry; and
rum for you, Mr. Masters?" Then the landlord gave the orders to the girl who had answered the bell.

"But they say he's actually going to Lord Rufford's," said young Botsey who would have given
one of his fingers to be asked to the lord's house.

"They are all going from Bragton," said Runciman.

"The young squire is going to ride one of my horses," said Harry Stubbings.

"That'll be an easy three pounds in your pockets, Harry," said the doctor. In answer to which
Harry remarked that he took all that as it came, the heavies and lights together, and that
there was not much change to be got out of three sovereigns when some gentlemen had had a horse
out for the day,--particularly when a gentleman didn't pay perhaps for twelve months.

"The whole party is going," continued the landlord. "How he is to have the cheek to go into
his Lordship's house after what he is doing is more than I can understand."

"What business is it of his?" said Larry angrily. "That's what I want to know. What'd he think
if we went and interfered over there? I shouldn't be surprised if he got a little rough usage
before he's out of the county. I'm told he came across Bean when he was ferreting about the
other day, and that Bean gave him quite as good as he brought."

"I say he's a spy," said Ribbs the butcher from his seat on the sofa. "I hates a spy."

Soon after that Mr. Masters left the room and Larry Twentyman followed him. There was something
almost ridiculous in the way the young man would follow the attorney about on these Saturday
evenings,--as though he could make love to the girl by talking to the father. But on this occasion
he had something special to say. "So Mary's going to Cheltenham, Mr. Masters."

"Yes, she is. You don't see any objection to that, I hope."

"Not in the least, Mr. Masters. I wish she might go anywhere to enjoy herself. And from all
I've heard Lady Ushant is a very good sort of lady."

"A very good sort of lady. She won't do Mary any harm, Twentyman."

"I don't suppose she will. But there's one thing I should like to know. Why shouldn't she tell
me before she goes that she'll have me?"

"I wish she would with all my heart."

"And Mrs. Masters is all on my side."

"Quite so."

"And the girls have always been my friends."

"I think we are all your friends, Twentyman. I'm sure Mary is. But that isn't marrying; is it?"

"If you would speak to her, Mr. Masters."

"What would you have me say? I couldn't bid my girl to have one man or another. I could only
tell her what I think, and that she knows already."

"If you were to say that you wished it! She thinks so much about you:'

"I couldn't tell her that I wished it in a manner that would drive her into it.  Of course
it would be a very good match. But I have only to think of her happiness and I must leave her
to judge what will make her happy."

"I should like to have it fixed some way before she starts," said Larry in an altered tone.

"Of course you are your own master, Twentyman. And you have behaved very well"

"This is a kind of thing that a man can't stand," said the young farmer sulkily. "Good night,
Mr. Masters" Then he walked off home to Chowton Farm meditating on his own condition and trying
to make up his mind to leave the scornful girl and become a free man. But he couldn't do it.
He couldn't even quite make up his mind that he would try to do it. There was a bitterness
within as he thought of permanent fixed failure which he could not digest. There was a craving
in his heart which he did not himself quite understand, but which made him think that the world
would be unfit to be lived in if he were to be altogether separated from Mary Masters. He couldn't
separate himself from her. It was all very well thinking of it, talking of it, threatening
it; but in truth he couldn't do it. There might of course be an emergency in which he must
do it. She might declare that she loved some one else and she might marry that other person.
In that event he saw no other alternative but,-- as he expressed it to himself,--"to run a
mucker." Whether the "mucker" should be run against Mary, or against the fortunate lover, or
against himself, he did not at present resolve.

