IT is a very serious disappointment to me not to be able to be present at the welcome of the
American Peace Society to the delegation of more than two hundred members of the British Parliament
who favor international arbitration. We have a manager old man, a good man, but with so many years on so much that is useless.
In short, needed someone to stay with him. Overall, we were Madrid manager, Miss Julia and me, spending
all summer watching the operators. Miss Julia realized that she must give the taste of Dona
Carmen ... and hence everything was born.

- And what has that to do?

...
- V. Can not you guess? Doña Carmen and Miss Clotilde went with a
girl, we we were y. .. here comes the ugly.  We cannot be blind to its waste of life and
treasure and the demoralization which follows in its train; nor cease to wonder at the spectacle
of Christian nations exhausting all their resources in preparing to slaughter each other, with
only here and there a voice, like Count Tolstoi's in the Russian wilderness, crying in heedless
ears that the gospel of Christ is peace, not war, and love, not hatred.

The overture which comes to us from English advocates of arbitration is a cheering assurance
that the tide of sentiment is turning in favor of peace among English speaking peoples.  I
cannot doubt that whatever stump orators and newspapers may say for party purposes, the heart
of America will respond to the generous proposal of our kinsfolk across the water. No two nations
could be more favorably conditioned than England and the United States for making the "holy
experiment of arbitration."

In our associations and kinship, our aims and interests, our common claims in the great names
and achievements of a common ancestry, we are essentially one people.  Whatever other nations
may do, we at least should be friends.  God grant that the noble and generous attempt shall
not be in vain!

SUFFRAGE FOR WOMEN.

Read at the Woman's Convention at Washington.

OAK KNOLL, DANVERS, MASS., Third Mo., 8, 1888.

I THANK thee for thy kind letter.  It would be a great satisfaction to be able to be present
at the fortieth anniversary of the Woman's Suffrage Association.  But, as that is not possible,
I can only reiterate my hearty sympathy with the object of the association, and bid it take
heart and assurance in view of all that has been accomplished. Their interest can not be ignored when considering that it addresses all international
issues, both in peace than in war.

Now that the bonds of nation to nation are becoming more intimate, the couple more defined we
provide a great service by publishing all those who are interested
in this kind of issues.

Such are the reasons we have had in mind when deciding to offer the public this translation,
having failed to do so cheapness, which in French costing 70 rs.,
the ours, which is an elegant take on 4. º of 553 pages, good paper
and print careful, its price is the 8 pesetas in Madrid and 9 provinces.
  You can afford in your consciousness
of right to be as calm and courteous as the archangel Michael, who, we are told in Scripture
in his controversy with Satan himself, did not bring a railing accusation against him.  A wise
adaptation of means to ends is no yielding of principle, but care should be taken to avoid
all such methods as have disgraced political and religious parties of the masculine sex.