By Georg Ebers

CHAPTER XLII.

The cloudless vault of heaven spread over the plain of Pelusium, the stars were bright, the
moon threw her calm light over the thousands of tents which shone as white as little hillocks
of snow.  All was silent, the soldiers and the Egyptians, who had assembled to welcome the
king, were now all gone to rest.

There had been great rejoicing and jollity in the camp; three enormous vats, garlanded with
flowers and overflowing with wine, which spilt with every movement of the trucks on which they
were drawn by thirty oxen, were sent up and down the little streets of tents, and as the evening
closed in tavern-booths were erected in many spots in the camp, at which the Regent's servants
supplied the soldiers with red and white wine.  The tents of the populace were only divided
from the pavilion of the Pharaoh by the hastily-constructed garden in the midst of which it
stood, and the hedge which enclosed it.

The tent of the Regent himself was distinguished from all the others by its size and magnificence;
to the right of it was the encampment of the different priestly deputations, to the left that
of his suite; among the latter were the tents of his friend Katuti, a large one for her own
use, and some smaller ones for her servants.  Behind Ani's pavilion stood a tent, enclosed
in a wall or screen of canvas, within which old Hekt was lodged; Ani had secretly conveyed
her hither on board his own boat.  Only Katuti and his confidential servants knew who it was
that lay concealed in the mysteriously shrouded abode.

While the banquet was proceeding in the great pavilion, the witch was sitting in a heap on
the sandy earth of her conical canvas dwelling; she breathed with difficulty, for a weakness
of the heart, against which she had long struggled, now oppressed her more frequently and severely;
a little lamp of clay burned before her, and on her lap crouched a sick and ruffled hawk; the
creature shivered from time to time, closing the filmy lids of his keen eyes, which glowed
with a dull fire when Hekt took him up in her withered hand, and tried to blow some air into
his hooked beak, still ever ready to peck and tear her.

At her feet little Scherau lay asleep.  Presently she pushed the child with her foot.  "Wake
up," she said, as he raised himself still half asleep.  "You have young ears--it seemed to
me that I heard a woman scream in Ani's tent.  Do you hear any thing?"

"Yes, indeed," exclaimed the little one.  "There is a noise like crying, and that--that was
a scream!  It came from out there, from Nemu's tent."

"Creep through  there," said the witch, "and see what is happening!"

The child obeyed: Hekt turned her attention again to the bird, which no longer perched in her
lap, but lay on one side, though it still tried to use its talons, when she took him up in
her hand.

"It is all over with him," muttered the old woman, "and the one I called Rameses is sleeker
than ever.  It is all folly and yet--and yet! the Regent's game is over, and he has lost it.
The creature is stretching itself--its head drops--it draws itself up--one more clutch at my
dress --now it is dead!"

She contemplated the dead hawk in her lap for some minutes, then she took it up, flung it into
a corner of the tent, and exclaimed:

"Good-bye, King Ani.  The crown is not for you!"  Then she went on: "What project has he in
hand now, I wonder?  Twenty times he has asked me whether the great enterprise will succeed;
as if I knew any more than he! And Nemu too has hinted all kinds of things, though he would
not speak out.  Something is going on, and I--and I?  There it comes again."

The old woman pressed her hand to her heart and closed her eyes, her features were distorted
with pain; she did not perceive Scherau's return, she did not hear him call her name, or see
that, when she did not answer him, he left her again.  For an hour or more she remained unconscious,
then her senses returned, but she felt as if some ice-cold fluid slowly ran through her veins
instead of the warm blood.

"If I had kept a hawk for myself too," she muttered, "it would soon follow the other one in
the corner!  If only Ani keeps his word, and has me embalmed!

"But how can he when he too is so near his end.  They will let me rot and disappear, and there
will be no future for me, no meeting with Assa."

The old woman remained silent for a long time; at last she murmured hoarsely with her eyes
fixed on the ground:

"Death brings release, if only from the torment of remembrance.  But there is a life beyond
the grave.  I do not, I will not cease to hope. The dead shall all be equally judged, and subject
to the inscrutable decrees.--Where shall I find him?  Among the blest, or among the damned?
And I?  It matters not!  The deeper the abyss into which they fling me the better.  Can Assa,
if he is among the blest, remain in bliss, when he sees to what he has brought me?  Oh! they
must embalm me--I cannot bear to vanish, and rot and evaporate into nothingness!"

While she was still speaking, the dwarf Nemu had come into the tent; Scherau, seeing the old
woman senseless, had run to tell him that his mother was lying on the earth with her eyes shut,
and was dying.  The witch perceived the little man.

"It is well," she said, "that you have come; I shall be dead before sunrise."

"Mother!"  cried the dwarf horrified, "you shall live, and live better than you have done till
now!  Great things are happening, and for us!"

"I know, I know," said Hekt.  "Go away, Scherau--now, Nemu, whisper in my ear what is doing?"
The dwarf felt as if he could not avoid the influence of her eye, he went up to her, and said
softly--"The pavilion, in which the king and his people are sleeping, is constructed of wood;
straw and pitch are built into the walls, and laid under the boards.  As soon as they are gone
to rest we shall set the tinder thing on fire.  The guards are drunk and sleeping."

"Well thought of," said Hekt.  "Did you plan it?"  "I and my mistress," said the dwarf not
without pride.  "You can devise a plot," said the old woman, "but you are feeble in the working
out.  Is your plan a secret? Have you clever assistants?"

"No one knows of it," replied the dwarf, "but Katuti, Paaker, and I; we three shall lay the
brands to the spots we have fixed upon.  I am going to the rooms of Bent-Anat; Katuti, who
can go in and out as she pleases, will set fire to the stairs, which lead to the upper story,
and which fall by touching a spring; and Paaker to the king's apartments."

"Good-good, it may succeed," gasped the old woman.  "But what was the scream in your tent?"
The dwarf seemed doubtful about answering; but Hekt went on:

"Speak without fear--the dead are sure to be silent."  The dwarf, trembling with agitation,
shook off his hesitation, and said:

"I have found Uarda, the grandchild of Pinem, who had disappeared, and I decoyed her here,
for she and no other shall be my wife, if Ani is king, and if Katuti makes me rich and free.
She is in the service of the Princess Bent-Anat, and sleeps in her anteroom, and she must not
be burnt with her mistress.  She insisted on going back to the palace, so, as she would fly
to the fire like a gnat, and I would not have her risk being burnt, I tied her up fast."

"Did she not struggle?"  said Hekt.

"Like a mad thing," said the dwarf.  "But the Regent's dumb slave, who was ordered by his master
to obey me in everything to-day, helped me. We tied up her mouth that she might not be heard
screaming!"

"Will you leave her alone when you go to do your errand?"

"Her father is with her!"

"Kaschta, the red-beard?"  asked the old woman in surprise. No one knew what "anon" meant. It was
probably some especially horrible way of writhing.

Romeo Augustus shook with terror. He could hear that clock talking still down stairs.

"Tick-tock--tick-tock. 'Tis nine--o'clock. Ro-meo--be-low, Come see--in me THINGS drear--ap-pear.
'Tis nine--o'clock. Tick-tock--tick-tock."

That is what it said.

"How painful it must be to 'writhe anon'!" whispered Romeo Augustus to himself. "I wouldn't
care if it was persons--but THINGS!"

For some unknown reason the idea was ghastly to Romeo Augustus.

Now, my little readers, wait a moment before you laugh at him. Hear what this eight-year-old
boy did.

Once upon a time Solomon had composed the following somewhat startling
proverb, "It is a wise fellow who wrenches forth the serpent's fang."

Which dark saying, being interpreted, was, "If you are scared of anything, just trot right up
and wrestle with it."

"For," continued Solomon, in a speech to the other five, "that's the
only way to grow plucky.

If you hear an odd noise, don't hide your head like a hyena or an ostrich, whichever it is,
but hunt it up. If you happen to see a ghost, skip up and attack it."

Now the words of Solomon were always prized as gold.

The boys reverenced Solomon, who could repeat the whole of a Latin verb, and was, moreover,
"pitcher" on "the nine."

So the "babes" had made a solemn compact that if any one of them was
ever "scared," he should step boldly out and "wrench forth the serpent's
fang."

     Should he be too great a coward so to do, he should wear a huge letter
     =C= pinned on his jacket for a fortnight, and be subject to all the
     taunts which could be imagined at his expense.

No wonder the boys grew brave. They dared not be otherwise.

Philemon's special bugbear had been a dark cellar, filled to overflowing
with shadows.

Down into this cellar he had gone with a beating heart, and had forced himself to search out every
crack and cranny, even to the coal-bin. Of course he found nothing to fear, and now it was Philemon
who was always ready to go down for apples in the winter evenings, and that too without even
a candle.

As for Elias, he had stood in much awe of a grove over the hill,
and was obliged to spend the greater part of a whole month wandering
solitary among the trees before he could snap his fingers at their
shadows.

And now Romeo Augustus's turn had come. His poor little
heart was filled with dismay when he found that he was in mortal fear
of the clock. He felt sure that he should have to search the matter
to the very bottom.

For a week he had been trying to bring himself
up to the pitch of requisite boldness. More than once he had marched
up to the enemy, and then marched back again, vanquished. He dared
not breathe a word to Philemon. The big letter =C= was all ready to
cling to his back, and how could he bear such disgrace? No sympathy
could he expect from any brother. His work must be done, and done
alone.

How loudly the clock called out from below! Could it be actually
stalking up stairs?--so sharply did its tones ring in Romeo Augustus's
wide-open ears.

"Tick-tock--tick-tock. 'Tis ten--o'clock. Make haste--don't
waste Minutes--in fits Of fear.--Come here! 'Tis ten--o'clock. Tick-tock--tick-tock."

Romeo
Augustus put one bare foot out of bed; he drew it back; he half rose,
and sank on the pillows again. Then, with a mighty effort, he gave
a bound, and stood shivering in the middle of the floor.

The house
was still. Elias was sleeping the sleep of the just, never dreaming
how he had terrified his small brother.

Out into the entry stole
Romeo Augustus. The harvest-moon threw a broad band of light on the
stairs. Down crept the small bare feet along the lower hall into the
sitting-room.  "Swear that you will provide for my burial,"
said the old woman.

"I swear it!"  cried the girl.  "But for God's sake--"

"Katuti, Paaker, and Nemu are gone to set fire to the palace when Rameses is sleeping, in three
places.  Do you hear, Kaschta!  Now hasten, fly after the incendiaries, rouse the servants,
and try to rescue the king."

"Oh fly, father,"  cried the  girl, and they both rushed away in the darkness.

"She is honest and will keep her word," muttered Hekt, and she tried to drag herself back to
her own tent; but her strength failed her half-way. Little Scherau tried to support her, but
he was too weak; she sank down on the sand, and looked out into the distance.  There she saw
the dark mass of the palace, from which rose a light that grew broader and broader, then clouds
of black smoke, then up flew the soaring flame, and a swarm of glowing sparks.

"Run into the camp, child," she cried, "cry fire, and wake the sleepers."

Scherau ran off shouting as loud as he could.

The old woman pressed her hand to her side, she muttered: "There it is again."

"In the other world--Assa--Assa," and her trembling lips were silent for ever.

CHAPTER XLIII.

Katuti had kept her unfortunate nephew Paaker concealed in one of her servants' tents.  He
had escaped wounded from the battle at Kadesh, and in terrible pain he had succeeded, by the
help of an ass which he had purchased from a peasant, in reaching by paths known to hardly
any one but himself, the cave where he had previously left his brother.  Here he found his
faithful Ethiopian slave, who nursed him till he was strong enough to set out on his journey
to Egypt.  He reached Pelusium, after many privations, disguised as an Ismaelite camel-driver;
he left his servant, who might have betrayed him, behind in the cave.

Before he was permitted to pass the fortifications, which lay across the isthmus which parts
the Mediterranean from the Red Sea, and which were intended to protect Egypt from the incursions
of the nomad tribes of the Chasu, he was subjected to a strict interrogatory, and among other
questions was asked whether he had nowhere met with the traitor Paaker, who was minutely described
to him.  No one recognized in the shrunken, grey-haired, one-eyed camel-driver, the broad-shouldered,
muscular and thick-legged pioneer.  To disguise himself the more effectually, he procured some
hair-dye--a cosmetic known in all ages--and blackened himself.

     [In my papyrus there are several recipes for the preparation of
     hair-dye; one is ascribed to the Lady Schesch, the mother of Teta,
     wife of the first king of Egypt.  The earliest of all the recipes
     preserved to us is a prescription for dyeing the hair.]

Katuti had arrived at Pelusium with Ani some time before, to superintend the construction of
the royal pavilion.  He ventured to approach her disguised as a negro beggar, with a palm-branch
in his hand.  She gave him some money and questioned him concerning his native country, for
she made it her business to secure the favor even of the meanest; but though she appeared to
take an interest in his answers, she did not recognize him; now for the first time he felt
secure, and the next day he went up to her again, and told her who he was.

The widow was not unmoved by the frightful alteration in her nephew, and although she knew
that even Ani had decreed that any intercourse with the traitor was to be punished by death,
she took him at once into her service, for she had never had greater need than now to employ
the desperate enemy of the king and of her son-in-law.

The mutilated, despised, and hunted man kept himself far from the other servants, regarding
the meaner folk with undiminished scorn.  He thought seldom, and only vaguely of Katuti's daughter,
for love had quite given place to hatred, and only one thing now seemed to him worth living
for-- the hope of working with others to cause his enemies' downfall, and of being the instrument
of their death; so he offered himself to the widow a willing and welcome tool, and the dull
flash in his uninjured eye when she set him the task of setting fire to the king's apartments,
showed her that in the Mohar she had found an ally she might depend on to the uttermost.

Paaker had carefully examined the scene of his exploit before the king's arrival.  Under the
windows of the king's rooms, at least forty feet from the ground, was a narrow parapet resting
on the ends of the beams which supported the rafters on which lay the floor of the upper story
in which the king slept.  These rafters had been smeared with pitch, and straw had been laid
between them, and the pioneer would have known how to find the opening where he was to put
in the brand even if he had been blind of both eyes.

When Katuti first sounded her whistle he slunk to his post; he was challenged by no watchman,
for the few guards who had been placed in the immediate vicinity of the pavilion, had all gone
to sleep under the influence of the Regent's wine.  Paaker climbed up to about the height of
two men from the ground by the help of the ornamental carving on the outside wall of the palace;
there a rope ladder was attached, he clambered up this, and soon stood on the parapet, above
which were the windows of the king's rooms, and below which the fire was to be laid.

Rameses' room was brightly illuminated.  Paaker could see into it without being seen, and could
bear every word that was spoken within.  The king was sitting in an arm-chair, and looked thoughtfully
at the ground; before him stood the Regent, and Mena stood by his couch, holding in his hand
the king's sleeping-robe.

Presently Rameses raised his head, and said, as he offered his hand with frank affection to Ani:

"Let me bring this glorious day to a worthy end, cousin.  I have found you my true and faithful
friend, and I had been in danger of believing those over-anxious counsellors who spoke evil
of you.  I am never prone to distrust, but a number of things occurred together that clouded
my judgment, and I did you injustice.  I am sorry, sincerely sorry; nor am I ashamed to apologize
to you for having for an instant doubted your good intentions.  You are my good friend--and
I will prove to you that I am yours.  There is my hand-take it; and all Egypt shall know that
Rameses trusts no man more implicitly than his Regent Ani.  I will ask you to undertake to
be my guard of honor to-night--we will share this room. I sleep here; when I lie down on my
couch take your place on the divan yonder."  Ani had taken Rameses' offered hand, but now he
turned pale as he looked down.  Paaker could see straight into his face, and it was not without
difficulty that he suppressed a scornful laugh.

Rameses did not observe the Regent's dismay, for he had signed to Mena to come closer to him.

"Before I sleep," said the king, "I will bring matters to an end with you too.  You have put
your wife's constancy to a severe test, and she has trusted you with a childlike simplicity
that is often wiser than the arguments of sages, because she loved you honestly, and is herself
incapable of guile.  I promised you that I would grant you a wish if your faith in her was
justified.  Now tell me what is your will?"

Mena fell on his knees, and covered the king's robe with kisses.

"Pardon!"  he exclaimed.  "Nothing but pardon.  My crime was a heavy one, I know; but I was
driven to it by scorn and fury--it was as if I saw the dishonoring hand of Paaker stretched
out to seize my innocent wife, who, as I now know, loathes him as a toad--"

"What was that?"  exclaimed the king.  "I thought I heard a groan outside."

He went up to the window and looked out, but he did not see the pioneer, who watched every
motion of the king, and who, as soon as he perceived that his involuntary sigh of anguish had
been heard, stretched himself close under the balustrade.  Mena had not risen from his knees
when the king once more turned to him.

"Pardon me," he said again.  "Let me be near thee again as before, and drive thy chariot. 
I live only through thee, I am of no worth but through thee, and by thy favor, my king, my
lord, my father!"

Rameses signed to his favorite to rise.  "Your request was granted," said he, "before you made
it.  I am still in your debt on your fair wife's account.  Thank Nefert--not me, and let us
give thanks to the Immortals this day with especial fervor.  What has it not brought forth
for us!  It has restored to me you two friends, whom I regarded as lost to me, and has given
me in Pentaur another son."

A low whistle sounded through the night air; it was Katuti's last signal.

Paaker blew up the tinder, laid it in the bole under the parapet, and then, unmindful of his
own danger, raised himself to listen for any further words.

"I entreat thee," said the Regent, approaching Rameses, "to excuse me. I fully appreciate thy
favors, but the labors of the last few days have been too much for me; I can hardly stand on
my feet, and the guard of honor--"

"Mena will watch," said the king.  "Sleep in all security, cousin.  I will have it known to
all men that I have put away from me all distrust of you.  Give the my night-robe, Mena.  Nay-one
thing more I must tell you.  Youth smiles on the young, Ani.  Bent-Anat has chosen a worthy
husband, my preserver, the poet Pentaur.  He was said to be a man of humble origin, the son
of a gardener of the House of Seti; and now what do I learn through Ameni?  He is the true
son of the dead Mohar, and the foul traitor Paaker is the gardener's son.  A witch in the Necropolis
changed the children.  That is the best news of all that has reached me on this propitious
day, for the Mohar's widow, the noble Setchem, has been brought here, and I should have been
obliged to choose between two sentences on her as the mother of the villain who has escaped
us.  Either I must have sent her to the quarries, or have had her beheaded before all the people--In
the name of the Gods, what is that?"

They heard a loud cry in a man's voice, and at the same instant a noise as if some heavy mass
had fallen to the ground from a great height. Rameses and Mena hastened to the window, but
started back, for they were met by a cloud of smoke.

"Call the watch!"  cried the king.

"Go, you," exclaimed Mena to Ani.  "I will not leave the king again in danger."

Ani fled away like an escaped prisoner, but he could not get far, for, before he could descend
the stairs to the lower story, they fell in before his very eyes; Katuti, after she had set
fire to the interior of the palace, had made them fall by one blow of a hammer.  Ani saw her
robe as she herself fled, clenched his fist with rage as he shouted her name, and then, not
knowing what he did, rushed headlong through the corridor into which the different royal apartments
opened.

The fearful crash of the falling stairs brought the King and Mena also out of the sleeping-room.

"There lie the stairs! that is serious!"  said the king cooly; then he went back into his room,
and looked out of a window to estimate the danger.  Bright flames were already bursting from
the northern end of the palace, and gave the grey dawn the brightness of day; the southern
wing or the pavilion was not yet on fire.  Mena observed the parapet from which Paaker had
fallen to the ground, tested its strength, and found it firm enough to bear several persons.
He looked round, particularly at the wing not yet gained by the flames, and exclaimed in a
loud voice:

"The fire is intentional! it is done on purpose.  See there!  a man is squatting down and pushing
a brand into the woodwork."

He leaped back into the room, which was now filling with smoke, snatched the king's bow and
quiver, which he himself had hung up at the bed-head, took careful aim, and with one cry the
incendiary fell dead.

A few hours later the dwarf Nemu was found with the charioteer's arrow through his heart. 
After setting fire to Bent-Anat's rooms, he had determined to lay a brand to the wing of the
palace where, with the other princes, Uarda's friend Rameri was sleeping.

Mena had again leaped out of window, and was estimating the height of the leap to the ground;
the Pharaoh's room was getting more and more filled with smoke, and flames began to break through
the seams of the boards. Outside the palace as well as within every one was waking up to terror
and excitement.

"Fire!  fire!  an incendiary!  Help!  Save the king!"  cried Kaschta, who rushed on, followed
by a crowd of guards whom he had roused; Uarda had flown to call Bent-Anat, as she knew the
way to her room.  The king had got on to the parapet outside the window with Mena, and was
calling to the soldiers.

"Half of you get into the house, and first save the princess; the other half keep the fire
from catching the south wing.  I will try to get there."

But Nemu's brand had been effectual, the flames flared up, and the soldiers strained every
nerve to conquer them.  Their cries mingled with the crackling and snapping of the dry wood,
and the roar of the flames, with the trumpet calls of the awakening troops, and the beating
of drums. The young princes appeared at a window; they had tied their clothes together to form
a rope, and one by one escaped down it.

Rameses called to them with words of encouragement, but he himself was unable to take any means
of escape, for though the parapet on which he stood was tolerably wide, and ran round the whole
of the building, at about every six feet it was broken by spaces of about ten paces.  The fire
was spreading and growing, and glowing sparks flew round him and his companion like chaff from
the winnowing fan.

"Bring some straw and make a heap below!"  shouted Rameses, above the roar of the conflagration.
"There is no escape but by a leap down."

The flames rushed out of the windows of the king's room; it was impossible to return to it,
but neither the king nor Mena lost his self- possession.  When Mena saw the twelve princes
descending to the ground, he shouted through his hands, using them as a speaking trumpet, and
called to Rameri, who was about to slip down the rope they had contrived, the last of them all.

"Pull up the rope, and keep it from injury till I come."

Rameri obeyed the order, and before Rameses could interfere, Mena had sprung across the space
which divided one piece of the balustrade from another.  The king's blood ran cold as Mena,
a second time, ventured the frightful leap; one false step, and he must meet with the same
fearful death as his enemy Paaker.

While the bystanders watched him in breathless silence--while the crackling of the wood, the
roar of the flames, and the dull thump of falling timber mingled with the distant chant of
a procession of priests who were now approaching the burning pile, Nefert roused by little
Scherau knelt on the bare ground in fervent and passionate prayer to the saving Gods.  She
watched every movement of her husband, and she bit her lips till they bled not to cry out.
She felt that he was acting bravely and nobly, and that he was lost if even for an instant
his attention were distracted from his perilous footing.  Now he had reached Rameri, and bound
one end of the rope made out of cloaks and handkerchiefs, round his body; then he gave the
other end to Rameri, who held fast to the window- sill, and prepared once more to spring. 
Nefert saw him ready to leap, she pressed her hands upon her lips to repress a scream, she
shut her eyes, and when she opened them again he had accomplished the first leap, and at the
second the Gods preserved him from falling; at the third the king held out his hand to him,
and saved him from a fall.  Then Rameses helped him to unfasten the rope from round his waist
to fasten it to the end of a beam.

Rameri now loosened the other end, and followed Mena's example; he too, practised in athletic
exercises in the school of the House of Seti, succeeded in accomplishing the three tremendous
leaps, and soon the king stood in safety on the ground.  Rameri followed him, and then Mena,
whose faithful wife went to meet him, and wiped the sweat from his throbbing temples.

Rameses hurried to the north wing, where Bent-Anat had her apartments; he found her safe indeed,
but wringing her hands, for her young favorite Uarda had disappeared in the flames after she
had roused her and saved her with her father's assistance.  Kaschta ran up and down in front
of the burning pavilion, tearing his hair; now calling his child in tones of anguish, now holding
his breath to listen for an answer.  To rush at random into the immense-burning building would
have been madness.  The king observed the unhappy man, and set him to lead the soldiers, whom
he had commanded to hew down the wall of Bent-Anat's rooms, so as to rescue the girl who might
be within.  Kaschta seized an axe, and raised it to strike.

But he thought that he heard blows from within against one of the shutters of the ground-floor,
which by Katuti's orders had been securely closed; he followed the sound--he was not mistaken,
the knocking could be distinctly heard.

With all his might he struck the edge of the axe between the shutter and the wall, and a stream
of smoke poured out of the new outlet, and before him, enveloped in its black clouds, stood
a staggering man who held Uarda in his arms.  Kaschta sprang forward into the midst of the
smoke and sparks, and snatched his daughter from the arms of her preserver, who fell half smothered
on his knees.  He rushed out into the air with his light and precious burden, and as he pressed
his lips to her closed eyelids his eyes were wet, and there rose up before him the image of
the woman who bore her, the wife that had stood as the solitary green palm- tree in the desert
waste of his life.  But only for a few seconds-Bent- Anat herself took Uarda into her care,
and he hastened back to the burning house.

He had recognized his daughter's preserver; it was the physician Nebsecht, who had not quitted
the princess since their meeting on Sinai, and had found a place among her suite as her personal
physician.

The fresh air had rushed into the room through the opening of the shutter, the broad flames
streamed out of the window, but still Nebsecht was alive, for his groans could be heard through
the smoke.  Once more Kaschta rushed towards the window, the bystanders could see that the
ceiling of the room was about to fail, and called out to warn him, but he was already astride
the sill.

"I signed myself his slave with my blood," he cried, "Twice he has saved my child, and now
I will pay my debt," and he disappeared into the burning room.

He soon reappeared with Nebsecht in his arms, whose robe was already scorched by the flames.
He could be seen approaching the window with his heavy burden; a hundred soldiers, and with
them Pentaur, pressed forward to help him, and took the senseless leech out of the arms of
the soldier, who lifted him over the window sill.

Kaschta was on the point of following him, but before he could swing himself over, the beams
above gave way and fell, burying the brave son of the paraschites.

Pentaur had his insensible friend carried to his tent, and helped the physicians to bind up
his burns.  When the cry of fire had been first raised, Pentaur was sitting in earnest conversation
with the high-priest; he had learned that he was not the son of a gardener, but a descendant
of one of the noblest families in the land.  The foundations of life seemed to be subverted
under his feet, Ameni's revelation lifted him out of the dust and set him on the marble floor
of a palace; and yet Pentaur was neither excessively surprised nor inordinately rejoiced; he
was so well used to find his joys and sufferings depend on the man within him, and not on the
circumstances without.

As soon as he heard the cry of fire, he hastened to the burning pavilion, and when he saw the
king's danger, he set himself at the head of a number of soldiers who had hurried up from the
camp, intending to venture an attempt to save Rameses from the inside of the house.  Among
those who followed him in this hopeless effort was Katuti's reckless son, who had distinguished
himself by his valor before Kadesh, and who hailed this opportunity of again proving his courage.
Falling walls choked up the way in front of these brave adventurers; but it was not till several
had fallen choked or struck down by burning logs, that they made up their minds to retire--one
of the first that was killed was Katuti's son, Nefert's brother.

Uarda had been carried into the nearest tent.  Her pretty head lay in Bent-Anat's lap, and
Nefert tried to restore her to animation by rubbing her temples with strong essences.  Presently
the girl's lips moved: with returning consciousness all she had seen and suffered during the
last hour or two recurred to her mind; she felt herself rushing through the camp with her father,
hurrying through the corridor to the princess's rooms, while he broke in the doors closed by
Katuti's orders; she saw Bent-Anat as she roused her, and conducted her to safety; she remembered
her horror when, just as she reached the door, she discovered that she had left in her chest
her jewel, the only relic of her lost mother, and her rapid return which was observed by no
one but by the leech Nebsecht.

Again she seemed to live through the anguish she had felt till she once more had the trinket
safe in her bosom, the horror that fell upon her when she found her escape impeded by smoke
and flames, and the weakness which overcame her; and she felt as if the strange white-robed
priest once more raised her in his arms.  She remembered the tenderness of his eyes as he looked
into hers, and she smiled half gratefully but half displeased at the tender kiss which had
been pressed on her lips before she found herself in her father's strong arms.

"How sweet she is!"  said Bent-Anat.  "I believe poor Nebsecht is right in saying that her
mother was the daughter of some great man among the foreign people.  Look what pretty little
hands and feet, and her skin is as clear as Phoenician glass."

CHAPTER XLIV.

While the friends were occupied in restoring Uarda to animation, and in taking affectionate
care of her, Katuti was walking restlessly backwards and forwards in her tent.

Soon after she had slipped out for the purpose of setting fire to the palace, Scherau's cry
had waked up Nefert, and Katuti found her daughter's bed empty when, with blackened hands and
limbs trembling with agitation, she came back from her criminal task.

Now she waited in vain for Nemu and Paaker.

Her steward, whom she sent on repeated messages of enquiry whether the Regent had returned,
constantly brought back a negative answer, and added the information that he had found the
body of old Hekt lying on the open ground.  The widow's heart sank with fear; she was full
of dark forebodings while she listened to the shouts of the people engaged in putting out the
fire, the roll of drums, and the trumpets of the soldiers calling each other to the help of
the king.

To these sounds now was added the dull crash of falling timbers and walls.

A faint smile played upon her thin lips, and she thought to herself: "There--that perhaps fell
on the king, and my precious son-in-law, who does not deserve such a fate--if we had not fallen
into disgrace, and if since the occurrences before Kadesh he did not cling to his indulgent
lord as a calf follows a cow."

She gathered fresh courage, and fancied she could hear the voice of Ethiopian troops hailing
the Regent as king--could see Ani decorated with the crown of Upper and Lower Egypt, seated
on Rameses' throne, and herself by his side in rich though unpretending splendor.  She pictured
herself with her son and daughter as enjoying Mena's estate, freed from debt and increased
by Ani's generosity, and then a new, intoxicating hope came into her mind.  Perhaps already
at this moment her daughter was a widow, and why should she not be so fortunate as to induce
Ani to select her child, the prettiest woman in Thebes, for his wife?  Then she, the mother
of the queen, would be indeed unimpeachable, and all-powerful. She had long since come to regard
the pioneer as a tool to be cast aside, nay soon to be utterly destroyed; his wealth might
probably at some future time be bestowed upon her son, who had distinguished himself at Kadesh,
and whom Ani must before long promote to be his charioteer or the commander of the chariot
warriors.

Flattered by these fancies, she forgot every care as she walked faster and faster to and fro
in her tent.  Suddenly the steward, whom she had this time sent to the very scene of the fire,
rushed into the tent, and with every token of terror broke to her the news that the king and
his charioteer were hanging in mid air on a narrow wooden parapet, and that unless some miracle
happened they must inevitably be killed.  It was said that incendiaries had occasioned the
fire, and he, the steward, had hastened forward to prepare her for evil news as the mangled
body of the pioneer, which had been identified by the ring on his finger, and the poor little
corpse of Nemu, pierced through by an arrow, had been carried past him.

Katuti was silent for a moment.

"And the king's sons?"  she asked with an anxious sigh.

"The Gods be praised," replied the steward, "they succeeded in letting themselves down to the
ground by a rope made of their garments knotted together, and some were already safe when I
came away."

Katuti's face clouded darkly; once more she sent forth her messenger. The minutes of his absence
seemed like days; her bosom heaved in stormy agitation, then for a moment she controlled herself,
and again her heart seemed to cease beating--she closed her eyes as if her anguish of anxiety
was too much for her strength.  At last, long after sunrise, the steward reappeared.

Pale, trembling, hardly able to control his voice, he threw himself on the ground at her feet
crying out:

"Alas! this night! prepare for the worst, mistress!  May Isis comfort thee, who saw thy son
fall in the service of his king and father!  May Amon, the great God of Thebes, give thee strength!
Our pride, our hope, thy son is slain, killed by a falling beam."

Pale and still as if frozen, Katuti shed not a tear; for a minute she did not speak, then she
asked in a dull tone:

"And Rameses?"

"The Gods be praised!"  answered the servant, "he is safe-rescued by Mena!"

"And Ani?"

"Burnt!--they found his body disfigured out of all recognition; they knew him again by the
jewels he wore at the banquet."

Katuti gazed into vacancy, and the steward started back as from a mad woman when, instead of
bursting into tears, she clenched her small jewelled hands, shook her fists in the air, and
broke into loud, wild laughter; then, startled at the sound of her own voice, she suddenly
became silent and fixed her eyes vacantly on the ground.  She neither saw nor heard that the
captain of the watch, who was called "the eyes and ears of the king," had come in through the
door of her tent followed by several officers and a scribe; he came up to her, and called her
by her name.  Not till the steward timidly touched her did she collect her senses like one
suddenly roused from deep sleep.

"What are you doing in my tent?"  she asked the officer, drawing herself up haughtily.

"In the name of the chief judge of Thebes," said the captain of the watch solemnly.  "I arrest
you, and hail you before the high court of justice, to defend yourself against the grave and
capital charges of high treason, attempted regicide, and incendiarism."

"I am ready," said the widow, and a scornful smile curled her lips.  Then with her usual dignity
she pointed to a seat and said:

"Be seated while I dress."

The officer bowed, but remained standing at the door of the tent while she arranged her black
hair, set her diadem on her brow, opened her little ointment chest, and took from it a small
phial of the rapid poison strychnine, which some months before she had procured through Nemu
from the old witch Hekt.

"My mirror!"  she called to a maid servant, who squatted in a corner of the tent.  She held
the metal mirror so as to conceal her face from the captain of the watch, put the little flask
to her lips and emptied it at one mouthful.  The mirror fell from her hand, she staggered,
a deadly convulsion seized her--the officer rushed forward, and while she fixed her dying look
upon him she said:

"My game is lost, but Ameni--tell Ameni that he will not win either."

She fell forward, murmured Nefert's name, struggled convulsively and was dead. 

So you are going to Lady Montfort? Ask her why she chits me!"

"My dear uncle! You know how secluded her life is at present; but she has charged me to assure
you of her unalterable regard for you; and whenever her health and
spirits are somewhat more recovered, I have no doubt that she will
ask you to give her the occasion to make that assurance in person."

COLONEL MORLEY.--"Can her health and spirits continue so long affected by grief for the loss
of that distant acquaintance whom the law called her husband?"

GEORGE.--"She is very far from well, and her spirits are certainly much broken. And now, uncle,
for the little favour I came to ask. Since you presented me to Mr. Darrell, he kindly sent
me two or three invitations to dinner, which my frequent absence from town would not allow
me to accept. I ought to call on him; and, as I feel ashamed not to have done so before, I wish
you would accompany me to his house. One happy word from you would save me a relapse into
stutter. When I want to apologise I always stutter."

"Darrell has left town," said the Colonel, roughly, "you have missed an opportunity that will never
occur again. The most charming companion; an intellect so manly, yet so sweet! I shall never find
such another." And for the first time in thirty years a tear stole to Alban Morley's eye.

GEORGE.--"When did he leave town?"

COLONEL MORLEY.--"Three days ago."

GEORGE.--"Three days ago! and for the Continent again?"

COLONEL MORLEY.--"No; for the Hermitage, George.

I have such a letter from him! You know how many years he has been absent from the world. When,
this year, he re-appeared, he and I grew more intimate than we had
ever been since we had left school; for though the same capital held
us before, he was then too occupied for much familiarity with an idle
man like me.

But just when I was intertwining what is left of my life with the bright threads of his, he
snaps the web asunder: he quits this London world again; says he will return to it no more."

GEORGE.--"Yet
I did hear that he proposed to renew his parliamentary career; nay, that he was about to form
a second marriage, with Honoria Vipont?"

COLONEL MORLEY.--"Mere gossip-not true. No, he will never marry again. Three days ago I thought
it certain that he would--certain that I should find for my old age a nook in his home--the easiest
chair in his social circle; that my daily newspaper would have a
fresh interest, in the praise of his name or the report of his speech;
that I should walk proudly into White's, sure to hear there of Guy
Darrell; that I should keep from misanthropical rust my dry knowledge
of life, planning shrewd panegyrics to him of a young happy wife,
needing all his indulgence-- panegyrics to her of the high-minded
sensitive man, claiming tender respect and delicate soothing;--that
thus, day by day, I should have made more pleasant the home in which
I should have planted myself, and found in his children boys to lecture
and girls to spoil.

Don't be jealous, George. I like your wife, I love your little ones, and you will inherit all
I have to leave. But to an old bachelor, who would keep young to the last, there is no place
so sunny as the hearth of an old school-friend. But my house of cards is blown down--talk of it no
more--'tis a painful subject. You met Lionel Haughton here the last time you called--how did
you like him!"

"Very much indeed."

"Well, then, since you cannot call on Darrell, call on him."

GEORGE (with animation).--"It is just what I meant to do--what is his address?"

COLONEL MORLEY--"There is his card--take it. He was here last night to inquire if I knew where Darrell
had gone, though no one in his household, nor I either, suspected
till this morning that Darrell had left town for good. You will find
Lionel at home, for I sent him word I would call. But really I am
not up to it now. Tell him from me that Mr. Darrell will not return
to Carlton Gardens this season, and is gone to Fawley. At present
Lionel need not know more--you understand? And now, my dear George,
good day."

CHAPTER XX.

EACH GENERATION HAS ITS OWN CRITICAL CANONS
IN POETRY AS WELL AS IN POLITICAL CREEDS, FINANCIAL SYSTEMS, OR WHATEVER
OTHRR CHANGEABLE MATTERS OF TASTE ARE CALLED "SETTLED QUESTIONS" AND
"FIXED OPINIONS."

George, musing much over all that his uncle had
said respecting Darrell, took his way to Lionel's lodgings.

"The king of the Danaids gave you up in exchange for his daughter, and he rejoices long since
in the restoration of his child; but we, in losing her, lost the most powerful means of coercing
the seafaring nations of the islands and northern coasts of the great sea who are constantly
increasing in might and daring, and so diminished our chances of securing a solid and abiding
peace.

"Thus--through the careless wilfulness of a boy, the great work is endangered which I had hoped
to have achieved.  It grieves me particularly to humiliate your spirit to-day, when I have
had so much reason to encourage you with praise.  Nor will I punish you, only warn you and
teach you.  The mechanism of the state is like the working of the cogged wheels which move
the water-works on the shore of the Nile- if one tooth is missing the whole comes to a stand-still
however strong the beasts that labor to turn it.  Each of you--bear this in mind--is a main-wheel
in the great machine of the state, and can serve an end only by acting unresistingly in obedience
to the motive power.  Now rise!  we may perhaps succeed in obtaining good security from the
Asiatic king, though we have lost our hostage."

Heralds at this moment marched into the tent, and announced that the representative of the
Cheta king and the allied princes were in attendance in the council tent; Rameses put on the
crown of Upper and Lower Egypt and all his royal adornments; the chamberlain who carried the
insignia of his power, and his head scribe with his decoration of plumes marched before him,
while his sons, the commanders in chief, and the interpreters followed him.  Rameses took his
seat on his throne with great dignity, and the sternest gravity marked his demeanor while he
received the homage of the conquered and fettered kings.

The Asiatics kissed the earth at his feet, only the king of the Danaids did no more than bow
before him.  Rameses looked wrathfully at him, and ordered the interpreter to ask him whether
he considered himself conquered or no, and the answer was given that he had not come before
the Pharaoh as a prisoner, and that the obeisance which Rameses required of him was regarded
as a degradation according to the customs of his free- born people, who prostrated them selves
only before the Gods.  He hoped to become an ally of the king of Egypt, and he asked would
he desire to call a degraded man his friend?

Rameses measured the proud and noble figure before him with a glance, and said severely:

"I am prepared to treat for peace only with such of my enemies as are willing to bow to the
double crown that I wear.  If you persist in your refusal, you and your people will have no
part in the favorable conditions that I am prepared to grant to these, your allies."

The captive prince preserved his dignified demeanor, which was nevertheless free from insolence,
when these words of the king were interpreted to him, and replied that he had come intending
to procure peace at any cost, but that he never could nor would grovel in the dust at any man's
feet nor before any crown.  He would depart on the following day; one favor, however, he requested
in his daughter's name and his own --and he had heard that the Egyptians respected women. 
The king knew, of course, that his charioteer Mena had treated his daughter, not as a prisoner
but as a sister, and Praxilla now felt a wish, which he himself shared, to bid farewell to
the noble Mena, and his wife, and to thank him for his magnanimous generosity.  Would Rameses
permit him once more to cross the Nile before his departure, and with his daughter to visit
Mena in his tent.

Rameses granted his prayer: the prince left the tent, and the negotiations began.

In a few hours they were brought to a close, for the Asiatic and Egyptian scribes had agreed,
in the course of the long march southwards, on the stipulations to be signed; the treaty itself
was to be drawn up after the articles had been carefully considered, and to be signed in the
city of Rameses called Tanis--or, by the numerous settlers in its neighborhood, Zoan.  The
Asiatic princes were to dine as guests with the king; but they sat at a separate table, as
the Egyptians would have been defiled by sitting at the same table with strangers.

Rameses was not perfectly satisfied.  If the Danaids went away without concluding a treaty
with him, it was to be expected that the peace which he was so earnestly striving for would
before long be again disturbed; and he nevertheless felt that, out of regard for the other
conquered princes, he could not forego any jot of the humiliation which he had required of
their king, and which he believed to be due to himself-- though he bad been greatly impressed
by his dignified manliness and by the bravery of the troops that had followed him into the field.

The sun was sinking when Mena, who that day had leave of absence from the king, came in great
excitement up to the table where the princes were sitting and craved the king's permission
to make an important communication.  Rameses signed consent; the charioteer went close up to
him, and they held a short but eager conversation in a low voice.

Presently the king stood up and said, speaking to his daughter:

"This day which began so horribly will end joyfully.  The fair child who saved you to-day,
but who so nearly fell a victim to the flames, is of noble origin."

"She cones of a royal house," said Rameri, disrespectfully interrupting his father.  Rameses
looked at him reprovingly.  "My sons are silent," he said, "till I ask them to speak."

The prince colored and looked down; the king signed to Bent-Anat and Pentaur, begged his guests
to excuse him for a short time, and was about to leave the tent; but Bent-Anat went up to him,
and whispered a few words to him with reference to her brother.  Not in vain: the king paused,
and reflected for a few moments; then he looked at Rameri, who stood abashed, and as if rooted
to the spot where he stood.  The king called his name, and beckoned him to follow him.

CHAPTER XLV.

Rameri had rushed off to summon the physicians, while Bent-Anat was endeavoring to restore
the rescued Uarda to consciousness, and he followed them into his sister's tent.  He gazed
with tender anxiety into the face of the half suffocated girl, who, though uninjured, still
remained unconscious, and took her hand to press his lips to her slender fingers, but Bent-Anat
pushed him gently away; then in low tones that trembled with emotion he implored her not to
send him away, and told her how dear the girl whose life he had saved in the fight in the Necropolis
had become to him--how, since his departure for Syria, he had never ceased to think of her
night and day, and that he desired to make her his wife.

Bent-Anat was startled; she reminded her brother of the stain that lay on the child of the
paraschites and through which she herself had suffered so much; but Rameri answered eagerly:

"In Egypt rank and birth are derived through the mother and Kaschta's dead wife--"

"I know," interrupted Bent-Anat.  "Nebsecht has already told us that she was a dumb woman,
a prisoner of war, and I myself believe that she was of no mean house, for Uarda is nobly formed
in face and figure."

"And her skin is as fine as the petal of a flower," cried Rameri.  "Her voice is like the ring
of pure gold, and--Oh!  look, she is moving. Uarda, open your eyes, Uarda!  When the sun rises
we praise the Gods. Open your eyes!  how thankful, how joyful I shall be if those two suns
only rise again."

Bent-Anat smiled, and drew her brother away from the heavily-breathing girl, for a leech came
into the tent to say that a warm medicated bath had been prepared and was ready for Uarda.
The princess ordered her waiting-women to help lift the senseless girl, and was preparing to
follow her when a message from her father required her presence in his tent.  She could guess
at the significance of this command, and desired Rameri to leave her that she might dress in
festal garments; she could entrust Uarda to the care of Nefert during her absence.

"She is kind and gentle, and she knows Uarda so well," said the princess, "and the necessity
of caring for this dear little creature will do her good.  Her heart is torn between sorrow
for her lost relations, and joy at being united again to her love.  My father has given Mena
leave of absence from his office for several days, and I have excused her from her attendance
on me, for the time during which we were so necessary to each other really came to an end yesterday.
I feel, Rameri, as if we, after our escape, were like the sacred phoenix which comes to Heliopolis
and burns itself to death only to soar again from its ashes young and radiant --blessed and
blessing!"

When her brother had left her, she threw herself before the image of her mother and prayed
long and earnestly; she poured an offering of sweet perfume on the little altar of the Goddess
Hathor, which always accompanied her, had herself dressed in happy preparation for meeting
her father, and--she did not conceal it from herself--Pentaur, then she went for a moment to
Nefert's tent to beg her to take good care of Uarda, and finally obeyed the summons of the
king, who, as we know, fulfilled her utmost hopes.

As Rameri quitted his sister's tent he saw the watch seize and lead away a little boy; the
child cried bitterly, and the prince in a moment recognized the little sculptor Scherau, who
had betrayed the Regent's plot to him and to Uarda, and whom he had already fancied he had
seen about the place.  The guards had driven him away several times from the princess's tent,
but he had persisted in returning, and this obstinate waiting in the neighborhood had aroused
the suspicions of an officer; for since the fire a thousand rumors of conspiracies and plots
against the king had been flying about the camp.  Rameri at once freed the little prisoner,
and heard from him that it was old Hekt who, before her death, had sent Kaschta and his daughter
to the rescue of the king, that he himself had helped to rouse the troops, that now he had
no home and wished to go to Uarda.

The prince himself led the child to Nefert, and begged her to allow him to see Uarda, and to
let him stay with her servants till he himself returned from his father's tent.

The leeches had treated Uarda with judgment, for under the influence of the bath she recovered
her senses; when she had been dressed again in fresh garments and refreshed by the essences
and medicines which they gave her to inhale and to drink, she was led back into Nefert's tent,
where Mena, who had never before seen her, was astonished at her peculiar and touching beauty.

"She  is very like my Danaid princess," he said to his wife; "only she is younger and much
prettier than she."

Little Scherau came in to pay his respects to her, and she was delighted to see the boy; still
she was sad, and however kindly Nefert spoke to her she remained in silent reverie, while from
time to time a large tear rolled down her cheek.

"You have lost your father!"  said Nefert, trying to comfort her.  "And I, my mother and brother
both in one day."

"Kaschta was rough but, oh! so kind," replied Uarda.  "He was always so fond of me; he was
like the fruit of the doom palm; its husk is hard and rough, but he who knows how to open it
finds the sweet pulp within.  Now he is dead, and my grandfather and grandmother are gone before
him, and I am like the green leaf that I saw floating on the waters when we were crossing the
sea; anything so forlorn I never saw, abandoned by all it belonged to or had ever loved, the
sport of a strange element in which nothing resembling itself ever grew or ever can grow."

Nefert kissed her forehead. A letter from you is like water in the desert."

When I read that letter I became full of the noblest resolutions. Not another day should pass,
I vowed, before I answered it. So I prepared a great many sheets of thin note-paper, carefully selected
a clean nib and sat down at my writing-table to begin. As I did so my eyes fell upon Martin
Chuzzlewit, which was lying within easy reach. The book seemed positively to command me to read
it for the tenth time. I took it up, and in another moment Mrs. Gamp had taken possession of
me. My writing-chair was uncomfortable. I transferred myself into an arm-chair. Is it necessary
to add that I did not write to TOM?

His letter is getting frayed and soiled from being constantly in my pocket. Day after day it accompanies
me on my daily round, unanswered and seemingly unanswerable.

For I feel it to be a duty to write, and my mind abhors a duty.

The letter weighs upon my conscience like lead. A few strokes of the pen would remove the burden,
but I simply cannot screw myself up to the task. That is one of the things I ought to do.

Again,
ought I not to call on the WHITTLESEAS? Mr. and Mrs. WHITTLESEA have simply overflowed with kindness
towards me. I never enjoyed anything more than the week I spent at their house in Kent a short
time ago. They are now in town, and, what is more, they know that I am in town too. Of course
I ought to call. It's my plain duty, and that is, as far as I can tell, the only reason which
absolutely prevents me from calling upon that hospitable family. Why need I go through the long
list of my pressing duties? I ought to write my article on "Modern Theosophy: A Psychological
Parallel," for the next number of The Brain. I ought to visit my
dentist; I ought to have my hair cut.

But I shall do none of these things.

On the other hand, it is absolutely unnecessary that I should write
to you.

No evil would befall me if I waited another year, or even omitted
altogether to write to you.  "I  snatched it out of my chest and held it in my hand when
Nebsecht took me in his arms, and I still had it in my hand when I was lying safe on the ground
outside the burning house, and Bent-Anat was close to me, and Rameri came up.  I remember seeing
him as if I were in a dream, and I revived a little, and I felt the jewel in my fingers then."

"Then it was dropped on the way to the tent?"  said Nefert.

Uarda nodded; little Scherau, who had been crouching on the floor beside her, gave Uarda a
loving glance, dimmed with tears, and quietly slipped out of the tent.

Time went by in silence; Uarda sat looking at the ground, Nefert and Mena held each other's
hands, but the thoughts of all three were with the dead.  A perfect stillness reigned, and
the happiness of the reunited couple was darkly overshadowed by their sorrow.  From time to
time the silence was broken by a trumpet-blast from the royal tent; first when the Asiatic
princes were introduced into the Council-tent, then when the Danaid king departed, and lastly
when the Pharaoh preceded the conquered princes to the banquet.

The charioteer remembered how his master had restored him to dignity and honor, for the sake
of his faithful wife; and gratefully pressed her hand.

Suddenly there was a noise in front of the tent, and an officer entered to announce to Mena
that the Danaid king and his daughter, accompanied by body-guard, requested to see and speak
with him and Nefert.

The entrance to the tent was thrown wide open.  Uarda retired modestly into the back-ground,
and Mena and Nefert went forward hand in hand to meet their unexpected guests.

The Greek prince was an old man, his beard and thick hair were grey, but his movements were
youthful and light, though dignified and deliberate. His even, well-formed features were deeply
furrowed, he had large, bright, clear blue eyes, but round his fine lips were lines of care.
Close to him walked his daughter; her long white robe striped with purple was held round her
hips by a golden girdle, and her sunny yellow hair fell in waving locks over her neck and shoulders,
while it was confined by a diadem which encircled her head; she was of middle height, and her
motions were measured and calm like her father's.  Her brow was narrow, and in one line with
her straight nose, her rosy mouth was sweet and kind, and beyond everything beautiful were
the lines of her oval face and the turn of her snow-white throat.  By their side stood the
interpreter who translated every word of the conversation on both sides.  Behind them came
two men and two women, who carried gifts for Mena and his wife.

The prince praised Mena's magnanimity in the warmest terms.

"You have proved to me," he said, "that the virtues of gratitude, of constancy, and of faith
are practised by the Egyptians; although your merit certainly appears less to me now that I
see your wife, for he who owns the fairest may easily forego any taste for the fair."

Nefert blushed.

"Your generosity," she answered, "does me more than justice at your daughter's expense, and
love moved my husband to the same injustice, but your beautiful daughter must forgive you and
me also."

Praxilla went towards her and expressed her thanks; then she offered her the costly coronet,
the golden clasps and strings of rare pearls which her women carried; her father begged Mena
to accept a coat of mail and a shield of fine silver work.  The strangers were then led into
the tent, and were there welcomed and entertained with all honor, and offered bread and wine.
While Mena pledged her father, Praxilla related to Nefert, with the help of the interpreter,
what hours of terror she had lived through after she had been taken prisoner by the Egyptians,
and was brought into the camp with the other spoils of war; how an older commander had asserted
his claim to her, how Mena had given her his hand, had led her to his tent, and had treated
her like his own daughter.  Her voice shook with emotion, and even the interpreter was moved
as she concluded her story with these words: "How grateful I am to him, you will fully understand
when I tell you that the man who was to have been my husband fell wounded before my eyes while
defending our camp; but he has recovered, and now only awaits my return for our wedding."

"May the Gods only grant it!"  cried the king, "for Praxilla is the last child of my house.
The murderous war robbed me of my four fair sons before they had taken wives, my son-in-law
was slain by the Egyptians at the taking of our camp, and his wife and new-born son fell into
their hands, and Praxilla is my youngest child, the only one left to me by the envious Gods."

While he was still speaking, they heard the guards call out and a child's loud cry, and at
the same instant little Scherau rushed into the tent holding up his hand exclaiming.

"I have it!  I have found it!"

Uarda, who had remained behind the curtain which screened the sleeping room of the tent--but
who had listened with breathless attention to every word of the foreigners, and who had never
taken her eyes off the fair Praxilla--now came forward, emboldened by her agitation, into the
midst of the tent, and took the jewel from the child's hand to show it to the Greek king; for
while she stood gazing at Praxilla it seemed to her that she was looking at herself in a mirror,
and the idea had rapidly grown to conviction that her mother had been a daughter of the Danaids.
Her heart beat violently as she went up to the king with a modest demeanor, her head bent down,
but holding her jewel up for him to see.

The bystanders all gazed in astonishment at the veteran chief, for he staggered as she came
up to him, stretched out his hands as if in terror towards the girl, and drew back crying out:

"Xanthe, Xanthe!  Is your spirit freed from Hades?  Are you come to summon me?"

Praxilla looked at her father in alarm, but suddenly she, too, gave a piercing cry, snatched
a chain from her neck, hurried towards Uarda, and seizing the jewel she held, exclaimed:

"Here is the other half of the ornament, it belonged to my poor sister Xanthe!"

The old Greek was a pathetic sight, he struggled hard to collect himself, looking with tender
delight at Uarda, his sinewy hands trembled as he compared the two pieces of the necklet; they
matched precisely--each represented the wing of an eagle which was attached to half an oval
covered with an inscription; when they were laid together they formed the complete figure of
a bird with out-spread wings, on whose breast the lines exactly matched of the following oracular
verse:

    "Alone each is a trifling thing, a woman's useless toy
     But with its counterpart behold! the favorite bird of Zeus."

A glance at the inscription convinced the king that he held in his hand the very jewel which
he had put with his own hands round the neck of his daughter Xanthe on her marriage-day, and
of which the other half had been preserved by her mother, from whom it had descended to Praxilla.
It had originally been made for his wife and her twin sister who had died young. Before he
made any enquiries, or asked for any explanations, he took Uarda's head between his hands,
and turning her face close to his he gazed at her features, as if he were reading a book in
which he expected to find a memorial of all the blissful hours of his youth, and the girl felt
no fear; nor did she shrink when he pressed his lips to her forehead, for she felt that this
man's blood ran in her own veins.  At last the king signed to the interpreter; Uarda was asked
to tell all she knew of her mother, and when she said that she had come a captive to Thebes
with an infant that had soon after died, that her father had bought her and had loved her in
spite of her being dumb, the prince's conviction became certainty; he acknowledged Uarda as
his grandchild, and Praxilla clasped her in her arms.

Then he told Mena that it was now twenty years since his son-in-law had been killed, and his
daughter Xanthe, whom Uarda exactly resembled, had been carried into captivity.  Praxilla was
then only just born, and his wife died of the shock of such terrible news.  All his enquiries
for Xanthe and her child had been fruitless, but he now remembered that once, when he had offered
a large ransom for his daughter if she could be found, the Egyptians had enquired whether she
were dumb, and that he had answered "no."  No doubt Xanthe had lost the power of speech through
grief, terror, and suffering.

The joy of the king was unspeakable, and Uarda was never tired of gazing at his daughter and
holding her hand.

Then she turned to the interpreter.

"Tell me," she said.  "How do I say 'I am so very happy?'" 

I could not help smiling, as I thought of the prodigious amount of literary labor he had performed,
and at the same time remembered the simple comfort of his dwelling, next door.

"I am serious," he continued; "I never take up the pen without an
effort; I work only from necessity.

I never walk out without seeing some pretty, useless thing which I want to buy. Sometimes
I pass the same shop-window every day for months, and resist the temptation, and think I'm safe;
then comes the day of weakness, and I yield. My physician tells me I must live very simply, and
not dine out so much; but I cannot break off the agreeable habit. I shall look at this picture
and think of my dragons, though I don't expect ever to overcome them."

After his four lectures on the Georges had been delivered in New York,
a storm of angry abuse was let loose upon him in Canada and the other
British Provinces.

The British-Americans, snubbed both by Government and society when they go to England, repay
the slight, like true Christians, by a rampant loyalty unknown in
the mother-country.

Many of their newspapers accused Thackeray of pandering to the prejudices of the American public,
affirming that he would not dare to repeat the same lectures in England,
after his return.

Of course, the papers containing the articles, duly marked to attract attention, were sent to
him.

He merely remarked, as he threw them contemptuously aside,--"These fellows will see that I shall
not only repeat the lectures at home, but I shall make them more
severe, just because the auditors will be Englishmen."

He was true to his promise. The lecture on George IV. excited, not, indeed, the same amount
of newspaper-abuse as he had received from Canada, but a very angry
feeling in the English aristocracy, some members of which attempted
to punish him by a social ostracism.

When I visited him in London, in July, 1856, he related this to me, with great good-humor.
"There, for instance," said he, "is Lord ----" (a prominent English statesman) "who has dropped
me from his dinner-parties for three months past.

Well, he will find that I can do without his society better than
he can do without mine."

A few days afterwards Lord ---- resumed his invitations.

About the same time I witnessed an amusing interview, which explained to me the great personal
respect in which Thackeray was held by the aristocratic class.

He never hesitated to mention and comment upon the censure aimed against him in the presence
of him who had uttered it. His fearless frankness must have seemed
phenomenal.

In the present instance, Lord ----, who had dabbled in literature, and held a position at Court,
had expressed himself (I forget whether orally or in print) very
energetically against Thackeray's picture of George IV.

We had occasion to enter the shop of a fashionable tailor, and there found Lord ----. Thackeray
immediately stepped up to him, bent his strong frame over the disconcerted champion of the
Royal George, and said, in his full, clear, mellow voice,--"I know what you have said. Of
course, you are quite right, and I am wrong. I only regret that I did not think of consulting
you before my lecture was written." The person addressed evidently did not know whether to take
this for irony or truth: he stammered out an incoherent reply, and seemed greatly relieved
when the giant turned to leave the shop.

At other times, however, he was kind and considerate. Reaching London one day in June, 1857,
I found him at home, grave and sad, having that moment returned from the funeral of Douglas
Jerrold.  The prince has wooed her, so to speak, on the highway, but if she now comes
with me he can enter the palace of kings as suitor to a princess, and the marriage feast I
will provide shall be a right royal one."

"What you demand is just and wise," replied Rameses.  "Take your grand- child with you as my
son's betrothed bride--my future daughter.  Give me your hands, my children.  The delay will
teach you patience, for Rameri must remain a full year from to-day in Egypt, and it will be
to your profit, sweet child, for the obedience which he will learn through his training in
the army will temper the nature of your future husband.  You, Rameri, shall in a year from
to-day--and I think you will not forget the date--find at your service a ship in the harbor
of Pelusium, fitted and manned with Phoenicians, to convey you to your wedding."

"So be it!"  exclaimed the old man.   "And by Zeus who hears me swear--I will not withhold
Xanthe's daughter from your son when he comes to claim her!"

When Rameri returned to the princes' tent he threw himself on their necks in turn, and when
he found himself alone with their surly old house- steward, he snatched his wig from his head,
flung it in the air, and then coaxingly stroked the worthy officer's cheeks as he set it on
his head again.

CHAPTER XLVI.

Uarda accompanied her grandfather and Praxilla to their tent on the farther side of the Nile,
but she was to return next morning to the Egyptian camp to take leave of all her friends, and
to provide for her father's internment.  Nor did she delay attending to the last wishes of
old Hekt, and Bent-Anat easily persuaded her father, when he learnt how greatly he had been
indebted to her, to have her embalmed like a lady of rank.

Before Uarda left the Egyptian camp, Pentaur came to entreat her to afford her dying preserver
Nebsecht the last happiness of seeing her once more; Uarda acceded with a blush, and the poet,
who had watched all night by his friend, went forward to prepare him for her visit.

Nebsecht's burns and a severe wound on his head caused him great suffering; his cheeks glowed
with fever, and the physicians told Pentaur that he probably could not live more than a few hours.

The poet laid his cool hand on his friend's brow, and spoke to him encouragingly; but Nebsecht
smiled at his words with the peculiar expression of a man who knows that his end is near, and
said in a low voice and with a visible effort:

"A few breaths more and here, and here, will be peace."  He laid his hand on his head and on
his heart.

"We all attain to peace," said Pentaur.  "But perhaps only to labor more earnestly and unweariedly
in the land beyond the grave.  If the Gods reward any thing it is the honest struggle, the
earnest seeking after truth; if any spirit can be made one with the great Soul of the world
it will be yours, and if any eye may see the Godhead through the veil which here shrouds the
mystery of His existence yours will have earned the privilege."

"I have pushed and pulled," sighed Nebsecht, "with all my might, and now when I thought I had
caught a glimpse of the truth the heavy fist of death comes down upon me and shuts my eyes.
What good will it do me to see with the eye of the Divinity or to share in his omniscience?
It is not seeing, it is seeking that is delightful--so delightful that I would willingly set
my life there against another life here for the sake of it."  He was silent, for his strength
failed, and Pentaur begged him to keep quiet, and to occupy his mind in recalling all the hours
of joy which life had given him.

"They have been few," said the leech.  "When my mother kissed me and gave me dates, when I
could work and observe in peace, when you opened my eyes to the beautiful world of poetry--that
was good!"

And you have soothed the sufferings of many men, added Pentaur, "and never caused pain to any one."

Nebsecht shook his head.

"I drove the old paraschites," he muttered, "to madness and to death."

He was silent for a long time, then he looked up eagerly and said: "But not intentionally--and
not in vain!  In Syria, at Megiddo I could work undisturbed; now I know what the organ is that
thinks.  The heart!  What is the heart?  A ram's heart or a man's heart, they serve the same
end; they turn the wheel of animal life, they both beat quicker in terror or in joy, for we
feel fear or pleasure just as animals do.  But Thought, the divine power that flies to the
infinite, and enables us to form and prove our opinions, has its seat here--Here in the brain,
behind the brow."

He paused exhausted and overcome with pain.  Pentaur thought he was wandering in his fever,
and offered him a cooling drink while two physicians walked round his bed singing litanies;
then, as Nebsecht raised himself in bed with renewed energy, the poet said to him:

"The fairest memory of your life must surely be that of the sweet child whose face, as you
once confessed to me, first opened your soul to the sense of beauty, and whom with your own
hands you snatched from death at the cost of your own life.  You know Uarda has found her own
relatives and is happy, and she is very grateful to her preserver, and would like to see him
once more before she goes far away with her grandfather."

The sick man hesitated before he answered softly:

"Let her come--but I will look at her from a distance."

Pentaur went out and soon returned with Uarda, who remained standing with glowing cheeks and
tears in her eyes at the door of the tent.  The leech looked at her a long time with an imploring
and tender expression, then he said:

"Accept my thanks--and be happy."

The girl would have gone up to him to take his hand, but he waved her off with his right hand
enveloped in wrappings.

"Come no nearer," he said, "but stay a moment longer.  You have tears in your eyes; are they
for me or only for my pain?"

"For you, good noble man! my friend and my preserver!"  said Uarda.  "For you dear, poor Nebsecht!"
The leech closed his eyes as she spoke these words with earnest feeling, but he looked up once
more as she ceased speaking, and gazed at her with tender admiration; then he said softly:

"It is enough--now I can die."

Uarda left the tent, Pentaur remained with him listening to his hoarse and difficult breathing;
suddenly:

Nebsecht raised himself, and said: "Farewell, my friend,--my journey is beginning, who knows
whither?"

"Only not into vacancy, not to end in nothingness!" cried Pentaur warmly.

The leech shook his head.  "I have been something," he said, "and being something I cannot
become nothing.  Nature is a good economist, and utilizes the smallest trifle; she will use
me too according to her need. She brings everything to its end and purpose in obedience to
some rule and measure, and will so deal with me after I am dead; there is no waste. Each thing
results in being that which it is its function to become; our wish or will is not asked--my
head! when the pain is in my head I cannot think--if only I could prove--could prove----"

The last words were less and less audible, his breath was choked, and in a few seconds Pentaur
with deep regret closed his eyes.

Pentaur, as he quitted the tent where the dead man lay, met the high- priest Ameni, who had
gone to seek him by his friend's bed-side, and they returned together to gaze on the dead.
Ameni, with much emotion, put up a few earnest prayers for the salvation of his soul, and then
requested Pentaur to follow him without delay to his tent.  On the way he prepared the poet,
with the polite delicacy which was peculiar to him, for a meeting which might be more painful
than joyful to him, and must in any case bring him many hours of anxiety and agitation.

The judges in Thebes, who had been compelled to sentence the lady Setchem, as the mother of
a traitor, to banishment to the mines had, without any demand on her part, granted leave to
the noble and most respectable matron to go under an escort of guards to meet the king on his
return into Egypt, in order to petition for mercy for herself, but not, as it was expressly
added--for Paaker; and she had set out, but with the secret resolution to obtain the king's
grace not for herself but for her son.

     [Agatharchides, in Diodorus III. 12, says that in many cases not
     only the criminal but his relations also were condemned to labor in
     the mines.  In the convention signed between Rameses and the Cheta
     king it is expressly provided that the deserter restored to Egypt
     shall go unpunished, that no injury shall be done "to his house, his
     wife or his children, nor shall his mother be put to death."]

Ameni had already left Thebes for the north when this sentence was pronounced, or he would
have reversed it by declaring the true origin of Paaker; for after he had given up his participation
in the Regent's conspiracy, he no longer had any motive for keeping old Hekt's secret.

Setchem's journey was lengthened by a storm which wrecked the ship in which she was descending
the Nile, and she did not reach Pelusium till after the king.  The canal which formed the mouth
of the Nile close to this fortress and joined the river to the Mediterranean, was so over-
crowded with the boats of the Regent and his followers, of the ambassadors, nobles, citizens,
and troops which had met from all parts of the country, that the lady's boat could find anchorage
only at a great distance from the city, and accompanied by her faithful steward she had succeeded
only a few hours before in speaking to the high-priest.

Setchem was terribly changed; her eyes, which only a few months since had kept an efficient
watch over the wealthy Theban household, were now dim and weary, and although her figure had
not grown thin it had lost its dignity and energy, and seemed inert and feeble.  Her lips,
so ready for a wise or sprightly saying, were closely shut, and moved only in silent prayer
or when some friend spoke to her of her unhappy son.  His deed she well knew was that of a
reprobate, and she sought no excuse or defence; her mother's heart forgave it without any.
Whenever she thought of him-- and she thought of him incessantly all through the day and through
her sleepless nights-her eyes overflowed with tears.

Her boat had reached Pelusium just as the flames were breaking out in the palace; the broad
flare of light and the cries from the various vessels in the harbor brought her on deck.  She
heard that the burning house was the pavilion erected by Ani for the king's residence; Rameses
she was told was in the utmost danger, and the fire had beyond a doubt been laid by traitors.

As day broke and further news reached her, the names of her son and of her sister came to her
ear; she asked no questions--she would not hear the truth--but she knew it all the same; as
often as the word "traitor" caught her ear in her cabin, to which she had retreated, she felt
as if some keen pain shot through her bewildered brain, and shuddered as if from a cold chill.

All through that day she could neither eat nor drink, but lay with closed eyes on her couch,
while her steward--who had soon learnt what a terrible share his former master had taken in
the incendiarism, and who now gave up his lady's cause for lost--sought every where for the
high-priest Ameni; but as he was among the persons nearest to the king it was impossible to
see him that day, and it was not till the next morning that he was able to speak with him.
Ameni inspired the anxious and sorrowful old retainer with, fresh courage, returned with him
in his own chariot to the harbor, and accompanied him to Setchem's boat to prepare her for
the happiness which awaited her after her terrible troubles.  But he came too late, the spirit
of the poor lady was quite clouded, and she listened to him without any interest while he strove
to restore her to courage and to recall her wandering mind. At this precise moment I can think
of a hundred different things that I ought to be doing.

For instance, I have not written to TOM, who is in the wilds of Canada, for months. His last
letter ended with a pathetic appeal for an answer.  Pentaur was wonderfully like her lost husband, and the priest, experienced
in humanity, thought that the sight of him would rouse the dormant powers of her mind.  When
she had arrived at his tent, he told her with kind precaution the whole history of the exchange
of Paaker for Pentaur, and she followed the story with attention but with indifference, as
if she were hearing of the adventures of others who did not concern her.  When Ameni enlarged
on the genius of the poet and on his perfect resemblance to his dead father she muttered:

"I know--I know. He admires our best qualities so greatly that he does not scourge us for our faults
as we deserve."

Towards the end of May, 1861, I saw Thackeray again in London. During our first interview, we
talked of little but the war, which had then but just begun.  The high-priest's servants told him that Setchem had persuaded the easily-moved old
prophet Gagabu to conduct her to the place where the body of Paaker lay.  Ameni was very much
vexed, for he feared that Setchem was now lost indeed, and he desired the poet to follow him
at once.

The mortal remains of the pioneer had been laid in a tent not far from the scene of the fire;
his body was covered with a cloth, but his pale face, which had not been injured in his fall,
remained uncovered; by his side knelt the unhappy mother.

She paid no heed to Ameni when he spoke to her, and he laid his hand on her shoulder and said
as he pointed to the body:

"This was the son of a gardener.  You brought him up faithfully as if he were your own; but
your noble husband's true heir, the son you bore him, is Pentaur, to whom the Gods have given
not only the form and features but the noble qualities of his father.  The dead man may be
forgiven--for the sake of your virtues; but your love is due to this nobler soul--the real
son of your husband, the poet of Egypt, the preserver of the king's life."

Setchem rose and went up to Pentaur, she smiled at him and stroked his face and breast.

"It is he," she said.  "May the Immortals bless him!"

Pentaur would have clasped her in his arms, but she pushed him away as if she feared to commit
some breach of faith, and turning hastily to the bier she said softly:

Poor Paaker--poor, poor Paaker!"

"Mother, mother, do you not know your son?"  cried Pentaur deeply moved.

She turned to him again: "It is his voice," she said.  "It is he."

She went up to Pentaur, clung to him, clasped her arm around his neck as he bent over her,
then kissing him fondly:

"The Gods will bless you!" she said once more.  She tore herself from him and threw herself
down by the body of Paaker, as if she had done him some injustice and robbed him of his rights.

Thus she remained, speechless and motionless, till they carried her back to her boat, there
she lay down, and refused to take any nourishment; from time to time she whispered "Poor Paaker!"
She no longer repelled Pentaur, for she did not again recognize him, and before he left her
she had followed the rough-natured son of her adoption to the other world.

CHAPTER XLVII.

The king had left the camp, and had settled in the neighboring city of Rameses' Tanis, with
the greater part of his army.  The Hebrews, who were settled in immense numbers in the province
of Goshen, and whom Ani had attached to his cause by remitting their task-work, were now driven
to labor at the palaces and fortifications which Rameses had begun to build.

At Tanis, too, the treaty of peace was signed and was presented to Rameses inscribed on a silver
tablet by Tarthisebu, the representative of the Cheta king, in the name of his lord and master.

Pentaur followed the king as soon as he had closed his mother's eyes, and accompanied her body
to Heliopolis, there to have it embalmed; from thence the mummy was to be sent to Thebes, and
solemnly placed in the grave of her ancestors.  This duty of children towards their parents,
and indeed all care for the dead, was regarded as so sacred by the Egyptians, that neither
Pentaur nor Bent-Anat would have thought of being united before it was accomplished.

On the 21st day of the month Tybi, of the 21st year of the reign of Rameses, the day on which
the peace was signed, the poet returned to Tanis, sad at heart, for the old gardener, whom
he had regarded and loved as his father, had died before his return home; the good old man
had not long survived the false intelligence of the death of the poet, whom he had not only
loved but reverenced as a superior being bestowed upon his house as a special grace from the Gods.

It was not till seven months after the fire at Pelusium that Pentaur's marriage with Bent-Anat
was solemnized in the palace of the Pharaohs at Thebes; but time and the sorrows he had suffered
had only united their hearts more closely.  She felt that though he was the stronger she was
the giver and the helper, and realized with delight that like the sun, which when it rises
invites a thousand flowers to open and unfold, the glow of her presence raised the poet's oppressed
soul to fresh life and beauty.  They had given each other up for lost through strife and suffering,
and now had found each other again; each knew how precious the other was.  To make each other
happy, and prove their affection, was now the aim of their lives, and as they each had proved
that they prized honor and right-doing above happiness their union was a true marriage, ennobling
and purifying their souls.  She could share his deepest thoughts and his most difficult undertakings,
and if their house were filled with children she would know how to give him the fullest enjoyment
of those small blessings which at the same time are the greatest joys of life.

Pentaur finding himself endowed by the king with superabundant wealth, gave up the inheritance
of his fathers to his brother Horus, who was raised to the rank of chief pioneer as a reward
for his interposition at the battle of Kadesh; Horus replaced the fallen cedar-trees which
had stood at the door of his house by masts of more moderate dimensions.

The hapless Huni, under whose name Pentaur had been transferred to the mines of Sinai, was
released from the quarries of Chennu, and restored to his children enriched by gifts from the poet.

The Pharaoh fully recognized the splendid talents of his daughter's husband; she to his latest
days remained his favorite child, even after he had consolidated the peace by marrying the
daughter of the Cheta king, and Pentaur became his most trusted adviser, and responsible for
the weightiest affairs in the state.

Rameses learned from the papers found in Ani's tent, and from other evidence which was only
too abundant, that the superior of the House of Seti, and with him the greater part of the
priesthood, had for a long time been making common cause with the traitor; in the first instance
he determined on the severest, nay bloodiest punishment, but he was persuaded by Pentaur and
by his son Chamus to assert and support the principles of his government by milder and yet
thorough measures. Rameses desired to be a defender of religion--of the religion which could
carry consolation into the life of the lowly and over-burdened, and give their existence a
higher and fuller meaning--the religion which to him, as king, appeared the indispensable means
of keeping the grand significance of human life ever present to his mind--sacred as the inheritance
of his fathers, and useful as the school where the people, who needed leading, might learn
to follow and obey.

But nevertheless no one, not even the priests, the guardians of souls, could be permitted to
resist the laws of which he was the bulwark, to which he himself was subject, and which enjoined
obedience to his authority; and before be left Tanis he had given Ameni and his followers to
understand that he alone was master in Egypt.

The God Seth, who had been honored by the Semite races since the time of the Hyksos, and whom
they called upon under the name of Baal, had from the earliest times never been allowed a temple
on the Nile, as being the God of the stranger; but Rameses--in spite of the bold remonstrances
of the priestly party who called themselves the 'true believers'--raised a magnificent temple
to this God in the city of Tanis to supply the religious needs of the immigrant foreigners.
In the same spirit of toleration he would not allow the worship of strange Gods to be interfered
with, though on the other hand he was jealous in honoring the Egyptian Gods with unexampled
liberality.  He caused temples to be erected in most of the great cities of the kingdom, he
added to the temple of Ptah at Memphis, and erected immense colossi in front of its pylons
in memory of his deliverance from the fire.

     [One of these is still in existence. I soon found that his ideas concerning
     the cause of the war were as incorrect as were those of most Englishmen
at that time.

He understood neither the real nature nor the extent of the conspiracy, supposing that Free
Trade was the chief object of the South, and that the right of Secession was tacitly admitted
by the Constitution. I thereupon endeavored to place the facts of the case before him in their
true light, saying, in conclusion,--"Even if you should not believe this statement, you must
admit, that, if we believe it, we are justified in suppressing the Rebellion by force."

He said,--"Come, all this is exceedingly interesting. It is quite new to me, and I am sure it
will be new to most of us.

Take your pen and make an article out of what you have told me, and I will put it into the next
number of the 'Cornhill Magazine.' It is just what we want."

I had made preparations to leave London for the Continent on the following day, but he was so
urgent that I should stay two days longer and write the article that I finally consented to
do so. I was the more desirous of complying, since Mr. Clay's ill-advised letter to the London "Times"
had recently been published, and was accepted by Englishmen as the substance of all that could
be said on the side of the Union. Thackeray appeared sincerely gratified by my compliance with
his wishes, and immediately sent for a cab, saying,--"Now we will go down to the publishers,
and have the matter settled at once.

I am bound to consult them, but I am sure they will see the advantage
of such an article."

We found the managing publisher in his office.
He looked upon the matter, however, in a very different light.  Rameses had been informed of the way in which he had turned
the death of the ram to account, and the use he had made of the heart, as he had supposed it,
of the sacred animal, and he translated him without depriving him of his dignity or revenues
to Mendes, the city of the holy rams in the Delta, where, as he observed not without satirical
meaning, he would be particularly intimate with these sacred beasts; in Mendes Ameni exerted
great influence, and in spite of many differences of opinion which threatened to sever them,
he and Pentaur remained fast friends to the day of his death.

In the first court of the House of Rameses there stands--now broken across the middle--the
wonder of the traveller, the grandest colossus in Egypt, made of the hardest granite, and exceeding
even the well-known statue of Memnon in the extent of its base.  It represents Rameses the
Great.  Little Scherau, whom Pentaur had educated to be a sculptor, executed it, as well as
many other statues of the great sovereign of Egypt.

A year after the burning of the pavilion at Pelusium Rameri sailed to the land of the Danaids,
was married to Uarda, and then remained in his wife's native country, where, after the death
of her grandfather, he ruled over many islands of the Mediterranean and became the founder
of a great and famous race.  Uarda's name was long held in tender remembrance by their subjects,
for having grown up in misery she understood the secret of alleviating sorrow and relieving
want, and of doing good and giving happiness without humiliating those she benefitted.

