UNCLE JOSH'S PUNKIN CENTRE STORIES

By Cal Stewart

Preface

To the Reader.

The one particular object in writing this book is to furnish you with an occasional laugh,
and the writer with an occasional dollar. If you get the laugh you have your equivalent, and
the writer has his.

In Uncle Josh Weathersby you have a purely imaginary character, yet one true to life. A character
chuck full of sunshine and rural simplicity. Take him as you find him, and in his experiences
you will observe there is a bright side to everything.

Sincerely Yours

Cal Stewart

Contents PREFACE

LIFE SKETCH OF AUTHOR

MY OLD YALLER ALMANAC

ARRIVAL IN NEW YORK

UNCLE JOSH IN SOCIETY

UNCLE JOSH IN A CHINESE LAUNDRY

UNCLE JOSH IN A MUSEUM

UNCLE JOSH IN WALL STREET

UNCLE JOSH AND THE FIRE DEPARTMENT

UNCLE JOSH IN AN AUCTION ROOM

UNCLE JOSH ON A FIFTH AVENUE 'BUS

UNCLE JOSH IN A DEPARTMENT STORE

UNCLE JOSH'S COMMENTS ON THE SIGNS SEEN IN NEW YORK

UNCLE JOSH ON A STREET CAR

MY FUST PAIR OF COPPER TOED BOOTS

UNCLE JOSH IN POLICE COURT

UNCLE JOSH AT CONEY ISLAND

UNCLE JOSH AT THE OPERA

UNCLE JOSH AT DELMONICO'S

IT IS FALL

SI PETTINGILL'S BROOMS

UNCLE JOSH PLAYS GOLF

JIM LAWSON'S HOGS

UNCLE JOSH AND THE LIGHTNING ROD AGENT

A MEETING OF THE ANNANIAS CLUB

JIM LAWSON'S HOSS TRADE

A MEETING OF THE SCHOOL DIRECTORS

THE WEEKLY PAPER AT PUNKIN CENTRE

UNCLE JOSH AT A CAMP MEETING

THE UNVEILING OF THE ORGAN

UNCLE JOSH PLAYS A GAME OF BASE BALL

THE PUNKIN CENTRE AND PAW PAW VALLEY RAILROAD

UNCLE JOSH ON A BICYCLE

A BAPTISIN' AT THE HICKORY CORNERS CHURCH

A REMINISCENCE OF MY RAILROAD DAYS

UNCLE JOSH AT A CIRCUS

UNCLE JOSH INVITES THE CITY FOLKS TO VISIT HIM

YOSEMITE JIM, OR A TALE OF THE GREAT WHITE DEATH

UNCLE JOSH WEATHERSBY'S TRIP TO BOSTON

WHO MARCHED IN SIXTY-ONE

Life Sketch of Author

THE author was born in Virginia, on a little patch of land, so poor we had to fertilize it
to make brick. Our family, while having cast their fortunes with the South, was not a family
ruined by the war; we did not have anything when the war commenced, and so we held our own.
I secured a common school education, and at the age of twelve I left home, or rather home left
me--things just petered out. I was slush cook on an Ohio River Packet; check clerk in a stave
and heading camp in the knobs of Tennessee, Virginia and Georgia; I helped lay the track of
the M. K. & T. R. R., and was chambermaid in a livery stable. Made my first appearance on the
stage at the National Theatre in Cincinnati, Ohio, and have since then chopped cord wood, worked
in a coal mine, made cross ties (and walked them), worked on a farm, taught a district school
(made love to the big girls), run a threshing machine, cut bands, fed the machine and ran the
engine. Have been a freight and passenger brakeman, fired and ran a locomotive; also a freight
train conductor and check clerk in a freight house; worked on the section; have been a shot
gun messenger for the Wells, Fargo Company. Have been with a circus, minstrels, farce comedy,
burlesque and dramatic productions; have been with good shows, bad shows, medicine shows, and
worse, and some shows where we had landlords singing in the chorus. Have played variety houses
and vaudeville houses; have slept in a box car one night, and a swell hotel the next; have
been a traveling salesman (could spin as many yarns as any of them). For the past four years
have made the Uncle Josh stories for the talking machine. The Lord only knows what next!

My Old Yaller Almanac

     Hangin' on the
     Kitchen Wall

     I'M sort of fond of readin' one
     thing and another,

     So I've read promiscus like
     whatever cum my way,

     And many a friendly argument's cum up 'tween
     me and mother,

     'Bout things that I'd be readin' settin' round
     a rainy day.

      Sometimes it jist seemed to me thar wa'nt
     no end of books,

      Some made fer useful readin' and some jist
     made fer looks;

      But of all the different books I've read,
     thar's none comes up at all

      To My Old Yaller Almanac, Hangin' on
     the Kitchen Wall.

      I've always liked amusement, of the good
     and wholesome kind,

      It's better than a doctor, and it elevates the
     mind;

      So, often of an evening, when the farm
     chores all were done,

      I'd join the games the boys would play, gosh
     how I liked the fun;

      And once thar wuz a minstrel troop, they
     showed at our Town Hall,

      A jolly lot of fellers, 'bout twenty of 'em all.

      Wall I went down to see 'em, but their
     jokes, I knowed 'em all,

      Read 'em in My Old Yaller Almanac,
     Hangin' on the Kitchen Wall.

      Thar wuz Ezra Hoskins, Deacon Brown and
     a lot of us old codgers,

      Used to meet down at the grocery store,
     what wuz kept by Jason Rogers.

      There we'd set and argufy most every market
     day,

      Chawin' tobacker and whittlin' sticks to pass
     the time away;

      And many a knotty problem has put us on
     our mettle,

      Which we felt it wuz our duty to duly solve
     and settle;

      Then after they had said their say, who
     thought they knowed it all,

      I'd floor 'em with some facts I'd got

      From My Old Yaller Almanac, Hangin' on
     the Kitchen Wall.

      It beats a regular cyclopedium, that old
     fashioned yeller book,

      And many a pleasant hour in readin' it I've
     took;

      Somehow I've never tired of lookin' through
     its pages,

      Seein' of the different things that's happened
     in all ages.

      One time I wuz elected a Justice of the
     Peace,

      To make out legal documents, a mortgage
     or a lease,

      Them tricks that lawyers have, you bet I
     knowed them all,

      Learned them in My Old Yaller Almanac,
     Hangin' on the Kitchen Wall.

     So now I've bin to New York, and all your
     sights I've seen,

      I s'pose that to you city folks I must look
     most awful green,

      Gee whiz, what lots of fun I've had as I
     walked round the town,

      Havin' Bunco Steerers ask me if I wasn't
     Mr. Hiram Brown.

      I've rode on all your trolloly cars, and hung
     onto the straps,

      When we flew around the corners, sat on
     other peoples' laps,

      Hav'nt had no trouble, not a bit at all,

      Read about your city in My Old Yaller
     Almanac, Hangin' on the Kitchen Wall.

Uncle Josh Weathersby's Arrival in New York

WALL, fer a long time I had my mind made up that I'd cum down to New York, and so a short time
ago, as I had my crops all gathered in and produce sold I calculated as how it would be a good
time to come down here. Folks at home said I'd be buncoed or have my pockets picked fore I'd
bin here mor'n half an hour; wall, I fooled 'em a little bit, I wuz here three days afore they
buncoed me. I spose as how there are a good many of them thar bunco fellers around New York,
but I tell you them thar street keer conductors take mighty good care on you. I wuz ridin'
along in one of them keers, had my pockit book right in my hand, I alowed no feller would pick
my pockits and git it long as I had it in my hand, and it shet up tight as a barrel when the
cider's workin'. Wall that conductor feller he jest kept his eye on me, and every little bit
he'd put his head in the door and say "hold fast." But I'm transgressin' from what I started
to tell ye. I wuz ridin' along in one of them sleepin' keers comin' here, and along in the
night some time I felt a feller rummagin' around under my bed, and I looked out jest in time
to see him goin' away with my boots, wall I knowed the way that train wuz a runnin' he couldn't
git off with them without breakin' his durned neck, but in about half an hour he brot them
back, guess they didn't fit him. Wall I wuz sort of glad he took em cause he hed em all shined
up slicker 'n a new tin whistle. Wall when I got up in the mornin' my trubbles commenced. I
wuz so crouded up like, durned if I could git my clothes on, and when I did git em on durned
if my pants wa'nt on hind side afore, and my socks got all tangled up in that little fish net
along side of the bed and I couldn't git em out, and I lost a bran new collar button that I
traded Si Pettingill a huskin' peg fer, and I got my right boot on my left foot and the left
one on the right foot, and I wuz so durned badly mixed up I didn't know which way the train
wuz a runnin', and I bumped my head on the roof of the bed over me, and then sot down right
suddin like to think it over when some feller cum along and stepped right squar on my bunion
and I let out a war whoop you could a heerd over in the next county. Wall, along cum that durned
porter and told me I wuz a wakin' up everybody in the keer. Then I started in to hunt fer my
collar button, cause I sot a right smart store by that button, thar warns another one like
it in Punkin Centre, and I thought it would be kind of doubtful if they'd have any like it
in New York, wall I see one stuck right in the wall so I tried to git it out with my jack knife,
when along came that durned black jumpin' jack dressed in soldier clothes and ast me what I
wanted, and I told him I didn't want anything perticler, then he told me to quit ringin' the
bell, guess he wuz a little crazy, I didn't see no bell. Wall, finally I got my clothes on
and went into a room whar they had a row of little troughs to wash in, and fast as I could
pump water in the durned thing it run out of a little hole in the bottom of the trough so I
jest had to grab a handful and then pump some more. Wall after that things went along purty
well fer a right smart while, then I et a snack out of my carpet bag and felt purty good. Wall
that train got to runnin' slower and slower 'till it stopped at every house and when it cum
to a double house it stopped twice. I hed my ticket in my hat and I put my head out of the
window to look at suthin' when the wind blew my hat off and I lost the durned old ticket, wall
the conductor made me buy another one. I hed to buy two tickets to ride once, but I fooled
him, he don't know a durned thing about it and when he finds it out he's goin to be the maddest
conductor on that railroad, I got a round trip ticket and I ain't a goin' back on his durned
old road. When I got off the ferry boat down here I commenced to think I wuz about the best
lookin' old feller what ever cum to New York, thar wuz a lot of fellers down thar with buggies
and kerridges and one thing and another, and jest the minnit they seen me they all commenced
to holler--handsome--handsome. I didn't know I wuz so durned good lookin'. One feller tried
to git my carpet bag and another tried to git my umbreller, and I jest told 'em to stand back
or durned if I wouldn't take a wrestle out of one or two of them, then I asked one of 'em if
he could haul me up to the Sturtevessant hotel, and by gosh I never heered a feller stutter
like that feller did in all my life, he said ye-ye-ye-yes sir, and I said wall how much air
you a goin' to charge me, and he said f-f-f-fif-fif-fifty c-c-cents, and I sed wall I guess
I'll ride with you, but don't stop to talk about it any more cause I'd kinder like to git thar.
Wall we started out and when we stopped we wuz away up at the other end of the town whar thar
warn't many houses, and I sed to him, this here ain't the Sturtevessant hotel, and he sed n-n-n-no
n-s-s-n-no sir, I sed why didn't you let me out at the hotel like I told ye, and he sed, b-b-b-be
c-c-c b-b-be cause I c-c-c-c-couldn't s-s-s-say w-w-w-whoa q-q-q-q-quick enough. Wall I hed
a great time with that feller, but I got here at last.

Uncle Josh in Society

WALL, I did'nt suppose when I cum down here to New York that I wuz a goin to flop right into
the middle of high toned society, but I guess that's jist about what I done. You see I had
an old friend a livin' down here named Henry Higgins, and I wanted to see Henry mighty bad.
Henry and me, we wuz boys together down home at Punkin Centre, and I hadn't seen him in a long
time. Wall, I got a feller to look up his name in the city almanac, and he showed me whar Henry
lived, away up on a street called avenue five. Wall when I seen Henry's house it jist about
took my breath away, I wuz that clar sot back. Henry's house is a good deal bigger'n the court
house at Punkin Centre. Wall at first I didn't know whether to go in or not, but finally I
mustered up my courage, and I went up and rang some new fangled door bell, when a feller with
knee britches on cum out and wanted to know who it wuz I wanted to see. Gosh I couldn't say
anything fer about a minnit, that feller jist looked to me like a picter I'd seen in a story
book. Wall finally I told him I wanted to see Henry Higgins, if it wuz the same Henry I used
to know down home at Punkin Centre. Wall I guess Henry he must a heered me talkin', cause he
jist cum out and grabbed me by both hands and sed, "why Josh Weathersby, how do you do, cum
right in." Wall he took me into the house and introduced me to more wimmin folks than I ever
seen before in all my life at one time. I guess they were havin' some kind of society doins
at Henry's house, one old lady sed to me, "my dear Mr. Weathersby, I am so pleased to meet
you, I've heered Mr. Higgins speak about you so often." Wall by chowder, I got to blushin'
so it cum pretty near settin' my hair on fire, but I sed, wall now I'm right glad to know you,
you kind-er put me in mind of old Nancy Smith down hum, and Nancy, she's bin tryin' to git
married past forty seasons that I kin remember on. Wall Henry took me off into a room by myself,
and when I got on my store clothes and my new calf skin boots, I tell you I looked about as
scrimptious as any of them. Wall they had a dance, I think they called it a cowtillion, and
that wuz whar I wuz right to hum, I jist hopped out on the floor, balanced to partners, swung
on the corners, and cut up more capers than any young feller thar, it jist looked as if all
the ladies wanted to dance with me. One lady wanted to know if I danced the german, but I told
her I only danced in English.

Wall after that we had something to eat in the dinin' room, and I hadn't any more'n got sot
down and got to eatin right good, when that durn fool with the knee britches on insulted me,
he handed me a little wash bowl with a towel round it, and I told him he needn't cast any insinuations
at me, cause I washed my hands afore I cum in. If it hadn't a bin in Henry's house I'd took
a wrestle out of him. Wall they had a lot of furrin dishes, sumthin what they called beef all
over mud, and another what they called a-charlotte russia-a little shavin' mug made out of
cake and full of sweetened lather, wall that was mighty good eatin', though it took a lot of
them, they wasn't very fillin'. Then they handed me somethin' what they called ice cream, looked
to me like a hunk of casteel soap, wall I stuck my fork in it and tried to bite it, and it
slipped off and got inside my vest, and in less than a minnit I wuz froze from my chin to my
toes. I guess I cut a caper at Henry's house.

Uncle Josh in a Chinese Laundry

I S'POSE I got tangled up the other day with the dogondest lookin' critter I calculate I ever
seen in all my born days, and I've bin around purty considerable. I'd seen all sorts of cooriosoties
and monstrosities in cirkuses and meenagerys, but that wuz the fust time I'd ever seen a critter
with his head and tail on the same end. You see I sed to a feller, now whar abouts in New York
do you folks git your washin' done; when I left hum to come down here I lowed I had enuff with
me to do me, but I've stayed here a little longer than I calculated to, and if I don't git
some washin' done purty soon, I'll have to go and jump in the river.

Wall he wuz a bligin sort of a feller, and he told me thar wuz a place round the corner whar
a feller done all the washin', so I went round, and there was a sine on the winder what sed
Hop Quick, or Hop Soon, or jump up and hop, or some other kind of a durned hop; and then thar
wuz a lot of figers on the winder that I couldn't make head nor tail on; it jist looked to
me like a chicken with mud on its feet had walked over that winder.

Wall I went in to see bout gittin' my washin' done, and gosh all spruce gum, thar was one of
them pig tailed heathen Chineeze, he jist looked fer all the world like a picter on Aunt Nancy
Smith's tea cups. I wuz sort of sot back fer a minnit, coz 'I sed to myself--I don't spose
this durned critter can talk English; but seein' as how I'm in here, I might as well find out.
So I told him I'd like to git him to do some washin' fer me, and he commenced a talkin' some
outlandish lingo, sounded to me like cider runnin' out of a jug, somethin' like--ung tong oowong
fang kai moi oo ung we, velly good washee. Wall I understood the last of it and jist took his
word fer the rest, so I giv him my clothes and he giv me a little yeller ticket that he painted
with a brush what he had, and I'll jist bet a yoke of steers agin the holler in a log, that
no livin' mortal man could read that ticket; it looked like a fly had fell into the ink bottle
and then crawled over the paper. Wall I showed it to a gentleman what was a standin' thar when
I cum out, and I sed to him--mister, what in thunder is this here thing, and he sed "Wall sir
that's a sort of a lotery ticket; every time you leave your clothes thar to have them washed
you git one of them tickets, and then you have a chance to draw a prize of some kind." So I
sed--wall now I want to know, how much is the blamed thing wuth, and he sed "I spose bout ten
cents," and I told him if he wanted my chants for ten cents he could hav it, I didn't want
to get tangled up in any lotery gamblin' bizness with that saucer faced scamp. So he giv me
ten cents and he took the ticket, and in a couple of days I went round to git my washin', and
that pig tailed heathen he wouldn't let me hev em, coz I'd lost that lotery ticket. So I sed--now
look here Mr. Hop Soon, if you don't hop round and git me my collars and ciffs and other clothes
what I left here, I'll be durned if I don't flop you in about a minnit, I will by chowder.
Wall that critter he commenced hoppin around and a talkin faster 'n a buzz saw could turn,
and all I could make out wuz--mee song lay tang moo me oo lay ung yong wo say mee tickee. Wall
I seen jist as plain as could be that he wuz a tryin' to swindle me outen my clothes, so I
made a grab fer him, and in less 'n a minnit we wuz a rollin' round on the floor; fust I wuz
on top, and then Mr. Hop Soon wuz on top, and you couldn't hav told which one of us the pig
tail belonged to. We upset the stove and kicked out the winder, and I sot Mr. Hop Soon in the
wash tub, and when I got out of thar I had somebody's washin' in one hand and about five yards
of that pig tail in tother, and Mr. Hop Soon, he wuz standin' thar yellin'--ung wa moo ye song
ki le yung noy song oowe pelecee, pelecee, pelecee. I had quite a time with that heathen critter.

Uncle Josh in a Museum

WHEN I wuz in New York one day I wuz a walkin' along down the street when I cum to a theater
or play doins' of some kind or other, so I got to lookin' at the picters, and I noticed whar
it sed it only cost ten cents to go in, and I alowed I might as well go in and see it. Wall
I don't spose I'd bin in thar over five minutes afore I made myself the laffin' stock of every
one in thar. I noticed a feller a sottin' thar gittin' his boots blacked, and thar was a durned
little pick pockit a pickin' his pockits. Wall I didn't want to see him git robbed, so I went
right up to him and I sed--look out mister, you air gittin' your pockits picked, wall sir,
that durned cuss never sed a word and every body commenced to laff, and I looked round to see
what they wuz a laffin' at, and it wan't no man at all, nothin' only a durned old wax figger.
I never felt so durned foolish since the day I popped the question to Samantha. Wall then I
looked round a spell longer, and thar wuz a feller what they called the human pin cushion,
and he wuz stuck chock full of needles and pins and looked like a hedge hog; he'd be a mighty
handy feller at a quiltin'. Wall, then a feller cum along and sed, "everybody over to this
end of the hall." Wall, I went along with the rest of them, and durn my buttins if thar wa'nt
a feller what had more picters painted on him than thar is in a story book. Wall, I'd jist
got to lookin' at him when that feller what had charge sed, "right this way everybody," and
we all went into whar they wuz havin' the theater doins', and I got sot down and a feller cum
out and sung a song I hadn't heered since I wuz a youngster. Neer as I kin remember it wuz
this way--

     Kind friends I hadn't had but one sleigh ride this year,
         And I cum within one of not bein' here,
     The facts I'll relate near as I kin remember,
         It happened some time 'bout last December.
              Li too ra loo ri too ra loo
                   ri too ra loo la ri do.

     The load was composed of both girls and boys,
         All tryin' to outdo the other in noise.
     And the way that we guarded agin the cold weather
         Wuz settin' all up spoon fashion together.

Wall, they had a parrit in that place and the way he sputtered and jabbered and talked! He
wuz a whole show all to himself. Wall, I bought one of them birds from a feller one time--he
said it wuz a good talker. Wall, I took it hum and hed it about three months, and it never
sed a durned word. I put in most of my spare time tryin' to git it to say "Uncle Josh," but
the durned critter wouldn't do it, so I got mad at him one day and throwed him out in the barn
yard amongst the chickens, and left him thar. Wall, when I went out the next mornin', I tell
you thar wuz a sight. Half of them chickens wuz dead, and the rest of 'em wuz skeered to death,
and that durned parrit had a rooster by the neck up agin the barn, and jist a givin' him an
awful whippin', and every time he'd hit him he'd say, "Now you say Uncle Josh, gol durn you,
you say Uncle Josh."

Uncle Josh in Wall Street

I USED to read in our town paper down home at Punkin Centre a whole lot about Wall street and
them bulls and bears, and one thing and another, so I jist sed to myself--now Joshua, when
you git down to New York City, that's jist what you want to see. Wall, when I got to New York,
I got a feller to show me whar it wuz, and I'll be durned if I know why they call it Wall street;
it didn't hav any wall round it. I walked up and down it bout an hour and a half, and I couldn't
find any stock exchange or see any place fer watterin' any stock. I couldn't see a pig nor
a cow, nor a sheep nor a calf, or anything else that looked like stock to me. So finally I
sed to a gentleman--Mister, whar do they keep the menagery down here. He sed "what menagery?"
I sed the place whar they've got all them bulls and bears a fitin'. Wall he looked at me as
though he thought I wuz crazy, and I guess he did, but he sed "you cum along with me, guess
I can show you what you want to see." Wall I went along with him, and he took me up to some
public institushun, near as I could make out it wuz a loonytick asylem. Wall he took me into
a room about two akers and a half squar, and thar wuz about two thousand of the crazyest men
in thar I ever seen in all my life. The minnit I sot eyes on them I knowed they wuz all crazy,
and I'd hav to umer them if I got out of thar alive. One feller wuz a standin' on the top of
a table with a lot of papers in his hand, and a yellin' like a Comanche injin, and all the
rest of them wuz tryin' to git at him. Finally I sed to one of 'em--Mister, what are you a
tryin' to do with that feller up thar on the table? And he sed, "Wall he's got five thousand
bushels of wheat and we are tryin' to git it away from him." Wall, jist the minnit he sed that
I knowed fer certain they wuz all crazy, cos nobody but a crazy man would ever think he had
five thousand bushels of wheat in his coat and pants pockits. Wall when they wan't a looking
I got out of thar, and I felt mighty thankful to git out. There wuz a feller standin' on the
front steps; he had a sort of a unyform on; I guess he wuz Superintendent of the institushun;
he talked purty sassy to me. I sed, Mister, what time does the fust car go up town. He sed
"the fust one went about twenty-five years ago." I sed to him--is that my car over thar? He
sed "no sir, that car belongs to the street car company." I sez, wall guess I'll take it anyhow.
He says "you'd better not, thar's bin a good many cars missed around here lately." I sed, wall
now, I want to know, is thar anything round here any fresher than you be? He sed, "yes, sir,
that bench you're a sotten on is a little fresher; they painted it about ten minnits ago."
Wall, I got up and looked, and durned if he wasn't right.

Uncle Josh and the Fire Department

ONE day in New York, I thot I'd rite a letter home. Wall after I'd got it all writ, I sed to
the landlord of the tavern--now, whar abouts in New York do you keep the post offis? And he
sed, "what do you want with the post offis?" So I told him I'd jist writ a letter home to mother
and Samantha Ann, and I'd like to go to the post offis and mail it. And he told me "you don't
have to go to the post offis, do you see that little box on the post thar on the corner?" I
alowed as how I did. Wall he says, "You jist go out thar and put your letter in that box, and
it will go right to the post offis." I sed--wall now, gee whiz, ain't that handy. Wall I went
out thar, and I had a good deal of trouble in gittin' the box open, and when I did git it open,
thar wan't any place to put my letter, thar wuz a lot of notes and hooks and hinges, and a
lot of readin,' it sed--"pull on the hook twice and turn the knob," or somethin, like that,
I couldn't jist rightly make it out. Wall I yanked on that hook 'till I tho't I'd pull it out
by the roots, but I couldn't git the durned thing open, then I turned on the knob two or three
times, and that didn't do any good, so I pulled on the hook and turned on the knob at the same
time, and jist then I think all the fire bells in New York commenced to ringin' all to onct.
Wall I looked round to see whar the fire wuz, and a lot of fire ingines and hook and ladder
wagons cum a gallopin' up to whar I stood, and they had a big sody water bottle on wheels,
and it busted and squirted sody water all over me. Wall one of them fire fellers, lookin' jist
like I'd seen them in picters in Ezra Hoskin's insurance papers, he cum up to me madder'n a
hornet, and he sed "what are you tryin' to do with that box?" So I told him I'd jist writ a
letter home, and I wuz a tryin' to mail it. He sed "why you durned old green horn, you've called
out the hull fire department of New York City." Wall I guess you could have knocked me down
with a feather. I sed--wall you'r a purty healthy lookin' lot of fellers, it won't hurt ye
any to go back, will it? Wall he sed, "thars your letter box over on thother corner, now you
let this box alone." Wall they all drove away, and I went over to the other box, but I didn't
know whether to touch it or not, I didn't know but maybe I'd call out the state legislater
if I opened it. Wall while I wuz a standin' thar a feller cum along and looked all round, and
when he thot thar wan't any body watchin' him, he opened that box and commenced takin' the
letters out. Wall I'd heered a whole lot 'bout them post offis robbers, when I wuz post master
down home at Punkin Center, so jist arrested him right thar, I took him by the nap of the neck
and flopped him right down on the side walk, and sot on him, I hollered--MURDER! PERLEES! and
every other thing I could think of, and a lot of constables and town marshalls cum a runnin'
up, and one of them sed "what are you holdin' this man fer?" and I told him I'd caught him
right in the act of robbin' the United States Post Offis, and by gosh I arrested him. Wall
they all commenced a laffin', and I found out I'd arrested one of the post masters of New York
City.

I lost mother's letter and she never did git it.

Uncle Josh in an Auction Room

I'D seen a good many funny things in New York at one time and another, so the last day I wuz
thar, I wuz a packin' up my traps, a gittin' ready to go home, when I jist conclooded I'd go
out and buy somethin' to remember New York by.

Wall I wuz a walkin' along down the street when I cum to a place whar they wuz auckshuneerin'
off a lot of things. I stopped to see what they had to sell. Wall that place wuz jist chuck
full of old-fashioned cooriositys. I saw an old book thar, they sed it wuz five hundred years
old, and it belonged at one time to Loois the Seventeenth or Eighteenth, or some of them old
rascals; durned if I believe anybody could read it.

Wall I commenced a biddin' on different things, but it jist looked as though everybody had
more money than I did, and they sort of out-bid me; but finally they put up an old-fashioned
shugar bowl fer sale, and I wanted to git that mighty bad, cos I thought as how mother would
like it fust rate. Wall I commenced a biddin' on it, and it wuz knocked down to me fer three
dollars and fifty cents I put my hand in my pockit to git my pockit book to pay fer it, and
by gosh it was gone. So I went up to the feller what wuz a sellin' the things, and I sed--now
look here mister, will you jist wait a minnit with your "goin' at thirty make it thirty-five,
once, twice, three times a goin'", and he sed "wall now what's the matter with you?" And I
sed, there's matter enuff, by gosh; when I cum in here I had a pockit book in my pockit, had
fifty dollars in it, and I lost it somewhars round here; I wish you'd say to the feller what
found it that I'll give five dollars fer it; another feller sed "make it ten," another sed
"give you twenty," and another sed "go you twenty-five."

Durned if I know which one of 'em got it; when I left they wuz still a biddin' on it.

     Advice--Advice is somethin' the other feller can't use, so
     he gives it to you.--Punkin Centre Philosophy.

Uncle Josh on a Fifth Ave. 'Bus

I WUZ always sort of fond of ridin', so I guess while I wuz down in New York I rode on about
everything they've got to ride on thar. I wuz on hoss cars and hot air cars, and them sky light
elevated roads. Wall, I had jist about cum to the conclushun that every street in New York
had a different kind of a street car on it, but I found one that didn't have care of any kind,
I think they call it Avenoo Five. Wall, I wuz a standin' thar one day a watchin' the people
and things go by, when all to onct along cum the durndest lookin' contraption I calculate I
ever seen in my life. It wuz a sort of a wagon, kind of a cross between a band wagon and a
hay rack, and it had a pair of stairs what commenced at the hind end and rambled around all
over the wagon. I sed to a gentleman standin' thar: "Mr. in the name of all that's good and
bad, what do you call that thing?" He sed: "Wall, sir, that's a Fifth Avenoo 'bus." I sed:
"Wall, now, I want to know, kin I ride on it?" And he sed: "You kin if you've got a nickel."
Wall, I got in and sot down, and I jist about busted my buttins a laffin' at things what happened
in that 'bus. Thar wuz a young lady cum in and sot down, and she had a little valise in her
hand, 'bout a foot squar. Wall, she opened the valise and took out a purse and shet the valise,
then she opened the purse and took out a dime, and shet the purse, opened the valise and put
in the purse, and shet the valise, then she handed the dime to a feller sottin' out on the
front of the 'bus, and he give her a nickel back. Wall, I had to snicker right out, though
I done my best not to, but I jist couldn't help it. I didn't have any small change so I handed
the feller a five-dollar bill. Wall, that feller jist sot and looked at it fer a spell, then
he sed "whoa!" stopped the hosses, cum round to the hind end of the 'bus and he sed: "Who give
me that five-dollar bill?" I sed: "I did, and it was a good one, too." He sed: "Wall, you cum
out here, I want to see you." Wall, I didn't know what he wanted, but I jist made up my mind
if he indulged in any foolishness with me I'd flop him in about a minnit. Wall, I got out thar,
and he sed: "Now look here, honest injun, did you give me that five-dollar bill?" I sed: "Yes,
sir, that's jist what I done," and he sed, "Wall, now, which one of the hosses do you want?"
Gosh, I don't believe I'd gin him five dollars fer the whole durned outfit.

     Ambition--Somethin' that has made one man a senator, and
     another man a convict.--Punkin Centre Philosophy

Uncle Josh in a Department Store

ONE day while I wuz in New York I sed to a feller, now whar kin I find one of them stores whar
they hav purty near everything to sell what thar is on earth, and he sed "I guess you mean
a department store, don't you?" I sed, wall I don't know bout that; they may sell departments
at one of them stores, but what I want to git is some muzlin and some caliker. Wall he showed
me which way to go, and I started out, and wuz walkin' along down the street lookin' at things,
when some feller throwed a bananer peelin' on the sidewalk. Wall now I don't think much of
a man what throws a bananer peelin' on the sidewalk, and I don't think much of a bananer what
throws a man on the sidewalk, neether. Wall, by chowder, my foot hit that bananer peelin' and
I went up in the air, and cum down ker-plunk, and fer about a minnit I seen all the stars what
stronomy tells about, and some that haint been discovered yit. Wall jist as I wuz pickin' myself
up a little boy cum runnin' cross the street and he sed "Oh mister, won't you please do that
agin, my mother didn't see you do it." Wall I wish I could a got my hands on that little rascal
fer about a minnit, and his mother would a seen me do it.

