"No, it would not," said Bell.

"Don't be ungenerous about it, my dear," said the squire turning to Bell; "Lady Julia means
to be kind. But, my darling," and the squire turned again towards Lily, addressing her, as
was his wont in these days, with an affection that was almost vexatious to her; "but, my darling,
why should you not go? A change of scene like that will do you all the good in the world, just
when you are getting well. Mary, tell the girls they ought to go."

Mrs Dale stood silent, again reading the note, and Lily came down from the ladder. When she
reached the floor she went directly up to her uncle, and taking his hand turned him round with
herself towards one of the windows, so that they stood with their backs to the room. "Uncle,"
she said, "do not be angry with me. I can't go;" and then she put up her face to kiss him.

He stooped and kissed her and still held her hand. He looked into her face and read it all.
He knew well, now, why she could not go; or, rather, why she herself thought that she could
not go. "Cannot you, my darling?" he said.

"No, uncle. It is very kind,--very kind; but I cannot go. I am not fit to go anywhere."

"But you should get over that feeling. You should make a struggle."

"I am struggling, and I shall succeed; but I cannot do it all at once. At any rate I could
not go there. You must give my love to Lady Julia, and not let her think me cross. Perhaps
Bell will go."

What would be the good of Bell's going,--or the good of his putting himself out of the way,
by a visit which would of itself be so tiresome to him, if the one object of the visit could
not be carried out? The earl and his sister had planned the invitation with the express intention
of bringing Lily and Eames together. It seemed that Lily was firm in her determination to resist
this intention; and, if so, it would be better that the whole thing should fall to the ground.
He was very vexed, and yet he was not angry with her. Everybody lately had opposed him in everything.
All his intended family arrangements had gone wrong. But yet he was seldom angry respecting
them. He was so accustomed to be thwarted that he hardly expected success. In this matter of
providing Lily with a second lover, he had not come forward of his own accord. He had been
appealed to by his neighbour the earl, and had certainly answered the appeal with much generosity.
He had been induced to make the attempt with eagerness, and a true desire for its accomplishment;
but in this, as in all his own schemes, he was met at once by opposition and failure.

"I will leave you to talk it over among yourselves," he said. "But, Mary, you had better see
me before you send your answer. If you will come up by-and-by, Ralph shall take the two notes
over together in the afternoon." So saying, he left the Small House, and went back to his own
solitary home.

"Lily, dear," said Mrs Dale, as soon as the front door had been closed, "this is meant for
kindness to you,--for most affectionate kindness."

"I know it, mamma; and you must go to Lady Julia, and must tell her that I know it. You must
give her my love. And, indeed, I do love her now. But--"

"You won't go, Lily?" said Mrs Dale, beseechingly.

"No, mamma; certainly I will not go." Then she escaped out of the room by herself, and for
the next hour neither of them dared to go to her.

CHAPTER L

Mrs Dale Is Thankful for a Good Thing

On that day they dined early at the Small House, as they had been in the habit of doing since
the packing had commenced. And after dinner Mrs Dale went through the gardens, up to the other
house, with a written note in her hand. In that note she had told Lady Julia, with many protestations
of gratitude, that Lily was unable to go out so soon after her illness, and that she herself
was obliged to stay with Lily. She explained also, that the business of moving was in hand,
and that, therefore, she could not herself accept the invitation. But her other daughter, she
said, would be very happy to accompany her uncle to Guestwick Manor. Then, without closing
her letter, she took it up to the squire in order that it might be decided whether it would
or would not suit his views. It might well be that he would not care to go to Lord De Guest's
with Bell alone.

"Leave it with me," he said; "that is, if you do not object."

"Oh dear, no!"

"I'll tell you the plain truth at once, Mary. I shall go over myself with it, and see the earl.
Then I will decline it or not, according to what passes between me and him. I wish Lily would
have gone."

"Ah! she could not."

"I wish she could. I wish she could. I wish she could." As he repeated the words over and over
again, there was an eagerness in his voice that filled Mrs Dale's heart with tenderness towards
him.

"The truth is," said Mrs Dale, "she could not go there to meet John Eames."

"Oh, I know," said the squire: "I understand it. But that is just what we want her to do. Why
should she not spend a week in the same house with an honest young man whom we all like."

"There are reasons why she would not wish it."

"Ah, exactly; the very reasons which should make us induce her to go there if we can. Perhaps
I had better tell you all. Lord De Guest has taken him by the hand, and wishes him to marry.
He has promised to settle on him an income which will make him comfortable for life."

"That is very generous; and I am delighted to hear it,--for John's sake."

"And they have promoted him at his office."

"Ah! then he will do well."

"He will do very well. He is private secretary now to their head man. And, Mary, so that she,
Lily, should not be empty-handed if their marriage can be arranged, I have undertaken to settle
a hundred a year on her,--on her and her children, if she will accept him. Now you know it
all. I did not mean to tell you; but it is as well that you should have the means of judging.
That other man was a villain. This man is honest. Would it not be well that she should learn
to like him? She always did like him, I thought, before that other fellow came down here among us."

"She has always liked him--as a friend."

"She will never get a better lover."

Mrs Dale sat silent, thinking over it all. Every word that the squire said was true. It would
be a healing of wounds most desirable and salutary; an arrangement advantageous to them all;
a destiny for Lily most devoutly to be desired,--if only it were possible. Mrs Dale firmly
believed that if her daughter could be made to accept John Eames as her second lover in a year
or two all would be well. Crosbie would then be forgotten or thought of without regret, and
Lily would become the mistress of a happy home. But there are positions which cannot be reached,
though there be no physical or material objection in the way. It is the view which the mind
takes of a thing which creates the sorrow that arises from it. If the heart were always malleable
and the feelings could be controlled, who would permit himself to be tormented by any of the
reverses which affection meets? Death would create no sorrow, ingratitude would lose its sting;
and the betrayal of love would do no injury beyond that which it might entail upon worldly
circumstances. But the heart is not malleable; nor will the feelings admit of such control.

"It is not possible for her," said Mrs Dale. "I fear it is not possible. It is too soon."

"Six months," pleaded the squire.

"It will take years,--not months," said Mrs Dale.

"And she will lose all her youth."

"Yes; he has done all that by his treachery. But it is done, and we cannot now go back. She
loves him yet as dearly as she ever loved him."

Then the squire muttered certain words below his breath,-- ejaculations against Crosbie, which
were hardly voluntary; but even as involuntary ejaculations were very improper. Mrs Dale heard
them, and was not offended either by their impropriety or their warmth. "But you can understand,"
she said, "that she cannot bring herself to go there." The squire struck the table with his
fist, and repeated his ejaculations. If he could only have known how very disagreeable Lady
Alexandrina was making herself, his spirit might, perhaps, have been less vehemently disturbed.
If, also, he could have perceived and understood the light in which an alliance with the de
Courcy family was now regarded by Crosbie, I think that he would have received some consolation
from that consideration. Those who offend us are generally punished for the offence they give;
but we so frequently miss the satisfaction of knowing that we are avenged! It is arranged,
apparently, that the injurer shall be punished, but that the person injured shall not gratify
his desire for vengeance.

"And will you go to Guestwick yourself?" asked Mrs Dale.

"I will take the note," said the squire, "and will let you know to-morrow. The earl has behaved
so kindly that every possible consideration is due to him. I had better tell him the whole
truth, and go or stay, as he may wish. I don't see the good of going. What am I to do at Guestwick
Manor? I did think that if we had all been there it might have cured some difficulties."

Mrs Dale got up to leave him, but she could not go without saying some word of gratitude for
all that he had attempted to do for them. She well knew what he meant by the curing of difficulties.
He had intended to signify that had they lived together for a week at Guestwick the idea of
flitting from Allington might possibly have been abandoned. It seemed now to Mrs Dale as though
her brother-in-law were heaping coals of fire on her head in return for that intention. She
felt half-ashamed of what she was doing, almost acknowledging to herself that she should have
borne with his sternness in return for the benefits he had done to her daughters. Had she not
feared their reproaches she would, even now, have given way.

"I do not know what I ought to say to you for your kindness."

"Say nothing,--either for my kindness or unkindness; but stay where you are, and let us live
like Christians together, striving to think good and not evil." These were kind, loving words,
showing in themselves a spirit of love and forbearance; but they were spoken in a harsh, unsympathising
voice, and the speaker, as he uttered them, looked gloomily at the fire. In truth the squire,
as he spoke, was half-ashamed of the warmth of what he said.

"At any rate I will not think evil," Mrs Dale answered, giving him her hand. After that she
left him, and returned home. It was too late for her to abandon her project of moving and remain
at the Small House; but as she went across the garden she almost confessed to herself that
she repented of what she was doing.

In these days of the cold early spring, the way from the lawn into the house, through the drawing-room
window, was not as yet open, and it was necessary to go round by the kitchen-garden on to the
road, and thence in by the front door; or else to pass through the back door, and into the
house by the kitchen. This latter mode of entrance Mrs Dale now adopted; and as she made her
way into the hall Lily came upon her, with very silent steps, out from the parlour, and arrested
her progress. There was a smile upon Lily's face as she lifted up her finger as if in caution,
and no one looking at her would have supposed that she was herself in trouble. "Mamma," she
said, pointing to the drawing-room door, and speaking almost in a whisper, "you must not go
in there; come into the parlour."

"Who's there? Where's Bell?" and Mrs Dale went into the parlour as she was bidden. "But who
is there?" she repeated.

"He's there!"

"Who is he?"

"Oh, mamma, don't be a goose! Dr Crofts is there, of course. He's been nearly an hour. I wonder
how he is managing, for there is nothing on earth to sit upon but the old lump of a carpet.
The room is strewed about with crockery, and Bell is such a figure! She has got on your old
checked apron, and when he came in she was rolling up the fire-irons in brown paper. I don't
suppose she was ever in such a mess before. There's one thing certain,--he can't kiss her hand."

"It's you are the goose, Lily."

"But he's in there certainly, unless he has gone out through the window, or up the chimney."

"What made you leave them?"

"He met me here, in the passage, and spoke to me ever so seriously. 'Come in,' I said, 'and
see Bell packing the pokers and tongs.' 'I will go in,' he said, 'but don't come with me.'
He was ever so serious, and I'm sure he had been thinking of it all the way along."

"And why should he not be serious?"

"Oh, no, of course he ought to be serious; but are you not glad, mamma? I am so glad. We shall
live alone together, you and I; but she will be so close to us! My belief is that he'll stay
there for ever unless somebody does something. I have been so tired of waiting and looking
out for you. 82

WALT WHITMAN IN EUROPE.

With the death and burial of Walt Whitman passes away the most picturesque
figure of contemporary literature.

It is true that in England the name of the poet is more familiar than his poetry, and that students
of literature are more conversant with the nature of his writings than are the mass of general
readers; yet the character of the man and the spirit of his compositions were rapidly beginning
to be appreciated by, and to sway an influence over, the whole higher
intelligence of the country.

Considering the man and his works, it
is almost surprising to find how easily he did conquer for himself
an audience, and even admirers, in England. But they'll remain there for ever if we don't go in. Come, mamma, you open the
door."

Then Mrs Dale did open the door, giving some little premonitory notice with the handle, so
that the couple inside might be warned of approaching footsteps. Crofts had not escaped, either
through the window or up the chimney, but was seated in the middle of the room on an empty
box, just opposite to Bell, who was seated upon the lump of carpeting. Bell still wore the
checked apron as described by her sister. What might have been the state of her hands I will
not pretend to say; but I do not believe that her lover had found anything amiss with them.
"How do you do, doctor?" said Mrs Dale, striving to use her accustomed voice, and to look as
though there were nothing of special importance in his visit. "I have just come down from the
Great House."

"Mamma," said Bell, jumping up, "you must not call him doctor any more."

"Must I not? Has any one undoctored him?"

"Oh, mamma, you understand," said Bell.

"I understand," said Lily, going up to the doctor, and giving him her cheek to kiss, "he is
to be my brother, and I mean to claim him as such from this moment. I expect him to do everything
for us, and not to call a moment of his time his own."

"Mrs Dale," said the doctor, "Bell has consented that it shall be so, if you will consent."

"There is but little doubt of that," said Mrs Dale.

"We shall not be rich--" began the doctor.

"I hate to be rich," said Bell. "I hate even to talk about it. I don't think it quite manly
even to think about it; and I'm sure it isn't womanly."

"Bell was always a fanatic in praise of poverty," said Mrs Dale.

"No; I'm no fanatic. I'm very fond of money earned. I would like to earn some myself if I knew
how."

"Let her go out and visit the lady patients," said Lily. "They do in America."

Then they all went into the parlour and sat round the fire talking as though they were already
one family. The proceeding, considering the nature of it,--that a young lady, acknowledged
to be of great beauty and known to be of good birth, had on the occasion been asked and given
in marriage,--was carried on after a somewhat humdrum fashion, and in a manner that must be
called commonplace. How different had it been when Crosbie had made his offer! Lily for the
time had been raised to a pinnacle,--a pinnacle which might be dangerous, but which was, at
any rate, lofty. With what a pretty speech had Crosbie been greeted! How it had been felt by
all concerned that the fortunes of the Small House were in the ascendant,--felt, indeed, with
some trepidation, but still with much inward triumph. How great had been the occasion, forcing
Lily almost to lose herself in wonderment at what had occurred! There was no great occasion
now, and no wonderment. No one, unless it was Crofts, felt very triumphant. But they were all
very happy, and were sure that there was safety in their happiness. It was but the other day
that one of them had been thrown rudely to the ground through the treachery of a lover, but
yet none of them feared treachery from this lover. Bell was as sure of her lot in life as though
she were already being taken home to her modest house in Guestwick. Mrs Dale already looked
upon the man as her son, and the party of four as they sat round the fire grouped themselves
as though they already formed one family.

But Bell was not seated next to her lover. Lily, when she had once accepted Crosbie, seemed
to think that she could never be too near to him. She had been in no wise ashamed of her love,
and had shown it constantly by some little caressing motion of her hand, leaning on his arm,
looking into his face, as though she were continually desirous of some palpable assurance of
his presence. It was not so at all with Bell. She was happy in loving and in being loved, but
she required no overt testimonies of affection. I do not think it would have made her unhappy
if some sudden need had required that Crofts should go to India and back before they were married.
The thing was settled, and that was enough for her. But, on the other hand, when he spoke of
the expediency of an immediate marriage, she raised no difficulty. As her mother was about
to go into a new residence, it might be as well that that residence should be fitted to the
wants of two persons instead of three. So they talked about chairs and tables, carpets and
kitchens, in a most unromantic, homely, useful manner! A considerable portion of the furniture
in the house they were now about to leave belonged to the squire,--or to the house rather,
as they were in the habit of saying. The older and more solid things,--articles of household
stuff that stand the wear of half a century,--had been in the Small House when they came to
it. There was, therefore, a question of buying new furniture for a house in Guestwick,--a question
not devoid of importance to the possessor of so moderate an income as that owned by Mrs Dale.
In the first month or two they were to live in lodgings, and their goods were to be stored
in some friendly warehouse. Under such circumstances would it not be well that Bell's marriage
should be so arranged that the lodging question might not be in any degree complicated by her
necessities? This was the last suggestion made by Dr Crofts, induced no doubt by the great
encouragement he had received.

"That would be hardly possible," said Mrs Dale. "It only wants three weeks;--and with the house
in such a condition!"

"James is joking," said Bell.

"I was not joking at all," said the doctor.

"Why not send for Mr Boyce, and carry her off at once on a pillion behind you?" said Lily.
"It's just the sort of thing for primitive people to do, like you and Bell. All the same, Bell,
I do wish you could have been married from this house."

"I don't think it will make much difference," said Bell.

"Only if you would have waited till summer we would have had such a nice party on the lawn.
It sounds so ugly, being married from lodgings; doesn't it, mamma?"

"It doesn't sound at all ugly to me," said Bell.

"I shall always call you Dame Commonplace when you're married," said Lily.

Then they had tea, and after tea Dr Crofts got on his horse and rode back to Guestwick.

"Now may I talk about him?" said Lily, as soon as the door was closed behind his back.

"No; you may not."

"As if I hadn't known it all along! And wasn't it hard to bear that you should have scolded
me with such pertinacious austerity, and that I wasn't to say a word in answer!"

"I don't remember the austerity," said Mrs Dale.

"Nor yet Lily's silence," said Bell.

"But it's all settled now," said Lily, "and I'm downright happy. I never felt more satisfaction,--never,
Bell!"

"Nor did I," said her mother; "I may truly say that I thank God for this good thing."

CHAPTER LI

John Eames Does Things Which He Ought Not to Have Done

John Eames succeeded in making his bargain with Sir Raffle Buffle. He accepted the private
secretaryship on the plainly expressed condition that he was to have leave of absence for a
fortnight towards the end of April. Having arranged this he took an affectionate leave of Mr
Love, who was really much affected at parting with him, discussed valedictory pots of porter
in the big room, over which many wishes were expressed that he might be enabled to compass
the length and breadth of old Ruffle's feet, uttered a last cutting joke at Mr Kissing as he
met that gentleman hurrying through the passages with an enormous ledger in his hands, and
then took his place in the comfortable arm-chair which FitzHoward had been forced to relinquish.

"Don't tell any of the fellows," said Fitz, "but I'm going to cut the concern altogether. My
governor wouldn't let me stop here in any other place than that of private secretary."

"Ah, your governor is a swell," said Eames.

"I don't know about that," said FitzHoward. "Of course he has a good deal of family interest.
My cousin is to come in for St. Bungay at the next election, and then I can do better than
remain here."

"That's a matter of course;" said Eames. "If my cousin were Member for St Bungay, I'd never
stand anything east of Whitehall."

"And I don't mean," said FitzHoward. "This room, you know, is all very nice; but it is a bore
coming into the City every day. And then one doesn't like to be rung for like a servant. Not
that I mean to put you out of conceit with it."

"It will do very well for me," said Eames. "I never was very particular." And so they parted,
Eames assuming the beautiful arm-chair and the peril of being asked to carry Sir Raffle's shoes,
while FitzHoward took the vacant desk in the big room till such time as some member of his
family should come into Parliament for the borough of St. Bungay.

But Eames, though he drank the porter, and quizzed FitzHoward, and gibed at Kissing, did not
seat himself in his new arm-chair without some serious thoughts. He was aware that his career
in London had not hitherto been one on which he could look back with self-respect. He had lived
with friends whom he did not esteem; he had been idle, and sometimes worse than idle; and he
had allowed himself to be hampered by the pretended love of a woman for whom he had never felt
any true affection, and by whom he had been cozened out of various foolish promises which even
yet were hanging over his head. As he sat with Sir Raffle's notes before him, he thought almost
with horror of the men and women in Burton Crescent. It was now about three years since he
had first known Cradell, and he shuddered as he remembered how very poor a creature was he
whom he had chosen for his bosom friend. He could not make for himself those excuses which
we can make for him. He could not tell himself that he had been driven by circumstances to
choose a friend, before he had learned to know what were the requisites for which he should
look. He had lived on terms of closest intimacy with this man for three years, and now his
eyes were opening themselves to the nature of his friend's character. Cradell was in age three
years his senior. "I won't drop him," he said to himself; "but he is a poor creature." He thought,
too, of the Lupexes, of Miss Spruce, and of Mrs Roper, and tried to imagine what Lily Dale
would do if she found herself among such people. It would be impossible that she should ever
so find herself. He might as well ask her to drink at the bar of a gin shop as to sit down
in Mrs Roper's drawing-room. If destiny had in store for him such good fortune as that of calling
Lily his own, it was necessary that he should altogether alter his mode of life.

In truth his hobbledehoyhood was dropping off from him, as its old skin drops from a snake.
Much of the feeling and something of the knowledge of manhood was coming on him, and he was
beginning to recognise to himself that the future manner of his life must be to him a matter
of very serious concern. No such thought had come near him when he first established himself
in London. It seems to me that in this respect the fathers and mothers of the present generation
understand but little of the inward nature of the young men for whom they are so anxious. They
give them credit for so much that it is impossible they should have, and then deny them credit
for so much that they possess! They expect from them when boys the discretion of men,--that
discretion which comes from thinking; but will not give them credit for any of that power of
thought which alone can ultimately produce good conduct. Young men are generally thoughtful,--more
thoughtful than their seniors; but the fruit of their thought is not as yet there. And then
so little is done for the amusement of lads who are turned loose into London at nineteen or
twenty. Can it be that any mother really expects her son to sit alone evening after evening
in a dingy room drinking bad tea, and reading good books? And yet it seems that mothers do
so expect,--the very mothers who talk about the thoughtlessness of youth! O ye mothers who
from year to year see your sons launched forth upon the perils of the world, and who are so
careful with your good advice, with under flannel shirting, with books of devotion and tooth-powder,
does it never occur to you that provision should be made for amusement, for dancing, for parties,
for the excitement and comfort of women's society? That excitement your sons will have, and
if it be not provided by you of one kind, will certainly be provided by themselves of another
kind. If I were a mother sending lads out into the world, the matter most in my mind would
be this,--to what houses full of nicest girls could I get them admission, so that they might
do their flirting in good company.

Poor John Eames had been so placed that he had been driven to do his flirting in very bad company,
and he was now fully aware that it had been so. It wanted but two days to his departure for
Guestwick Manor, and as he sat breathing a while after the manufacture of a large batch of
Sir Raffle's notes, he made up his mind that he would give Mrs Roper notice before he started,
that on his return to London he would be seen no more in Burton Crescent. He would break his
bonds altogether asunder, and if there should be any penalty for such breaking he would pay
it in what best manner he might be able. He acknowledged to himself that he had been behaving
badly to Amelia, confessing, indeed, more sin in that respect than he had in truth committed;
but this, at any rate, was clear to him, that he must put himself on a proper footing in that
quarter before he could venture to speak to Lily Dale.

As he came to a definite conclusion on this subject the little handbell which always stood
on Sir Raffle's table was sounded, and Eames was called into the presence of the great man.
"Ah," said Sir Raffle, leaning back in his arm-chair, and stretching himself after the great
exertions which he had been making--"Ah, let me see! You are going out of town the day after
to-morrow."

"Yes, Sir Raffle, the day after to-morrow."

"Ah! it's a great annoyance,--a very great annoyance. But on such occasions I never think of
myself. I never have done so, and don't suppose I ever shall. So you're going down to my old
friend De Guest?"

Eames was always angered when his new patron Sir Raffle talked of his old friendship with the
earl, and never gave the Commissioner any encouragement. "I am going down to Guestwick," said he.

"Ah! yes; to Guestwick Manor? I don't remember that I was ever there. I dare say I may have
been, but one forgets those things."

"I never heard Lord De Guest speak of it."

"Oh, dear, no. Why should his memory be better than mine? Tell him, will you, how very glad
I shall be to renew our old intimacy. I should think nothing of running down to him for a day
or two in the dull time of the year,--say in September or October. It's rather a coincidence
our both being interested about you,--isn't it?"

"I'll be sure to tell him."

"Mind you do. He's one of our most thoroughly independent noblemen, and I respect him very
highly. Let me see; didn't I ring my bell? What was it I wanted? I think I rang my bell."

"You did ring your bell."

"Ah, yes; I know. I am going away, and I wanted my--would you tell Rafferty to bring me--my
boots?" Whereupon Johnny rang the bell--not the little handbell, but the other bell. "And I
shan't be here to-morrow," continued Sir Raffle. "I'll thank you to send my letters up to the
square; and if they should send down from the Treasury;--but the Chancellor would write, and
in that case you'll send up his letter at once by a special messenger, of course."

"Here's Rafferty," said Eames, determined that he would not even sully his lips with speaking
of Sir Raffle's boots.

"Oh, ah, yes; Rafferty, bring me my boots."

"Anything else to say?" asked Eames.

"No, nothing else. Of course you'll be careful to leave everything straight behind you."

"Oh, yes; I'll leave it all straight." Then Eames withdrew, so that he might not be present
at the interview between Sir Raffle and his boots. "He'll not do," said Sir Raffle to himself.
"He'll never do. He's not quick enough,--has no go in him. He's not man enough for the place.
I wonder why the earl has taken him by the hand in that way."

Soon after the little episode of the boots Eames left his office, and walked home alone to
Burton Crescent. He felt that he had gained a victory in Sir Raffle's room, but the victory
there had been easy. Now he had another battle on his hands, in which, as he believed, the
achievement of victory would be much more difficult. Amelia Roper was a person much more to
be feared than the Chief Commissioner. He had one strong arrow in his quiver on which he would
depend, if there should come to him the necessity of giving his enemy a death-wound. During
the last week she had been making powerful love to Cradell, so as to justify the punishment
of desertion from a former lover. He would not throw Cradell in her teeth if he could help
it; but it was incumbent on him to gain a victory, and if the worst should come to the worst,
he must use such weapons as destiny and the chance of war had given him.

He found Mrs Roper in the dining-room as he entered, and immediately began his work. "Mrs Roper,"
he said, "I'm going out of town the day after to-morrow."

"Oh, yes, Mr Eames, we know that. You're going as a visitor to the noble mansion of the Earl
De Guest."

"I don't know about the mansion being very noble, but I'm going down into the country for a
fortnight. When I come back--"

"When you come back, Mr Eames, I hope you'll find your room a deal more comfortable. I know
it isn't quite what it should be for a gentleman like you, and I've been thinking for some
time past--"

"But, Mrs Roper, I don't mean to come back here any more. It's just that that I want to say
to you."

"Not come back to the crescent!"

"No, Mrs Roper. A fellow must move sometimes, you know; and I'm sure I've been very constant
to you for a long time."

"But where are you going, Mr Eames?"

"Well; I haven't just made up my mind as yet. That is, it will depend on what I may do,--on
what friends of mine may say down in the country. You'll not think I'm quarrelling with you,
Mrs Roper."

"It's them Lupexes as have done it," said Mrs Roper, in her deep distress.

"No, indeed, Mrs Roper, nobody has done it."

"Yes, it is; and I'm not going to blame you, Mr Eames. They've made the house unfit for any
decent young gentleman like you. I've been feeling that all along; but it's hard upon a lone
woman like me, isn't it, Mr Eames?"

"But, Mrs Roper, the Lupexes have had nothing to do with my going."

"Oh, yes, they have; I understand it all. But what could I do, Mr Eames? I've been giving them
warning every week for the last six months; but the more I give them warning, the more they
won't go. Unless I were to send for a policeman, and have a row in the house--"

"But I haven't complained of the Lupexes, Mrs Roper."

"You wouldn't be quitting without any reason, Mr Eames. You are not going to be married in
earnest, are you, Mr Eames?"

"Not that I know of."

"You may tell me; you may, indeed. I won't say a word,--not to anybody. It hasn't been my fault
about Amelia. It hasn't really."

"Who says there's been any fault?"

"I can see, Mr Eames. Of course it didn't do for me to interfere. And if you had liked her,
I will say I believe she'd have made as good a wife as any young man ever took; and she can
make a few pounds go farther than most girls. You can understand a mother's feelings; and if
there was to be anything, I couldn't spoil it; could I, now?"

"But there isn't to be anything."

"So I've told her for months past. I'm not going to say anything to blame you; but young men
ought to be very particular; indeed they ought." Johnny did not choose to hint to the disconsolate
mother that it also behoved young women to be very particular, but he thought it. "I've wished
many a time, Mr Eames, that she had never come here; indeed I have. But what's a mother to
do? I couldn't put her outside the door." Then Mrs Roper raised her apron up to her eyes, and
began to sob.

"I'm very sorry if I've made any mischief," said Johnny.

"It hasn't been your fault," continued the poor woman, from whom, as her tears became uncontrollable,
her true feelings forced themselves and the real outpouring of her feminine nature. "Nor it
hasn't been my fault. But I knew what it would come to when I saw how she was going on; and
I told her so. I knew you wouldn't put up with the likes of her."

"Indeed, Mrs Roper, I've always had a great regard for her, and for you too."

"But you weren't going to marry her. I've told her so all along, and I've begged her not to
do it,--almost on my knees I have; but she wouldn't be said by me. She never would. She's always
been that wilful that I'd sooner have her away from me than with me. Though she's a good young
woman in the house,--she is, indeed, Mr Eames,--and there isn't a pair of hands in it that
works so hard; but it was no use my talking."

"I don't think any harm has been done."

"Yes, there has; great harm. It has made the place not respectable. It's the Lupexes is the
worst. There's Miss Spruce, who has been with me for nine years,--ever since I've had the house,--she's
been telling me this morning that she means to go into the country. It's all the same thing.
I understand it. I can see it. The house isn't respectable, as it should be; and your mamma,
if she were to know all, would have a right to be angry with me. I did mean to be respectable,
Mr Eames; I did indeed."

"Miss Spruce will think better of it."

"You don't know what I've had to go through. There's none of them pays, not regular,--only
she and you. She's been like the Bank of England, has Miss Spruce."

"I'm afraid I've not been very regular, Mrs Roper."

"Oh, yes, you have. I don't think of a pound or two more or less at the end of a quarter, if
I'm sure to have it some day. The butcher,--he understands one's lodgers just as well as I
do,--if the money's really coming, he'll wait; but he won't wait for such as them Lupexes,
whose money's nowhere. And there's Cradell; would you believe it, that fellow owes me eight-and-twenty
pounds!"

"Eight and twenty pounds!"

"Yes, Mr Eames, eight-and-twenty pounds! He's a fool. It's them Lupexes as have had his money.
I know it. He don't talk of paying, and going away. I shall be just left with him and the Lupexes
on my hands; and then the bailiffs may come and sell every stick about the place. I won't say
nay to them." Then she threw herself into the old horsehair armchair, and gave way to her womanly
sorrow.

"I think I'll go upstairs, and get ready for dinner," said Eames.

"And you must go away when you come back?" said Mrs Roper.

"Well, yes, I'm afraid I must. I meant you to have a month's warning from to-day. Of course
I shall pay for the month."

"I don't want to take any advantage; indeed, I don't. But I do hope you'll leave your things.
You can have them whenever you like. If Chumpend knows that you and Miss Spruce are both going,
of course he'll be down upon me for his money." Chumpend was the butcher. But Eames made no
answer to this piteous plea. Whether or no he could allow his old boots to remain in Burton
Crescent for the next week or two, must depend on the manner in which he might be received
by Amelia Roper this evening.

When he came down to the drawing-room, there was no one there but Miss Spruce. "A fine day,
Miss Spruce," said he.

"Yes, Mr Eames, it is a fine day for London; but don't you think the country air is very nice?"

"Give me the town," said Johnny, wishing to say a good word for poor Mrs Roper, if it were
possible.

"You're a young man, Mr Eames; but I'm an old woman. That makes a difference," said Miss Spruce.

"Not much," said Johnny, meaning to be civil. "You don't like to be dull any more than I do."

"I like to be respectable, Mr Eames. I always have been respectable, Mr Eames." This the old
woman said almost in a whisper, looking anxiously to see that the door had not been opened
to other listening ears.

"I'm sure Mrs Roper is very respectable."

"Yes; Mrs Roper is respectable, Mr Eames; but there are some here that--Hush-sh-sh!" And the
old lady put her finger up to her lips. The door opened and Mrs Lupex swam into the room.

"How d'ye do, Miss Spruce? I declare you're always first. It's to get a chance of having one
of the young gentlemen to yourself, I believe. What's the news in the city to-day, Mr Eames?
In your position now of course you hear all the news."

"Sir Raffle Buffle has got a new pair of shoes. I don't know that for certain, but I guess
it from the time it took him to put them on."

"Ah! now you're quizzing. That's always the way with you gentlemen when you get a little up
in the world. You don't think women are worth talking to then, unless just for a joke or so."

"I'd a great deal sooner talk to you, Mrs Lupex, than I would to Sir Raffle Buffle."

"It's all very well for you to say that. But we women know what such compliments as those mean;--don't
we, Miss Spruce? A woman that's been married five years as I have,--or I may say six,--doesn't
expect much attention from young men. And though I was young when I married,--young in years,
that is,--I'd seen too much and gone through too much to be young in heart." This she said
almost in a whisper; but Miss Spruce heard it, and was confirmed in her belief that Burton
Crescent was no longer respectable.

"I don't know what you were then, Mrs Lupex," said Eames; "but you're young enough now for
anything."

"Mr Eames, I'd sell all that remains of my youth at a cheap rate,--at a very cheap rate, if
I could only be sure of--"

"Sure of what, Mrs Lupex?"

"The undivided affection of the one person that I loved. That is all that is necessary to a
woman's happiness."

"And isn't Lupex--"

"Lupex! But hush, never mind. I should not have allowed myself to be betrayed into an expression
of feeling. Here's your friend Mr Cradell. Do you know I sometimes wonder what you find in
that man to be so fond of him." Miss Spruce saw it all, and heard it all, and positively resolved
upon moving herself to those two small rooms at Dulwich.

Hardly a word was exchanged between Amelia and Eames before dinner. Amelia still devoted herself
to Cradell, and Johnny saw that that arrow, if it should be needed, would be a strong weapon.
Mrs Roper they found seated at her place at the dining-table, and Eames could perceive the
traces of her tears. Poor woman! Few positions in life could be harder to bear than hers! To
be ever tugging at others for money that they could not pay; to be ever tugged at for money
which she could not pay; to desire respectability for its own sake, but to be driven to confess
that it was a luxury beyond her means; to put up with disreputable belongings for the sake
of lucre, and then not to get the lucre, but be driven to feel that she was ruined by the attempt!
How many Mrs Ropers there are who from year to year sink down and fall away, and no one knows
whither they betake themselves! One fancies that one sees them from time to time at the corners
of the streets in battered bonnets and thin gowns, with the tattered remnants of old shawls
upon their shoulders, still looking as though they had within them a faint remembrance of long-distant
respectability. With anxious eyes they peer about, as though searching in the streets for other
lodgers. Where do they get their daily morsels of bread, and their poor cups of thin tea,--their
cups of thin tea, with perhaps a pennyworth of gin added to it, if Providence be good! Of this
state of things Mrs Roper had a lively appreciation, and now, poor woman, she feared that she
was reaching it, by the aid of the Lupexes. On the present occasion she carved her joint of
meat in silence, and sent out her slices to the good guests that would leave her, and to the
bad guests that would remain, with apathetic impartiality. What was the use now of doing favour
to one lodger or disfavour to another? Let them take their mutton,--they who would pay for
it and they who would not. She would not have the carving of many more joints in that house
if Chumpend acted up to all the threats which he had uttered to her that morning.

The reader may, perhaps, remember the little back room behind the dining parlour. A description
was given in some former pages of an interview which was held between Amelia and her lover.
It was in that room that all the interviews of Mrs Roper's establishment had their existence.
A special room for interviews is necessary in all households of a mixed nature. If a man lives
alone with his wife, he can have his interviews where he pleases. Sons and daughters, even
when they are grown up, hardly create the necessity of an interview-chamber, though some such
need may be felt if the daughters are marriageable and independent in their natures. But when
the family becomes more complicated than this, if an extra young man be introduced, or an aunt
comes into residence, or grown up children by a former wife interfere with the domestic simplicity,
then such accommodation becomes quite indispensable. No woman would think of taking in lodgers
without such a room; and this room there was at Mrs Roper's, very small and dingy, but still
sufficient,--just behind the dining parlour and opposite to the kitchen stairs. Hither, after
dinner, Amelia was summoned. She had just seated herself between Mrs Lupex and Miss Spruce,
ready to do battle with the former because she would stay, and with the latter because she
would go, when she was called out by the servant girl.

"Miss Mealyer, Miss Mealyer,--sh-sh-sh!" And Amelia, looking round, saw a large red hand beckoning
to her. "He's down there," said Jemima, as soon as her young mistress had joined her, "and
wants to see you most partic'lar."

"Which of 'em?" asked Amelia, in a whisper.

"Why, Mr Heames, to be sure. Don't you go and have anythink to say to the other one, Miss Mealyer,
pray don't; he ain't no good; he ain't indeed."

Amelia stood still for a moment on the landing, calculating whether it would be well for her
to have the interview, or well to decline it. Her objects were two,--or, rather, her object
was in its nature twofold. She was, naturally, anxious to drive John Eames to desperation;
and anxious also, by some slight added artifice, to make sure of Cradell if Eames's desperation
did not have a very speedy effect. She agreed with Jemima's criticism in the main, but she
did not go quite so far as to think that Cradell was no good at all. Let it be Eames, if Eames
were possible; but let the other string be kept for use if Eames were not possible. Poor girl!
in coming to this resolve she had not done so without agony. She had a heart, and with such
power as it gave her, she loved John Eames. But the world had been hard to her; knocking her
about hither and thither unmercifully; threatening, as it now threatened, to take from her
what few good things she enjoyed. When a girl is so circumstanced she cannot afford to attend
to her heart. She almost resolved not to see Eames on the present occasion, thinking that he
might be made the more desperate by such refusal, and remembering also that Cradell was in
the house and would know of it.

"He's there a-waiting, Miss Mealyer. Why don't yer come down?" and Jemima plucked her young
mistress by the arm.

"I am coming," said Amelia. And with dignified steps she descended to the interview.

"Here she is, Mr Heames," said the girl. And then Johnny found himself alone with his lady-love.

"You have sent for me, Mr Eames," she said, giving her head a little toss, and turning her
face away from him. "I was engaged upstairs, but I thought it uncivil not to come down to you
as you sent for me so special."

"Yes, Miss Roper, I did want to see you very particularly."

"Oh, dear!" she exclaimed, and he understood fully that the exclamation referred to his having
omitted the customary use of her Christian name.

"I saw your mother before dinner, and I told her that I am going away the day after to-morrow."

"We all know about that;--to the earl's, of course!" And then there was another chuck of her head.

"And I told her also that I had made up my mind not to come back to Burton Crescent."

"What! leave the house altogether!"

"Well; yes. A fellow must make a change sometimes, you know."

"And where are you going, John?"

"That I don't know as yet."

"Tell me the truth, John; are you going to be married? Are you--going--to marry--that young
woman--Mr Crosbie's leavings? I demand to have an answer at once. Are you going to marry her?"

He had determined very resolutely that nothing she might say should make him angry, but when
she thus questioned him about "Crosbie's leavings" he found it very difficult to keep his temper.

"I have not come," said he, "to speak to you about any one but ourselves."

"That put-off won't do with me, sir. You are not to treat any girl you may please in that sort
of way;--oh, John!" Then she looked at him as though she did not know whether to fly at him
and cover him with kisses, or to fly at him and tear his hair.

"I know I haven't behaved quite as I should have done," he began.

"Oh, John!" and she shook her head. "You mean, then, to tell me that you are going to marry her?"

"I mean to say nothing of the kind. I only mean to say that I am going away from Burton Crescent."

"John Eames, I wonder what you think will come to you! Will you answer me this; have I had
a promise from you,--a distinct promise, over and over again, or have I not?"

"I don't know about a distinct promise--"

"Well, well! I did think that you was a gentleman that would not go back from your word. I
did think that. I did think that you would never put a young lady to the necessity of bringing
forward her own letters to prove that she is not expecting more than she has a right! You don't
know! And that, after all that has been between us! John Eames!" And again it seemed to him
as though she were about to fly.

"I tell you that I know I haven't behaved well. What more can I say?"

"What more can you say? Oh, John! to ask me such a question! If you were a man you would know
very well what more to say. But all you private secretaries are given to deceit, as the sparks
fly upwards. However, I despise you,--I do, indeed. I despise you."

"If you despise me, we might as well shake hands and part at once. I dare say that will be
best. One doesn't like to be despised, of course; but sometimes one can't help it." And then
he put out his hand to her.

"And is this to be the end of all?" she said, taking it.

"Well, yes; I suppose so. You say I'm despised."

"You shouldn't take up a poor girl in that way for a sharp word,--not when she is suffering
as I am made to suffer. If you only think of it,--think what I have been expecting!" And now
Amelia began to cry, and to look as though she were going to fall into his arms.

"It is better to tell the truth," he said; "isn't it?"

"But it shouldn't be the truth."

"But it is the truth. I couldn't do it. I should ruin myself and you too, and we should never
be happy."

"I should be happy,--very happy indeed." At this moment the poor girl's tears were unaffected,
and her words were not artful. For a minute or two her heart,--her actual heart,--was allowed
to prevail.

"It cannot be, Amelia. Will you not say good-bye?"

"Good-bye," she said, leaning against him as she spoke.

"I do so hope you will be happy," he said. And then, putting his arm round her waist, he kissed
her; which he certainly ought not to have done.

When the interview was over, he escaped out into the crescent, and as he walked down through
the squares,--Woburn Square, and Russell Square, and Bedford Square,--towards the heart of
London, he felt himself elated almost to a state of triumph. He had got himself well out of
his difficulties, and now he would be ready for his love-tale to Lily.

CHAPTER LII

The First Visit to the Guestwick Bridge

When John Eames arrived at Guestwick Manor, he was first welcomed by Lady Julia. "My dear Mr
Eames," she said, "I cannot tell you how glad we are to see you." After that she always called
him John, and treated him throughout his visit with wonderful kindness. No doubt that affair
of the bull had in some measure produced this feeling; no doubt, also, she was well disposed
to the man who she hoped might be accepted as a lover by Lily Dale. But I am inclined to think
that the fact of his having beaten Crosbie had been the most potential cause of this affection
for our hero on the part of Lady Julia. Ladies,--especially discreet old ladies, such as Lady
Julia De Guest,--are bound to entertain pacific theories, and to condemn all manner of violence.
Lady Julia would have blamed any one who might have advised Eames to commit an assault upon
Crosbie. But, nevertheless, deeds of prowess are still dear to the female heart, and a woman,
be she ever so old and discreet, understands and appreciates the summary justice which may
be done by means of a thrashing. Lady Julia, had she been called upon to talk of it, would
undoubtedly have told Eames that he had committed a fault in striking Mr Crosbie; but the deed
had been done, and Lady Julia became very fond of John Eames.

"Vickers shall show you your room, if you like to go upstairs; but you'll find my brother close
about the house if you choose to go out; I saw him not half an hour since." But John seemed
to be well satisfied to sit in his arm-chair over the fire, and talk to his hostess; so neither
of them moved.

"And now that you're a private secretary, how do you like it?"

"I like the work well enough; only I don't like the man, Lady Julia. But I shouldn't say so,
because he is such an intimate friend of your brother's."

"An intimate friend of Theodore's!--Sir Raffle Buffle!" Lady Julia stiffened her back and put
on a serious face, not being exactly pleased at being told that the Earl De Guest had any such
intimate friend.

"At any rate he tells me so about four times a day, Lady Julia. And he particularly wants to
come down here next September."

"Did he tell you that, too?"

"Indeed he did. You can't believe what a goose he is! Then his voice sounds like a cracked
bell; it's the most disagreeable voice you ever heard in your life. And one has always to be
on one's guard lest he should make one do something that is--is--that isn't quite the thing
for a gentleman. You understand;--what the messenger ought to do."

"You shouldn't be too much afraid of your own dignity."

"No, I'm not. If Lord De Guest were to ask me to fetch him his shoes, I'd run to Guestwick
and back for them and think nothing of it,--just because he's my friend. He'd have a right
to send me. But I'm not going to do such things as that for Sir Raffle Buffle."

"Fetch him his shoes!"

"That's what FitzHoward had to do, and he didn't like it."

"Isn't Mr FitzHoward nephew to the Duchess of St Bungay?"

"Nephew, or cousin, or something."

"Dear me!" said Lady Julia, "what a horrible man!" And in this way John Eames and her ladyship
became very intimate.

There was no one at dinner at the Manor that day but the earl and his sister and their single
guest. The earl when he came in was very warm in his welcome, slapping his young friend on
the back, and poking jokes at him with a good-humoured if not brilliant pleasantry.

"Thrashed anybody lately, John?"

"Nobody to speak of," said Johnny.

"Brought your nightcap down for your out-o'-doors nap?"

"No, but I've got a grand stick for the bull," said Johnny.

"Ah! that's no joke now, I can tell you," said the earl. "We had to sell him, and it half broke
my heart. This is not a general statement. I have a specific instance in view, when, in 1886, I
went to the Leinster House in Dublin--the public library of the place--and asked for Walt Whitman's
"Leaves of Grass." On being informed that they had no copy of it in the library, I put down
the book in the suggestion list. A number of Trinity students did the same. The matter was brought
before the directors at their monthly meeting, and it appears it
was strenuously objected to by the librarian, who pleaded the exclusion
of the book on the ground of its being immoral, indecent!

We carried the fight from private discussion to correspondence in
the press; the editor of the Dublin University Review put the pages
of the magazine at our disposal, and it was not until a year afterwards,
and until considerable pressure was brought on the directors, that
"Leaves of Grass" was admitted into the catalogues of the Dublin library.

But

the genuine merit of Walt Whitman's works, as the true inspiration of individualistic genius
is always destined to do, is rapidly conquering the opposition and prejudice even of those whose
obtuse minds seldom discover the intrinsic good motive frequently
underlying an indifferent form.

Those whose objections rested on their incapacity of penetrating further than the surface
of the headline are rapidly beginning to discern in Walt Whitman's
writings a force, a sentiment, a moral passion, and a natural grandeur
that is amply compensating for the occasional roughness or looseness
of the expressions he mirrors them in.

 But the mother and the younger sister wouldn't
come. Lady Julia says it's all right;--that, as a matter of course, she wouldn't come when
she heard you were to be here. I don't quite understand it. In my days the young girls were
ready enough to go where they knew they'd meet their lovers, and I never thought any the worse
of them for it."

"It wasn't because of that," said Eames.

"That's what Lady Julia says, and I always find her to be right in things of that sort. And
she says you'll have a better chance in going over there than you would here, if she were in
the same house with you. If I was going to make love to a girl, of course I'd sooner have her
close to me,--staying in the same house. I should think it the best fun in the world. And we
might have had a dance, and all that kind of thing. But I couldn't make her come, you know."

"Oh, no; of course not."

"And Lady Julia thinks that it's best as it is. You must go over, you know, and get the mother
on your side, if you can. I take it, the truth is this;--you mustn't be angry with me, you
know, for saying it."

"You may be sure of that."

"I suppose she was fond of that fellow, Crosbie. She can't be very fond of him now, I should
think, after the way he has treated her; but she'll find a difficulty in making her confession
that she really likes you better than she ever liked him. Of course that's what you'll want
her to say."

"I want her to say that she'll be my wife,--some day."

"And when she has agreed to the some day, then you'll begin to press her to agree to your day;--eh,
sir? My belief is you'll bring her round. Poor girl! why should she break her heart when a
decent fellow like you will only be too glad to make her a happy woman?" And in this way the
earl talked to Eames till the latter almost believed that the difficulties were vanishing from
out of his path. "Could it be possible," he asked himself, as he went to bed, "that in a fortnight's
time Lily Dale should have accepted him as her future husband?" Then he remembered that day
on which Crosbie, with the two girls, had called at his mother's house, when in the bitterness
of his heart, he had sworn to himself that he would always regard Crosbie as his enemy. Since
then the world had gone well with him; and he had no longer any bitter feeling against Crosbie.
That matter had been arranged on the platform of the Paddington Station. He felt that if Lily
would now accept him he could almost shake hands with Crosbie. The episode in his life and
in Lily's would have been painful; but he would learn to look back upon that without regret,
if Lily could be taught to believe that a kind fate had at last given her to the better of
her two lovers. "I'm afraid she won't bring herself to forget him," he had said to the earl.
"She'll only be too happy to forget him," the earl had answered, "if you can induce her to
begin the attempt. Of course it is very bitter at first;--all the world knew about it; but,
poor girl, she is not to be wretched for ever, because of that. Do you go about your work with
some little confidence, and I doubt not but what you'll have your way. You have everybody in
your favour,--the squire, her mother, and all." While such words as these were in his ears
how could he fail to hope and to be confident? While he was sitting cosily over his bedroom
fire he resolved that it should be as the earl had said. But when he got up on the following
morning, and stood shivering as he came out of his bath, he could not feel the same confidence.
"Of course I shall go to her," he said to himself, "and make a plain story of it. But I know
what her answer will be. She will tell me that she cannot forget him." Then his feelings towards
Crosbie were not so friendly as they had been on the previous evening.

He did not visit the Small House on that, his first day. It had been thought better that he
should first meet the squire and Bell at Guestwick Manor, so he postponed his visit to Mrs
Dale till the next morning.

"Go when you like," said the earl. "There's the brown cob for you to do what you like with
him while you are here."

"I'll go and see my mother," said John; "but I won't take the cob to-day. If you'll let me
have him to-morrow, I'll ride to Allington." So he walked off to Guestwick by himself.

He knew well every yard of the ground over which he went, remembering every gate and stile
and greensward from the time of his early boyhood. And now as he went along through his old
haunts, he could not but look back and think of the thoughts which had filled his mind in his
earlier wanderings. As I have said before, in some of these pages, no walks taken by the man
are so crowded with thought as those taken by the boy. He had been early taught to understand
that the world to him would be very hard; that he had nothing to look to but his own exertions,
and that those exertions would not, unfortunately, be backed by any great cleverness of his
own. I do not know that anybody had told him that he was a fool; but he had come to understand,
partly through his own modesty, and partly, no doubt, through the somewhat obtrusive diffidence
of his mother, that he was less sharp than other lads. It is probably true that he had come
to his sharpness later in life than is the case with many young men. He had not grown on the
sunny side of the wall. Before that situation in the Income-tax Office had fallen in his way,
very humble modes of life had offered themselves,--or, rather, had not offered themselves for
his acceptance. He had endeavoured to become an usher at a commercial seminary, not supposed
to be in a very thriving condition; but he had been, luckily, found deficient in his arithmetic.
There had been some chance of his going into the leather-warehouse of Messrs Basil and Pigskin,
but those gentlemen had required a premium, and any payment of that kind had been quite out
of his mother's power. A country attorney, who had known the family for years, had been humbly
solicited, the widow almost kneeling before him with tears, to take Johnny by the hand and
make a clerk of him; but the attorney had discovered that Master Johnny Eames was not supposed
to be sharp, and would have none of him. During those days, those gawky, gainless, unadmired
days, in which he had wandered about the lanes of Guestwick as his only amusement, and had
composed hundreds of rhymes in honour of Lily Dale which no human eye but his own had ever
seen, he had come to regard himself as almost a burden upon the earth. Nobody seemed to want
him. His own mother was very anxious; but her anxiety seemed to him to indicate a continual
desire to get rid of him. For hours upon hours he would fill his mind with castles in the air,
dreaming of wonderful successes in the midst of which Lily Dale always reigned as a queen.
He would carry on the same story in his imagination from month to month, almost contenting
himself with such ideal happiness. Had it not been for the possession of that power, what comfort
could there have been to him in his life? There are lads of seventeen who can find happiness
in study, who can busy themselves in books and be at their ease among the creations of other
minds. These are they who afterwards become well-informed men. It was not so with John Eames.
He had never been studious. The perusal of a novel was to him in those days a slow affair;
and of poetry he read but little, storing up accurately in his memory all that he did read.
But he created for himself his own romance, though to the eye a most unromantic youth; and
he wandered through the Guestwick woods with many thoughts of which they who knew him best
knew nothing. All this he thought of now as, with devious steps, he made his way towards his
old home,--with very devious steps, for he went backwards through the woods by a narrow path
which led right away from the town down to a little water-course, over which stood a wooden
foot-bridge with a rail. He stood on the centre of the plank, at a spot which he knew well,
and rubbing his hand upon the rail, cleaned it for the space of a few inches of the vegetable
growth produced by the spray of the water. There, rudely carved in the wood, was still the
word LILY. When he cut those letters she had been almost a child. "I wonder whether she will
come here with me and let me show it to her," he said to himself. Then he took out his knife
and cleared the cuttings of the letters, and having done so, leaned upon the rail, and looked
down upon the running water. How well things in the world had gone for him! How well! And yet
what would it all be if Lily would not come to him? How well the world had gone for him! In
those days when he stood there carving the girl's name everybody had seemed to regard him as
a heavy burden, and he had so regarded himself. Now he was envied by many, respected by many,
taken by the hand as a friend by those high in the world's esteem. When he had come near the
Guestwick Mansion in his old walks,--always, however, keeping at a great distance lest the
grumpy old lord should be down upon him and scold him,--he had little dreamed that he and the
grumpy old lord would ever be together on such familiar terms, that he would tell to that lord
more of his private thoughts than to any other living being; yet it had come to that. The grumpy
old lord had now told him that that gift of money was to be his whether Lily Dale accepted
him or no. "Indeed, the thing's done," said the grumpy lord, pulling out from his pocket certain
papers, "and you've got to receive the dividends as they become due." Then, when Johnny had
expostulated,--as, indeed, the circumstances had left him no alternative but to expostulate,--the
earl had roughly bade him hold his tongue, telling him that he would have to fetch Sir Raffle's
boots directly he got back to London. So the conversation had quickly turned itself away to
Sir Raffle, whom they had both ridiculed with much satisfaction. "If he finds his way down
here in September, Master Johnny, or in any other month either, you may fit my head with a
foolscap. Not remember, indeed! Is it not wonderful that any man should make himself so mean
a fool?" All this was thought over again, as Eames leaned upon the bridge. The wealth of no single
man was found sufficient to place a railroad across the continent. Men combined their capital, and to-day
we can ride from New York to San Francisco in a car as luxuriously furnished as a drawing-room.
Had it not been for this union of dollars, we should to-day be forced to use the stage coach
or to walk. When the railroads were once built, their owners found combination necessary to
keep them from cutting each other's throats and to maintain a good rate of profit.
 When he had carved that name on the rail, his love for Lily
had been an idea. It had now become a reality which might probably be full of pain. If it were
so,--if such should be the result, of his wooing,--would not those old dreamy days have been
better than these--the days of his success?

It was one o'clock by the time that he reached his mother's house, and he found her and his
sister in a troubled and embarrassed state. "Of course you know, John," said his mother, as
soon as their first embraces were over, "that we are going to dine at the Manor this evening?"
But he did not know it, neither the earl nor Lady Julia having said anything on the subject.
"Of course we are going," said Mrs Eames, "and it was so very kind. But I've never been out
to such a house for so many years, John, and I do feel in such a twitter. I dined there once,
soon after we were married; but I never have been there since that."

"It's not the earl I mind, but Lady Julia," said Mary Eames.

"She's the most good-natured woman in the world," said Johnny.

"Oh, dear; people say she is so cross!"

"That's because people don't know her. If I was asked who is the kindest-hearted woman I know
in the world, I think I should say Lady Julia De Guest. I think I should."

"Ah! but then they're so fond of you," said the admiring mother. "You saved his lordship's
life,--under Providence."

"That's all bosh, mother. You ask Dr Crofts. He knows them as well as I do."

"Dr Crofts is going to marry Bell Dale," said Mary; and then the conversation was turned from
the subject of Lady Julia's perfections, and the awe inspired by the earl.

"Crofts going to marry Bell!" exclaimed Eames, thinking almost with dismay of the doctor's
luck in thus getting himself accepted all at once, while he had been suing with the constancy
almost of a Jacob.

"Yes," said Mary; "and they say that she has refused her cousin Bernard, and that, therefore,
the squire is taking away the house from them. You know they're all coming into Guestwick."

"Yes, I know they are. But I don't believe that the squire is taking away the house."

"Why should they come then? Why should they give up such a charming place as that?"

"Rent-free!" said Mrs Eames.

"I don't know why they should come away; but I can't believe the squire is turning them out;
at any rate not for that reason." The squire was prepared to advocate John's suit, and therefore
John was bound to do battle on the squire's behalf.

"He is a very stern man," said Mrs Eames, "and they say that since that affair of poor Lily's
he has been more cross than ever with them. As far as I know, it was not Lily's fault."

"Poor Lily!" said Mary. "I do pity her. If I was her I should hardly know how to show my face;
I shouldn't, indeed."

"And why shouldn't she show her face?" said John, in an angry tone. "What has she done to be
ashamed of? Show her face indeed! I cannot understand the spite which one woman will sometimes
have to another."

"There is no spite, John; and it's very wrong of you to say so," said Mary, defending herself.
"But it is a very unpleasant thing for a girl to be jilted. All the world knows that she was
engaged to him."

"And all the world knows--" But he would not proceed to declare that all the world knew that
also Crosbie had been well thrashed for his baseness. It would not become him to mention that,
even before his mother and sister. All the world did know it; all the world that cared to know
anything of the matter,--except Lily Dale herself. Nobody had ever yet told Lily Dale of that
occurrence at the Paddington Railway Station, and it was well for John that her friends and
his had been so discreet.

"Oh, of course you are her champion," said Mary. "And I didn't mean to say anything unkind.
Indeed I didn't. Of course it was a misfortune."

"I think it was the best piece of good fortune that could have happened to her, not to marry
a d---- scoundrel like--"

"Oh, John!" exclaimed Mrs Eames.

"I beg your pardon, mother. But it isn't swearing to call such a man as that a d---- scoundrel."
And he particularly emphasised the naughty word, thinking that thereby he would add to its
import, and take away from its naughtiness. "But we won't talk any more about him. I hate the
man's very name. I hated him the first moment that I saw him, and knew that he was a blackguard
from his look. And I don't believe a word about the squire having been cross to them. Indeed
I know he has been the reverse of cross. So Bell is going to marry Dr Crofts!"

"There is no doubt on earth about that," said Mary. "And they say that Bernard Dale is going
abroad with his regiment."

Then John discussed with his mother his duties as private secretary, and his intention of leaving
Mrs Roper's house. "I suppose it isn't nice enough for you now, John," said his mother.

"It never was very nice, mother, to tell you the truth. There were people there-- But you mustn't
think I am turning up my nose because I'm getting grand. I don't want to live any better than
we all lived at Mrs Roper's; but she took in persons that were not agreeable. There is a Mr
and Mrs Lupex there." Then he described something of their life in Burton Crescent, but did
not say much about Amelia Roper. Amelia Roper had not made her appearance in Guestwick, as
he had once feared that she would do; and therefore it did not need that he should at present
make known to his mother that episode in his life.

When he got back to the Manor House he found that Mr Dale and his niece had arrived. They were
both sitting with Lady Julia when he went into the morning room, and Lord De Guest was standing
over the fire talking to them. Eames as he came among them felt terribly conscious of his position,
as though all there were aware that he had been brought down from London on purpose to make
a declaration of love;--as, indeed, all of them were aware of that fact. Bell, though no one
had told her so in direct words, was as sure of it as the others.

"Here comes the prince of matadores," said the earl.

"No, my lord; you're the prince. I'm only your first follower." Though he could contrive that
his words should be gay, his looks were sheepish, and when he gave his hand to the squire it
was only by a struggle that he could bring himself to look straight into the old man's face.

"I'm very glad to see you, John," said the squire, "very glad indeed."

"And so am I," said Bell. "I have been so happy to hear that you have been promoted at your
office, and so is mamma."

"I hope Mrs Dale is quite well," said he;--"and Lily." The word had been pronounced, but it
had been done with so manifest an effort that all in the room were conscious of it, and he
paused as Bell prepared her little answer.

"My sister has been very ill, you know,--with scarlatina. But she has recovered with wonderful
quickness, and is nearly well again now. She will be so glad to see you if you will go over."

"Yes; I shall certainly go over," said John.

"And now shall I show you your room, Miss Dale?" said Lady Julia. And so the party was broken
up, and the ice had been broken.

CHAPTER LIII

Loquitur Hopkins

The squire had been told that his niece Bell had accepted Dr Crofts, and he had signified a
sort of acquiescence in the arrangement, saying that if it were to be so, he had nothing to
say against Dr Crofts. He spoke this in a melancholy tone of voice, wearing on his face that
look of subdued sorrow which was now habitual to him. It was to Mrs Dale that he spoke on the
subject. "I could have wished that it might have been otherwise," he said, "as you are well
aware. I had family reasons for wishing that it might be otherwise. But I have nothing to say
against it. Dr Crofts, as her husband, shall be welcome to my house." Mrs Dale, who had expected
much worse than this, began to thank him for his kindness, and to say that she also would have
preferred to see her daughter married to her cousin. "But in such a matter the decision should
be left entirely to the girl. Don't you think so?"

"I have not a word to say against her," he repeated. Then Mrs Dale left him, and told her daughter
that her uncle's manner of receiving the news had been, for him, very gracious. "You were his
favourite, but Lily will be so now," said Mrs Dale.

"I don't care a bit about that;--or, rather, I do care, and think it will be in every way better.
But as I, who am the naughty one, will go away, and as Lily, who is the good one, will remain
with you, doesn't it almost seem a pity that you should be leaving the house?"

Mrs Dale thought it was almost a pity, but she could not say so now. "You think Lily will remain,"
she said.

"Yes, mamma; I feel sure she will."

"She was always very fond of John Eames;--and he is doing so well."

"It will be of no use, mamma. She is fond of him,--very fond. In a sort of a way she loves
him--so well, that I feel sure she never mentions his name without some inward reference to
her old childish thoughts and fancies. If he had come before Mr Crosbie it would have all been
well with her. But she cannot do it now. Her pride would prevent her, even if her heart permitted
it. Oh! dear; it's very wrong of me to say so, after all that I have said before; but I almost
wish you were not going. Uncle Christopher seems to be less hard than he used to be; and as
I was the sinner, and as I am disposed of--"

"It is too late now, my dear."

"And we should neither of us have the courage to mention it to Lily," said Bell.

On the following morning the squire sent for his sister-in-law, as it was his wont to do when
necessity came for any discussion on matters of business. This was perfectly understood between
them, and such sending was not taken as indicating any lack of courtesy on the part of Mr Dale.
"Mary," he said, as soon as Mrs Dale was seated, "I shall do for Bell exactly what I have proposed
to do for Lily. I had intended more than that once, of course. But then it would all have gone
into Bernard's pocket; as it is, I shall make no difference between them. They shall each have
a hundred a year,--that is, when they marry. You had better tell Crofts to speak to me."

"Mr Dale, he doesn't expect it. He does not expect a penny."

"So much the better for him; and, indeed, so much the better for her. He won't make her the
less welcome to his home because she brings some assistance to it."

"We have never thought of it,--any of us. The offer has come so suddenly that I don't know
what I ought to say."

"Say--nothing. If you choose to make me a return for it--; but I am only doing what I conceive
to be my duty, and have no right to ask for a kindness in return."

"But what kindness can we show you, Mr Dale?"

"Remain in that house." In saying these last words he spoke as though he were again angry,--as
though he were again laying down the law to them,--as though he were telling her of a duty
which was due to him and incumbent on her. His voice was as stern and his face as acid as ever.
He said that he was asking for a kindness; but surely no man ever asked for kindness in a voice
so peremptory. "Remain in that house." Then he turned himself in towards his table as though
he had no more to say.

But Mrs Dale was beginning, now at last, to understand something of his mind and real character.
He could be affectionate and forbearing in his giving; but when asking, he could not be otherwise
than stern. Indeed, he could not ask; he could only demand.

"We have done so much now," Mrs Dale began to plead.

"Well, well, well. I did not mean to speak about that. Things are unpacked easier than they
are packed. But, however-- Never mind. Bell is to go with me this afternoon to Guestwick Manor.
Let her be up here at two. Grimes can bring her box round, I suppose."

"Oh, yes: of course."

"And don't be talking to her about money before she starts. I had rather you didn't;--you understand.
But when you see Crofts, tell him to come to me. Indeed, he'd better come at once, if this
thing is to go on quickly."

It may easily be understood that Mrs Dale would disobey the injunctions contained in the squire's
last words. It was quite out of the question that she should return to her daughters and not
tell them the result of her morning's interview with their uncle. A hundred a year in the doctor's
modest household would make all the difference between plenty and want, between modest plenty
and endurable want. Of course she told them, giving Bell to understand that she must dissemble
so far as to pretend ignorance of the affair.

"I shall thank him at once," said Bell; "and tell him that I did not at all expect it, but
am not too proud to accept it."

"Pray don't, my dear; not just now. I am breaking a sort of promise in telling you at all,--only
I could not keep it to myself. And he has so many things to worry him! Though he says nothing
about it now, he has half broken his heart about you and Bernard." Then, too, Mrs Dale told
the girls what request the squire had just made, and the manner in which he had made it. "The
tone of his voice as he spoke brought tears into my eyes. I almost wish we had not done anything."

"But, mamma," said Lily, "what difference can it make to him? You know that our presence near
him was always a trouble to him. He never really wanted us. He liked to have Bell there when
he thought that Bell would marry his pet."

"Don't be unkind, Lily."

"I don't mean to be unkind. Why shouldn't Bernard be his pet? I love Bernard dearly, and always
thought it the best point in Uncle Christopher that he was so fond of him. I knew, you know,
that it was no use. Of course I knew it, as I understood all about--somebody else. But Bernard
is his pet."

"He's fond of you all, in his own way," said Mrs Dale.

"But is he fond of you?--that's the question," said Lily. "We could have forgiven him anything
done to us, and have put up with any words he might have spoken to us, because he regards us
as children. His giving a hundred a year to Bell won't make you comfortable in this house if
he still domineers over you. The members desired to receive bribes for their votes in as many
cases as possible. If a member could keep his constituents in ignorance of the way he voted,
he could often make money by voting in opposition to their interests. Bell and I have always felt that
his regard on such terms was not worth having."

"I almost feel that we have been wrong," said Mrs Dale; "but in truth I never thought that
the matter would be to him one of so much moment."

When Bell had gone, Mrs Dale and Lily were not disposed to continue with much energy the occupation
on which they had all been employed for some days past. There had been life and excitement
in the work when they had first commenced their packing, but now it was grown wearisome, dull,
and distasteful. Indeed so much of it was done that but little was left to employ them, except
those final strappings and fastenings, and that last collection of odds and ends which could
not be accomplished till they were absolutely on the point of starting. The squire had said
that unpacking would be easier than packing, and Mrs Dale, as she wandered about among the
hampers and cases, began to consider whether the task of restoring all the things to their
old places would be very disagreeable. She said nothing of this to Lily, and Lily herself,
whatever might be her thoughts, made no such suggestion to her mother.

"I think Hopkins will miss us more than any one else," she said. "Hopkins will have no one
to scold."

Just at that moment Hopkins appeared at the parlour window, and signified his desire for a
conference.

"You must come round," said Lily. "It's too cold for the window to be opened. I always like
to get him into the house, because he feels himself a little abashed by the chairs and tables;
or, perhaps, it is the carpet that is too much for him. Out on the gravel-walks he is such
a terrible tyrant, and in the greenhouse he almost tramples upon one!"

Hopkins, when he did appear at the parlour door, seemed by his manner to justify Lily's discretion. In
a late number of a popular periodical, Mrs. Amelia E. Barr, while telling of her childhood a half-century
ago, incidentally remarks: "I should have as soon thought of smoking
my father's pipe as of reading his newspaper.



As Mrs Dale did not answer him at once, Lily spoke: "Yes, Hopkins, we are going in a very few
days, now. We shall see you sometimes, I hope, over at Guestwick."

"Humph!" said Hopkins. "So you be really going! I didn't think it'd ever come to that, miss;
I didn't indeed,--and no more it oughtn't; but of course it isn't for me to speak."

"People must change their residence sometimes, you know," said Mrs Dale, using the same argument
by which Eames had endeavoured to excuse his departure to Mrs Roper.

"Well, ma'am; it ain't for me to say anything. But this I will say, I've lived here about t'
squire's place, man and boy, jist all my life, seeing I was born here, as you knows, Mrs Dale;
and of all the bad things I ever see come about the place, this is a sight the worst."

"Oh, Hopkins!"

"The worst of all, ma'am; the worst of all! It'll just kill t' squire! There's ne'ery doubt
in the world about that. It'll be the very death of t' old man."

"That's nonsense, Hopkins," said Lily.

"Very well, miss. I don't say but what it is nonsense; only you'll see. There's Mr Bernard,--he's
gone away; and by all accounts he never did care very much for the place. They say all he's
a-going to the Hingies. And Miss Bell is going to be married,--which is all proper, in course;
why shouldn't she? And why shouldn't you, too, Miss Lily?"

"Perhaps I shall, some day, Hopkins."

"There's no day like the present, Miss Lily. And I do say this, that the man as pitched into
him would be the man for my money." This, which Hopkins spoke in the excitement of the moment,
was perfectly unintelligible to Lily, and Mrs Dale, who shuddered as she heard him, said not
a word to call for any explanation. "But," continued Hopkins, "that's all as it may be, Miss
Lily, and you be in the hands of Providence,--as is others."

"Exactly so, Hopkins."

"But why should your mamma be all for going away? She ain't going to marry no one. Here's the
house, and there's she, and there's t' squire; and why should she be for going away? So much
going away all at once can't be for any good. It's just a breaking up of everything, as though
nothing wasn't good enough for nobody. I never went away, and I can't abide it."

"Well, Hopkins; it's settled now," said Mrs Dale, "and I'm afraid it can't be unsettled."

"Settled;--well. Tell me this: do you expect, Mrs Dale, that he's to live there all alone by
hisself without any one to say a cross word to,--unless it be me or Dingles; for Jolliffe's
worse than nobody, he's so mortial cross hisself. Of course he can't stand it. If you goes
away, Mrs Dale, Mister Bernard, he'll be squire in less than twelve months. He'll come back
from the Hingies, then, I suppose?"

"I don't think my brother-in-law will take it in that way, Hopkins."

"Ah, ma'am, you don't know him,--not as I knows him; all the ins and outs and crinks and crannies
of him. I knows him as I does the old apple-trees that I've been a-handling for forty year.
There's a deal of bad wood about them old cankered trees, and some folk say they ain't worth
the ground they stand on; but I know where the sap runs, and when the fruit-blossom shows itself
I know where the fruit will be the sweetest. It don't take much to kill one of them old trees,--but
there's life in 'm yet if they be well handled."

"I'm sure I hope my brother's life may be long spared to him," said Mrs Dale.

"Then don't be taking yourself away, ma'am, into them gashly lodgings at Guestwick. I says
they are gashly for the likes of a Dale. It is not for me to speak, ma'am, of course. And I
only came up now just to know what things you'd like with you out of the greenhouse."

"Oh, nothing, Hopkins, thank you," said Mrs Dale.

"He told me to put up for you the best I could pick, and I means to do it;" and Hopkins, as
he spoke, indicated by a motion of his head that he was making reference to the squire.

"We shan't have any place for them," said Lily.

"I must send a few, miss, just to cheer you up a bit. I fear you'll be very dolesome there.
And the doctor,--he ain't got what you can call a regular garden, but there is a bit of a place
behind."

"But we wouldn't rob the dear old place," said Lily.

"For the matter of that what does it signify? T' squire'll be that wretched he'll turn sheep
in here to destroy the place, or he'll have the garden ploughed. You see if he don't. As for
the place, the place is clean done for, if you leave it. You don't suppose he'll go and let
the Small House to strangers. T' squire ain't one of that sort any ways."

"Ah me!" exclaimed Mrs Dale, as soon as Hopkins had taken himself off.

"What is it, mamma? He's a dear old man, but surely what he says cannot make you really unhappy."

"It is so hard to know what one ought to do. I did not mean to be selfish, but it seems to
me as though I were doing the most selfish thing in the world."

"Nay, mamma; it has been anything but selfish. Besides, it is we that have done it; not you."

"Do you know, Lily, that I also have that feeling as to breaking up one's old mode of life
of which Hopkins spoke. I thought that I should be glad to escape from this place, but now
that the time has come I dread it."

"Do you mean that you repent?"

Mrs Dale did not answer her daughter at once, fearing to commit herself by words which could
not be retracted. But at last she said, "Yes, Lily; I think I do repent. I think that it has
not been well done."

"Then let it be undone," said Lily.

