The ratel, who had himself to feed, and a wounded wife and two young whom he would lead to
that honey-feast anon, looked calmly over his shoulder at the form of the antelope towering
above him.  There was no sign of fear in his straight stare at the shaggy, ferocious-looking
horned head. He had no business with it, and would thank it to mind its own affairs. And the
honey-bird didn't care much, either, she having no young to feed, because, cuckoo-like, she
left other birds--woodpeckers, for choice--to see to that.

Wherefore, for as long as a man would take to select a cigarette with care and light it, there
was dead silence and stillness, broken only by the distant, deep "Hoo-hoo, hoo! hoo-hoo, hoo!"
of a party of ground hornbills.

Then that devil of meddlesome curiosity which is the curse of the wildebeests fell upon that
gnu, and sanity left him.

"Kwank!" neighed he.  And again, "Kwank!"

Next instant he had spun, top-fashion, on all four feet at once, and jumped in the same manner,
and was gone, whirling round them, with great shaggy head down, and in a halo of his own swishing
tail, at the rate of knots.

It was nothing to be wondered at in that strange antelope that he should then sink from wild
motion to absolute, fixed rigidity, broken only by the restless, horse-like swishing of the
long tail, staring hard at the ratel.

Perhaps it was the bees that did it, or perhaps the ratel stood in the gnu's very own path,
or in the way of his private dusting-hole.  I know not; neither did the ratel--nor care much,
for the matter of that.  But when the gnu went off again, circling with hoarse snorts, and
shying and swerving furiously and wonderfully at top speed, he sat up on his hindlegs, the
better to get a view of the strange sight.  Perhaps he thought a lion was lying somewhere near
that he could not see from his lowly, natural position.

Again the gnu stopped as utterly instantly as if he had run into a brick wall, pawed, stamped,
snorted, and went off once more into furiously insane caperings--a new set--all the time circling,
with the little, black-and-gray, erect figure of the surprised ratel as a pivot.

And then, in a flash, before any one had a second's warning to grasp the truth or prepare,
with head down, eyes burning in the down-dropped, shaggy head, and upcurved horn-points gleaming
in the afternoon sun, he charged, hurling himself, a living, reckless, furious battering-ram,
straight at the little ratel.

Did that ratel quit quick?  Do ratels ever quit an unbeaten foe?  I don't know.  They may,
once in the proverbial blue moon; but I haven't seen 'em.  This one didn't.  He seemed to know
that it is held to be a sound military maxim to meet an attack by counter-attack, and he did,
though he had only the fifth of a second to do it in.  Ah, but it was good to see that odd
little beast trotting out coolly, head low, tail high, singing his war-song as he rolled along
to meet the charging foe so many, many times his own size.

Next moment there was a thud--somewhat as if some one had punched a pillow--and the ratel was
flying through the air, high and fine, in a graceful and generous curve.  A thorn-bush--what
matter the precise name? there are so many in those parts, all execrable--acknowledged receipt
of his carcass with a crash, and for a few seconds he hung, like a sack on a nail, spitted
cleanly by at least one thorn, far thornier than anything we know here, before the thing gave
way, and he fell, still limply, this way and that, hesitatingly, as it were, as each point
lovingly sought to retain him, to a fork near the bottom, where he stayed.

At last he picked himself out of the fork, and--oh my!--with a whistling grunt of rage, coolly,
calmly, clumsily if you like, but grandly all the same, trotted forth into the open to look
for that bull-gnu again.  And that, sirs, was the sort, of animal he was.

The bull-gnu, however, who was not previously acquainted with small beasts that would face
his charge--and an aerial journey, and the thorns--and come back for more, had fetched a curve
at full gallop, and loped off into the landscape.  For the first time since the herds outlawed
him, I fancy, he seemed to be quite pleased with himself, and soon, antelope-like, put the
ratel from him placidly, and forgot.  But he was reckoning without his host.  If he had done
with the ratel, the ratel had not done with him.  No, by thunder--not by a good bit!

Finding no bull-gnu, the slow little black and grayish-white fighter from Fightersville returned
at a walk, still whistling with rage, to the unearthed bees'-nest, which looked like a town
after a bad air-raid.  And the first thing he did was to patter almost on top of a cobra, a
five-footer, who, having narrowly escaped death by the gnu's flying hoofs, was what one might
call considerably "het" up, or "off the handle," so to say.

The servant of the Devil sat up, blew out its beastly hood, and shot forth a hiss that seemed
to run all up and down one's spine, like lightning on an elm-tree.

The robber of honey sat up, said "Tchik!" and turned a somersault. What's that?  Yes, somersault
is right.

Followed instantly two thin jets of liquid, as much as anything I can think of like those lines
called "trajectory curves" which ballisticians do so love to draw in books on rifle-shooting;
only, these curved lines began at the hollow point of Mr. Cobra's poison-fangs, and were meant
to end in Mr. Ratel's eyes.  They didn't.  Old man ratel, he was standing on his hind-legs,
with his sturdy paws in front of his eyes--like a man who looks across a sunny land--and seemed
just about to turn a somersault again.  He changed his mind, though, when the poison, that
would have blinded him for life--and that life wouldn't have been long in that wild then, I
want to tell you--stopped, and he went in at that black-necked, legless, soulless servant of
Satan, utterly and amazingly unafraid.  It was fine.

Oh, by the way, I forgot to tell you that when Nature repented, and gave the ratel a courage
surpassing the courage of any other beast on earth, she also gave him a skin tough as a pachyderm's,
and loose, as if it were two sizes too large; and that is why that black-necked cobra died
quite quickly, and the ratel didn't, even slowly.  Even if the snake's fangs had got through,
which was not in the least likely, that did not mean to say they would touch Mr. Ratel's person
inside.  This, by the way, may explain why being spitted on thorns, like a beetle on a pin,
when the bull-gnu charged, did not seem to worry him much, either.

The moon was up when the wounded mother ratel, on guard at the mouth of her burrow, looked
up sharply.  A side-striped jackal, who kidded himself she had not seen him lying in wait to
find out, when she went hunting, what she hid in that den, suddenly bolted with a yap; and
a hyena, represented by two burning eyes, who appeared, by some magic of his own, to guess
she was wounded, jumped up and made way for something that approached.  It was her husband
and the cobra, the latter trailing along limply behind, who came that way; and even the hyena
had retired, with an audible sigh--at least, it wasn't a moan quite--when he claimed the path.
After all, there is no sense, if you are the most cowardly beast for your power on earth, in
getting up against the pluckiest thing in creation in full possession of life and liberty.

Later our ratel sallied forth to "face the world" again.  His wife had recovered from her wounds--the
result, these, of refusing to believe she was not so good as a twelve-foot python, and a bit
better--sufficiently to walk slowly; but that was not enough to face that wild where die-quicks,
from lions, down through leopards, hyenas, wild-dogs, jackals, and the rest, are forever hiding,
on the lookout for unfortunate ones flying an S.O.S. signal.  No, he must go and do the provisioning
alone, and alone he went.

For a peaceful beast, one only too pleased to mind his own business and thank other folks to
mind theirs, his subsequent doings were rather astonishing.  This was because he cared for
neither man nor beast nor devil, in the first place, and because the night produced all three,
in the second.

He got man in the form of the smell of meat--well-seasoned meat, even for Africa!--what time
he was testing a native village, by scent and on the downwind side of him--and that showed
his pluck, my word!--for honey or fowl.  He detected neither out of the few dozen unspeakable
stenches, but struck meat, and following it up-wind, arrived at a piece--a good big piece--on
the ground among grass.

A civet cat--who is more civet than cat, by the way--a small spotted genet--who looked like
an exaggerated ferret in the uncertain gloom--and the inevitable black-backed jackal--who must
not be confused with him of the side-stripes--faded out at his approach like steam in a dry
atmosphere.  He might have felt proud of this silent respect, if it were not a fact that these
gentry, these village frontier haunters, scenting danger, thought it a fine "kink" to let the
brave one test it first.

And he did.

To be exact, that ratel touched off the tooth-jawed trap that was the reason for that free
meal of high and valuable meat in that place, and when he jumped he didn't get anywhere.  Also,
it hurt his leg abominably.

Then the others reincarnated themselves out of the shadows--especially the jackal, who shouted
"Yaaaa-ya-ya-ya!" and called a friend--and waited for things to happen.  They were confident
things would happen, for Africa is not a good place wherein to get caught in a trap--there
is too much likelihood of being mistaken for the bait!

But they might as well have seen a thunder "portent" captured by the tail as this ratel by
the leg; for, instead of instantly and foolishly abandoning himself to the frenzy of unthinkable
fear--the fear of being trapped is the greatest of all to a free, wild thing--as practically
all others would have done, he said nothing at all; he failed to lose his head; and, to crown
all, he instantly, coolly, slowly, viciously, and doggedly set himself to struggle, with a
grim persistence that was amazing.  And, moreover, from that instant he never left off.

A striped hyena, seemingly in lifelong terror of his own shadow, turned up by magic--or perhaps
he heard the snap of the trap.  Seven times he bolted, for no earthly reason that one could
see, before finally gaining courage to snap at the ratel at the very end of his reach.  It
was the kind of snap that would take half a man's face away, and not nice to meet when you
are trapped.  The ratel, however, came calmly at the hyena, trap and all, and so nearly got
his own trap-jaws locked home on the unclean one that the hyena was glad to go away.

In the end, thanks to the amazing toughness of his skin, and its looseness, the ratel managed
to, as it were, slide the bone of his leg between the jaws of the trap, leaving the skin and
fur in, and the rest was mainly determined tugging and strong fang-work.

Then he coolly ate the real bait, and--the onlookers remembered appointments elsewhere.  None
of them, it seemed, was tickled to meet the ratel when he had finished.  He was sure to be
crusty; and, anyway, he had bitterly disappointed them all--he had achieved the apparently
impossible, and, worst part of the lot, was not dead.

Now, a ratel will do almost as much for honey as a bear for pork, a leopard for little "bow-wows,"
or a man for diamonds.  This will explain why he was foolish enough to follow, some hours later,
the trail of some natives who had been out collecting honey from a camp the day before; or
perhaps he knew nothing about the honey till, not too scientifically, he got into the camp.
Anyway, the honey was very good.

There are, however, from a wilding's point of view, camps and camps. Most of the inhabitants
of the wild, including the lion, who are not born with a pluck considerably above proof, can
discriminate the difference. The ratel either could not or would not.

Then the knowledge was driven home.  Driven home in the shape of a big, loose-limbed, deep-jowled
brute of a dog, as unlike the ordinary native curs as it well could be. As Canada received her successive
grants of liberties, and ever new liberties, the imperial authorities began to consider the
advisability of withdrawing imperial troops by degrees, and of leaving Canada to meet the ordinary
demands of her own defence. Grey and Elgin had corresponded largely on the point; and the result
had been a very general reduction of British troops {288} in Canada, the assumption being
that Canada would look to her own protection. To discover the character of the change thus introduced,
and its bearing on imperial politics, it again becomes necessary to travel beyond the limit set,
and to examine its results between 1860 and 1867. In these years the military situation developed
new and alarming possibilities for Canada.

The re-organization of the Canadian tariff excited much ill-feeling in the United States,
for it seemed an infringement of the arrangements made by Elgin in 1854.[61] Then followed the
Trent episode, the destruction created by the Alabama, the questionable policy both of England
and of Canada in taking sides, no matter how informally, in the war. In addition, the Irish-American
section of the population, which had furnished its share, both of
rank and file, and of leaders, to the war, was in those years bitterly
hostile to the British Empire, and plotted incessantly some secret
stroke which should wound Britain through Canada.

The gravest danger threatening British peace and supremacy at that time lay, not in Europe, but
along the Canadian {289} frontier, nor would it be fair to say that Britain alone, not Canada,
had helped to provoke the threatened American attack. Under these circumstances, partly because
of the expense, but partly also through factiousness and provincial
shortsightedness, the Canadian assembly rejected a scheme for providing
an adequate militia, and left a situation quite impossible from the
military point of view.

Instantly a storm of criticism broke over the heads of the colonies, so bitter and unqualified
that there are those who believe that to this day the mutual relations of Britain and Canada
have never quite recovered their old sincerity.[62] A member of the Canadian parliament, who
was travelling at the time in England, found the country in arms against his province: "You have
no idea of the feeling that exists here about the Militia Bill, and the defences of Canada generally.
No one will believe that there is not a want of loyalty among the
Canadians, and whenever I try to defend Canada, the answer is always
the same, that 'the English look for actions not assertions'; many
hard and unjust things are now said about the country, all of which
add strength to the Goldwin Smith party, which, after {290} all, is
not a very small one; and the Derbyites make no secret of what they
would do if they were in power,--let Canada take her chance."[63]
Even Earl Grey was prepared, at that crisis, to submit to the British
and Canadian parliaments a clear issue, calling on the latter to afford
adequate support to the British forces left in British North America,
or to permit the last of them to leave a country heedless of its own
safety.[64] From that time forth, more especially after Lee, Jackson,
Grant, and Sherman had revealed the military possibilities of the
American Republic, even military men began to accept the strategic
arguments against the retention of Canada as unanswerable, and joined
the ranks of those who called for separation.

Richard Cartwright, who had opportunities for testing British opinion, more especially among military
officers, found a universal agreement that Canada was indefensible, and that separation had
better take place, before rather than after war.[65] So John Bright and the leaders of the
British army had at last found a point in diplomacy and strategy on which they might agree.


They had proceeded perhaps three hundred yards, when, turning a bush carelessly, as no other
creature would dare to do, the ratel fell almost on to the back of the bull-gnu.

There is no need to be surprised that they should meet.  The wild is not an aimless mix-up
in that way.  Each creature has its beat, temporarily or permanently, nor seeks to deviate.
You may look for the same herd of antelope, feeding near the same place, about the same hour
each day; the same lion stumping the same beat, as regular as a policeman, most nights; the
same hyena uttering horrible nothings within hearing of the same hills, any time after the
setting of each sun, just as surely as the same cock-robin asks you for crumbs, the same blackbird
awakens you with inimitable fluting, and the same black cat seeks for both in the same vicinity
each dusk.

The surprise was in what followed.  Perhaps the bull-gnu kicked our ratel badly as he lurched
to his feet, jerked from half-sleep into violent collision with he knew not what.  Perhaps
the ratel had a memory. Perhaps the presence of his family weighed with him.  Whatever the
cause, the result was decided enough.  He reared and hit deep, and fixed home a very living
vise, where he bit.

Then things happened, but that which immediately followed was not a fight; it was not even
a spar.  The ratel never moved, although he was moved--astoundingly.  The gnu bull did the
moving, and produced the most amazing bit of violent activity one could dream of.  It was quite
indescribable.  A buck-jumping mustang of the most hustling kind would have been as a gentle
lamb to it.  The ground all about looked as if herds had jumped upon it--bushes, grass, flowers,
and all were trampled down flat.  But it did not do what it was designed to do--it did not
break the ratel's hold.  Bruised, assuredly, shaken so that he ought to have fallen to hits,
dizzy and blind, he did not let go, and in the position he held he could not be hammered off.
He just glued where he was, saying nothing at all, till the end--till that grand old bull sank
and was still, exhausted, by loss of blood, and with one great hopeless sigh his life departed
from him, and he died.

The ratel did not leave go for some little time.  He seemed to suspect that the gnu bull was
bluffing, or perhaps he was himself half-stunned.

It was the sudden and peculiar growling hiss from his wife--sounding all a-magnified in that
wilderness silence after the battle--that made him look up, at her first, and then almost instantly
at something else. His wife was backing slowly towards the "bush," every hair on her body sticking
straight out at right angles, her eyes fixed strangely upon that something else.  His young
had taken to cover, not, it seemed, too readily, but by their parent's order.

A lion was standing, still as a carved beast, at the far end of that little clearing--he was
the something else.  Goodness and his kingly self alone knew how long he had been there, that
great, heavy-jowled, deep-bellied, haughty-eyed brute.  He may have been present from the first,
or the middle, or only at that moment.  Being a lion, he was just there, suddenly, without
any visible effect of having got there, a presence of dread, created apparently out of thin
air at the moment, in that spot, and with less sound than a blown leaf.

This power of being, without seeming to come, of evolving from nowhere, is one of the lion's
most highly perfected tricks; for King Leo believes in all the ritual of his craft, and is
great on effects, even down to the minor details.  Power, grim and terrible, he has, without
shadow of doubt; but he never forgets to impress that fact--and more--upon the world, and every
action is carefully studied to advertise, not himself, but his "frightfulness."  A very fine
play-actor is the king of all the beasts.

But the ratel did not move.  He had met his Napoleon, and was not--so far as the watcher could
see--afraid.

Motionless, scowling, with head down, and shrewd, proud eyes smoldering, the lion stood there
like an apparition of doom.  He was, I fully suspect, letting the effect sink in deliberately.
He knew his game. Also, he had a reason.  Surely a great poker-player was lost in the lion.

But the little ratel met that regal stare squarely and unmoved.  He whose proud boast it was
that he feared nothing that walked or crawled, or swam or flew, could not be frightened now.
And he who came to terrify was perhaps all but ten feet long, and he whom he sought to terrify
was barely three feet.  It was a comparison to make you gasp.

Now, that lion did not want the ratel at all, or his wife, or his family, or anything that
was his.  He wanted the gnu, and would be very pleased if the ratel would go away and leave
it to him.

The ratel, moreover, did not want the gnu, being an eater of honey, locusts, and generally
badger-like fare for the most part; and if the lion had only had the sense to wait a few minutes
longer behind the scenes, the ratel would have gone away and left the gnu.  But he would not
be driven; that was the rub.  Attacking nobody unprovoked, he was a grim beast to attack, and
gave way before none.  Hence the trouble.

Finding that the bluff of the impressive tableau did not work, the lion tried a fresh one.
Still staring at the ratel, he sank his head to the ground, so that his great mane hung to
the earth all about him.  His forelegs and his shoulders crouched, but his hindlegs and his
back were held at their highest, and his tail began to lash behind.  Then he began to growl
tremendously and nerve-shatteringly, and as he did so he curled his upper lips up and back,
till the whole ghastly array of his teeth was laid bare to view.  In this position he looked
like a gigantic grinning mask, with blind eye-sockets where the wrinkles were on the sloping
forehead, his eyes nearly invisible below, and a tail lashing far up atop.  It was a horrible
sight, and one calculated to stampede the pluckiest animal.

It was, of course, also a deliberate piece of mesmeric bluff, the reason for which was not
made clear till one noticed, what the ratel probably could not, that the great leonine tusks,
the terrible fangs, were yellow and worn, as were the rest of the teeth.  This was an old lion,
a king on a throne already tottering, a monarch of yesterday.

That lion, however, might have turned into Satan himself, for all the ratel cared.  He was
threatened, attacked, bullied, forced.  His blood was up, and had not all who ever fought him
allowed that he was the pluckiest beast on earth?  Enough!  Come lion! come devil! he would
give ground to none.

Lions are not too patient.  Also, they have fine spirit of their own. They are among the very
few beasts who will hunt and attack animals as strong as, or stronger than, themselves.  And
this lion's patience snapped suddenly.  All at once he seemed to remember that he was still
a king, though a king already within the shadow of abdication.  The terrible bass rumble of
his growl grew, and changed tone; his tail lashed faster and faster; and then, all suddenly
heralded by a couple of wicked, rasping, coughing grunts, he--charged.

The ratel moved to meet him--to meet him--and at a cool jog-trot!

What happened then was hard to follow.  It looked as if the worn fangs of the lion failed to
make his hold on the wonderful, leathern, loose armor of the little honey-badger, and that
he bungled the stroke of his terrible paw.  Be that as it may, the honey-badger certainly went
straight in, right under the lion's guard, right under the lion, and rearing, he bit home,
and hung like a living spanner.

And here, perhaps, it is best to draw a curtain.  For one reason, I cannot describe it, and
frankly confess the fact.  For several other reasons, it is best not to try.  The ratel died
in about ten minutes, crushed, battered, smashed to death; but the chaos lasted longer than
that, because, even after death, he was not done with--the passing of life had locked his amazing
jaws shut forever, and they were shut on the lion.

The end found the little ratel lying crumpled up and crimson on the trampled grass, and the
lion running about like some great injured dog, squatting down every few seconds to lick furiously
at his wound.  Fear was in the eyes of the king of beasts, for the first, probably, and certainly
for the last, time in his life, and his blood reddened the grass wherever he made his way;
but the internal hemorrhage was the worst.

Then the vultures came, and that, my friends, is a signal for us humans to go.  The vultures
get the last word always, even in a story, and the name of that word is--FINIS.

XVIII

THE DAY

Now, if you wore a helmet and neck armor of purple, green, and blue in metallic reflections,
with scarlet cheek and eye pieces, if your uniform were of purple, brown, yellow, orange-red,
green, and black, "either positive or reflected," with a long, rakish, dashing rapier-scabbard
cocked jauntily out behind, wouldn't you feel proud? So did he; pride and the "grand air" were
written all over him.  True, though, the rapier-scabbard was not a rapier-scabbard exactly--only
a tail; but it looked like one, in a way.  His full title was Phasianus colchicus, but ordinary
people called him just plain pheasant for short.

You would have thought, after all this, that even in the first pale light of a cold dawn he
would have been easy to see.  As a matter of fact, Gaiters, the head gamekeeper, one of his
underlings, three dogs, and a gun passed right under his bed without seeing him.  Rather, they
may have unconsciously seen him, and put him down as a bundle of dead twigs and leaves caught
up in a branch.  This is not very complimentary, perhaps, to a gentleman attired in a gorgeous
uniform as heretofore set out, but true; and lucky for him, too, to have at once a uniform
of unquestioned splendor and one which would melt into its surroundings.

They, the men, did not see him; but he, the old cock-pheasant, saw them right enough.  He opened
one eye, and stared at them through that. Then he opened the other eye, and stared at them
through that.  Neither stare seemed to please him.

It was not Gaiters's way to march through the wood at that hour in the morning.  What meant
this unseemly disturbance of Phasianus's domain? His suspicions, never long at rest, woke up.
Moreover, somewhere at the back of his brain rose a memory, a little, tiny speck of a memory,
which grew.

Then he stood right up.

Everywhere, here and there, in the gray cloak of the dawn-mist, he could hear the sharp "Chawk-chawk!"
and the quick, flustered whir as pheasant after pheasant came down from its roosting-perch
to clean and breakfast.  But his suspicions held him for a few minutes longer, stretching his
neck and peering about at the still-shrouded mystery of the ground below; and it was as well,
perhaps.

Suddenly his head was still; a spray of a brier-bush was swaying gently.  There was nothing
in that, of course, if there had been any breath of wind to move it; but there wasn't.  Wherefore
our gallant friend did not come down to preen and breakfast like the rest, but sat motionless
as a statue, while the sun rose and touched him to a winking golden and bronze wonder, and
the mists began to be torn asunder.  He wanted to know what moved that brier-branch, and he
wasn't taking chances till he did.

Day came on apace, and all the night hunters who had remained so late had already hurried off
to bed save one.  He appeared, evidently empty, certainly very angry indeed at having waited
for a cock-pheasant who refused to do what he was supposed to do and come down to breakfast.
Out of the brier-bush he came, a lean dog-fox, snarling horribly up at the pheasant, who calmly
returned the gaze, conscious of his safety, of course, and said "Chuck it!" in a loud, harsh
voice, and quite distinctly, twice.

The fox, knowing it was no good to wait any longer in the daylight, went, like a floating red
shadow.  The pheasant watched him go, but did not move for some time.  Foxes had been known
to come back again more suddenly than they went.

At last he flew to the earth, but even then he did so as silently as his noisy wings would
let him; and he did not announce the fact with a half-crow, as the others had done.  Very circumspectly
he slipped off through the undergrowth, by a series of little crouching runs, stopping every
now and then to freeze and listen.

Soon he came to one of those open, beautiful, grass-covered "rides" with which keepers intersect
pheasant-coverts.  He stopped dead on the edge of it, himself invisible among the drooping,
leaning, old-gold bracken.  The "ride" was full of wood-people, for here had been scattered
that corn which Gaiters intended the pheasants to feed upon. Indeed, there were about ten pheasants,
hens and young cocks of the year, doing exactly what they were intended to do.  Also, there
were some half-dozen softly-tinged, blue-gray wood-pigeons, and one cheeky jay--whose wing-patches
rivaled the perfection of the blue sky above--doing their best in a quiet sort of way to help
the pheasants, which they were not intended to do, by any manner of means.

The old cock-pheasant slid across the "ride" after a bit, low as a crouching rat.  He had no
business there this day.  His mind was still alert with suspicion.  Moreover, his father had
been a cunning old cock who had managed, by ways that were dark, to keep out of the game-bag
for years, too.  The taint, as Gaiters would have called it, had been passed on to him.

He made for the open edge of the covert, and he was mighty careful about doing that even. 
He felt that air and plenty of horizon were necessary to his well-being, after the disturbing
vision of Gaiters and Co., so unnaturally busy, hurrying through the dawn.

Now, it is quite remarkable how much you can see from the edge of a pheasant-covert without
being seen yourself.  Keepers know that, but do not give the fact away.  The ground sloped
away in two open grass fields, a hedge dividing them, and it was within about the longitude
and the latitude of where that hedge met the covert that our old friend maneuvered.

The climate about there seemed to suit him admirably.  True, good food was not strewn in plenty
just where he could most easily see it.  He had to look for his acorns or his beechmast by
the good old domestic-fowl plan of scratching among the leaves; roots also he was forced to
scratch for; and the noisy mistle-thrushes with the tempers of Eblis had to be driven off the
berries he would look after in the ditch.

Also, there was a stoat.  That stoat, however, tackled him just once. In the process it discovered
(a) that he wore spurs not meant to be ornaments, and (b) that no one could teach him much
about using those same spurs.  The stoat, plus a new carmine decoration for gallantry, remembered
an urgent appointment down a rat-hole, and kept it.  Perhaps it was a young stoat, and had
not learnt that there are at least four degrees of cock-pheasant, namely, young and brainless,
adult and brave, old and brave and cunning, and old and decrepit; but the last stage is a rare
bird.  There is nothing of any use to the stoat in the second and third degrees of cock-pheasant--no
health to the stoat, you understand.

The dawning of the morning had passed by now in gold and crimson and purple splendor; the mist-curtain
had been drawn back by the fingers of the wind, the utter darkness upon everything at ground-level
had begun to give way before the sun, and to leeward of most trees and bushes there was a balmy
luxuriance of golden light that held one lingering.

Gnats were dancing under the low-hung boughs in still corners, as they will dance on the coldest
day; song-thrushes were beginning to take life for one more day, and tack hither and yon, as
if they were busy pegging the field down with an invisible "cats' cradle"; and the black rooks,
shining like burnished steel shields, flashed and flashed again as they began to gather beneath
the trees, where the ground thawed most and first.  Though they alone seemed to have discovered
it, the pigeons very quickly found that the rooks had hit something good, and you can bet one
jay, at any rate, must be there, to make profit out of somebody.

It was the jester of a jay, whom, in spite of his painted plumage, no one seemed to have noticed,
that first gave the alarm that carried the cock-pheasant's suspicious temperament a step farther
upon the path of independent action. Maurice clasped me in his arms, and in the midst of my tears
and pleadings, my guardian succumbed. It was arranged that our marriage
should take place within a fortnight, and that we should immediately
start to Europe.

Poor Elsie!--truest, wisest, best friend God ever gave me,--was enraged and distressed beyond
expression.

She wept, wrung her hands, and falling on her knees entreated me not to execute my insane purpose,--assured
me I was a lamb led to sacrifice, was the victim of an infamous scheme between uncle and nephew
to possess themselves of my estate, and she exhausted argument and
persuasion in attempting to recall my wandering common sense.

Much as I loved her, this bitter vituperation of my idol incensed and estranged me, and I temporarily
forbade her to enter my presence. Poor, dear, devoted Elsie! When my heart relented, and I
sought her to assure her of my forgiveness, tears and groans greeted me, and I found her sitting at
the foot of her bed, with her face hidden in her apron."

Stretching her arms towards the grave, Mrs. Gerome paused; her lips quivered, and two tears
rolled down her cheeks.

"Ah! dear old heart! Brave, true, tender soul! How different my lot would have been had I heeded
her prayers and counsel! Not until I lie down yonder, and mingle my dust with hers, can I,
even for an instant, forget her faithful, sleepless care and love. I believe she is the only
human being who was ever tenderly and truly attached to me, and God
knows I learned before I lost her how much her affection was worth."

The
cold, ringing voice grew tremulous, wavering, and some moments passed
before Mrs. Gerome continued,--

Half-way down the hedge, very low and long, the cock-pheasant was sneaking.  He seemed suddenly
anxious to mind his own business, and that everybody else should mind theirs.  He was going
away from the wood, which the books tell us is the realm, the sanctuary, the all, to a pheasant,
and he had no desire to answer questions by the way.  For this reason, then, and a few others,
he felt no special delight in sighting, about two hundred yards farther on--at a place where
two stacks surrounded by rails stood and sheltered a fowlhouse--a baker's dozen of fowls sunning
themselves on the hedge-bank.  He held for fowls all the wild creatures' contempt for the tame
or domestic.  All the same, he saw no health in risking the open just then, and would not turn
back, so there was nothing for it but the fowls.

Low as low he crouched, and ran very quickly, and hoped for the best; and there is no bird
that can wish itself out of sight in this fashion better than friend pheasant.  But he forgot
the odd cockerel out.  He shot right on to the wretched thing--a gawky red youth--messing about
all alone in a nettle-clump, and it dashed into the field, racing on long yellow legs, and
squawking fit to wake the dead.

Down clapped the pheasant as if the noise had pierced his heart, and remained stiller than
the crawling roots around him, and not half so easy to see.  But it was no good.  Up shot the
dozen heads above the herbage, and two dozen vacuous eyes regarded his vicinity with empty-headed
inquisitiveness.

He almost melted into the ground, but it was useless.  An old, old hen--who perhaps was ignored
by the lord of the harem, and hoped for an adventure--waddled up, stood within a yard of his
crouched, rounded shape without seeing him, saw him, shot straight up in the air at least one
foot, screaming for help, and promptly charged blindly into the hedge, where she as promptly
got held up among roots and twigs.

The old pheasant got to his feet just as the rooster who owned the outfit came racing up, panting
and red.  He had heard a wife scream for help.  Perhaps it was the odd bird out; or, anyway,
some one who had to be abolished.  And he never waited to think.  He saw what might have been
a small cockerel (if it had been large he might have thought twice) crouching, and--he just
sailed right in.

Then something happened.  The two met, going up breast to breast.  For a moment or two the
cock-pheasant showed on or about that big rooster. Some feathers hung in the air.  The rooster
sat on his heels, met by a blow in the chest that seemed to take all the wind from his sails,
so to speak, and would have drawn off to reconsider things if he had not promptly become more
busy than ever before in his life.

It was over ere any one knew quite what was happening.  The old cock-pheasant had passed through
the crowd and vanished at the double down the hedge, and the big rooster was slowly subsiding
into a pool of his own blood, from which he was destined never to rise again.

But those who make, instead of following, their own destiny do not get let off thus lightly
in the wild.  The pheasant had not gone a hundred yards, when a most intolerable blast, an
almost unbearable blast, of shrill, nerve-racking noise throbbed through his head.  The bird
fell in his tracks where he ran, as if some one had jerked his legs from under him, and he
peered out.

What he beheld was an under-keeper standing close by and blowing upon a two-note pea-whistle
till there seemed some danger that he would burst his cheeks, or a blood-vessel, on the spot,
and far up the field three wandering pheasants racing back to the covert, as they thought,
for very life; but, as a matter of fact--and you shall see--it was to very death.  The blower
of whistles was stationed there to drive back into the covert any pheasants who were so misguided
as to wish to roam thence into the fields and away.

Now, that old reprobate of a pheasant of ours was a pretty confirmed runner, anyway.  He had
trained himself to it.  Yet never in all his checkered life was he conscious of a more awful
desire to flee by means of the wings that God had given him.  The weakness was over in a few
seconds, and he crept on; but it was a near thing while it lasted.  He passed, however, away
from the danger zone, resisting temptation, and it was as well.

As he went there burst forth, at the opposite end of the big covert to that at which he had
come out, a sudden, quick shot.  It echoed away and away back among the woods, clattering and
banging like great doors shutting.  The old cock-pheasant stopped to listen; he cocked his
green head on one side; he stood with one foot daintily uplifted: and in the same instant there
burst upon the air a rending, crashing succession of shots, worse than ragged volley-firing,
which almost made him jump.  It had begun--the big shoot over his covert, the largest, the
best, the richest in pheasants, which had been saved for this--"the day" had begun.  When it
ended very few pheasants would be left alive, for word had gone forth that it was to be thinned
down, almost shot out, and that not a cock must escape.

He, our own cock-pheasant, might have chuckled--as a cock-pheasant can, and will, very low
and softly to himself, if you are close enough to hear him--if something had not very suddenly
and very mysteriously said "phtt!" just like that, close beside him.  The old bird's head snicked
round, right round, almost hindpart before; but he made no other movement.  The sound was new
to him, and of a strangely sinister import.  Also, there was a little splayed hole in the ground,
as if a walking-stick had been poked in there, close beside him, which had not been there before.

He was still staring when something, singing a little, high-pitched song in a minor key to
itself, came romping through the silent air, and, with an oddly emphasized and emphatic "phtt!"
landed between his feet.  It bored a hole just like the first thing, and it spat dirt up into
his face.

The third mystery thing clipped three feathers from his back as he ran, bolted for dear life,
crouching low--even then he would not rise--for the hedge.  He got there alive, if not quite
whole; while a fourth nameless object cut twigs off above him.  Then he kept on running, always
hugging the hedges, till he was two fields away.  He was upset and overstrained, for Fate had
given him plenty of deaths to circumvent as it was, in the ordinary course of business, and
this addition was a bit too much. 

"Unless you blend with it the true and good, your love of beauty will degenerate into the merely
sensuous æsthetics, which, at the present day, renders its votaries fastidious, etiolated voluptuaries.
The deification of humanity, so successfully inaugurated by Feuerbach and Strauss, is now no
longer confined to realms of abstract speculation; but cultivated sensualism has sunk so low
that popular poets chant the praises of Phryne and Cleopatra, and painters and sculptors seek
to immortalize types that degrade the taste of all lovers of Art.

The true mission of Art, whether through the medium of books, statues, or pictures, is to purify
and exalt; but the curse of our age is, that the fashionable pantheistic raving about Nature,
and the apotheosizing of physical loveliness,--is rapidly sinking into a worship of the vilest elements
of humanity and materialism. Pagan æsthetics were purer and nobler than the system, which, under
that name, finds favor with our generation."

She listened, not assentingly, but without any manifestation of impatience, and while he talked,
her eyes rested dreamily upon the yellow beach, where,--

"Trampling up the sloping sand, In lines outreaching far and wide,
The white-maned billows swept to land."

Whether she pondered his words, or was too entirely absorbed by her
own thoughts to heed their import, he had no means of ascertaining.

"Mrs.
Gerome, what have you painted recently?"

"Nothing, since my illness;
and perhaps I shall never touch my brush again. Sometimes I have thought
I would paint a picture of Handel standing up to listen to that sad
song from his own 'Samson,'--'Total eclipse, no sun, no moon!' But
I doubt whether I could put on canvas that grand, mournful, blind
face, turned eagerly towards the stage, while tears ran swiftly from
his sightless eyes.  In fact, from the instant
he got sight of that head, it was as if a Hand had come down and turned him by magic into a
big model of a bird cast in bronze.  All life in him appeared to have dried up and fled.  He
looked as if you could have picked him up and put him upon a bracket in your drawing-room without
his ever moving again.  But that was only because of the head he had seen--and its reputation.
Moreover, the head was not alone.  At least, it had multiplied itself half-a-dozen times in
less than half-a-dozen seconds, and even a stoat, which the head belonged to, cannot be in
two places at once--though for sheer quickness of movement it, and far more its cousin the
weasel, comes very near to it.

Just at this moment it seemed that about the roost unhealthful thing he could do would be to
be seen in the air.  Wherefore did this innocent and guileless old bird affect not to see the
stoats, but made out that he was feeding his way along, quite and absolutely intent upon that
yellow devil of a weed whose other name is charlock.  He did not even hurry, and each deliberate
step was taken with almost a proud daintiness.  The only thing was, he never lifted his head;
he was almost too obviously unwary--for him.  And he gave the impression that every step would
be his last out into the field; that he was always going to turn back next instant or the next,
as he had done before when the stoats were not there.

On and on he kept till he had crossed the field, going faster and faster, till he ended at
the far hedge with a run.  And there, so far as he was concerned, was an end of the stoats.
He put them aside.  He forgot all about them.

They, however, had not forgotten about him.

It was half-an-hour later, and he was patiently gleaning such food as the rooks and the sparrows
and the larks had left behind them, when something, he could not tell what, caused him to straighten
up, with that beautiful, proud bearing that seems part of the pheasant's heritage from the
gorgeous East.

And he was only just in time.

The stoat that had come up behind him, unseen, turned on its heels as it charged, changing
its mind at the last moment, as if it saw he saw, and was gone again before you could click
a finger, diving superbly back into long grass.

They were following him, then, those little hounds of death; tracking him; running him down.
And why?  He did not know, perhaps, yet--maybe he did.  Blood is a dangerous thing to have
on you in the wild--a flaming signal of distress for eye and nose to detect--and they are not
often rescuers who hurry to the scene.  He had blood on his back, that cock-pheasant, and just
every now and then a single bright drop fell by the way.  The .22-bore bullet had only grazed
him.  'Twas nothing--but it bled more than you would expect.  And that explained it.  The tracking
stoats thought he was wounded.

But even then the old cock-pheasant would not rise.

The firing in the covert had risen suddenly to a fierce crescendo, breaking out afresh from
another quarter.  Here, however, was silence--the absolute, deadly silence in which all the
weasel tribe hunt.  But they were there, though he could not see them.  He knew that, invisible
even in the sunlight--they were closing in, tracking him fast, those stoats.

Then he ran.  He ran not so much for his life, but for the right to keep on the ground.  If
the worst came to the worst, he could always fly; but he would do anything rather than that.

He turned and ran away from the woods--raced like a fowl, but quicker, lower, much harder to
see.  A sudden gleam of bright-chestnut fur dead ahead, however, stopped him, and he turned
back, keeping always to the hedge--towards the covert.  He could hear no sound around him,
only the burst and the bang of the guns in the woods, and he might have been alone; but directly
he came to another hedge, and swung down to it at right angles, a furry tail with a paint-brush
tip, vanishing round a holly-stem, fetching him up all standing.  They were there, too, those
stoats.  He seemed to be surrounded on all sides save one, and that the one towards the woods.
So he swung back into his original path.

Then, very soon, as he ran up the hedge-ditch, it seemed to him as if the dead leaves collected
there were beginning to whisper behind him. But there was no wind to move them.  Moreover,
it grew closer, till it seemed at his very tail, that whisper of dead leaves.

Then, in a flash, he had stopped, spun about like a top, and struck with his spurs twice--whack,
whack--more than instantly, and a long, low, brown body--close behind him, that had risen as
he turned, so that its spotlessly clean shirt-front offered him a fine mark, went over sideways--with
a grunt and all the wind knocked out of it, as well as an inch-and-a-half gash to remember
friend pheasant by.  That was one stoat; but it was not alone.  He had a vision of chestnut
forms sliding and rippling in and out of the shadows and the long copper gleams of the westering
sun.

As he turned again, and the whispering began once more behind, the firing in front broke out
afresh, and much nearer.  Still he would not rise, however.  It was this fact, probably, which
kept the stoat-pack at his heels.  They seemed convinced that he was badly wounded and unable
to fly.

Then came the road.  He was on it before he knew.  There was the wedge-shaped, low-browed head
of a stoat racing up along one side of him, with murder plainly written in the gleam of its
beady eyes; there was the hot breath of another beating on his opposite flank; there was one
with feet out and all brakes on, trying its best to pull out one of the feathers of his long
and beautiful tail; and--there was the road dead ahead.

It was one of three--the road, the air, or death where he was.  He chose the road, and crossed,
like a hunted cat crossing a back-yard. His feet seemed scarcely to touch the dust as he negotiated
the open, yet he had time to take in a fact or two.  One was that the stoats had stopped--a
little bunch of peering heads on a group of craning necks on the edge of the ditch behind him.
Another was that several people and a motor-car were standing still in the road quite close,
watching the shooting.  I don't think any of them saw him, but he felt as if all of them did.

Arrived in the hedge on the far side of the road, he clapped down, panting.  The hedge ran
along the road.  On the other side of it was the grass of the park-land, stretching away two
hundred yards or so to the edge of the covert, which came down to a point here.  He could hear
the tapping of sticks in the covert--beaters' sticks.  He could hear an occasional shout. 
Men in tweeds stood motionless on the edge of the covert, and suddenly moved.

Then came the infernal crash of the guns again, and he saw a hen-pheasant pitch sickeningly
on her head from a height, and a cock-pheasant, flaming like a rocket in the sinking sun, run
the gauntlet of four shots, only to turn over and slide down at a fifth.

Then--and then, he jumped.

Something had pushed past him.  In the din he had not heard it.  He turned as he crouched,
and saw that it was a hen-pheasant, with blood on her breast and one wing trailing alongside.
And in the same instant he was aware of a man--an under-keeper--crackling about in the hedge
only ten yards away, looking for that hen-pheasant.

And the unwounded old cock, crouching almost till he looked like a tortoise, followed the blundering,
staggering, wounded hen.  It was the only thing he dared do.

It was a strange creep, and an erratic one, with many stops, those two hunted ones took together,
meeting, so strangely, too--not for the first time, since she had been one of his wives in
the dim peaceful past--with the guns thundering away so close, and their sons and their daughters
being slain almost all around them.  They had, however, little time to think about it, for
they came, after about twenty yards, to a gap spanned by barbed wire, and they stopped, the
cock about a foot behind the hen's tail, in cover scarcely enough to hide them.

But that was not all.  Two men in fawn overcoats stood in the road by the gap, looking through
it at the shooting; and a boy with a bicycle stood close to them, interested in the same thing.

It was the boy with the bicycle that did it; or, rather, it was the unhappy hen-pheasant that
made him.  She, being in extremis, had made some noise among the stiff dead leaves.  It was
not much of a noise, but it caught the boy's young ear, and he bent forward to peer at the hedge.

One of the men saw him, said something, to which the boy nodded, jumped down into the ditch,
and thrusting in a long arm, began to feel with a purposeful hand.  The hen-pheasant, whose
nerves were already shattered to little pieces, struggled to get out of reach, and in a second
had given the whole show away.

But I like to think of what our cunning old cock-pheasant did then.  He did nothing--absolutely
nothing at all. The warmest language used concerning Her Majesty's representative in Canada may
be found in the speech of Macdonald in the confederation debate: "We place no restriction on
Her Majesty's prerogative in the selection of her representative.
  That, my masters, needed a nerve, after
all that he had gone through.  What?

The two men, seeming to think that they had got enough for one quiet walk, departed, not quickly,
but without unnecessary delay.  The man who had been looking for the hen-pheasant, and had
seen nothing of what took place at the gap, gave it up, and went away over the grass to the
shooters.  The shooting ended with one last double shot, at one last old cock-pheasant driven
reluctantly from the last hush of the covert; the dogs were out, galloping all over the ground
for the wounded and the slain; the watchers in the road departed; the shooters gradually merged
into groups, and drew farther and farther away up the park; and the boy, who was shy, mounted
his bicycle and rode off into the sad blue-gray of the gathering dusk.

The big day was over, and the old cock-pheasant was alone with the melancholy song of a single
robin, and a chaffinch calling "Chink!" And the cold breath of the sunset wind, shuddering
and sighing all to itself across the face of the empty scene, touched the feathers that were
left by the hen-pheasant attached to thorns and twigs in her last struggle, so that they danced
and wavered and flickered before the old cock's eyes, as a reminder of all that had been for
them in the past--the past, which for him, but never for her, might be again.

That night he roosted in the covert, as usual.

THE END