"The truth is, Elsie refused him, and it is difficult for a man to make a second offer when
he has such slight opportunities of seeing her, even if he has not made a transfer of his affections."

"I would make an opportunity--I would write--I would ask point-blank to see her--I would speak
to you about it, if I were in his place. It is cowardly in Brandon."

"Why, Francis, you are very unreasonable. Elsie refused him as positively and uncompromisingly
as possible on her way down to Derbyshire. I do not think she would do so now; but how is he
to know that?"

"I would hint as much to him, if I were you. Why, Jane, a word from you might secure your sister's
happiness for life, and you shrink from saying it."

"Indeed I do," said Jane. "I think no good can come from interfering in such matters, and I
am particularly ill-adapted for such a delicate communication. Besides, if one may judge by
the last few weeks, it is Miss Phillips who ought to receive the offer of marriage, and not
Elsie. If her brother were to ask what Mr. Brandon's intentions are, as he might very well
do, the result would be a marriage of two very ill-assorted people. She cannot comprehend the
real goodness and simplicity of his character, and despises the man whom she is scarcely worthy
to wait on. She even looks down on her generous brother; she has no love for her brother's
children, and no sympathy with anyone. I am really very glad to observe, with you, that her
influence with Mr. Brandon has decreased of late; but he certainly has paid her a great deal
of attention, and she expects a proposal."

"Her face has no charm to me," said Francis. "Taken feature by feature it is handsome enough;
but it wants play and variety, and it has not the perfect harmony of Mrs. Phillips's. That
is a singularly beautiful index to a soul that appears to be nothing particular. I have heard
it said that we have all our ugly moments. Have you ever seen such a time with Mrs. Phillips?"

"There are times when she certainly does not look beautiful to me, nor to Elsie either. But
I wanted to speak to you of your own affairs. I had letter from Tom Lowrie this morning, in
which he says that he hears from one of his old schoolfellows that you have been asked to stand
for the Swinton group of burghs, and that every one says you will easily be able to carry them
over the duke's man."

"Ah! has he heard about it? I should have told you of it, but the more pressing personal interest
of the letter from Melbourne, Mr. Phillips's strange agitation, and this mysterious spiritual
communication, put it out of my head for the time, and a word from you would put it aside for
ever," said Francis, with the old wistful look.

Jane, like all women who are interested in public matters at all, and they form a very small
minority of her sex, rather over-estimated the importance of a parliamentary career. She knew
the turn of her cousin's mind, his education as a man of the people, his position as a man
of property, his earnest desire to do right, his patient habits of business, and his thorough
method of research and inquiry, were all certain guarantees that he could not fail; and she
had the belief that his abilities, and readiness, and confidence would make him an eloquent
and skilful debater. It appeared to her to be an object of great importance that a perfectly
honest and independent member should replace for the burghs in her native country the nominee
of a great family, who only voted with his party, and never had done any credit either to the
electors or to the nation. She said truly when she spoke of her ambition finding its vent in
dreams about him and her pupil, Tom Lowrie. She certainly had influenced Francis Hogarth's
character greatly during the turning-point of his life; the ideas she had nursed in her trials
had been on his mind with force and earnestness, and through him she could hope to give a voice
to a number of her crotchets and theories. Where a woman writes as well as thinks, she does
not feel this dependence on the other sex so strongly; for, though at a disadvantage, she can
for herself utter her thoughts--but Jane, as my readers will have observed, was not literary. "Well,"
he said, "they've played their trump, boys. Doc Jim--your law's been attacked in the federal court--under
Tom Van Dorn--damn him!"

The group barked a common question in many voices. Fenn replied: "As I make it out, they got a
New York stockholder of the Wahoo Valley Fuel Company to ask for an injunction against paying
little Ben his money to-morrow, and the temporary injunction has been granted with the hearing
set for June 16."

"And won't they pay us without a suit?" asked Bowman.

"Why, I don't see how that can be--they've been paying for accidents for a year now."

"Why, the law's through all the courts!" queried Brotherton.

"The state courts--yes," answered Fenn, "but they didn't own the federal court until they got
Tom in."

Bowman's jaw began to tremble.

His Adam's apple bobbed like a cork, and no one spoke.

Finally Dr. Nesbit spoke in his high-keyed voice: "I presume legal verbiage is all they talk
in hell!" and sat pondering.

"Is there no way to beat it?" asked Brotherton.

"Not in this court, George," replied Fenn, "that's why they brought suit in this court."

"That means a long fight--a big law suit, Henry?" asked Bowman.

"Unless they compromise or wear you out," replied the lawyer.

"And can't a jury decide?"

"No--it's an injunction. It's up to the court, and the court is Tom Van Dorn," said Fenn.

Then Dick Bowman spoke: "And there goes little Ben's school and a
chance to make something out of what's left of him.

Why, it don't look right when the legislature's passed it, and the
people's confirmed it and nine lawyers in all the state courts have
said it's law,--for the attorney for the company holding a job as
judge to turn over all them forms of law.

Can't we do something?"

"Yes," spoke the big voice of Grant Adams for the first time since Fenn made his announcement,
"we can strike--that's one thing we can do. Why," he continued, full of emotion, "I could no more
hold those men down there against a strike when they hear this than
I could fly.

They'll have to fight for this right, gentlemen!"

"Be calm now, Grant," piped the Doctor; "don't go off half cocked."

Grant's
eyes flared--his nose dilated and the muscles of his heavy jaw worked
and knotted. He answered in a harsh voice:

"Oh, I'll be calm all
right, Doctor. I'm going down in the morning and plead for peace.
But I know my people. I can't hold 'em."

Those in the room stood
for a moment in dazed silence; then the Doctor and Brotherton, realizing
the importance of further discussion that night, soon withdrew from
the room, leaving Dick voluble in his grief and Lida, his wife, stony
and speechless beside him. She shook no sympathizing hand, not even
Grant's, as the Bowmans left for home. But she climbed out of the
chair and down the stairs on tired, heavy feet.

In the morning there
was turmoil in the Valley. In the Times Jared Thurston, with the fatuous
blundering which characterizes all editors of papers like his, printed
the news that little Ben Bowman would be denied his rights, as a glorious
victory over the reformers. In an editorial, written in old Joe Calvin's
best style, the community was congratulated upon having one judge
at last who would put an end to the socialistic foolishness that had
been written by demagogues on the state statute books, and hinting
rather broadly that the social labor program adopted by the people
at the last election through the direct vote would go the way of the
fool statute under which the Bowman lad hoped to cheat the courts
of due process of law. The appointments
which the Whigs have made of late years have often been most shamefully actuated by family
or party reasons, and not with a single eye to the public service. Many times the Conservatives
are really more liberal than the Whigs--sometimes the Whigs are more Conservative than the
Tories. It is of the first importance that there should be many men such as you in Parliament,
who will watch over both parties; and, if this determined dualism is at work everywhere, how
are such men to get into the legislature? But, surely, you could carry the burghs--you can
speak, can you not?"

"I don't know, I never tried; but I dare say I could beat Mr. Fortescue, the duke's candidate.
He has never opened his mouth in the House, but to give his vote, and on the hustings he made
no figure."

"Try the independent course, by all means; you may be beaten, but then if you succeed, you
will be so much more useful."

"It will probably cost me a thousand pounds."

"It is shameful that the duty of serving one's country for nothing should be so dearly bought.
If you get in, you must try to introduce some measure to reduce election expenses."

"A difficult matter. The object of the Parliament, when once assembled, is to make it difficult
and expensive to get in. To keep the candidature within the limits of a privileged body is
considered a great safeguard."

"Not by me, or by you," said Jane. "I want you to get in because you know the feelings and
the wants of the people who have no votes better than ninety-nine out of a hundred, who are
members of Parliament. Oh! Francis, I feel quite sure that if you exert yourself you can get
in. And what is a thousand pounds?--you have it to spare."

"I am doubtful," said Francis, shaking his head, "if I can afford to go into Parliament."

"Have you not two thousand a year? and do not lawyers who can scarcely make a living go into
Parliament? I am sure there is some perjury on the subject of property qualification--but as,
perhaps, the latter is unnecessary, it is the less matter."

"They go to increase their means, or their practice, or their influence, and generally take
the first opportunity of accepting something better than the Chiltern Hundreds under Government,"
said Francis.

"There must be something very wrong somewhere, if a country gentleman of your standing cannot
afford to give his services to the House of Commons. Have you brought the requisition that
was sent to you?" said Jane.

"Yes; do you really want to see it? I have it in my pocket, and if I really felt in earnest
on the subject, I ought to communicate with Mr. Freeman, the earl's political agent in London,
to know how he will favour a man who would support the general policy of Government, but who
will hold himself free to vote against them whenever he sees them in the wrong. My only means
of securing the earl's influence is by convincing him that he cannot carry the burghs against
Fortescue by such a man as he has to put up; and as I am rather doubtful on that point, I can
scarcely assert it confidently. If he chooses to withhold his family interest he can make me
fail; but if it comes to the push, I would rather retire than let Fortescue get in."

"Electioneering, then, is very nice and difficult work," said Jane.

"Very difficult for the scrupulous, the sincere, and the far-seeing."

"Who are just the sort of people whom we want to see in Parliament."

"Whom YOU want to see, Jane, but not whom the two great parties wish to see. Then, should I
go to Mr. Freeman, do you think, with this requisition and a frank declaration of my principles,
and hear what he says on the matter? If the earl supports me I may count on a majority of twenty--a
safe enough one; and if not, shall I spend the thousand pounds in a glorious defeat; writing
the boldest and most independent of addresses; making the most uncompromising speeches from
the hustings, if I can find voice?"

"No fear of your finding voice, Francis," said Jane, warmly.

"Regardless of the savour of rotten eggs; undaunted by the sneers at my birth and breeding;
the tales about my father, the jeers at my mother; and only retiring at the last moment, when
I have said all that I have got to say, but which, I fear, my audience were not much in a mood
to hear. My own idea is, that I should succeed better in the calm argumentative debates in
Parliament, than as a hustings orator, or a popular declaimer."

"Yes, you will, and you certainly should try the second, that you may attain to the first.
My uncle was asked to stand for these burghs some ten years ago, but he was too crotchety,
and could not write an address that was at all likely to be acceptable to the electors, so
he gave up the contest before it began. Yet, you know, it would be well to have a few crotchety
people in the House of Commons. The game of life, whether social or political, is not played
by only two sets of black and red men--like chess or backgammon."

"I have met a gentleman at Miss Thomson's pretty frequently," said Francis, "who struck me
as having the most remarkable qualifications for a member of Parliament. He has a habit of
recurring to first principles which is rather startling, but which always forces you to give
a reason for the faith that is in you, and which either confirms your opinion satisfactorily,
or changes, or modifies it. He has retired from business on about 700 pounds a year--which
he has made in America, principally--has no family, no cares, and plenty of leisure--is the
most upright of men, and knows more of the principles of jurisprudence, and the details of
commercial matters than any one I ever knew; but no constituency would choose him, and he cannot
afford to throw away a thousand pounds for the privilege of having his say out. He is one of
the electors of Swinton, and particularly anxious that I should contest the burghs. His own
vote he can answer for, but he boasts of no large following; though he is a man who ought to
exert mental influence, he is too far ahead to be popular. If I were to stand, and were to
succeed, I will find him a most useful prompter; and with you to inspire enthusiasm for the
public service, and this Mr. Sinclair to suggest principles and details, I ought to distinguish
myself."

"I am quite sure that you will," said Jane; "so my advice is to lose no time in seeing Mr.
Freeman. I cannot believe that people who call themselves liberal can act so illiberally as
to endeavour to stifle independence. You will tell me a different tale tomorrow."

Francis did as Jane advised him, and as he himself thought he should do, and waited on Mr.
Freeman. It happened to be a time of a lull in party politics; there was no question strongly
before the public mind on which Whigs and Tories were so equally pitted that one vote was of
extreme importance; there was no near prospect of a change of Ministry, and the great Whig
houses had been much baited lately about their family selfishness and their party selfishness
being quite as bad as that of the old Tory set. So it appeared to Mr. Freeman at the present
crisis to be a very wise and expedient thing to offer support to an independent man like Mr.
Hogarth, for it was very questionable if the duke, who had been more liberal in his expenditure
in the towns, would not carry it against a mere club man, and they had no better man to spare.
Mr. Hogarth, at least, was sure to ask nothing of the Government. His support, when they got
it, would cost nothing; his adverse vote would be only on outside questions, as a rule. It
would look very well for the county election, which was to be a very tough affair between a
younger son of the duke and a younger brother of the earl, that Mr. Hogarth, of Cross Hall,
should have the earl's cordial support in the burghs. His vote was secure for the Honourable
James, and all those he could influence, he hoped. Francis said he could answer for his own,
but his tenants must please themselves.

"Oh, yes, certainly; but tenants generally find it for their advantage to vote with their landlord,"
said the agent.

"I will give my tenants distinctly to understand that they must vote from conviction, and that
that will please me. That is my view of being a Liberal," said Francis.

"And if all the other county proprietors had the same view the Honourable James would walk
the course; but we must oppose all the stratagems of war of an enemy who takes every advantage,
and strains to the utmost the influence of property and patronage."

"I want to go in with perfectly clean hands," said Francis.

"Bless you, so does everybody," said the parliamentary agent; "but somehow there is a lot of
queer work must be done to get fairly seated on the benches."

"I not only wish it, but I mean to do it," said Mr. Hogarth.

"Well, well--I hope you will be able to manage it. I must introduce you to the earl. I think
he will say, as I say, that he will give you cordial support; so that the sooner you get your
address out the better--as soon in the field as possible, and don't fall asleep over it. The
other party are like weasels--they are not to be caught napping; and will undermine what you
fancy secure ground, if you only give them a chance."

The result of Francis' interview with the earl was as satisfactory as that with the agent.
Party for once was inclined to waive its high prerogative, and to allow a person to slip into
Parliament without any pledge as to future action. His manner prepossessed the earl; he received
an invitation to dinner to meet a few political friends, and to talk over the canvass for the
county, which was one on which all their strength was to be expended. Harriett Phillips was
all the more interested in Mr. Hogarth when he had been invited to dinner with a peer of the
realm, and stood a good chance of adding M.P. (though only for a Scotch group of burghs) to
his name. Even Mrs. Phillips felt a little excited at the idea of a British member of Parliament,
and seemed to view both Jane and Elsie with more favour than she had done before; while Mr.
Phillips, anxious to do away with the impression of his first interview with Mr. Hogarth, was
quietly and cordially hospitable, and hoped that the Swinton burghs would return him, that
they might have the pleasure of his society in London for the coming sessions. Francis spent
a week or more in London, and promised Miss Phillips to pay a visit to her father in Derbyshire
by and by. Mr. Brandon was completely at a discount, and as fairly out of the circle of Harriett's
probable future life at Ashfield as if he had sailed for Australia.

Chapter XIII.

Good-Bye

While Jane and Francis were discussing the state of Brandon's affections, the object of their
solicitude was going as fast as the railway could take him to Ashfield, where his widowed mother
lived with his unmarried sister, a confirmed invalid, and a widowed sister, Mrs. Holmes, the
mother of those wonderful nephews and nieces whose ignorance on the subject of dirt-pies had
so much impressed Emily Phillips. Brandon had always been very glad to go to see them, and
to stay a short time, but the intolerable dullness of the place had always driven him back
to London. Australians generally prefer a large town as a residence, and London most of all;
for though their relatives in small country towns or rural neighbourhoods fancy that it must
be so much more lively with them than it is in the bush, there is a great difference between
the dullness where there is plenty of work to be done, and the dullness where there is absolutely
nothing.

Mrs. Brandon was a conscientious and, to a certain extent, rather a clever woman, but she had
many prejudices and little knowledge of the world. Mary Brandon was the most amiable and the
most pious and patient of sufferers, who only got out in a Bath chair, and received a great
deal of care from her mother, while Mrs. Holmes devoted herself to her children with a fidelity
and an exclusiveness that made her influence elsewhere almost infinitesimal. All of them loved
Walter dearly, and were very anxious that he should be married--most disinterestedly--for their
circumstances were straitened, and but for Walter's assistance, which had been given whenever
he could possibly afford to do so, they would have found it difficult to make ends meet. Mr.
Holmes had been unfortunate in business, and the widow had sacrificed part of her jointure,
and the invalid sister as much of her little fortune as was at her own disposal, to assist
him in his difficulties. Their generosity had the usual result of only delaying the crash for
him, and of finally impoverishing themselves.

One most promising brother had died at the close of a long, expensive professional education,
which he had expected to turn to great account for the benefit of his sisters. Walter himself
had been sent out to Australia in his father's lifetime with a better capital than could have
been given afterwards, so that he always considered that he had got more than his share, and
that his assistance was nothing at all generous.

The young Holmeses were taught and guarded by their mother night and day; she accompanied their
walks, she overlooked their games, she read all their books before giving them to the children
to read, and cut out or erased anything that she thought incorrect in fact or questionable
in tendency. She allowed no intercourse with servants, and almost as little with playfellows
of their own age. And when Uncle Walter from Australia came first to disturb the even tenor
of their way by lavish presents of sweetmeats, cakes, and toys, and by offers to take the whole
family to every attainable amusement, he was first reasoned with, and then, as he was not convinced,
he was put down, his gifts returned, and the children instructed to say that they would rather
not have the treats he offered. He certainly preferred the wild spirits and rebellious conduct
of the little Phillipses, even in their worst days, to the prim good-child behaviour of his
own nephews and nieces.

He had the pleasure of telling Mrs. Holmes on this occasion that the wild young Australians
had been reduced to something like order by an admirable governess whom he had been the means
of procuring for them: that in spite of all the overindulgence she had suffered from, Emily
was proving a very tolerable scholar--that she had good abilities and an excellent heart, though
she did climb on his knee for comfits, and beg to be taken to Astley's. Mrs. Holmes wondered
at his procuring a governess for the children, and asked a good deal about her, with the view
of ascertaining if her brother was fixed at last; but he talked about her with perfect NONCHALANCE,
saying that she was a particular favourite of an old servant of his called Peggy Walker, and
that her account of Miss Melville's qualifications was perfectly satisfactory, as the result
had proved. Mrs. Holmes was bewildered as to the curious social relations of Australian people,
but her mind was set at rest about Jane Melville.

"But, Fanny," said he to his sister, "you know I have come to bid you goodbye in a week or
ten days. I cannot help it; things look so badly just at present that unless I am on the spot
I cannot see my way at all clearly. I have little doubt that I will work things all right again;
the master's eye makes all go well. There need be no difference in the little allowance I sent
to my mother and you--that will be sent home regularly as before. But I want to assist you
otherwise if you will allow me to do it. You have enough to do to bring up those six children
of yours, even with my little help. I will take your boy Edgar with me; as I am not going overland
it will not be so expensive. I will train him to be useful to me, and make a man of him."

"No, no, Walter, I could not let him be away from under my own eye; he is so young--his education
is not finished," said Mrs. Holmes.

"And never will be, if you keep him always at your apron-string. You cannot do it, Fanny; you
must turn him into the world some day, and surely he will be better turned out under my guidance
than under none at all. Why, the lad is sixteen, and though he is uncommonly ignorant of the
world, he knows enough of books and that sort of thing to acquit himself very fairly in Australia.
I promise to do my very best for him, and he can be of great service to me very soon, if he
has only a head on his shoulders. And though it is very hard to find out what your children
are fit for, I dare say the boy has average intelligence."

"Average intelligence!" exclaimed Mrs. Holmes; "his memory is admirable. If you would only
examine him in history, or geography, or Latin, or scientific dialogues, or chronology, you
would find----"

"That I do not know the tenth part of what he does, no doubt," said Brandon. "But that is not
what will make him get on in the world. You cannot afford to give him a profession."

"I fear not. I wish I could. Perhaps I might by more economy. The education of my children
has cost me very little hitherto, only the classics and mathematics from the curate. I should
like to bring Edgar up for the Church."

"But, my dear Fanny, if you were to give him a profession, you must send him away from you.
If I take him I will do my utmost to get him on, and I will really look after him, and keep
him out of mischief, better than you can do at a public school or a university."

"Oh! Walter, you know what a state Victoria is in--full of runaway convicts, and all sorts
of bad characters, attracted there by the gold-diggings. I should not like Edgar to meet with
such people."

"At my sheep stations he will see little or nothing of these people. I will keep him busy,
and by and by, when he comes to man's estate, I will give him a start; and if you think I succeed
with Edgar, I will take Robert, too, when he is old enough."

"I know, Walter, that you mean very kindly by me and mine, but I do not care so much for my
boys being rich, or getting on, as you call it; I want them to be good. I do not wish to throw
them into the world till their principles are fixed, and strong enough to withstand temptation.
Edgar is very young, and you are not firm enough to have the guidance of him."

"I can be firm enough in important things," said Brandon; "but there are a number of little
matters that a lad should learn to determine for himself. Let us ask Edgar if he would like
to go. Don't say anything for or against. For once let the boy exercise his choice, and have
the freedom of his own will. You may reverse his decision afterwards if you see fit."

Mrs. Holmes assented to this, but with some fear and trembling. Edgar was called in, and his
uncle kindly and fairly made him the offer. The lad hesitated--looked at his mother, then at
his uncle, then at the floor.

"What do you think I should do, mamma?" said he.

"Your mother wishes you to make your own choice," said Brandon.

"Then I think I should like to go with you, Uncle Walter."

"No, no; I cannot part with you yet, my dear boy."

"Nonsense, Fanny; do not stand in the boy's light," said Brandon, a little ruffled at being
taken at his word, and the lad's decision reversed by his mother.

"I don't want to go if you do not wish it, mamma," said Edgar, looking rather ashamed at his
choice.

"Consult our mother and Mary on the matter, Fanny; I believe they will be more reasonable."

The advice of both grandmother and aunt was to the effect that Mrs. Holmes should take advantage
of her brother's kindness, and entrust Edgar to his care. It was not without a great effort
that she made up her mind to part with her son, and she had many serious compunctions of conscience
afterwards; but as his letters home were regular and very prettily expressed, and as his uncle
Walter generally added a few lines to say that the boy was doing remark ably well, and growing
strong and large, she took comfort, and hoped that all was for the best.

Brandon was rather surprised at the cool reception he got from Harriett Phillips on his return;
it was a relief to him to see that she could part from him without regret, for he felt none
at leaving her. He had been putting on his Australian set of feelings, and preparing to like
his bush life very much, as he had done in reality before. He had Edgar with him when he came
to bid the Phillipses goodbye, and Emily was much amused at the idea of this model lad going
out to Melbourne in a large ship, and seeing dear Wiriwilta before she could do so. She gave
him messages to some of the people, and desired him to inquire after the welfare of her pet
opossum and her rose-crested cockatoo, and write her a full, true, and particular account of
them all, and of how he liked the colony, which Edgar readily promised to do.

"And so this Mr. Hogarth has left London, Emily?" said Mr. Brandon.

"Oh, he has gone home to see about getting into Parliament--what stupid work it must be!"

"Don't talk so absurdly," said Aunt Harriett.

"I see by the newspapers that he is likely to be put up; and you think it stupid work, Emily,
do you? You are a young lady of taste. I think the same."

"He is quite sure of success," said Harriett Phillips, who thought the question and remarks
might have been addressed to her, as the best informed person in the house.

"Miss Melville will be pleased at her cousin's going into the political line," said he.

"Indeed, we are all pleased. I never saw any one so fitted to shine in Parliament," said Harriett.
"He has promised, when the election is over, to visit papa; their politics will suit, I think."

"And how is Miss Melville?" asked Brandon.

"Quite well, she is always well; but we have been very much troubled about servants of late.
I believe really that all the good servants have gone to Australia, for we cannot hear of a
housemaid or nurse to suit us, and it puts every one about. I know it annoys me, and Miss Melville
(who holds rather a singular combination of employments, and I must say that she certainly
discharges both of them extremely well) is particularly engaged just now, making up her housekeeping
books."

"And how is Miss Alice Melville? She is not so invariably well as her sister is."

"No, she mopes more. She has not half the spirit of Miss Melville; but I believe she is quite
well just now."

"Well", said Brandon, with a half sigh, "I have come to bid you all goodbye; no one can tell
when we may meet again."

"Oh! no fear," said Mrs. Phillips, "we will see you here again in a year or two. Mr. Phillips
is often grumbling about his affairs, but I know it just ends in nothing."

"By the by, Emily," whispered Brandon, "you promised if I was a good boy that you would give
me a great treat. You will never have another opportunity."

"Oh! yes," said Emily, "I recollect quite well--come along with me," and Brandon followed the
child to the nursery. Elsie was singing something to a tune that sounded like that of "Chevy
Chase," a great favourite with Brandon in his childhood--but she caught the sound of footsteps
at the door and stopped abruptly.

"This is our nursery," said Emily; "mamma says it is far better than the old one at Wiriwilta,
but I do not like it half so well. I have brought Mr. Brandon here, Alice, to hear your songs
and your stories, as I promised him the night you would not sing in the drawing-room when he
asked you."

"Go on, Miss Alice, I beg of you; do not let me interrupt you. Indulge me for once--that old
air carries me back many years," said Brandon.

"Oh, no," said Alice; "I could not venture on a stanza before you. You cannot imagine what
doggerel I make to please the children."

"It is not doggerel; it is beautiful," said little Harriett; "it is the best song of all, and
the newest--the one that Alice has made about the fire, when we were such tiny babies; and
how poor mamma was so weak and ill, and papa was away, and the flames were all around; and
Peggy and Jim--you recollect Jim, black Jim, Mr. Brandon--and Mrs. Tuck--Martha, you know--were
working so hard to save us; and then when Mr. Brandon came up on his horse, Cantab--we told
Alice his name was Cantab--she knew all the rest of the story--and rode so fast and got off
in such a hurry, and fetched water and quenched the fire. Oh! Mr. Brandon, it is a lovely song."

"And all made up after our talk of old times the other night; for I thought it was just the
thing for a ballad, and Alice will do anything I ask her. You see that we will make a hero
of you, and we will sing this song in your praise when you are far away," said Emily.

"Then I am not be forgotten," said Brandon, speaking to Emily, but looking very hard at Elsie.
"I do not wish to be forgotten by any one here; but I do not care for being remembered as a
hero, which I do not deserve to be--but as a--a friend."

"Our friends here have been so few that we are not likely to forget any of them, and with Emily
beside us we stand a good chance of hearing your name frequently," said Elsie.

"And you made a song about me--actually about me," said Brandon, looking as if he wished the
five young Phillipses out of the way.

"Oh! Alice can make a song about anything," said Constance; "she made one about my little kitten."

"And such a nice one about my humming-top--how it goes whiz--whiz," said Hubert.

"And Peggy told Alice and Miss Melville about the fire, and all about you long ago--long before
she saw any of us," said Emily.

"She made up a pretty story to amuse them just as Alice does for us when they were sad and
dull--only Peggy's story was all true, and Alice's are mostly not."

Brandon's quick eye could observe the faintest additional flush pass over Elsie's already crimson
cheek, and guessed that Peggy's revelations had been a little too true and minute. What motive
had she to conceal anything about him when she was relating her own experiences to divert the
minds of the two poor girls in their troubles and perplexities? Was this the solution of his
refusal in the railway carriage? If it was, he should try again. He had been a fool, an idiot,
to give up so readily at the first nay-say. Now, it was too late; his passage was taken out
for himself and Edgar, and he was to sail on the morrow; but if things looked decently well
at Barragong on his return he must write, though he was no great scribe.

"Shall I not call Jane?" said Elsie, who felt embarrassed by his looks and manner, and dreaded
his saying anything particular before a group of the sharpest children in the world. "She is
extremely busy, but if you have come to bid her goodbye, she must see you for that."

"You used to talk of going to Australia--to Melbourne, I mean--with your sister and Peggy,
when she returns."

"We hope to be able to do so," said Elsie.

"Then I will see you again--I must see you again. Don't call your sister yet--don't."

Here Brandon was interrupted by the entrance of Miss Harriett, whose curiosity as to where
Emily had taken her friend had led her to the nursery, a place she seldom visited.

"Why, Emily, what a thing to bring Mr. Brandon into the nursery! You are a dreadful girl! I
must tell Miss Melville of this."

"I have only come to bid goodbye to some friends," said Brandon.

"They should have come to you in the drawing-room, only those children are so fond of their
liberty that they prefer the nursery, where they can torment Alice to their hearts' content,
to anything like restraint in the drawing-room. What a litter the place is in! I do wish we
could get a nurse."

"I must see Miss Melville, too, and bid her goodbye," said Brandon.

"She is in the housekeeper's room," said Harriett. "As you have been introduced by Emily into
the nursery, perhaps you will let me take you there."

"Goodbye, then, Miss Alice," said Brandon.

"Goodbye," said she.

Brandon could not drop a word of his intention to Jane, for Harriett Phillips was at his elbow
when he made his adieu; but somehow Elsie treasured up his parting looks, and embarrassed expressions,
with as much fidelity as if he had made an open declaration of love. Many a woman's heart lives
long on such slight food as this. And the next day, Brandon was on board, and soon on the high
seas, on his way back to his sheep-stations and his troubles.

Chapter XIV.

Francis Hogarth's Canvass And Election

There can be little doubt that Jane Melville was a good deal influenced in her decision as
to the position she ought to hold with Francis by the letter she had received from Tom Lowrie
on the morning of the day in which her cousin had betrayed to her more unmistakably than ever
the state of his own heart. It was something more for him to give up, and, as I have said before,
she rather overestimated both the importance of the public duty and the amount of success in
it which Francis was likely to attain to. It might seem to impartial observers rather Utopian
to hope and expect some regeneration of the political world of Great Britain from the return
of an intelligent country gentleman of independent and original principles, for a few obscure
Scottish burghs, to be one of an assembly of six hundred and fifty-eight legislators, but it
is from such Utopianism, felt, not in one instance, but in many, that the atmosphere of politics,
both in Great Britain and in Australia, can be cleared and purified. When people, whether as
electors or candidates (or, as in the case of Jane Melville, even those who are neither), take
an exaggerated view of the trouble, expense, and annoyance attending the discharge of public
duty, and form a low estimate of the good that each honest energetic individual can do to his
country by using every means in his power to secure good government, to promote public spirit,
and to raise the standard of political morality, the country is on the decline. It may grow
rich, it may increase in national prosperity, but, as a nation, it wants the soul of national
life and national freedom. I prefer Jane Melville's rather unreasonable hopes to the pusillanimous
fears--the LASSEZ FAIRE policy of those who think they know the world far better, and who believe
the game of public life is not worth the cost of the candle that lights it up.

If she had been the only woman in the world, or the only woman likely to suit Francis, and
to make him happy, she would have felt very differently; but surely he could have no difficulty
in finding, among the hundreds of thousands of marriageable women in Great Britain, some one
as likely (she even thought, more likely), to satisfy his heart than herself. It was only because
circumstances had made him know her so well, and because he had been so intimately connected
with no one else, that he believed he loved her. He was a man whom any woman might easily learn
to love; and if she steadily held out to him that she was only his dear sister--his faithful
friend, and that she could never be anything else, he would ere long form a tenderer tie. But
she hoped and wished that his lot might be cast with a good woman, who would not grudge her
the secondary place that she felt she could not give up. She tried to convince herself that
it could be only friendship really on his part; but he had been so unused to affectionate friendships,
especially with one of the other sex, that he was very likely to mistake his feelings.

The state of her own heart she did not like to look into very closely; she knew that Francis
was inexpressibly dear to her, but the absolute absence of all jealousy made her doubt if it
were really what is called love. She could look forward without pain to another person becoming
more to him than herself. My readers will think that if it had been really love, it would have
forced itself upon her, and burst through all the barriers that were laid across its course.
But love in a strong nature is a very different thing from the same amount of love in a feeble
nature. If it had been her own property and career that had to be given up for his sake, her
love would have probably conquered all private ambition; but the very high estimation in which
she held her cousin, fought against her instinctive wish to make him happy. And if the irrevocable
step were taken, what security would she have that he might not regret it?

She dwelt in her own mind on the disparities between them, which, but for the peculiar circumstances
in which they had been placed by her uncle's will, must have prevented the formation even of
the friendship, now so close and so precious. She was perhaps scarcely aware that such contrasts
are more favourable to the growth and the continuance of love than too near resemblance in
character and temperament. She was so different in many ways from him--he was literary--she
was practical; he was poetical and artistic, and by no means scientific--she was destitute
of taste, and saw more romance in the wonders of science than in much of the poetry he admired
so much; he was aristocratic by temperament, and only forced by her influence at the turning-point
of his life into her democratic views--she could not rest from the over-activity of her nature,
while he liked repose, meditative, literary, and DILETTANTI. The strong sense of duty, which
certainly was the guiding principle of his nature, led him to exertion; while Jane worked because
she could not help it. With Jane's temperament Francis never would have stayed for fifteen
years clerk in the Bank of Scotland, while there were new countries to conquer, or new fields
to work in. He found pleasure in beautiful things; all disorder or disorganization was positively
painful to him. To begin again a life of comparative poverty, burdened with the care of Elsie,
would be far more trying to him than to her; for though she had been brought up in greater
affluence, she cared less for the elegances of life. She loved him far too well to allow him
to sacrifice a great deal more than she thought she was worth for such a doubtful good, and
she entered heart and soul into the prospects of this election, as the thing which would decide
Francis' fate, and would give him still nobler work to do, to keep him from regretting what
it was better he should not obtain.

The spiritual communication on the subject of Francis' hopes, to the effect that after a time
he should succeed in the object dearest to his heart, had made far less impression on her mind
than on his. She had not heard the unearthly taps; she had not been startled by the appropriate
answers; she had not herself had her hand arrested at the letters which spelled out the unknown
names. Her curiosity led her to attend a seance with Francis at the same place, but everything
on that occasion was a failure. The spirits had not got rightly EN RAPPORT with her; her dead
relations were misnamed; their messages were uncharacteristic; and the spirit of Mr. Hogarth
never could be summoned up again. She therefore determined to dismiss the whole subject from
her thoughts, and advised Francis to do the same. Mr. Dempster, however, was not willing to
relinquish his half-made proselyte; and certainly, the less Jane was inclined to believe in
these manifestations the more she became attached to the simple-minded pious visionary who
rested so completely in them.

Jane's own life was particularly full of work and of worry at this time; for, as Miss Phillips
might have taken part of the blame to herself, if she had conceived it possible that she could
do wrong; for it was on her account that the housemaid had given warning--she said that two
missusses, that was, Mrs. Phillips and Miss Melville, was enough for her, and she could not
submit to a third, and she couldn't abear Miss Phillips's interference. The nursemaid took
umbrage at Elsie sitting so much in the nursery with the children, though it was what Mr. Phillips
liked, and what the children delighted in; and besides there was no other convenient place
for her except her own bedroom, which was too cold for comfort and too dark for fine work.
Elsie's position in the house was rather anomalous, and certainly added to Jane's difficulties.

While Francis was busily engaged with his canvass, Mr. and Mrs. Phillips took a short tour
on the Continent. Harriett would have liked to accompany them, and threw out hints to show
that she expected an invitation; but her sister-in-law thought they had done quite enough for
her, having her all that time in London, and taking her about everywhere. Jane was to be left
in charge of the children, and Elsie was to go with her mistress. Now that Mrs. Phillips had
a lady's-maid, she could not possibly travel without one; and as neither her husband nor herself
knew any modern language but their own, Elsie might be useful besides as an interpreter, as
she understood French very tolerably, and had learned a good deal of Italian. There might be
advantage by and by from being able to advertise French and Italian acquired off the Continent,
for perhaps a school might suit the Melvilles better than going into business; so Jane was
very glad indeed that her sister, who would profit most by it, should take the trip rather
than herself. Miss Phillips returned to Derbyshire, as she had no desire to stay even with
such a congenial companion as Miss Melville, with the drawback of a houseful of children.

In the meantime Francis' canvass went on briskly; Mr. Sinclair constituted himself his most
active agent, and certainly took more trouble and fatigue about it than any paid agent; but
he sometimes seemed to do his cause more harm than good by his constant recurrence to first
principles, which alarmed the jog-trot old Whigs, and occasionally even the out-and-out Radicals.

The five burghs, whose representation Mr. Hogarth was about to contest, were grouped together
because they lay in adjoining counties, and not because they had any identity of interests.
In the good old times, before the passing of the Reform Bill, each burgh sent one delegate
to vote for the member. The delegate was elected by the majority of the town council, and as
that body invariably elected their successors, the representation of the citizens, either municipal
or parliamentary, by such means, was the most glorious fiction that has ever been devised by
the wisdom of our ancestors. The double election in this case had no good tendency. The Reform
Bill was, on the whole, a very good thing, more because it was a great change in the representation,
which was carried out without endangering the constitution, and was an earnest of still greater
reforms being made in the future, than because there is any very great improvement either in
the character of the electors or their representatives; but to Scotland it was a greater boon
than to England; for the semblance of representative institutions without the reality was a
mockery to a free people, and a very mischievous mockery. In 185--the burghs had each their
registered voters on the roll, who each voted for his favourite candidate, so that the votes
of five hundred men in one burgh could not be neutralized by those of eighty men in another.

The stronghold of the Conservative party lay in Swinton, the genteel, and Freeburgh, the county
town. The Liberals mustered very strong in Ladykirk, which had taken to the woollen manu factory
within the last quarter of a century, and had increased very much in extent and population,
so that it had far more voters paying 10 pounds rent than any of the other towns. In Auldbiggin
and Plainstanes parties were so equal that no majority on either side could be reckoned on,
but the Whig majority in Ladykirk was expected to overtop the Tory majority in the two first
towns by as much as would secure Hogarth's return. The public loves fictitious novels! this is
a true novel.

It loves books which make a pretence of introducing their readers
to fashionable society: this book deals with the life of the street.

It loves little indecent books, memoirs of courtesans, alcove confessions, erotic obscenity, the
scandal tucked away in pictures in a bookseller's shop window: that
which is contained in the following pages is rigidly clean and pure.

Do not expect the photograph of Pleasure décolletée: the following study is the clinic of
Love.

Again, the public loves to read pleasant, soothing stories, adventures that end happily, imaginative
works that disturb neither its digestion nor its peace of mind: this book furnishes entertainment
of a melancholy, violent sort calculated to disarrange the habits and injure the health of the
public.

Why then have we written it? For no other purpose than to annoy the public and offend its tastes?

By
no means.

Living as we do in the nineteenth century, in an age of universal suffrage, of democracy, of liberalism,
we asked ourselves the question whether what are called "the lower classes" had no rights
in the novel; if that world beneath a world, the common people, must needs remain subject to
the literary interdict, and helpless against the contempt of authors who have hitherto said
no word to imply that the common people possess a heart and soul. We asked ourselves whether,
in these days of equality in which we live, there are classes unworthy the notice of the author
and the reader, misfortunes too lowly, dramas too foul-mouthed, catastrophes too commonplace
in the terror they inspire. We were curious to know if that conventional symbol of a forgotten
literature, of a vanished society, Tragedy, is definitely dead; if, in a country where castes
no longer exist and aristocracy has no legal status, the miseries of the lowly and the poor
would appeal to public interest, emotion, compassion, as forcibly as the miseries of the great
and the rich; if, in a word, the tears that are shed in low life have the same power to cause
tears to flow as the tears shed in high life.

These thoughts led us to venture upon the humble tale, Soeur Philomène, in 1861; they lead us
to put forth Germinie Lacerteux to-day.

Now, let the book be spoken slightingly of; it matters little. At this day, when the sphere of
the Novel is broadening and expanding, when it is beginning to be the serious, impassioned,
living form of literary study and social investigation, when it is becoming, by virtue of analysis
and psychological research, the true History of contemporary morals,
when the novel has taken its place among the necessary elements of
knowledge, it may properly demand its liberty and freedom of speech.

And to encourage it in the search for Art and Truth, to authorize it to disclose misery and suffering
which it is not well for the fortunate people of Paris to forget, and to show to people of
fashion what the Sisters of Charity have the courage to see for themselves, what the queens
of old compelled their children to touch with their eyes in the hospitals:
the visible, palpitating human suffering that teaches charity; to
confirm the novel in the practice of that religion which the last
century called by the vast and far-reaching name, Humanity:--it needs
no other warrant than the consciousness that that is its right.

Paris, October, 1864.

SECOND PREFACE

PREPARED FOR A POSTHUMOUS EDITION OF GERMINIE LACERTEUX

July 22, 1862.--The disease is gradually doing its work of destruction in our poor Rose. It is
as if the immaterial manifestations of life that formerly emanated from her body were dying one by
one. Her face is entirely changed. Her expression is not the same, her gestures are not the same;
and she seems to me as if she were putting off every day more and more of that something, humanly
speaking indefinable, which makes the personality of a living being. Disease, before making
an end of its victim, introduces into his body something strange, unfamiliar, something that is
not he, makes of him a new being, so to speak, in whom we must seek to find the former being--he,
whose joyous, affectionate features have already ceased to exist.

July 31.--Doctor Simon is to tell me very soon whether our dear old
Rose will live or die.

I am waiting to hear his ring, which to me, is equivalent to that of a jury at the assizes,
announcing their return to the court room with their verdict. "It is all over, there is no hope, it
is simply a question of time. The disease has progressed very rapidly. One lung is entirely
gone and the other substantially."

And we must return to the invalid, restore her serenity with a smile,
give her reason to hope for convalescence in every line of our faces.

Then we feel an unconquerable longing to rush from the room and from the poor creature. We leave the
house, we wander at random through the streets; at last, overdone with fatigue, we sit down
at a table in a café. We mechanically take up a copy of L'Illustration and our eyes fall at
once upon the solution of its last riddle: Against death, there is no appeal!

Monday, August 11.--The disease of the lungs is complicated with peritonitis. She has terrible
pains in the bowels, she cannot move without assistance, she cannot lie on her back or her left
side. In God's name, is not death enough? must she also endure suffering, aye, torture, as
the final implacable breaking-up of the human organism? And she suffers thus, poor wretch!
in one of the servant's rooms, where the sun, shining in through a window in the sloping roof,
makes the air as stifling as in a hothouse, and where there is so little room that the doctor has to put
his hat on the bed. We struggled to the last to keep her, but finally we had to make up our minds
to let her go away. She was unwilling to go to Maison Dubois, where we proposed to take her;
it seems that twenty-five years ago, when she first came to us, she
went there to see the nurse in charge of Edmond, who died there, and
so that particular hospital represents to her the place where people
die.

I am waiting for Simon who is to bring her a permit to go to Lariboisière. She passed almost
a good night. She is all ready, in high spirits, in fact. We have
covered everything up from her as well as we could.

She longs to be gone. She is in a great hurry. She feels that she is going to get well there.
At two o'clock Simon arrives: "Here it is, all right." She refuses to have a litter: "I should
think I was dead!" she says. She is dressed. As soon as she leaves her bed, all the signs of
life to be seen upon her face disappear. It is as if the earth had
risen under her skin.

She comes down into our apartments. Sitting in the dining-room, with a trembling hand, the
knuckles of which knock against one another, she draws her stockings on over a pair of legs like
broomsticks, consumptive legs. Then, for a long moment, she looks about at the familiar objects
with dying eyes that seem desirous to take away with them the memory of the places they are
leaving--and the door of the apartment closes upon her with a noise as of farewell. She reaches
the foot of the stairs, where she rests for an instant on a chair. The concierge, in a bantering
tone, assures her that she will be well in six weeks.

She bows and says "yes," an inaudible "yes." The cab drives up to the door. She rests her hand
on the concierge's wife. I hold her against the pillow she has behind her back. With wide open,
vacant eyes she vaguely watches the houses pass, but she does not speak. At the door of the
hospital she tries to alight without assistance. "Can you walk so far?" the concierge asks.
She makes an affirmative gesture and walks on.

Really I cannot imagine where she procured the strength to walk as she does. Here we are at
last in the great hall, a high, cold, bare, clean place with a litter standing, all ready for use,
in the centre.

I seat her in a straw armchair by a door with a glazed wicket. A young man opens the wicket, asks
my name and age and writes busily for quarter of an hour, covering
ten or more sheets of paper with a religious figure at the head.

At last, everything is ready, and I embrace her. A boy takes one arm, the housekeeper the other.--After
that, I saw nothing more.

Thursday, August 14.--We have been to Lariboisière. We found Rose quiet, hopeful, talking of
her approaching discharge--in three weeks at most,--and so free from all thought of death that
she told us of a furious love scene that took place yesterday between
a woman in the bed next hers and a brother of the Christian schools,
who was there again to-day.

Poor Rose is death, but death engrossed with life. Near her bed was a young woman, whose husband,
a mechanic, had come to see her. "You see, as soon as I can walk, I shall walk about the garden
so much that they'll have to send me home!" she said. And the mother in her added: "Does the
child ask for me sometimes?"

"Sometimes, oh! yes," the man replied.

Saturday, August 16.--This morning, at ten o'clock, someone rings the bell. I hear a colloquy
at the door between the housekeeper and the concierge.

The door opens, the concierge enters with a letter. I take the letter; it bears the stamp of Lariboisière.
Rose died this morning at seven o'clock.

Poor girl! So it is all over! I knew that she was doomed; but she was so animated, so cheerful,
almost happy, when we saw her Thursday! And here we are both walking up and down the salon,
filled with the thought that a fellow-creature's death inspires: We shall never see her again!--an
instinctive thought that recurs incessantly within you. What a void! what a gap in our household!
A habit, an attachment of twenty-five years growth, a girl who knew our whole lives and opened
our letters in our absence, and to whom we told all our business. When I was a bit of a boy
I trundled my hoop with her, and she bought me apple-tarts with her
own money, when we went to walk.

She would sit up for Edmond till morning, to open the door for him,
when he went to the Bal de l'Opéra without our mother's knowledge.

She was the woman, the excellent nurse, whose hands mother placed in ours when she was dying.
She had the keys to everything, she managed everything, she did everything
for our comfort.

For twenty-five years she tucked us up in bed every night, and every
night there were the same never-ending jokes about her ugliness and
her disgraceful physique.

Sorrows and joys alike she shared with us. She was one of those devoted creatures upon whose solicitude
you rely to close your eyes. Our bodies, when we were ill or indisposed, were accustomed to
her attentions. She was familiar with all our hobbies. She had known all our mistresses. She was
a piece of our life, part of the furniture of our apartment, a stray memory of our youth, at
once loving and scolding and care-taking, like a watchdog whom we were accustomed to having
always beside us and about us, and who ought to last as long as ourselves. And we shall never
see her again! It is not she moving about the rooms; she will never again come to our rooms
to bid us good-morning!

It is a great wrench, a great change in our lives, which seems to us, I cannot say why, like
one of those solemn breaks in one's existence, when, as Byron says, destiny changes horses.

Sunday,
August 17.--This morning we are to perform all the last sad duties.

We must return to the hospital, enter once more the reception hall,
where I seem to see again, in the armchair against the wicket, the
ghost of the emaciated creature I seated there less than a week ago.

"Will you identify the body?" the attendant hurls the question at
me in a harsh voice.

We go to the further end of the hospital, to a high yellow door,
upon which is written in great black letters: Amphitheatre.

The attendant knocks. After some moments the door is partly opened, and a head like a butcher's
boy's appears, with a short pipe in its mouth: a head which suggests the gladiator and the grave-digger.
I fancied that I was at the circus, and that he was the slave who received the gladiators'
bodies; and he does receive the slain in that great circus, society. They made us wait a long
while before opening another door, and during those moments of suspense,
all our courage oozed away, as the blood of a wounded man who is forced
to remain standing oozes away, drop by drop.

The mystery of what we were about to see, the horror of a sight that
rends your heart, the search for the one body amid other bodies, the
scrutiny and recognition of that poor face, disfigured doubtless--the
thought of all this made us as timid as children.

We were at the end of our strength, at the end of our will-power, at the end of our nervous
tension, and, when the door opened, we said: "We will send some one,"
and fled.

From there we went to the mayor's office, riding in a cab that jolted us and shook our heads about
like empty things. And an indefinable horror seized upon us of death in a hospital, which seems
to be only an administrative formality. One would say that in that abode of agony, everything
is so well administered, regulated, reduced to system, that death opens it as if it were an
administrative bureau.

While we were having the death registered,--Mon Dieu! the paper, all covered with writing and
flourishes for a poor woman's death!--a man rushed out of an adjoining
room, in joyous exultation, and looked at the almanac hanging on the
wall to find the name of the saint of the day and give it to his child.

As he passed, the skirt of the happy father's coat swept the sheet on which the death was registered
from the desk to the floor.

When we returned home, we must look through her papers, get her clothes together, sort out the
clutter of phials, bandages and innumerable things that sickness collects--jostle death about,
in short.

It was a ghastly thing to enter that attic, where the crumbs of bread from her last meal were still lying
in the folds of the bedclothes.

I threw the coverlid up over the bolster, like a sheet over the ghost of a dead man.
 Lord John Russell's
proposal was an approximation to a right principle, which, if it had been properly supported,
might have given the fairest opening for greater reforms. If the Conservatives had voted for
a really Conservative measure like this it would have been carried, but as it was brought forward
by a political opponent they voted against it, though they now taunt him with introducing it.
If the Whig party had seen the importance of it, and had vigorously supported it, it might
have facilitated the extension of the suffrage, a measure which none of you can desire more
earnestly than I do. I have conversed recently with some colonial gentlemen returned from Australia
on the working of their manhood suffrage and the ballot, and from one of them I got an idea
which appears to be a still better one than Lord John Russell's. It was embodied in a Municipal
Bill for an infant city--that of Adelaide--drawn up by no less a person than Rowland Hill,
then Secretary for the Colonisation Commissioners. I believe it was a deplorably bad town council
for Birmingham that led his acute mind to ponder how to secure the rights of minorities, as
it was the enormous expense of a correspondence he entered into on the subject of the coal-tax
grievance that led him to make the calculations and to devise the system by which letters could
be carried all over the kingdom for a penny."

"Well, and what does Rowland Hill say about the minorities that ye care muckle for?" asked
Sandy Pringle. "We hae a' great respect for Rowland Hill, and what he has to say on sic a subject
should weel deserve a hearing at ony rate."

"He had an arrangement by which a quorum of the citizens could plump for one member of council,
giving additional force to their vote. As they voted for one instead of eighteen, their vote
was worth eighteen. By concentrating their vote they proportionally increased the power of it."

"Oh! we ken that plumping aye makes the vote mair valuable," says Sandy.

"Simply because your one vote is an advantage to your member, which is not given to any other;
but this system gives a much greater reward for concentrating your vote. In Lord John's case
the thing was incomplete, for unless you have the power of giving your two votes to one man,
a minority of a third cannot get in a member. It is the cumulative power given by Rowland Hill
that secures that minorities will not be extinguished. This subject will receive my careful
attention, if I am returned for the burghs, for I consider it by far the most important question
of the day, and if I can get the working classes to sympathize with me, I hope for success
in time. Also a revision of the partnership laws, so as to afford every facility for working
people to co-operate with each other, for it is only by that means that much can be done to
improve their condition. Those Rochdale pioneers are going on most satisfactorily with their
co-operative store, which they are now extending to other undertakings of a greater magnitude,
and I hope soon to see hundreds of similar associations in Great Britain and Ireland. But we
want more freedom for limited liability companies, instead of so many difficulties being thrown
in their way by over-legislation. I do not want to treat working people as children, but to
encourage them to help themselves. I have had to work hard myself, and I know what it is."

"We will lippen to you," said Sandy Pringle, "and even though in some points we may not see
things exactly as ye do, we want a man, an' no a mere thing to hae a name, an' be coonted like
thae Fortescues and Turnbulls they are puttin' up."

"Little good, little ill, like a spale amang parritch, was that chap Trummle," said Jamie Howison.

"I am sorry I have been so short a time in the district, so that I am so imperfectly known
to you, but I hope in time to show that I deserve your confidence," said Francis.

"But what about the ballot?" asked Jamie Howison.

"I have not quite made up my mind about the ballot," said Francis. "It is humiliating to confess
to such ignorance, but there is so much to be said on both sides that I am puzzled. I should
like public opinion to be so much improved that there would be no necessity for the ballot,
but perhaps without it we cannot regenerate public opinion. I am quite open to conviction on
either side on this as on many other political questions. Now I think you understand my principles.
I will vote for whatever I think right, no matter from what side of the House or from what
party it emanates. If you can trust to my intelligence and my integrity, you will vote for
me, but I make no pledge."

"And we will ask nane," said Pringle, "we will lippen to you."

"But Maister Hogarth," said one of Jamie Howison's colleagues, "we look to you to mind the
interests of them that has nae votes, and that is a large body, as ye ken."

"Yes, a very large body indeed, when you include the women and children," said Francis.

"Oh! the women and children," said the weaver, with a disappointed air, "I was na thinking
of them; they are weel enuch--the men taks care o' them."

"Not always the best care in the world," said Francis. "Children need protective legislation
to guard them from being overworked by parents and masters. Women are supposed to be free agents,
but they do not really get all the rights of free agents--they should be empowered to protect
themselves; the law should support them in obtaining their just rights. A wife ought not to
be treated as a chattel; her earnings should be protected if she wishes it. And women, too,
should have a wider field of labour. The difficulties which are thrown in the way of the weaker
sex, in their attempts to earn a livelihood, both by law and by society, are very unworthy
of the age we live in."

"Weel, Maister Hogarth, though I dinna just see the needcessity for bringing in women to compete
wi' men at their trades, we could do ill without them at our mills, an' maybe ye're in the
richt. Ye'll find us Whigs at Ladykirk united, and in that case ye're safe to carry the day,"
said Sandy Pringle.

Francis' return, however, ran more risk than either he or Sandy Pringle counted upon, for the
suggestion carefully circulated by Fortescue, Toutwell, and the Tory agents, and feebly denied
even by Mr. Hogarth's own Swinton agent, that he was a most unpopular man in the county, and
that it was a mistake on the earl's part to support him, very nearly brought down a member
of the Reform Club to force him to retire after his canvass was made, and his majority counted
as small but safe. This shabby proceeding was only averted by the firmness of the Newtown Whigs,
who were indignant at such treatment of a man so independent and so able as Mr. Hogarth, and
they declared to the earl, through their agent, that if he did not with his party support Cross
Hall for the burghs, they would set up Mr. Sinclair for the county and vote as one man for
him, so that Lord Frederic would have an overwhelming majority over the Honourable James.

This threat of a certain defeat for the county restored the earl to his original intention
of giving a mild support to Hogarth, who certainly would be a better man than Fortescue. There
was the usual amount of personal abuse levelled at the banker's clerk--neither his father nor
his mother was spared--there were caricatures of him in mean lodgings and shabby raiment, doing
things for himself, which he recollected doing, and which he was not ashamed of having done.
If Francis had been made a duke, instead of merely trying to be a member of parliament, he
would never have been ashamed of his past life, nor would he have been distressed or disturbed
by the unexpected honour. He would have taken it as a matter of course. His speech from the
hustings was clear, manly, and dignified, and far surpassed that of Fortescue, even with Toutwell's
diligent prompting. Mr. Sinclair's speech was received with cheers and hisses, but in print
it read exceedingly well.

Then followed Mr. Toutwell's very rhetorical, very sarcastic, and, as his own party said, very
telling speech; but to Jane, who read this report with the greatest interest, it told nothing.

The result of the poll was a majority of three in favour of Francis Hogarth, Esq., of Cross
Hall, who was accordingly declared duly elected, and took his seat along with Lord Frederic
(who had got in for the county by a majority of twenty-seven, much to the earl's chagrin, who
had supported Cross Hall for nothing, after all) and the other members of the new parliament.

Chapter XV.

Mrs. Phillips's First Grief

Mrs. Phillips was somewhat annoyed at her husband's treating Elsie Melville on their continental
tour more as a travelling companion than as a paid dependant. Where was to be the glory of
this journey through France and Italy, of which she would have to boast all her life, if her
maid and herself were to be on such terms of equality? In vain Mr. Phillips said he had disliked
the difference that was made between the two sisters, and had only submitted to it in London
on account of the servants, and that he was glad to take this opportunity of treating Elsie
as her birth and education deserved. In vain he pointed out that French ladies conducted themselves
to their dependants with less distance and hauteur than Englishwomen, and that in France it
was proper to do as the French did. Mrs. Phillips felt offended, and, for the first time in
her life, a little jealous--not very jealous, for she was so conscious of her own beauty, and
so unconscious of her defects of mind and temper, that she had a strong substratum of confidence
in her husband's affection--but at this time, Elsie was looking really very pretty; her movements
were quick and graceful--a great contrast to Mrs. Phillips's slow, dignified, Juno-like deportment--and
her conversation so sparkling and amusing, that she thought Mr. Phillips looked at her too
much, and talked to her too much. When they spoke French together--for Mr. Phillips was trying
to revive his more than half-forgotten schoolboy French, and found he could do it more easily
with Alice than with the foreigners--Mrs. Phillips had a vague sense that they were talking
about something that they did not want her to hear. Elsie would have enjoyed this trip exceedingly,
but for Mrs. Phillips's unreasonableness and caprices; but, even in spite of them, she brought
away many delightful recollections of scenes and people. When on this tour, she felt as if
she could write verses again, if she had only time and quiet.

When in Paris she called on Madame Lenoir with a letter of introduction from her cousin. She
received Elsie very kindly, and asked her and the Phillipses to her 'at homes'; but as all
the people there talked French, Mrs. Phillips did not find them at all entertaining, and she
thought French hospitality a very shabby affair. They did not remain long in Paris, but went
down to Italy, and visited Florence and Rome. Mr. Phillips wished he had had his two eldest
girls with him in Italy, and promised to himself that next time he took the journey they should
accompany him.

When they returned to London they found that all had gone well in their absence--Francis had
won his election; Jane appeared to be in excellent spirits; and the children had made good
progress with their lessons. Mr. Phillips appeared to miss his old friend and neighbour, Brandon,
very much, and could not find any one of his colonial acquaintances who could fill up the blank
which his departure from London had made. Besides, they were always losing somebody out of
their pleasant circle. Every mail steamer, and every fine clipper ship that sailed for Australia
seemed to take one or more from them; and though new people did come, they did not appear to
be so agreeable as those who went away. Mr. Phillips could not remain contented in London,
so he proposed a trip to America with his wife and Alice as before; but Mrs. Phillips disliked
the sea, and did not feel very well, so she said she would rather stay in London with the family,
though it was getting rather late in the season for London. She did not care to go to Derbyshire
without him, far less to go to Scotland; so, if he could be so cruel as to leave her, she would
prefer London. If Emily had been a little older, Mr. Phillips would have taken her with him,
for he disliked travelling alone, but she was too young, as he himself acknowledged.

Elsie could not understand the cause of Mrs. Phillips's peculiarly disagreeable conduct to
herself lately, and she was almost on the point of leaving her, and taking another situation,
when the children, one after the other, took scarlatina, and in such a house of sickness she--their
favourite--could not be spared. All lessons, of course, were at an end. Mrs. Phillips looked
into the nursery several times a day, and said how sorry she was to see the children so ill,
and how she suffered from her anxiety about them; but it was Jane and Elsie who took the real
charge of the little patients. The mother did not seem really alarmed, though the children
were really very ill; the only thing she did that appeared like apprehension was making Jane
write to Mr. Phillips to return to England without delay as soon as the children were seized
with the fever. Jane also wrote to Dr. Phillips, and Vivian hurried to London, and stayed with
his brother's family until his return, which was a great lightening of the load of responsibility
which the sisters felt rested on them. In spite of every care and all that either doctor or
nurses could do, little Eva fell a victim to the disease; and, after her death, Mrs. Phillips
for the first time seemed to realize the danger of the others. Everything had gone so prosperously
with her since her marriage; she had known no sorrow, and little annoyance; she had always
had her husband at her side to smooth everything for her, so that she really scarcely knew
what the contingencies and trials of life were; but this death, happening when the father who
loved his children so dearly was absent, affected the indolent and generally unimpressible
woman very strongly. She felt that she was somehow to blame about it. "What will Stanley say
when he comes home? Oh, what will he say to me for losing his darling child? Oh, why did he
go to America, and leave me with such a charge? And the others will be sure to die, too!"--were
her constant lamentations.

Her grief made her quite unfit to take any charge of the survivors, and yet she was incredulous
when she was told by her brother-in-law, or by the Misses Melville, that they were really recovering.
It was not till her husband returned, which was as soon as he possibly could, and assured her
that they were quite out of danger, that she gave any credit to it. Mr. Phillips felt the loss
of one of his children more keenly than most men, but he was grateful to see that he was likely
to save the others, and he did full justice to the care and attention which they had received
from Vivian and Jane and Elsie.

Francis Hogarth was in London, attending a short parliamentary session, when the children were
so ill, and was constant in his inquiries as to their health. Dr. Vivian Phillips forced Jane
and Elsie out to hear their cousin make his first speech one evening, when the patients were
decidedly convalescent. Jane was very much pleased with Francis' DEBUT, and though Elsie thought
it rather tame, because it was not on an important subject, and was very calmly delivered,
she was glad that he had not broken down, for it seemed a most imposing assembly for a stranger
to address. Francis had visited the Derbyshire Phillipses, according to promise, after his
election was over, and had been a good deal interested in Dr. Vivian, both on account of his
own qualifications, and because Jane Melville had been interested in him. He now felt that
Jane and the young physician were placed in very intimate relations with each other, and he
naturally enough fancied that what he so much wished for himself would appear desirable to
a man so acute and sensible as Vivian Phillips. Her calm temper, her promptitude, her method,
were all shown to great advantage in a sick room. He forgot that Elsie's gentle tender ways
and her overflowing sympathy might be equally attractive, but Dr. Vivian was quite used to
all sorts of sick rooms, and to all sorts of nursing, and nothing was very striking to him,
so that he fell in love with neither sister, though he liked them both very much.

Jane in particular was one of those women who may count herself fortunate if she meets with
one real lover in her lifetime. William Dalzell was not to be counted, except perhaps as a
blank, but by means of the most favouring circumstances, she had taken Francis Hogarth's heart
into her possession, at least for time, and this was her one prize in the strange lottery of
love. No other attachment she was likely to inspire, as she felt herself, but her lover was
not so clear-sighted. Dr. Vivian Phillips had a great respect for her, and enjoyed her society
now and then as a pleasant change from the more insipid company of his sisters or their female
acquaintances, but to spend a life with her would be too fatiguing. She seemed always to require
him to think his best, to say his best, and to do his best in her company. Now a wife just
intelligent enough to appreciate his own abilities, but willing in all things to be guided
by him, was a desirable thing; but one so thoroughly his equal as Jane Melville would allow
him no repose.

The children did not gain strength rapidly, and Emily in particular made a most tardy recovery.
Her illness threatened permanently to weaken her constitution, particularly as winter was fast
approaching, and she had felt that season in England very trying during the preceding year.
Her uncle Vivian strongly recommended that she should winter in a milder climate to re-establish
her health, and Mr. Phillips thought going to the south of France, where the girls might acquire
the language without much trouble, would be a good arrangement; but when he mentioned it to
Emily herself as an excellent idea, the child languidly put it aside.

"Why not take up back to dear old Wiriwilta?" said she. "We were never ill there. It is warmer
and drier than France; and if Miss Melville and dear Alice go with us, we can learn lessons
just as well there as here. I am tired of this great London, with its smoke and its noise."

Mr. Phillips was not a man to disregard a sick child's longing at any time; and when his brother
said that, though he would regret the departure of the family from England, her native air
was probably the very best she could have, and the long voyage in a good ship would benefit
all the children, he turned his thoughts towards Australia, as he could not have believed possible
three months before. The accounts he received from Dr. Grant as to his affairs were satisfactory
enough, but the returns were not at all what he had expected; and he found that his London
establishment was very costly. He might return to England in a few years, but the children
were so young they might go on with Miss Melville very well at Wiriwilta for some time. A very
fine ship was on the berth; Mr. Dempster was going in it, and several other acquaintances;
so that, though he would have preferred waiting for Brandon's report of how things were going
on, he decided on leaving England before the season was so far advanced, on Emily's account.

Mrs. Phillips was in consternation at hearing her husband say he was really going to return.

"I thought you was never going back to Australia again, Stanley. You promised me you would
not. What will you do about the children's education?"

"We will take Miss Melville with us, and I have no fear but that they will all do very well.
Their music, certainly, is not provided for; but something may turn up for that. Our first
business is to get them into good health."

"But Miss Melville will never go without Alice," said Mrs. Phillips.

"Probably not; but we can take Alice, too."

"I thought you said we was spending too much money, and that we must retrench," said Mrs. Phillips.

"Our children's education is the last thing I should think of retrenching on," answered her
husband. "I have heard you say that Alice saves her salary in your milliners' bills. I have
scarcely seen that proved, however, Lily; but Miss Melville saves me two hundred a year--that
is clear enough, in black and white. It would be false economy to grudge her salary. Besides,
Emily would be broken-hearted to part with Alice, so that I will offer to take both sisters
with us, if they will come."

"We don't need such a housekeeper as Miss Melville at Wiriwilta. The house used to keep itself,"
said Mrs. Phillips.

"I know I had more trouble with it than was pleasant or convenient," said her husband. "I think
things will go on much more comfortably there if Miss Melville continues with us; and after
all their exceeding kindness and care of our poor dear children during their illness, I know
that you too must be disinclined to leave them behind us."

"Oh, yes! really they were very good to the children. I was not strong enough to do much for
them myself; and I don't feel inclined for the voyage just at this time. Let us go overland,
and it will be sooner over."

"No; we cannot go overland; there is very little pleasure going overland with four young children,
and as I suppose you will want one servant, as well as Miss Melville and Alice, you must think
of the expense."

"I hate the sea, and you know I must be on shore before the end of February. And you recollect
Mr. Brandon, for all his difficulties--saying he was ruined and all that sort of thing--would
have gone overland, if he had only had his letters soon enough."

"Because he was only one, or, with Edgar, two, and time was of more importance to him than
the difference in passage-money. A fine long voyage will restore our children to health, and
it does not matter to me being a month or two longer on the voyage. I think we are sure to
be in Melbourne time enough for you. If it were only you and myself, Lily, there is nothing
I should like so much as the overland route. There is so much that I should like to see and
to show to you, but under present circumstances it is impossible."

No arrangement could have suited Jane and Elsie so well as Mr. Phillips's proposal, as a personal
favour to himself, that they should accompany his family to Melbourne. It was the destination
they had long aimed at; and as they were neither of the station nor qualifications to obtain
free passages in any immigrant ship, they joyfully agreed to his liberal offer.

"But," said Jane, "we must be perfectly frank with you. We have had a great desire to begin
business in Melbourne together. We must tell you that we have often planned to join our savings
to those of Peggy Walker, when she returns to Melbourne, as she will probably do ere long.
Plans, of course, may not be carried out, but if ours are, we may leave you when you depend
most on us. I am quite satisfied with my position in your family, but----"

"But neither you nor I are quite satisfied with your sister's," interposed Mr. Phillips. "It
was the best arrangement that at the time could have been made; but you would never consent
to go with us to Australia, and leave Alice to work here by herself; so, if she sees anything,
either in Melbourne or in the bush that will suit her better, she is quite free to accept of
it, and to leave Mrs. Phillips. Her services and your services to our children in this recent
affliction can never be forgotten by us. I can assure you, Mrs. Phillips feels deeply indebted
to both of you."

The party to Australia was increased from an unexpected quarter. Harriett Phillips had found
that she had made no impression whatever on Mr. Hogarth. He had paid his visit to her father,
but had taken almost no notice of her, who had been the person who invited him: in fact, he
had markedly preferred her elder sister. His head had apparently been so full of politics,
or something else, that he had not been half so agreeable as when she had met him in London,
so that she was now very sorry that she had treated Mr. Brandon so cruelly during the last
days of his stay in England. He certainly would have proposed if she had not discouraged him
so much; it was really almost wrong in her to try to make him jealous, and she had succeeded
only too well. After having entertained the idea that she could be married to him if she pleased
for several months, she missed the pleasing excitement of a lover when she returned to her
flat country life.

Now that her brother had actually made up his mind to leave England, she would also miss the
change and the gaiety of a London winter, which she reckoned on having every year; so she astonished
him by saying that she should like of all things to accompany them to Melbourne, and to see
a little of bush life at that dear Wiriwilta that Emily was always talking about. She did not
think that she would care to stay long, but for a year or two she really thought the life would
be very pleasant for a change, just to see how things were done in these outlandish uncivilized
places. She said, too, to her brother, that she thought she could be of service to Mrs. Phillips
and the children. The society of Victoria was so indifferent, that it would be desirable to
form a pleasant little coterie of one's own. The children's music should really be kept up;
and she would be most happy to give them lessons. If her papa and Georgiana and Vivian could
only spare her for a year or two, she should really like extremely to go. She would feel it
so sad when Stanley left for an indefinite period again.

Mr. Phillips was pleased with the proposal; it showed a more friendly feeling towards his wife
and family than she had ever evinced before, so he offered to pay all her outward-bound expenses,
at any rate, for her. If she liked Australia, perhaps she might stay there with them altogether;
or, indeed, she might find a home for herself there, and settle in the colony. Harriett said
such a thing had never entered her head--that she went merely on a visit; but she set about
getting her outfit in a very business-like way. It was an exceedingly busy fortnight for Jane
and Elsie; but by dint of great applications to ready-made warehouses, everything was really
got ready in time, and Mr. Phillips had again to admire the thoughtfulness, the foresight,
and the method which Miss Melville showed in all her arrangements, while Elsie's busy fingers
were employed from morning to night in doing an endless variety of little things that were
needed to supplement the ready-made stock of clothes.

Chapter XVI.

Another Good-Bye

Emily brightened up wonderfully at the prospect of a return to her old home. She seemed to
gain strength every day, and no objection could be made to her going up to Edinburgh to pay
her long-promised visit to Peggy Walker before she left England. Mr. and Mrs. Phillips and
little Harriett accompanied her, and they took Jane Melville with them, for Elsie could not
be spared from the needlework, and she did not wish so much to go to Scotland as Jane did.

Peggy was delighted to see her two nurslings, and also to see the young lady to whom she had
given a home when she most needed one. Tom eagerly showed Jane what he had done in her absence,
and received the commendation he deserved for his industry and his success. Grandfather was
very weak, but in very tolerable spirits; this visit from Peggy's friends would be something
for him to think on for the short remainder of his life. Mrs. Phillips's beauty and her fine
clothes were something new to him; and the liveliness of the girls, and the politeness of their
father, and Miss Jean's kind inquiries and kind looks all did him good.

Francis Hogarth met, by appointment, his cousin Jane at Peggy Walker's, where she meant to
bid him good-bye, but he was not disposed to do so.

"You MUST come to Cross Hall, just to give a look at it before you bid the country farewell
for ever. Mr. Phillips, do come round by Cross Hall, and let Jane see her old home once more."

"I want so much to see Cross Hall, that Alice tells us such pretty stories about," said Emily.

"Cross Hall! is that the name of your place?" said Mrs. Phillips. "I would like to see it too,
very much. Mr. Phillips will go, of course, if we all wish it."

Jane expected to suffer something in this farewell visit. It was not to be long, but it must
be trying. Francis was cruel to ask it, and Mr. Phillips inconsiderate to accept of his invitation.
There were some things to be done that were not painful. When they left the train and got into
Francis' carriage--which was her uncle's old one, in which she had been used to ride--for a
five-miles drive, they passed the gates of Moss Tower, and saw William Dalzell and his young
wife riding out, and bowed to both. Then they went to Allendale, for Miss Thomson had expressed
the strongest wish to see Miss Melville before her departure for Australia, and Jane, too,
was very much pleased to see again one whom she held in such high esteem. There, for the first
time, she saw Mr. Sinclair, whose appearance and conversation were quite equal to her expectations;
but even he was not so great an object of curiosity to her as Mary Forrester--a niece of Miss
Thomson's several years older than the girl who had got her new frock at Mrs. Dunn's, in Elsie's
time. Mary was then on a visit to her aunt, and apparently had the charge of two lovely children,
cousins of her own, and grand-nephew and niece of Miss Thomson's. Their parents had gone a
voyage in search of health, and Aunt Margaret had invited them to spend the winter at Allendale,
and cousin Mary to keep them company. Jane thought she had never seen a more charming girl
than Mary, who was evidently a great favourite with her aunt and Mr. Sinclair. Frank, intelligent,
and graceful, she looked like a sunbeam in the house. The little Phillipses knew at once that
she liked children, and wondered if she knew any of the delightful stories and ballads for
which Elsie was famed. The little Munroes would take the Australians out of doors to see the
poultry and the wonderful peacock, so Mary and Jane accompanied their charges. Mary had heard
so much of Jane that she was disposed to be interested in her, while a new tide of ideas flowed
into Jane's mind in relation to this stranger. In all probability this was the girl to whom
Francis was likely to become attached when she left the country. And now that it was no unseen,
and perhaps impossible, person whom she was to fancy as his wife, but a really pretty and amiable
girl, did the thought now give her pain or awaken any sharp pang of jealousy? Her heart filled
with many emotions at the thought, agitating and painful enough, but there was no jealousy.
The more she fancied that Francis could love her, the more Jane felt that she must love her too.

"I really half envy you, Miss Melville," said Mary. "I wish I could do something for myself.
You cannot think how anxiously I watched and wondered how you and your sister got on, and how
delighted I was when you got the situation with Mrs. Phillips. Your cousin too--it must have
been a sad weight off his mind. A generous man like him must have felt the terms on which he
got the property very cruel."

"Yes," said Jane, "I know he felt it very much. We have great cause to thank God that things
have turned out so well as they have done."

"Well, Miss Melville, do you know I feel quite ashamed to think of the amount of money which
our family has cost Aunt Margaret; and after all she has spent on my education, and I really
did try my best to learn too, I feel almost guilty in looking for a situation. There are so
many wanting employment, that it seems like taking bread out of their mouths; and here am I,
a full-grown woman, dependent on other people for mine. There are four girls of us, and only
Grace at school now, but yet none of us are doing anything for ourselves. I spoke to Aunt Margaret
about taking a situation, but she said she must have me at Allendale for the winter, on account
of Archie and Maggie. After that is over, I may speak of it again. You are going to Melbourne,
where I have got a brother doing pretty well; but one does not like to be dependent even on
a brother. If you think there is any opening there for us, will you let us know through your
cousin? we see him very often."

"Then you stay at Allendale for all this winter?" said Jane.

"Yes, and it will be very pleasant. I like living with Aunt Margaret so much, and John and
I were always the two who drew together most of the family; and then Mr. Sinclair is the dearest
old gentleman in the world."

"My cousin seems to be a favourite of your aunt's," said Jane.

"I never saw aunt take to any one at once as she did to him. What a pity your uncle did not
take him home; it would have added very much to his happiness and to yours."

It was not like the parting of strangers that took place between Jane Melville and Mary Forrester.

"Will you let me kiss you?" said Jane, timidly, as she said good-bye. This was rather a remarkable
proceeding on Jane's part, for she was not addicted to the promiscuous osculation so common
among young ladies, but she felt for Mary Forrester no common interest.

Mary frankly granted the little request, and they parted to meet again--when, and where, and how?

The party then went to Cross Hall, which was unaltered since Jane had left it; and while Mrs.
Phillips and the children were resting after their journey, Francis took Mr. Phillips and Jane
to look at the cottages he had built, and she mounted her old horse to ride out to see the
allotments, which, even in this short time, showed signs of improvement. There were words of
greeting to be said to everybody and to every animal about the place. The old servants were
eager to tell her of all that had been done, and all that was to be done; they were glad to
see her in good health, and apparently in good spirits. Many sad reports had reached Cross
Hall about their straitened circumstances when in Edinburgh, and about poor Miss Elsie falling
into a decline; and to see and hear that all was so well with the sisters was a pleasant thing
for all who were attached to them. After all this had been gone through, and she went into
the room which had been hers and Elsie's for fifteen years, to dress for dinner, the past,
the present, and the future all came upon her at once, and she felt as if she could have given
the world for the opportunity to give way. Everything was exactly as she had left it; all the
furniture which had been taken to Edinburgh had been brought back and placed as it used to be.

"Can I help you, any way, Miss Jane?" said Susan, the upper housemaid, tapping at the door.

"No, thank you," said Jane: then recollecting herself, and hoping that the presence of the
girl might help to steady her nerves--"but stop, do come in for a little, and brush my hair.
I am too tired, I think, to do it; and my head aches a little."

"Is everything right here? The master said I was to tell him exactly how things used to be,
that ye should see nae change."

"All is right," said Jane. "If Elsie were here I might forget that I ever had left Cross Hall;
and I see that our people have no cause to miss us, so that we can go to Australia with lighter
hearts."

But for all this talk about a light heart, the tears would come into Jane's eyes slowly as
she looked out to the familiar scene and heard the well-known voices, and thought that to-morrow
she must leave Cross Hall and Scotland and Francis for ever.

Mr. Phillips helped her well to keep up conversation at dinner and during the evening, but
after the children had gone to bed and Mrs. Phillips had retired, he thought the cousins might
wish to have their quiet talk by themselves, and wished them good-night.

"You have not been in the library yet Jane," said Francis; "shall we adjourn there? I have
a little, a very little business to talk over with you, and I am going to bid you our real
farewell tonight, for I am not going to see you on board ship. I dare not."

Jane followed him to the library. She had not been in it since they had searched through her
uncle's papers, and had read the letters of Madame de Vericourt together. Francis took from
the drawer, which still contained those yellow letters, a paper on which was some writing and
figures, and a parcel of bank-notes.

"You recollect that you asked me to store the furniture that you left in your room till you
saw fit to claim it. After Elsie decided on staying at Mrs. Phillips's, I sent to Peggy's for
what you had there, as I think I wrote to you, and Susan saw that everything was placed just
as it used to be. Was it so?"

"Yes; exactly so."

"I do not want to part with any of it, but I got a valuation taken of it the other day, which
you see here, and I give you the market price for all the things. There is no favour in such
a commercial transaction as that surely, so here is a little addition to your slender capital.
You will find the money all right, I think, odd shillings and all."

"All right," said Jane, compelling herself to count the notes according to her old methodical way.

"And you like my cottages, Jane, and you hope great things from the allotments, and you were
pleased with my two speeches in parliament? Oh! Jane, if I am ever worth anything I will owe
it to you, and now you are going to put half the globe between us, I feel as if I had lost
more than half of myself."

Jane could scarcely trust herself to speak.

"It is better so, Francis."

"If you miss me as I know I will miss you, write and tell me so. You KNOW, Jane, I love you,"
said Francis.

"I feared it."

"Why should you fear it? Is it not the most natural, the most reasonable thing I could do?
If you loved me you would not fear it."

"I thought that in all your many avocations, and especially in public life, that you would
forget this fancy, but it is well that I must leave the country, for then I may hope that you
will form another attachment. Write to me when you do so, that I may know I have not permanently
deprived you of domestic happiness, and that I may pray for you both. You think you owe me
much, but to you I owe still more. Till I knew you I had no religion, I never knew the privilege
of prayer. Even though we may never meet again on earth, we can look forward to a happy meeting
in heaven."

"Now, Jane, when you women bid good-bye to a friend of your own sex, as dear to you as I am
to you--for in a sense I am dear to you, am I not?"

"Yes, very dear to me," was wrung out of Jane, by Francis' earnest looks and words.

"Well, when you bade farewell to Peggy this morning, she took you in her arms and kissed you--you
kissed Mary Forrester, a stranger to you--and you are going to leave me--perhaps for ever--me,
who would give my life to serve you, who would give up fortune, fame, almost duty for your
sake, and you will shake hands coldly, and say--'Good-bye, Francis.'"

"Not coldly, my friend--my brother. Do not think I can part from you so," and by an irresistible
impulse, she turned to her cousin, and felt herself folded for a few seconds in his arms, and
kissed with passionate tenderness.

"This is what might have been ours for life, but for this accursed will, and your notions of
what is best for me, and perhaps a natural disinclination towards my suit. Reflect--think--before
it is too late make your choice;--love in poverty and obscurity, perhaps--but still love."

"Love is not all life, either for you or for me;--it is better for us to part."

"Then you make your choice;--but Jane, if you change your mind, write to me, and let me know.
I tried to leave off writing at one time; but it did no good, for I could do nothing that did
not remind me of you. Then it must be good-bye. May God bless you, my beloved one, now and
for ever!"

"May God bless you, my dear Francis, and now farewell!"

Another sort of farewell from her dismissal of William Dalzell! Centuries had seemed to have
passed over her since that first eventful day of her life. She scarcely could identify herself
with the woman who had so calmly and so kindly extinguished a fancied partiality, as she sat
down in her own room and trembled from head to foot at the thought of the pain she had given,
and the love she had rejected. In the one case she was perfectly certain that she had done
right, in this she was not by any means so clear. As she heard her cousin restlessly pacing
up and down the library, she felt tempted to go to him and say she would share his fortunes,
and even destroy them for him if he wished it. She looked at the mirror, and wondered at her
being able to excite such an attachment; she looked into her own soul, and did not see anything
in it to warrant a man in giving her such a power over him. Duty was clear as to the dismissal
of William Dalzell, and the result had proved that she was in the right; and now, when duty
was so terribly difficult, surely time, that tardy, but certain adjuster of life's inequalities,
would justify her both to Francis and herself. William Dalzell's love had appeared to evaporate;
but Francis' had grown more intense and passionate till she felt she could scarcely look at him.

But it was true that she had admired his speeches, and that she was ambitious for his success
in all his plans. Every one who knew anything about the subject said that Francis Hogarth was
the most promising young man who had entered the walls of parliament at this recent general
election. He had given great attention to public business; he had mastered the details with
ease; and the principles seemed to be intuitive with him.

He had become acquainted with a small band of outsiders like himself, men of independence and
originality, who kept aloof from party, but whose votes were of importance to both parties,
and whose approbation was of far more value than that of the strongest partizan. No one could
tell to what height he might not rise from such a beginning; the ministry had noticed him favourably,
and he was as likely as not to be offered office before the parliament had expired.

Mr. Sinclair had told her how his hopes rested on the new member for the burghs, and how many
public matters and reforms they talked over together with constant reference to first principles.

Jane was proud of the conquest she had made, and proud of her influence over a man so able,
and so upright; but now she felt it was dangerous to see too much of him, and his parliamentary
life had brought him into far more frequent contact with her now than ever before. She had
led him so far in the right direction, but now she feared for her own resolution; she knew
she could not withstand many such scenes as she had just gone through, and she saw that there
was great wisdom and propriety in her leaving the country that he lived in. From her distant
home across the ocean, she could hear of his labours and his triumphs, and, she hoped, after
a time, of his happiness. But while she reasoned with herself as to the propriety of leaving
him, she felt all the bitterness of the lifelong separation. She could no longer disguise the
truth from herself--he was as truly half of her as she was of him--and she shivered at the
thought of a life to be gone through in which she should never more see his face, or hear his
voice. It was as sad a night, and as sleepless, as that she had spent in her cousin's house
in Edinburgh, when all doors had seemed to be shut against her, except the faint chance of
a sub-matronship in a lunatic asylum. Now, two doors were open to her--one to a life of toil
and dependence for herself and probably a happy life for Elsie, at the antipodes; and the other,
a life of love with the man who had all her heart, and who deserved it all, with a dependent
life for Elsie. Even though her own hand had closed the door, she could not help lingering
at the threshold, and grieving that she was shut out from the only paradise she cared for.

So the good ship sailed next week, bearing Jane from the man who loved her, and whom she loved,
and Elsie and Miss Harriett Phillips towards the man whom they both thought loved them.

Volume III.

Chapter I.

Mr. Brandon's Second Proposal To Elsie, And Its Fate

On Mr. Brandon's arrival at Melbourne after a longer voyage than he had expected in a ship
with such a high character as the one he sailed in, he hurried up to Barragong, and was much
gratified to find things there did not look so badly as he had been led to expect. It was his
overseer's want of confidence in himself that had made him exaggerate everything that was going
wrong, or was likely to go wrong. In fact Mr. Phillips's affairs were suffering much more from
the want of the master's eye than his; but Dr. Grant had a better opinion of his own management,
and wrote more cheerful accounts. Brandon regretted that Powell had left his employment, for
if he had been in charge of Barragong there might have been three more happy months in England
for his master.

As his affairs were really in a sufficiently satisfactory state, he felt that he must write
to Elsie Melville, renewing his offer of marriage, and endeavouring as far as he could to give
her confidence in the stability of his character. How exceedingly awkward he felt it to be
to have to write this instead of saying it. How incomparably better such things are done by
word of mouth, particularly when one is not a ready and clever letter-writer. He would in the
personal interview have felt the effect of one sentence before he ventured on another--he would
have assisted his halting phrases by all the advantages of tone, gesture, and expression of
countenance. Though he had failed once in his attempt to win her affections, he had been far
more stupid than he was now, and he was now more anxious for success. The more he had thought
over the person, the manners, and the character of Elsie Melville, the more convinced he was
that she was the one woman in the world for him; but he was by no means so sanguine of being
accepted as he had been, particularly when he had only the pen to trust to. There was no saying
what so clever and so literary a girl as Elsie Melville was would think of his blundering declaration.
The paper looked cold and blank and uninviting--it really was hard to make it the only means
of telling her how much he loved her. No kind wishes towards the overseer whose fears and scruples
had hurried him away, or towards Miss Phillips, who had interrupted him when he was about to
say something he had hoped Elsie could not mistake, accompanied the half-dozen different attempts
at a love-letter, which were written before he could please himself. Emily was his friend;
Jane, he thought, would be his friend too. Elsie was really a kind-hearted girl, and if he
could only convince her that he would be miserable if she refused him, she might pity him a
little. He had not the same objections to a little pity that she had on that day in the railway
carriage, when he had been so confident of success. But when he reflected on what Peggy might
have said with truth about him, and when he put to that the fact that immediately after his
refusal by Elsie he had devoted himself to Miss Phillips, there was no doubt that Elsie had
some cause to suspect the steadiness of his principles. It was difficult by writing to hint
at these things without saying too much, but they must not be passed over in silence either.

At last the letter was written and committed to the country post-office nearest to Barragong--not
that he was satisfied with it, but he must not lose the mail. If she was good enough to accept
of him, she was to draw upon him for a specified sum for passage-money and outfit, and come
out in the mail steamer following her answer. It was not a brilliant letter, but it was honest
and straightforward. However, as Elsie had sailed for Melbourne before it reached England,
it was of the less consequence what it was.

Pending her answer, Brandon felt very unsettled. He could not set himself to work systematically,
and all the neighbours said that his visit to England had spoiled him for a colonist, as it
did with most people. He missed his pleasantest neighbour, Mr. Phillips, and he missed the
children. Though Dr. Grant in one direction, and Mr. M'Intyre in another, thought they were
ten times better than the Phillipses, Brandon did not feel that they could make up to him for
their absence.

Dr. Grant was certainly mismanaging, to a considerable extent, Mr. Phillips's business, and
muddling it as he did his own affairs. He had now been many years in the sheep-farming line,
and in the best of times, for he had bought very cheap--much cheaper than either Phillips or
Brandon, and he had quite as large a capital to start with; but he had a bad way of managing
the men on his stations; he gave the same wages as other people, certainly, for he could not
help that, but he always gave them with a grudge, and seemed to think his employes were picking
his pocket. He had a harsh and dictatorial way of giving orders--very different from Brandon's
and Phillips's pleasant manner--and he consequently had never been well served. His men had
been the first to leave at the time of the diggings, and the consequences had been most disastrous.
From sheer want of hands, he had sacrificed one of his runs with the sheep on it to Powell,
and now he grudged to see how very handsomely Powell had been repaid for his money and time
in this transaction. The fortune that Powell had made ought to have been his--Dr. Grant's own--instead
of filling the pockets of a man who had only sprung from the ranks.

The same style of mismanagement was carried into Mr. Phillips's affairs; and yet when Brandon
relieved Dr. Grant of the burden he had so unwillingly taken up, the latter felt rather hurt,
for he had had a handsome salary for the charge of Wiriwilta and the other stations, and he
would certainly miss the money; and, besides, he thought it showed a want of confidence in
himself on Phillips's part.

At Wiriwilta, however, there was a feeling of pleasure at the exchange, and Brandon had the
satisfaction of really benefiting his friend without taking any very great deal of trouble.

In this restless state of his mind he had great pleasure in the society of Edgar, who attached
himself to his uncle with quiet fidelity. He soon learned to ride, and to ride fearlessly and
far; he learned too to use his limbs, his ears, and his eyes, so that Brandon found he really
had a head on his shoulders, which he had been rather doubtful of when the lad had been kept
so constantly at his books.

One day when the boy had been talking with enthusiasm of Australian life, and expressing his
longing after more adventures, his uncle, who also was eager for change, proposed to Edgar
an overland journey together to Adelaide. He had heard that some particularly fine sheep were
to be had in South Australia, and he wished to add this variety to his own flocks as well as
to those of Mr. Phillips. He had always had a great wish to see the Adelaide side, and this
journey would amuse and employ him till he could get his answer from Elsie. If she accepted
him, and came out, as he wished, without delay, he might never have another opportunity for
making the visit, for he would not be inclined to leave her, for a while at any rate.

Edgar was delighted with the proposal, and helped his uncle with the few simple preparations
for their long ride with a vigour and despatch that showed he had the stuff in him for a good
bushman. How his tender mother would have trembled at the thought of the perils and hardships
of such a journey but as she knew nothing about it till it was safely over, she was spared
all anxiety. Brandon was not altogether insincere when he told Elsie and the Edinburgh ladies
that the finest prospect he ever saw in Victoria was the prospect of getting out of it, but
the present pleasure made him forget many past ones. He had a real enjoyment in the bush life
he then talked so contemptuously about. Camping out was to him no hardship, and to Edgar it
was a delightful novelty. It was varied by nights spent at sheep stations, where a hospitable
welcome generally awaited them, and an amount of comfort varying according to circumstances.
When they crossed the Victorian border, and came to the South Australian side, the welcome
appeared to be equally hearty. Edgar Holmes could not help admiring the want of suspicion and
the liberality of these absolute strangers.

Brandon went about his purchase of sheep on his way to Adelaide, and made what he thought a
very satisfactory bargain. It was to be a joint speculation between himself and Mr. Phillips,
and he was sure it would turn out very well. When he had left directions as to delivery, he
and his nephew went down to Adelaide, to see what they thought of that little colonial capital.
Edgar was charmed with Adelaide, and preferred it out-and-out to Melbourne, but as he had only
passed through the latter, and had got acquainted with none of the people there, his preference
was perhaps not worth much. Brandon, however, could not help confessing that the Adelaide men
had some cause for the patriotism so strongly, and, as he had thought, so tiresomely expressed
at the time of the diggings. It had less bustle than Melbourne, and certainly was not so wealthy;
but it was a quiet, cheap, and hospitable place, and its prosperity rested on a very solid
basis. The amount of cultivation, both agricultural and horticultural, contrasted favourably
with that of Melbourne, which had been almost exclusively pastoral till the gold diggings broke
out, and had had many drawbacks, in the shape of land regulations, to its becoming a corn and
wine bearing country.

Brandon took up his abode at the York Hotel, of course, and met with some pleasant people in
and about Adelaide. Some of them he had known in London, and they introduced him to others.
If his heart had not been fixed at this present time on Elsie Melville, he might have taken
a fancy to one of the Adelaide girls whom he met. They were not so formidable in the array
of their accomplishments and acquirements as the modern English young lady; they were frank,
agreeable, and not ignorant of domestic matters, and they had no apparent horror of the bush.
But Brandon's affections were really engaged, and he put considerable restraint on his flirting
powers during this visit, which all engaged men ought to do, but which, I must say, I have
found very few engaged men do; they feel so perfectly safe themselves that they care very little
for what construction other people may put on their attentions, or their polite speeches.

Brandon had sent directions for Mr. Talbot to get his letters and forward them to him in Adelaide,
for he was now daily expecting Elsie's answer. In case of his being accepted, he would cross
over to Melbourne in time to receive her from the next mail-steamer, would marry her there,
and take her home to Barragong, and thus save himself two long land journeys.

But the mail-steamer had come with the Adelaide mails, and the next after that with his own
letters, but not a word from Elsie or from any of the Phillipses. He had had a few lines from
Emily the preceding month, to say that dear little Eva was dead, and that they were all getting
better. The address was either in Jane's hand writing or in Elsie's, but he took if for granted
that it was Elsie's, and had treasured it up in consequence of that supposition. But this month
there was not a word from any of them. There had been plenty of time for an answer, for his
letter had been sent via Marseilles, so that Elsie had had ten days clear to make up her mind
and reply to what she ought to have thought an important communication.

It was using him extremely ill to treat his letter with so much contempt. He was never more
near being very angry in his life. It was strange that Elsie Melville, whose manner was so
remarkably gentle and winning, should on two important occasions have treated him with such
marked discourtesy. No doubt, his letter was not worth very much in itself; but to him it was
great consequence. If she wanted a month for consideration, why not write and tell him so?
Or, if she feared to commit herself, she might have got Jane to write. Could she have taken
the fever? That was a solution--but a very sad one--of her conduct. Jane would have certainly
written in that case if she had not got the fever too. He would alter his plans: he would go
back overland; or, rather, he would sail up the Murray, and not pass through Melbourne at all.
So he took his passage and Edgar's by one of the Murray steamers, and felt that if he was not
a very ill-used man, he ought to feel a very unhappy one.

Chapter II.

Mrs. Peck

In a poor-looking room of a small wayside public-house, about twenty miles out of Adelaide,
were seated one evening, shortly after Brandon's departure up the Murray, a man and a woman,
neither of them young or handsome or respectable-looking. If they had been so once they had
outgrown them all. The greatest danger to be guarded against in considering all scales as continuous
rather than discrete, is that careless thinkers may refine their calculations far beyond the
accuracy which their original measurements would warrant. One should be very careful not to make
such unjustifiable refinements in his statement of results as are often made by young pupils when
they multiply the diameter of a circle, which has been measured only to the nearest inch,
by 3.1416 in order to find the circumference. Even in the ordinary calculation of the average
point of a series of measures of length, the amateur is sometimes tempted, when the number of
measures in the series is not contained an even number of times in the sum of their values,
to carry the quotient out to a larger number of decimal places than the original measures would
justify.

Final results should usually not be refined far beyond the accuracy of the original measures.

It
is of utmost importance in calculating medians and other measures
of a distribution to keep constantly in mind the significance of each
step on the scale.

If the scale consists of tasks to be done or problems to be solved, then "doing 1 task correctly"
means, when considered as part of a continuous scale, anywhere from doing 1.0 up to doing
2.0 tasks.

A child receives credit for "2 problems correct" whether he has just barely solved 2.0 problems or
has just barely fallen short of solving 3.0 problems.

If, however, the scale consists of a series of productions graduated in quality from very poor
to very good, with which series other productions of the same sort are to be compared, then
each sample on the scale stands at the middle of its "step" rather than at the beginning.

The second kind of scale described in the foregoing paragraph may
be designated as "scales for the quality of products," while the other
variety may be called "scales for magnitude of achievement."

In the one case, the child makes the best production he can and measures its quality by comparing
it with similar products of known quality on the scale.

Composition, handwriting, and drawing scales are good examples of scales for quality of products.
In the other case, the scales are placed in the hands of the child at the very beginning, and
the magnitude of his achievement is measured by the difficulty or number of tasks accomplished
successfully in a given time.

Spelling, arithmetic, reading, language, geography, and history tests are examples of scales
for quantity of achievement

. Frank got all Cross Hall's property, and all through
me; and Betsy, with her London establishment and her carriage, no doubt, and her children dressed
like duchesses, and herself, too--and look at me!"

"Well, just look at you, Liz. I fancy that the sight of you would do them no credit. You're
well enough off with Phillips. I think this is a very handsome offer. Though we're both sick
of Adelaide, we can stop here a bit longer--at least, till we can see our way clear to get
out of it."

"Do you think I don't care for my liberty? and I hate the Adelaide side. It was all your doings
coming across here at all, and a precious mull you've made of it. I fancy they must be thinking
of coming back to Melbourne, from this notice to me to keep out of the way. And do you think
I don't want to see my own daughter? Did not I put her in the way of all her good fortune?
Did not I dress her the day she first saw Phillips, and did not she look like a angel?"

"And he was spoon enough to marry her, which was more than either you or me expected. As for
the girl, she was glad enough to go away from you; you never cared so much for her."

"Did I not, when I saw she was growing up so handsome and a credit to me?"

"Yes, yes; we both wanted to make our own of her, and I think we did not do amiss, considering,"
said Peck. "We've had bad luck in Adelaide, but things may change--money goes farther here."

"Money never goes far with us," said Mrs. Peck, "and Melbourne is the place where we can get
on best. If I had Frank's money, which I must and shall get out of him somehow, we could manage
to rub along here, but without it we never could. The black-hearted scoundrel, not to send
me a farthing--me who could----"

"You had better threaten him with what you can do in your next letter. I always thought that
style of working the oracle would pay best; but perhaps the motherly affectionate dodge was
the best to try first. Threaten him in your next."

"I don't think I'll condescend to threaten him; I don't care to save him from what he deserves
for his shameful ingratitude to me. I could make better terms with Cross Hall's nieces than
I could do with Frank. Surely they would give me more for my secret than he would do to keep
me quiet. They were left beggars, I know, and the estate is worth a great deal to them."

"Hang it, Mrs. Peck, that is a glorious idea, but don't be too hurried in your movements. You
don't care about your own share in the business being known?" said Peck.

"I care for nothing if I could only get my revenge on him, and if I could only get as much
out of the Melville girls as would allow me to snap my fingers at Phillips. I would rather
relish publishing my connection with him. I would like to bring down Betsy a peg."

"There's where you always make a mull of it, Liz. Your infernal temper always gets the better
of you. Revenge and spite are very good things in their way, but I don't see that they pay.
I think you would be very mad to give up so much a year for the pleasure of vexing Phillips
and Betsy; and as for the Melville girls, how are you to get at them? There is not shot in
the locker to take you to England, and letters are very risky things to write. You're sure
to let out more than is safe, and if you let out too little the girls will see no advantage in it."

"I hate letters," said Mrs. Peck, moodily; "but I would like to get at the girls by word of mouth."

As this interesting pair were engaged in conversation, a traveller of a very different description
alighted at the door of the inn, and requested lodgings for the night. He was well-dressed
and respectable-looking; he was probably as old as either of them, but his face and air gave
tokens of a quieter life and a calmer temper. His horse was knocked up, so that he could not
go on to a larger and better-appointed inn than this, which was five miles nearer town; but
when he saw the name over the door and the host and hostess, he was reconciled to the inferior
accommodation. But he rather objected to the company that he found in the inn parlour, and
did not seem pleased with the proposal that he should take supper with them.

"Oh, Mr. Dempster," said the host, "I fancy you have got nice since you were in England. These
people are decent enough, I reckon, though rather down in their luck, like some others of us.
I wish I had such a house to receive you in as that I built on the--Road. I had plenty rooms
there; but you see it was not licensed, and I was ruined--at least brought down to this."

"Well, Frankland, I suppose I must submit," said Mr. Dempster, "as you say you have no other
place for me; but I never would have thought these were particularly decent people."

Whether from spiritual influences or not, Mr. Dempster felt a great repugnance to this man
and woman. The influence might have been partly spirituous, for there was a considerable fragrance
of strong liquor about them both.

In spite of the unpromising appearance of the house, the hostess produced a very tempting-looking
supper for hungry people. She sat down herself to make tea for the company, and was delighted
to see Mr. Dempster, and to have a little talk with him about old colonists and old times.
She was a very old colonist herself, and had known many ups and downs, generally in the same
line of life.

Active, civil, and much-enduring, she was an admirable hostess, but her husband was rather
idle and speculative, and had invested the savings of many years in the erection of a large
hotel in a place where, in the opinion of the Bench of Magistrates, it was not wanted, and
the licence was refused, so they had come down in the world in consequence, and had taken this
small inn, where they could just make ends meet. Mrs. Frankland missed the old customers who
used to call, and felt this visit from Mr. Dempster something like a revival of old days, and
asked him as to the changes he saw in Adelaide; and as Mr. and Mrs. Peck were Melbourne people,
who did not know anything about the old colonists, Mr. Dempster spoke to her with freedom.

"You have been visiting your married daughter, I suppose," said Mrs. Frankland.

"Yes, that is the first thing I had to do on my return."

"A fine family she is getting about her, I hear; but I have not seen her for awhile. This house
is not good enough for her to stay a night in."

"Yes, she has a very fine family--another little fellow since I left Adelaide."

"You must feel it lonesome now," said the hostess.

"Yes: it is the way of the world, and one should not murmur at it; but yet a man must feel
it very much when his only daughter, and one so much his companion as my girl was, chooses
a home for herself, and surrounds herself with new ties and new cares."

"You should see and get some one to take care of you," said Mrs. Frankland, cheerily;--"a pleasant,
kindly body--not too young. You must have met many such in England, who would have been glad
of the chance."

"Yes, and who would have grumbled at the colony whenever she came out, and given me no peace
till I took her home again. Now my business and my interests are all in South Australia. Besides,
I like the young women best, and they would never look at an old fogie like me; so I must content
myself with my memories of the past and my hopes for a future life. My home is not so lonely
as you fancy it, Mrs. Frankland. Even here I feel the departed ones are near me. The veil that
separates this world from the next is a very thin one; and if our intercourse with each other
is less complete than in the days when we were together in the flesh, it is none the less real.
I have become a spiritualist since I went to England."

"A what?" asked the hostess.

"You must have heard of table-turning, and all those strange manifestations?"

"La! Mr. Dempster, I never thought of YOU giving in to a pack of nonsense like that. I beg
your pardon for my rudeness, but really you DO surprise me."

"What would you think of spirits who can read unseen letters--tell the names of persons whom
none of the company knew--find out the secrets of every one in the room? You recollect Tom
Bean, who was lost in the bush twelve years ago, and more; his spirit appeared to me in London,
and gave me a message to his old mother, to say he was expecting her soon; and the old lady
did not live three months after."

"Well, that is strange, but I would be very hard to convince. But yet, Mr. Dempster, that is
no reason why you should not get a nice tidy body to make you comfortable. The spirits would
not surely begrudge you that. And so you had a pleasant voyage, and went round by Melbourne
so as to see all that was to be seen. Did any of the old colonists come out with you?"

"We had a large party altogether--Mr. and his family, who had just been home to finish their
education."

"And you admired the young ladies, of course, but really they are too young for you. Have they
grown up handsome?"

"Not particularly handsome, but very pleasant-looking; but if you talk of beauty, it was a
Melbourne lady who bore off the palm on board ship. Unfortunately, she was married, and it
would have been very improper to take a fancy to her, but Mrs. Phillips is superb."

"Mrs. Phillips of Wiriwilta?" said Mrs. Peck, eagerly.

"Yes, I fancy that is the name of the place; at least the children used to talk about it by
that name. Mr. Phillips is a sheep-farmer on the Victoria side," said Mr. Dempster.

"And you say she is handsome?" said Mrs. Peck.

"Perfectly beautiful!--but uneducated, and somewhat capricious. I fancy her face must have
captivated her husband, who is a very intelligent, agreeable man."

"I suppose they are rich now?" said Mrs. Peck.

"Oh! very well to do, I fancy. I visited them a good deal when I was in London."

"How many children have they?" asked Mrs. Peck. "I knew them long ago."

"They lost one with scarlet fever before they sailed. There were four on board ship; but there
are five by this time, for Mrs. Phillips stayed in Melbourne for her confinement, and had a
little boy within a week of landing."

"Is her husband with her?" asked Mrs. Peck, eagerly.

"Oh, no! I think Phillips went up to his stations; he had a number of things to see to. What
do you know about them?" asked Mr. Dempster, rather surprised at Mrs. Peck's curiosity.

"I was once in their employment at Wiriwilta, and Mrs. Phillips was uncommonly good-looking
then. There was not so much style in those days as I suppose there is now."

"Probably not; we have all had to work hard for what we have earned in these colonies and Phillips
must have made his way like the rest of us. They had a very pretty little establishment in London."

"Kep' their carriage, no doubt," said Mrs. Peck, with a thinly-disguised sneer.

"No, they did not; but if it's any satisfaction to you to know it, Mrs. Phillips has had a
tour on the Continent, and has had a lady's-maid."

"A lady's-maid," said Mrs. Peck; "well! well! and the children, I suppose, are being educated
up to the nines?"

"They took both the governess and the lady's-maid with them to Melbourne," said Mr. Dempster.
"They were sisters, and very superior young ladies. In fact, to my taste, Mrs. Frankland, the
lady's-maid was more charming than the mistress; not so regularly handsome--but very lovely--while
as to intelligence and refinement there was no comparison. If she had been a dozen of years
older I might have been a little presumptuous."

"Was this Mrs. Phillips so very far behind as that her maid was so superior to her?" asked
Mrs. Frankland.

"It happened that these sisters were the young ladies of whom, even in these distant parts,
you may have heard something; who were brought up to inherit a large property in the south
of Scotland, by a very eccentric uncle, who left everything he had to a son whom nobody had
ever heard of before, and left the girls absolutely penniless."

"Was not their name Melville?" asked Mrs. Peck, eagerly and fiercely.

"Yes," replied Mr. Dempster, astonished to find his chatty communications to his old friend,
Mrs. Frankland, taken up in this way by this unprepossessing-looking stranger. "The fool takes
after you, and the fiddler after his mother--but Jap--he's real Sands--he's like me."

He laughed at his joke, and when his breath came back he went on.

"There's Morty--he's like both the fool and the fiddler--both the fool and the fiddler--and not
a bit like me."

"Morty isn't very well, Daniel," said Amos Adams, ignoring all that the old man had said. "Don't
you think, Daniel, you're letting that disease get too deep a hold
on Morty?

With all your money, Dan, I think you'd--"

"With all my money--with all my money, Amos," cried the old man, shaking
his hands, "with all my money--I can just stand and wait.

Amos--he's a fool, I know--but he's the only boy I've got--the only boy. And with all my money--what
good will it do me? Anne won't have it--and Morty's all I've got and he's going before I do. Amos--Amos--tell
me, Amos--what have I done to deserve this of God? Haven't I done
as I ort?

Why is this put on me?" He sat panting and blinking and shaking his ever-denying, palsied head.
Amos did not reply. The chauffeur was taking his seat in the car.

"Ain't I paid my share in the church? Ain't I give parks to the city? Ain't I had family prayers
for fifty years?

Ain't I been a praying member all my life nearly? Ain't I supported missions? Why," he panted,
"is it put on me to die without a son to bear my name and take care
of my property?

I made over two millions to him the other day. But why, Amos," the old man's voice was broken and
he whimpered, "has the Lord sent this to Morty?"

Amos did not reply, but the big voice of Grant spoke very softly: "Uncle Dan, Morty's got tuberculosis--you
know that. Tuberculosis has made you twenty per cent. interest for twenty years--those hothouses
for consumption of yours in the Valley. But it's cost the poor scores and scores of lives.
Morty has it." Grant's voice rose solemnly. "Vengeance is mine sayeth the Lord, I will repay.
You've got your interest, and the Lord has taken his toll."

The old man showed his colorless gums as he opened a raging mouth.

"You--you--eh, you blasphemer!"

He shook as with a chill and screamed, "But we've got you now--we'll fix you!"

The car for Harvey came, and the Adamses climbed in.

Amos Adams, sitting on the hard seat of the street car looking into the moonlight, considered
seriously his brother-in-law, and his low estate.

That he had to be helped into his limousine, that he had to be wrapped up like a baby, that his
head was palsied and his hands fluttering, seemed strange and rather inexplicable to Amos. He counted
Daniel a young man, four years his junior, barely seventy-nine; a man who should be in his prime.
Amos did not realize that his legs had been kept supple by climbing on and off a high printer's
stool hourly for fifty years, and that his body had buffeted the winds of the world unprotected
all those years and had kept fit. But Daniel Sands's sad case seemed pathetic to the elder Adams
and he cut into some rising stream of conversation from Grant and the Bowmans inadvertently
with: "Poor Daniel--Morty doomed, and Daniel himself looking like
the breaking up of a hard winter--poor Daniel!

He doesn't seem to have got the hang of things in this world; he
can't seem to get on some way. I'm sorry for Daniel, Grant; he might
have made quite a man if he'd not been fooled by money."

Clearly
Amos was meditating aloud; no one replied and the talk flowed on.
But the old man looked into the moonlight and dreamed dreams.

The
next day was Grant's day at his carpenter's bench, and when he came
to his office with his kit in his hands at five o'clock in the afternoon,
he found Violet Hogan waiting with the letters he was to sign, and
with the mail opened and sorted. As he was signing his letters Violet
gave him the news of the day:

"Dick Bowman ran in at noon and asked
me to see if I could get Dr. Nesbit and George Brotherton and Henry
Fenn down here this evening to talk over his investment of little
Ben's money. The check will come to-morrow." Mrs. Peck had an object in view--she wanted money to take
her to Melbourne, and to take her immediately, and this easy-going, benevolent-looking Adelaide
gentleman seemed to be the most likely victim she could meet with.

She had long wished to see her daughter apart from her husband, and there never had been such
a chance since she was married; and to get hold of one or both of the Melville girls at the
same time was a conjunction of circumstances absolutely and marvellously favourable. Her last
remittance from Mr. Phillips had been received a month before, and was spent as soon as it
was got. Peck, with whose fortunes she had for many years connected herself, had not been lucky
of late. He had come to Adelaide at race time, and had not got on well with his bets. He had
done a little in gambling, but had got into a sort of row at a low public-house, and been taken
up and fined for being drunk and disorderly, and dismissed with a caution; so he had gone up
to the sheep-shearing, and then had worked a little at the hay-harvest, and again at the wheat-harvest.
He could work pretty hard at such times, and make good wages; but he had no turn for steady,
regular work, and neither had she. If she had been in Melbourne, she could have borrowed the
ten or twelve pounds needed for her passage-money, and a decent-looking outfit from people
who knew her there, and guessed that she had some hidden means, either from friends or foes;
but in Adelaide she was unknown except from her connection with Peck, which did not inspire
confidence.

This Adelaide gentleman had just come from London, and could know nothing about her, so she
was determined to use her plausible tongue, and get the money out of him.

As Mr. Phillips said, she was possessed with the spirit of falsehood. She always had a disinclination
to speak the truth, unless when it was very decidedly for her own interest to do so, or when
she was enraged out of all prudence. So now, when she wanted to get an advance from Mr. Dempster,
she forgot the agitation and the eagerness which she had shown about the Phillipses, the Melvilles,
and the Hogarths, and opened up a quite new mine of anxieties and fears. Her secret, such as
it was, should not be told to any one but the parties to whom it was valuable, and who would
pay her handsomely for it, so she must now prevent this friend of the family from even guessing
at what her schemes were.

Chapter III.

Raising The Wind

As Mrs. Peck sipped her brandy-and-water, putting a constraint on herself in so doing--for
her natural taste would have led her to swallow it in large gulps, but that would not have
answered her purpose of impressing Mr. Dempster--she began to talk of the letter she had received
from Melbourne, which had distressed her so much. Her daughter was ill and dying, and her son-in-law
had written to her to beg that if she possibly could she would come across to see poor dear
Mary before she was no more; but, poor fellow, he was always hard up--a decent well-meaning
fellow he was--but he wanted push, and things had never gone rightly with him.

"They have never had the doctor out of the house since they have been married, and many births
and many deaths keep a man always poor, Mr. Dempster, as well you must know; and it's many's
the five-pound note as I've given to them out of my small means to help them through at a hard
pinch, and he thinks, of course, as how I can just put my hand in my pocket and pay my passage
in the first steamer as quick as he thinks for to ask me; and so I would, and would never have
begrudged it, for my poor Mary's sake, but things has gone so contrary with me and Peck for
this year back that I ain't got a penny to lay out. And there's the poor soul laying so bad,
and thinking as I'm on the road, I dare say, and me can no more get to her without wings nor
she can to get me."

"What is your son-in-law by trade?" asked Mr. Dempster.

"Why, he ain't got no trade to speak of, but he's warehouseman to Campbell and Co., in Melbourne,
the merchants, you know," said Mrs. Peck.

"Then he must have a good situation and regular payment--he ought not to be so badly off,"
said Mr. Dempster.

"There's such expenses with a family in Melbourne, where there's much sickness especially.
A very decent, good-tempered fellow he is, and don't spend his wages away from his home. Poor
Mary! I well remember the day she was married, and how pretty she looked in her white gown,
and how she says to me, 'Oh, my mother! I can't abear to leave you, even for James,' and now
she is agoing to leave all of us. And when little Betsy was born, and I was a nursing of her,
she looked up and says she, 'Oh, mother! I don't think as I'm long for this world;' but I roused
her, and said she wasn't a-dying then, and my words was true, for she was not going then; but
now to think my being so far from her and her so bad."

Then Mrs. Peck wiped her eyes energetically and sobbed a little. Mr. Dempster seemed to be
soft-hearted and simple-minded. She thought she had made an impression, and she endeavoured
to deepen it.

"I am a very old colonist. I have been in Australia this thirty year and more, travelling about
from place to place. When you and Mrs. Frankland were talking about changes and ups and downs,
I thought on a many as I have seen in the other colonies. There's them as I remember without
a sixpence as is now rolling in gold. I don't know the Adelaide gentry so well, but I reckon
they chop and change just like the others. It is very unlucky for me to be here just at this
present time, for I know of a many in Sydney that I might have applied to for a little loan,
and they'd have been glad to give me assistance; but, unfortunately, I am on the Adelaide side,
where nobody knows me. There's the Hunters, of Sydney, that I was nurse in the family."

"And the Phillipses, of Wiriwilta, too, who I dare say, would be most happy to help you if
you were straitened on the Melbourne side," said Mr. Dempster, drily. "Mr. Phillips is a more
liberal man than Mr. Hunter."

"It is not Mr. Hunter I'd look to, but his wife; she has the generous spirit," said Mrs. Peck.

"The Hunters are at present in London--at least, Mr. Hunter and the family are. Mrs. Hunter
died four years ago," said Mr. Dempster.

"That's a pity. Oh, dear, dear! I am sorry to hear that news. Poor, dear lady; but in the midst
of life we are in death," said Mrs. Peck.

"No doubt we are," said Mr. Dempster. "No one knows that better than I do, for I am always
living amongst the dead, and they occasionally help me to judge of people. I get a good deal
of insight into character through their means; and my impression is, that there is not a word
of truth in all you have just been telling me. You want to go to Melbourne, no doubt, but it
is not to see a dying daughter. You have other plans in view which cannot be carried out here."

Mrs. Peck was somewhat taken aback by this blunt expression of opinion coming from a man apparently
so suave and gentle.

"Indeed, sir," said she, "I never heard nobody doubt my word afore; but this comes of leaving
the place where you are known. It is to see my daughter that I am most wishful to go to Melbourne.
No doubt I might have other reasons, for I don't like Adelaide; but it's this letter and this
bad news that has made me so set on going. But I was asking no favour of you. If I did want
a loan of a trifle, I'd have paid back every farthing of it with good interest. But I think
I had better draw on a friend of mine in Melbourne. I suppose that if I did that, I could get
the draft cashed at any of the banks?"

"You could get it cashed anywhere, provided you showed your authority to draw, and convinced
the person to whom you applied that your friend was good for the money. Under these conditions
I should not mind advancing it for you myself."

"But you'd be rather hard to convince, I fancy," said Mrs. Peck. "After the unhandsome way
you have doubted my true story, I would not like to apply to you. But any advance that any
one would make to me would be as safe as the bank. I have an annuity, and have had it for many
years."

"No," said Mr. Dempster, "you have no annuity; you got a sum of money instead."

Mrs. Peck started at this confident assertion, and coloured indignantly. "How can you speak
so positive about things you can know nothing about? I have an annuity from another quarter."

"For valuable services, I suppose," said Mr. Dempster. "Well, if you can prove that you are
still in receipt of an annuity, and if you can lodge an order to forestall it, I dare say you
can get an advance from any Adelaide bill discounter; but I myself would rather not do business
with a person who I feel is not to be relied on."

To put an end to the revelations, true or false, of this unpleasant old woman, Mr. Dempster
asked to be shown to bed, as he was tired; and he found his room, though small, was as clean
and comfortable as Mrs. Frankland had been used to give to him in her more prosperous days.

Mrs. Peck's first attempt had failed, though it had appeared very promising. She thought she
would next try Frankland, who, though he was poor, might be victimized to the extent of ten
pounds. She did not think she could affect him by dwelling much on the desire she felt to see
her dying daughter, though for the sake of consistency it was mentioned as her motive to get
to Melbourne just at this time; but she had several sums of money due to her in Melbourne,
and she was afraid, from the letter she had just received, that she would lose them if she
kept out of the way; there was nothing like being on the spot--nothing like prompt measures
when one wants to get in money. Mr. Talbot's letter was sufficient warrant for her to raise
money on Mr. Phillips's annuity, but not for the purpose of going to Melbourne, which she had
unluckily betrayed. It was also rather disagreeable in its tone, and not likely to inspire
confidence in any one who read it. So she had only her own representations to trust to, and
she certainly gave a very minute, and at the same time glowing account of her debtors and her
expectations from them; but what with one thing and another she had really never been so hard
up in her life. Peck had not got all his wages for harvesting, and she had been so foolish
as to lend a little money in Adelaide, which she feared she could not get back. Indeed, they
had a score at the inn that had lain too long; but if she could only get her own she could
pay all and be quite easy. She spoke of a rate of interest for a trifling advance that rather
dazzled Frankland, and he was wondering if he could not manage to raise it, when his wife came
into the room, and stopped their talk by saying it was bed-time. When she was told of Mrs.
Peck's wishes and her offers, Mrs. Frankland peremptorily refused to listen to them, saying
they had no money to advance to any one. Frankland had brought them down low enough in the
world by being so free in lending and in spending. If she had not taken care of the business,
and worked early and late, and looked after the money so far as she had it in her power, they
would not have had a roof over their heads by this time. What with the licence that had just
been paid, and the rent that must be paid before the end of the month, they would be cleared
out, without advancing money to strangers that were in their debt already. As Mrs. Frankland
was really the bread-winner, and at their present low water the purse-keeper also, Mrs. Peck
saw it was of no use to press her offers on her husband in the face of such formidable opposition.

On the following day she started early in the mail conveyance for Adelaide, leaving Peck behind
as a pledge for the settlement of the bill, and determined to raise ten or twelve pounds somehow.

With Mr. Talbot's letter in her hand she presented herself to a bill-discounter in Adelaide.
He understood her position at once; that she was somehow connected with, but very obnoxious
to a wealthy client of Mr. Talbot's, for Mr. Phillips's name was not mentioned in the letter;
and also that, like most people of her class and habits, she had spent her money before she
got it. Of course she said nothing of wanting to go to Melbourne, in which case, by the body
of the letter, it would be almost certain that her annuity would cease, but the discounter
wanted some security against such a contingency, and asked her if she meant to stay in South
Australia, according to agreement. Mrs. Peck was willing to say anything, to swear anything,
and to sign anything, for his satisfaction on this point, but her very fluency made him suspicious.

"I cannot advance this money," said he, "even on the deposit of your order to arrest what is
coming to you, unless I have some collateral security, or some other name, in case of your
going to Victoria."

Mrs. Peck could get no one to corroborate her statements but Peck, who could be of no service
to her. She felt rather in a fix.

"What should take me to Melbourne?" said she, in accents of great surprise. "It is so much
against my interest to go there, that I would never be such a fool as to quarrel with my bread
and butter; but it so happens I am much in need of money just at the present. I am expecting
money from Scotland every mail. Indeed, it was trusting to that as put me so back this quarter.
I never doubted that I'd get a handsome sum from Scotland; I've got the rights to it, and if
it don't come by next mail, I will prosecute. You are sure to get your money well paid, with
good interest, if you do run just a little risk."

"That may be all very well," said the bill discounter; "but, in the meantime, can you not get
any one to back you in this? I like good interest, but I cannot lend without better security."

"There's the best of security. Mr. Talbot's next payment is due in two months, and I make it
over to you; and if that does not satisfy you, I would give you something more next pay day,
as much as would cover your risk and your trouble, and your interest, handsome enough."

"Not at all handsome, if I chance to lose it all. One needs to keep one's weather eye open,
in dealing with old hands like you, Mrs. Peck."

"Then you won't do this for me--such a trifling accommodation as it is?"

"Not without some one to back you," said the money-lender.

"I daresay I can easily find that, if you are so stiff," said Mrs. Peck, as she flounced off
in great indignation, and with very little hope of succeeding in what was required.

Here was she in possession of a secret worth so much to her, and unable to turn it to account
for want of a beggarly ten or twelve pounds. The bill discounter was too sharp for her; she
must try a good-natured man next, one who would be willing to do her a kindness--but here again,
Mr. Talbot's letter, her only authority to give any security, would injure her more than with
the keen man of the world. There was a steamer to sail on the morrow for Melbourne, and no
other for a week or ten days; every day was of the greatest consequence, for now that she had
made up her mind not to make terms with Francis, but to do so with his cousins, she was eager
to carry her resolution into practice, and she must get on board the Havilah, if possible.

She had lived some weeks in Adelaide in rather a poor way, and in rather a poor neighbourhood,
when she and Peck had come first across. She had made acquaintance with a very few people,
and had left Adelaide slightly in debt, but in her eagerness she was inclined to overlook those
circumstances, and to hope that some one or other of her late neighbours might be prevailed
on to be a guarantee to the money-lender merely as a matter of form, and he might be induced
to accept of it; so she turned her steps in the direction of her old residence.

She looked into the shop where she had been accustomed to make her purchases of groceries,
with an intention of paying the eleven shillings which she owed if things looked promising,
and if it would be a good speculation.

"Well Mrs. Smith, and how are you?" said she to the woman who kept the establishment with the
favourite old Adelaide sign of "General Store."

"Much as usual, Mrs. Peck. You went away rather in a hurry," said Mrs. Smith.

"Oh! Peck had to go off to the sheep-shearing, and I had the offer of a good nursing in the
country, so I had to move at a minute's warning, you see. But how are you getting on here?"

"Much as usual, Mrs. Peck; but the news is, that my man came home last night, after being at
them diggings for four years, and not writing me a word, good or bad, for three and more; and
now he expects me to be as sweet as sugar to him after serving me so; and me had all his children
to keep and do for, and got no help from him no more nor if he was dead; and now he says as
how I give him the cold shoulder."

"Well, to be sure, and no wonder either! When a woman's been served so, she has the right to
look a bit stiff," said Mrs. Peck, who had heard during her stay in Adelaide that Mrs. Smith
had passed judgment by default, and was going to take to herself another mate, which was nothing
more than the absent Smith deserved.

"Well, to be sure, that beats cock-fighting; and what does Harris say to all this?"

"Why, in course, he's off, and I'm in such a quandary," said Mrs. Smith.

"You wasn't married to Harris, out and out, was you?" said Mrs. Peck, who had a keen relish
for such interesting news as this.

"No; there was two or three things as put it off; but the banns was gave in last Sunday, and
I had got my gown for the wedding, and lovely it looks--and here's Smith as savage as if he
had been writing to me every month and sending me money."

"I suppose he's come home as poor as a rat, like the rest of them?" said Mrs. Peck.

"No, no, I cannot just say that," said Mrs. Smith, relenting a little, "He says he never had
no luck till the last six months, and now he has come back with three hundred pounds; and he's
been behaving very genteel with it, I must say, and brought presents for me and for the children--there's
a shawl for me as is quite a picter--so rich in the colours; but I can't say I feel quite pleased
at the way he neglected me so long. And poor Harris, too; I can't just get him out of my head
all at once."

"That's natural enough," said Mrs. Peck with a sympathizing sigh.

Here Mr. Smith came into the shop, and started at the sight of Mrs. Peck.

"Well! who'd have thought of seeing you here, Mrs.? I don't rightly recollect your name, but
I know you as well as possible," said he.

"Mrs. Peck is my name," said she impressively. "I recollect you well on Bendigo."

"Many's the time I've seen you there," said Smith, in an embarrassed tone of voice. "I hope
as how you have your health, Mrs. Peck. Susan, my dear, you'd better give Mrs. Peck some refreshments.
Step in, Mrs. Peck, I'm just a day home, and I ain't come back too soon, neither, as it appears.
Susan, my dear, get out the spirit bottle. Will you have brandy with hot water or cold, Mrs. Peck?"

"With cold this hot day. When the scales are very crude, or when small numbers of measurements
are being considered, it is not worth while to locate this median point any more accurately
than by indicating on what step of the scale it falls. If the measuring instrument has been carefully
derived and accurately scaled, however, it is often desirable, especially where the group being
considered is reasonably large, to locate the exact point within
the step on which the median falls.

If the unit of the scale is some measure of the variability of a defined group, as it is in the
majority of our present educational scales, this median point may well be calculated to the
nearest tenth of a unit, or, if there are two hundred or more individual measurements in the
distribution, it may be found interesting to calculate the median point to the nearest hundredth
of a scale unit. Very seldom will anything be gained by carrying the calculation beyond the second
decimal place.

The best rule for locating the median point of a distribution is to take as the median that
point on the scale which is reached by counting out one half of the
measures, the measures being taken in the order of their magnitude.

If we let n stand for the number of measures in the distribution, we may express the rule as follows:
Count into the distribution, from either end of the scale, a distance
covered by *n/2 measures.

For example, if the distribution contains 20 measures, the median
is that point on the scale which marks the end of the 10th and the
beginning of the 11th measure.

If there are 39 measures in the distribution, the median point is reached by counting out
19-1/2 of the measures; in other words, the median of such a distribution is at the mid-point
of that fraction of the scale assigned to the 20th measure.

The median step of a distribution is the step which contains within
it the median point.

Similarly, the median measure in any distribution is the measure which contains the median point.
In a distribution containing 25 measures, the 13th measure is the
median measure, because 12 measures are greater and 12 are less than
the 13th, while the 13th measure is itself divided into halves by
the median point.

Where a distribution contains an even number of measures, there is in reality no median measure
but only a median point between the two halves of the distribution.

Where a distribution contains an uneven number of measures, the median measure is the (n+1)/2 measurement,
at the mid-point of which measure is the median point of the distribution.

Much inaccurate calculation has resulted from misguided attempts to secure a median point with
the formula just given, which is applicable only to the location
of the median measure.

It will be found much more advantageous in dealing with educational statistics to consider
only the median point, and to use only the n/2 formula given in a previous paragraph, for practically
all educational scales are or may be thought of as continuous scales rather than scales composed
of discrete steps.


Mrs. Peck was overjoyed at her unexpected good luck in meeting with this returned digger, whom
she had known very well at Bendigo under another name, and where he passed himself off as the
husband of another woman. She perceived that now he had found his wife in Adelaide, doing very
well in business, he would rather that she heard nothing of his own little infidelities, particularly
in the first days of meeting, and his probable loss of the money he advanced was not too high
a price to pay to purchase silence.

Everything had turned out most propitiously for Mrs. Peck, so far. The information from Mr.
Dempster showed that all her objects of interest were collected in one spot, and this recognition
of Smith put into her hands the means to get to them while Mr. Phillips was absent. She was
flushed with hope and confident expectation when she made her purchases of some articles of
ready-made clothing, and took out her passage in Melbourne in the 'Havilah,' to prosecute her
plans for revenge on Francis and advantages to herself.

Chapter IV.

Miss Phillips Meets With A Congenial Spirit In Victoria

As Mr Dempster had reported there had been a division in the family of the Phillipses shortly
after they landed. Mrs. Phillips wished to remain in Melbourne for a month or two, as she did
not feel able to stand the long land journey at this particular time. Neither her husband nor
herself had much confidence in Dr. Grant's skill, and she could have better attendance in town.
Mr. Phillips having ascertained that Mrs. Peck was in Adelaide, and having, through Mr. Talbot,
sent a request that she should remain there, which her own interest was likely to make her
attend to, had less objection to her staying in Melbourne than he ever had before; so he took
a suite of furnished apartments for her and those of the family who remained in town.

Jane Melville went at once to Wiriwilta with the children, who all longed to be there, and
who disliked Melbourne more than London. Miss Phillips had her choice to remain in town or
to go up to the station, and she decided on the former alternative, for she began to fear the
station would be very dull, and would contrast unfavourably with the voyage, which had been
lively and pleasant. There were some of her fellow-passengers whom she was unwilling to lose
sight of; and Mr. Brandon was not at Barragong, but in Adelaide, so, on the whole, she thought
it would be preferable to stay. She gave as her ostensible reason for the choice, her wish
to be with Mrs. Phillips during her brother's necessary absence. Mr. Phillips stayed with his
wife till she presented him with a second son, and then, as she was doing very well, he left
her in the care of his sister and Elsie.

He had been rather annoyed to find that Brandon had been amusing himself by taking a journey
to Adelaide so soon after coming out to the colony again. Dr. Grant came down to meet Phillips,
and represented that a great deal had gone amiss at Wiriwilta since he (Dr. Grant) had been
supplanted in the charge of the stations; so that he thought it indispensable to go up with
the least possible delay to look to all the flocks and the out-stations.

"It was the wildest thing in Brandon to start off in that way," said Grant, "with a poor lad
of a nephew who did not know a wattle from a gum-tree when he came, and scarcely a sheep from
a cow. I never would have done such a thing."

"But he has gone to buy some new sheep, I hear," said Phillips. "Have they been delivered at
Wiriwilta?"

"No, not yet," said Grant; "and I think that was the most insane part of the business. I am
sure our Victorian flock-masters have always kept ahead of the Adelaide lot; and to go to the
Adelaide side for sheep would be the last speculation I should care to enter into for myself,
not to speak of implicating you in such a thing. The long overland journey will pull them down
so much that you are likely to lose a third of them on the road, and what you do save will
be in wretched order. Brandon was fairly ruined by going home to England."

"Ruined!" said Harriett Phillips. "He said he was ruined, or something like it, before he left.
Are his affairs really in such a bad state?"

"Oh, it's not exactly his affairs, but he got unsettled and would not work as he used to do.
He overturned most of my arrangements at Wiriwilta; and I am sure Mr. Phillips will not find
himself any the better for his alterations. He is so foolishly confiding. Now, I like to look
sharply after my people, and then I see what work I get out of them."

"I think you are quite right, Dr. Grant. I have remarked the want of that prudence in both
Mr. Brandon and my brother. They think it proceeds from benevolence, but I attribute it more
to indolence and the dislike to give themselves any trouble they can avoid," said Harriett.

Dr. Grant was piqued at being deprived of Mr. Phillips's agency, for though he had protested
against taking it, he had found it very lucrative; he was also piqued at Mrs. Phillips staying
in town for her confinement, though he always declared that he detested practising, and only
did it as an accommodation to his neighbours; but both things had added alike to his emolument
and his importance, and he was extremely jealous of any slight being cast either on his business
knowledge or his professional skill.

On this occasion he offered to stay in Melbourne for a week or so after Phillips left, merely
as a friend, to see how Mrs. Phillips was going on, and to take up a full and satisfactory
account to the station. Though he was not her medical attendant, he was as much in the house,
and far more than he had ever been before. When the week was over, he appeared to be in no
hurry to go away, but wrote to Phillips instead; and hung about the house, went errands for
her or her sister-in-law, took Harriett out for walks and drives, brought all his Melbourne
acquaintances to call on her, and to inquire for Mrs. Phillips and the baby, and was himself
engaged for several hours of every day in conversation with Harriett.

He had come to Melbourne determined to fall in love with Miss Phillips, whose likeness he had
seen and admired at Wiriwilta years ago, and whose face and figure, when seen in reality quite
came up to his expectations, while her air and manners were exactly suited to his taste. He
knew that she had a fortune--not large, certainly, but tempting to a man who was not exactly
poor, but always more or less embarrassed. Her perfect self-possession, her good education,
her musical talents, her excellent connections, her stylish way of dressing, her very egotism,
were all charming to a man who wanted a wife who would do him credit.

His Scotch family was a good one; he was connected with many noble houses; he could tell long
traditional stories of the feats of the Grants and the Gillespies, his father's and mother's
ancestors; and it was wonderful how much the history of Scotland, and indeed that of the world
generally, seemed to hang on the exploits of those ancient clans. Though Harriett was not a
Scotchwoman (it was the only drawback to their perfect suitability), she appreciated these
anecdotes wonderfully well. Dr. Grant laid himself out to please her in a much more marked
manner than Brandon had ever done, and his success was much greater. He had a subdued feeling
that his neighbour at Barragong was his rival, as he had seen so much of Harriett in England,
so he lost no opportunity of mentioning anything that would tell against him.

Then he was of the same profession as her father and brother Vivian, and liked to hear her
talk of them. Indeed, provided he got time and opportunity to speak about his own relations,
connections, and friends--to give anecdotes of his schoolboy and college days, more interesting
to his mother than to any one else heretofore--to describe how he had felt the colonial hardships
at first, and how he had gradually made himself very comfortable at Ben More (which was the
name he had given to his station, so much more suitable for a Scottish squatter than such native
names as Brandon and Phillips had retained for theirs);--he would allow Harriett to give her
school and society reminiscences too, to describe her home in Derbyshire--the furniture, the
ornaments, the lawn, and the greenhouse--the county Stanleys, and the county balls. As they
were generally TETE-A-TETE four or five hours a day, they had ample time for descanting on
all these interesting topics. Any visitors who might drop in, or any visit that they might
pay together only gave fresh food for further comparison of their own personal tastes and predilections.
Miss Phillips's avowed contemptuous compassion for everything colonial did not at all offend
Dr. Grant. He had never been thoroughly acclimatized himself, and he had vowed never to marry
any of the second-rate colonial girls, who, as he thought, had no manner and no style. It was
surprising how well these two new friends agreed about everything and everybody.

Dr. Grant, from his education and his habits, considered himself a reading man, and a very
well informed one. Miss Phillips, too, had thought Brandon greatly her inferior in literary
acquirements, as in all other things; but it was singular to observe how little these two people,
who were so congenial to each other, and who enjoyed each other's company so much, and had
so much of it, talked about the many books they must have read. As for religion, politics,
or any other of the great concerns of life, they never seemed to rise even on the surface of
conversation; and when a book happened to be mentioned, it was dismissed with a casual remark,
such as "I read it," or "I did not read it," or "I liked it," or "I thought it stupid," and
then they turned to things which more nearly interested them, and these were things in which
they themselves or some one related to them made some figure. If any of Miss Phillips's, or
any of Dr. Grant's relations had published a book, that would have been mentioned and extolled,
but they had not. Vivian's scientific attainments, which Harriett had thought rather a bore
at home, were however something to boast of here; and Dr. Grant had an uncle who had made some
improvements in agriculture in the north of Scotland, of whom he was never tired of talking.

Miss Phillips had remained in Melbourne to be with her sister-in-law, but she was very little
beside her. Besides Dr. Grant, there were fellow-passengers who visited at the house, and whose
visits Miss Phillips was bound to return, and there were also public places to go to with them;
for she wished to see all that was to be seen in Melbourne while she was there; and though
she generally criticised all the Melbourne concerts, and theatres, and balls, and private parties
very severely, she accepted every invitation and joined every party that was made up for the
theatre.

Elsie and the nurse had the care of Mrs. Phillips and the baby, though Elsie would have preferred
being at Wiriwilta, with Jane and the elder children, for she missed their cheerful society,
but she could not be spared. Miss Phillips was in exceedingly good-humour at this time, and
did not exact so much from Elsie as she had expected; but Mrs. Phillips missed her husband,
and was rather petulant and capricious. (of child on tasks of known difficulty).

In this connection it may be well to take one of the scales for quality of products and outline
the steps to be followed in assigning scores, making tabulations, and finding the medians
of distributions of scores.

When the Hillegas scale is employed in measuring the quality of English
composition, it will be advisable to assign to each composition the
score of that sample on the scale to which it is nearest in merit
or quality.

While some individuals may feel able to assign values intermediate to those appearing on the Hillegas
scale, the majority of those persons who use this scale will not thereby obtain a more accurate
result, and the assignment of such intermediate values will make it extremely difficult for any
other person to make accurate use of the results. To be exactly comparable, values should be assigned
in exactly the same manner.

The best result will probably be obtained by having each composition rated several times, and
if possible, by a number of different judges, the paper being given each time that value on the
Hillegas scale to which it seems nearest in quality. The final mark for the paper should be
the median score or step (not the median point or the average point) of all the scores assigned.
For example, if a paper is rated five times, once as in step number
five (5.85), twice as in step number six (6.75), and twice as in step
number seven (7.72), it should be given a final mark indicating that
it is a number six (6.75) paper.

After each composition has been assigned a final mark indicating to
what sample on the Hillegas scale it is most nearly equal in quality,
proceed as follows:

Make a distribution of the final marks given
to the individual papers, showing how many papers were assigned to
the zero step on the scale, how many to step number one, how many
to step number two, and so on for each step of the scale.

We may take as an example the distribution of scores made by the pupils of the eighth grade
at Butte, Montana, in May, 1914. If we begin with the 1 composition rated at 0 and count up through
the 9 rated at 1 and the 32 rated at 2 in the above distribution, we shall have counted 42.
 The houses were better, and
better furnished; the shops seemed to contain everything that enterprise could import or money
procure; the ladies were handsomely and expensively dressed, and there were public amusements
such as were never heard of in the early colonial days.

But still there was much even in Melbourne that was un-English and strange to a new comer.

Melbourne did not at all come up to Harriett's expectations, though what she had expected it
would have been difficult to tell. She had wished to go to Victoria because it would be a novelty
to her--it would be so different from England that it would be amusing--but every difference
that she observed, and she was very quick in observing such things, was always for the worse.
There was, of course, the difference of climate, which led to many alterations in dress and
manner of living, and which would reasonably lead to more if the English colonist was not so
much wedded to old customs and costumes. The heat and dust Harriett found to be insupportable,
and the dress which was most suited to it was so unbecoming, particularly the gentlemen's dress,
with the endless variety of hats for head-covering. Dr. Grant, who stood a good deal on the
dignity of his profession, when in Melbourne wore dark clothes and a black hat even in the
heat of summer, and that weighed in his favour with Harriett. The noise and bustle of Melbourne
was so different from what she had been accustomed to in Derbyshire--indeed it was more like
Liverpool than any part of London she had seen--a poor edition of Liverpool; and that was the
city of which the Victorians were so proud. She could not enter into the natural liking of
a people for a town that they have seen with their own eyes grow from a mere hamlet of rude
huts to a handsome, paved, lighted, commercial city like Melbourne--who identify themselves
with its progress, having watched the growth of every improvement. They wonder that it does
not strike strangers as being as astonishing as it appears to be to themselves.

Mrs. Phillips had no acquaintances in Melbourne; but Mr. Phillips and Dr. Grant knew a good
many people, who were disposed to be very friendly to Harriett, but she did not feel very grateful
for such kindness. She fancied that her position and education, and her being recently out
from England ought to give her an overpowering prestige in these half-savage lands, and though
she lost no chance of laughing or censuring anything which she thought colonial, she could
not bear being talked of as a new chum, whose opinions should be kept for two years at least
before they were worth anything, and whose advice was probably worth nothing at any time.

Amongst other subjects for censure, the great freedom of manners, particularly amongst young
people of different sexes towards each other, struck Miss Phillips forcibly. She had observed
at evening parties, at picnics, and at places of public amusement, the very unrestrained way
in which they talked and behaved, and she thought the colonial girls were badly trained, and
that they ought to be more carefully watched by mothers and chaperones. At the same time she
took full latitude herself, and did many things on the strength of her being in Australia,
where people might do as they liked, that surprised even the colonial girls themselves.

If she remarked on their flirtations with their old friends, they could not help observing
Miss Phillips's prepossession towards her new acquaintance, and laughing at the manner in which
the two seemed wrapped up in each other. How could she endure his returning to Ben More, and
leaving her, perhaps, for another month in Melbourne without his society, was a question which
they frequently put to each other; but she solved that difficulty to her own satisfaction and
as much to their amusement.

"I am very sorry to leave you," said Dr. Grant one day to the object of his attentions, "but
I must go. Business must not be neglected. I cannot be flying about like Brandon, letting my
affairs go to ruin. I hope you will not be long in coming to Wiriwilta, Miss Phillips."

"Not very long I suppose," said Harriett. "Indeed, I think there is nothing to prevent Mrs.
Phillips from going home now, if she would only believe so."

"Nothing whatever," said Grant.

"I am quite wearying to see Wiriwilta," said Harriett: "the children's letters are quite rapturous
about its beauties, and Miss Melville, too, seems very much pleased. You will like Miss Melville,
I am sure. You like Scotch people, I know."

"If I do not like Miss Melville better than her sister, my liking will not go very far," said
Grant.

"Do you know Stanley thought Alice quite pretty at first--I don't see it. Miss Melville is
what people call plain, but I prefer her appearance to Alice's, and she is very clever and
strong-minded. I quite expect you to fall in love with Miss Melville," said Harriett, with
a little laugh.

"No fear of that. I have no fancy for strong-minded women. Not but what I like a good understanding
and good sense in a lady, but let each sex keep to its own department. But, Miss Phillips,
if you really want to go to Wiriwilta, I can drive you up--or, better still, you could ride.
You are an admirable horsewoman, as I know, and I have an excellent horse in town that would
carry you easily that distance without fatiguing you. It would be a beautiful ride. You would
see the country so well as you go along."

"I should like to go, of all things," said Harriett; "but what would Stanley say?"

"Oh, I will tell him it was quite unnecessary for you to stay with Mrs. Phillips, and it will
be the easier for his horses to bring up the rest of them, if you have gone before," said Grant.

"Well, I am really tired of Melbourne; I think I have seen all that is to be seen, and I dare
say there are some preparations and arrangements I could make before Mrs. Phillips comes up,
so as to make her more comfortable, though I dare say Miss Melville has done her best. Still,
there are things that one of the family can do which strangers cannot be expected to attend to."

"Certainly," said Dr. Grant; "I can imagine your presence at Wiriwilta will make things more
comfortable for all parties."

"And, by-the-by, Emily and Harriett will be neglecting their music, and I engaged to see to
that so long as I remained in Victoria, as Miss Melville knows no music."

"No music!" said Dr. Grant; "that is a singular sort of governess to engage for young ladies
up the country."

"She is wonderfully clever about other things, and brings on the children very nicely. When
I compare them with the girls of their own age whom I have seen in Melbourne, I cannot help
congratulating my brother on having brought out a governess with him. It would have been better,
of course, if she had been English, but Miss Melville is not painfully Scotch."

"I hope you have no dislike to Scotch people," said Grant. "I myself glory in my country."

"Oh, I quite understand your feelings. If I had been born in Scotland, I should have felt the
same, I dare say," said Harriett.

"But, with regard to this drive or ride to Wiriwilta?" said Grant.

"How long should we be on the road?" asked Harriett.

"Two days, I think. We would stay all night at Mrs. Ballantyne's, a very old friend of mine,
and an acquaintance of your brother. Ballantyne and I were fellow-passengers when we first
came out. They will receive you with bush hospitality. I should like to introduce you to Scotch
bush hospitality, and it is a pretty place, too; rather romantically situated."

"I should really like to see it, for I want to study Australian scenery and Australian manners
during my short stay in the colony, to see as much as I can while I am among you savages."

"Then, shall it be a ride or a drive?" asked Dr. Grant.

"I think I should prefer driving," said Harriett; "but I must first consult Mrs. Phillips.
I do not suppose that she can enlighten me much, but as Stanley's wife I owe her that courtesy."
So Harriett, with a condescending smile, took leave of her admirer.

Mrs. Phillips was in an exceedingly bad humour, but she made no objection to Harriett's going
away. She did not quite believe in the zeal for the children's music or for her comfort, which
Miss Phillips professed, but she was tired of having the name of her society without the reality
of it. As for the impropriety of her sister-in-law's travelling all that distance with a single
gentleman, either riding or driving, Mrs. Phillips had never decided any question of the kind
for herself or others since she had been married. She had always acted as her husband thought
proper, that is to say, she might often have made mistakes or done wrong if he had not prevented
her, and the proposition did not strike her as at all objectionable. Elsie wondered if there
was an engagement between her and Dr. Grant, when a young lady of such strict principles proposed
so singular an expedition. Harriett was not at all quick at reading countenances, and was particularly
dull in the interpretation of Elsie's; but as some idea of the kind had dimly occurred to herself,
she gave it voice and explained her views on the subject, in Elsie's hearing, to Mrs. Phillips.

"Of course I should never think of such an adventurous journey in England, but here it seems
the fashion to do just as is most convenient to ourselves; and for your sake and that of the
children, I think it is better that I should go first. Dr. Grant being a professional man,
and such an old friend of my brother's, will be an excellent escort, and I am really desirous
of seeing a little of the roughness of colonial life. We will stay all night at Mr. Ballantyne's,
and reach Wiriwilta in good time the second day. I will see to have everything comfortable
for you, Lily, my dear, before you come up. I wish you could accompany me. Dr. Grant says you
could go up now, if you were disposed."

"I am not going to Wiriwilta till Stanley comes himself to fetch me, for I am so timid with
any one else driving on these dreadful roads; and as for what Dr. Grant says about my being
fit for the journey, he is not my medical man this time, so I won't go by his advice. Besides,
he don't understand my constitution as Dr. M---- does," said Mrs. Phillips.

"I feel very sorry to leave you, Lily," said Harriett.

"Oh, I dare say I'll get on very well, even without you. Alice and nurse will do for me until
Stanley comes. Tell him how I weary to see him the very first thing you say when you see him.
Whenever he's done with going over the stations, beg him to come down. Alice has written for
me to tell him to make haste. I am not strong enough yet to sit up to write."

The idea that Harriett might hasten her husband's return to her, helped to reconcile Mrs. Phillips
to the very cavalier treatment she received from that young lady.

Harriett enjoyed her drive exceedingly. The story appealed directly to the passions of the Valley
and the Valley's voice rose in the demand to resort to its last weapon of defense. The workers felt
that they must strike or forfeit their self-respect. And day by day the Times, gloating at the
coming downfall in Van Dorn's program of labor-repression, threw oil on the flaming passions
of the Valley, so labor raged and went white hot. The council of the Wahoo Valley Trades Workers
came together to vote on the strike. Every unit of seven was asked to meet and vote. Grant sat
in his office with the executive committee a day and a night counting the slowly returning
votes. Grant had influence enough to make them declare emphatically for a peaceful strike. But
the voice of the Valley was for a strike. The spring was at its full. The little garden plots
were blooming. The men felt confident. A conference of the officials of the council was called
to formulate the demands. Grant managed to put off the strike until the hearing on the temporary
injunction, June 16, was held. But the men drew up their demands and were ready for the court
decision which they felt would be finally against them.

The Wahoo Valley was stirred deeply by the premonitions of the coming strike. It was proud of
its record for industrial peace, and the prospect of war in the Valley overturned all its
traditions.

Market Street had its profound reaction, too. Market Street and the Valley, each in its own way,
felt the dreaded turmoil coming, knew what commercial disaster the
struggle meant, but Market Street was timid and powerless and panic-stricken.

Yet life went on. In the Valley there were births and deaths and marriages, and on the hill in Harvey,
Mrs. Bedelia Nesbit was working out her plans to make over the Nesbit house, while Lila, her
granddaughter, was fluttering about in the seventh Heaven, for she was living under the same sky
and sun and stars that bent over Kenyon, her lover, home from Boston
for the Morton-Adams wedding. Mr. Phillips was not at home, and not expected for some days. Jane was
somewhat surprised by the appearance of Miss Phillips under such care, but received her politely
and kindly.

Dr. Grant had to go home to attend to business, but promised to ride across to Wiriwilta, as
soon as possible, to see if Miss Phillips had not suffered any fatigue from the long journey
over such rough roads.

It was rather flat at the station for Harriett on the following day. She was disappointed with
the house, for though it was a great deal better than Mrs. Ballantyne's, it was not so large
or so convenient as she had expected. She could not take any interest in the many things which
the children showed her, which they thought so beautiful--their pet animals, the few wild flowers
they could find at this season of the year, their dear old trees, their pretty walks, the native
boy Jim, Mrs. Bennett's baby, and the curious windmill that Mr. Tuck had made for them with
his clasp knife and some twigs. She could not be troubled with such childish talk; she wanted
rational conversation; but when Jane Melville sat beside her, and conversed in her own quiet
sensible way, she felt even that to be unsatisfactory.

A new element had entered into Miss Phillips's life. She was, after her fashion, in love; and
she was restless and dissatisfied without the presence of the beloved object. Dr. Grant was
just long enough away to be very welcome when he came; and Jane was a little amused at the
manner in which Harriett threw off her languid air of indifference, and talked to this (to
Jane) most uninteresting Scotchman, who was so full of national pride and personal vanity.
Jane was very cosmopolitan in her ideas, both by nature and by education. Her uncle had always
had more pride in being a Briton than a North Briton, and never had fired up with indignation
at Scotland being included or merged in England. She did not think Scotchmen intrinsically
more capable than English; there was a greater diffusion of elementary knowledge in the northern
part of the island, but she thought that in society Englishmen were more agreeable than Scotch,
as a general rule, because they were more certain of their own position. Scotch and Irish people
are apt to be afraid that they are looked down upon, and are too often on the look-out for
slights to be resented, whereas Englishmen, who do not know much of continental feelings and
habits of thought, have a comfortable conviction that the greatest country in the world belongs
to them, and that nobody can dispute it. Dr. Grant was surprised at Jane's want of nationality,
and confided to Harriett that he was greatly disappointed in her; and in spite of Harriett's
professed regard for Jane, she could not help seeing the faults which this keen-sighted observer
pointed out.

One day when Dr. Grant and Harriett were in the enjoyment of each other's company, and flirting
in their own interesting manner, and Jane was sitting beside them with the children, Mr. Brandon
and Edgar made their appearance. Emily and little Harriett met Brandon with acclamations, and
the little ones rejoiced over him in a very noisy manner, too. Jane gave him a hearty welcome,
for she was really delighted to see his face again, but Miss Phillips and Dr. Grant were scarcely
so affectionate.

"Well, here comes the recreant knight," said Miss Phillips. "What have you got to say for yourself,
Mr. Brandon?"

"To say for myself! Oh! I have a great deal to say for myself. I have seen a great deal since
we parted in London."

"But why have you left your own business and my brother's, and gone wool-gathering in South
Australia?"

"I have just gone wool-gathering, and that must be my excuse. Phillips will admire the sheep,
I am sure. They have just got home in first-rate condition; easy travelling and plenty of time.
But where is Mr. Phillips and Mrs. Phillips?"

"Oh, mamma is in Melbourne, and we have got a new little brother, and his name is to be Vivian,
after uncle Vivian, you know; and papa is out over the runs, and will be back on Saturday;
and I am sure he will be very glad to see you, and Edgar too, I dare say," said Emily.

"And where is your sister, Miss Melville? Has she come out to Australia with you? Is she quite
well?" asked Brandon.

"Quite well," said Harriett; "she is in Melbourne with Mrs. Phillips. We expect them out in
a week or two, or perhaps as much as three weeks, for Mrs. Phillips fancies she cannot stand
the journey for some time."

"Alice has not seen Wiriwilta yet," said Emily. "I know she will think it very pretty; Miss
Melville likes it very much."

"And you have got quite strong, Emily?" said Brandon.

"Quite strong again. I can walk to the water-holes near the grove of young gum-trees and back
again without being a hit tired. We have such lovely walks every day with Miss Melville. And
do you know Mr. Brandon, my dear old Cockey died just after you and Edgar went away to Adelaide;
but I have got another--such a beauty--and two such lovely parrots. Jim got them for me. You
can't think how glad Harriett and I were to see Jim. And Mrs. Bennett has got another baby,
and I'm to be godmother, and it's to be called Emily; and Mrs. Tuck has got another too, ever
so fat. We have not seen our own baby brother yet."

"But how does it happen that you did not write to me? I got one letter telling me little Eva
was dead, and that you were getting better; but next month I did not hear a syllable, good
or bad, from any of you."

"Because we were on board ship by that time, before the mail from Australia came in. Papa thought
we would be all here sooner than we were--but it was a delightful voyage. We had Mr. Dempster--you
know Mr. Dempster--and such a lot of nice Adelaide children. I was so sorry to bid good-bye
to Rose; she was my friend all the voyage; and there were some very nice gentlemen, too. It
was quite as nice a voyage as the last, only that Miss Melville made us do lessons all the
time; and perhaps after all it was as well that she did."

"I never heard such a chatterbox as you are, Emily," said her aunt.

"Did you find the voyage pleasant, Miss Phillips?" asked Brandon.

"Oh, yes, very pleasant indeed."

"I did not think you would condescend to visit our rude latitudes," said Brandon.

"Oh, I am really quite enjoying my visit. Stanley was greatly pleased at my proposal to come
out, for he thought it such an excellent thing for the family. I am only on a visit, you know.
I cannot say how I should like Victoria for a permanence, but I like the novelty for the present."

"And your cousin is in Parliament, I hear, and likely to distinguish himself, Miss Melville,"
said Brandon. "I hope that you and your sister do not despise us poor colonial people."

"Certainly not," said Jane; "indeed, Francis says that he got most of his best ideas from Mr.
Sinclair, who had been in Canada and the United States, and from a conversation between you
and Mr. Phillips and Mr. Dempster the first day he dined with us in London. He says nothing
sharpens an Englishman up like intercourse with such pushing, energetic, straightforward people
as colonists."

"That is high praise from a British member of Parliament. I owe him something for that. But
did you see Peggy before you left?"

"Yes; we went up to bid her good-bye. I think she will not be long in joining us," said Jane.

"Well," said Grant, who, as well as Harriett, felt that Miss Melville was receiving more than
her fair share of Brandon's conversation, "you have not given at all a satisfactory account
of yourself. You have been figuring away in Adelaide, I suppose, and enjoying yourself, and
leaving your own affairs and Mr. Phillips's affairs to mind themselves."

"And you have been figuring away in Melbourne, Dr. Grant," said Emily--she could not bear any
aspersion to be cast on her friend, Brandon--"and then you brought Aunt Harriett away; so you
leave no one with poor mamma but Alice. I am wearying so to see mamma and the baby boy."

"Suppose you go with me," said Brandon; "for I am going to Melbourne to-morrow to see them,
and I have some business there besides."

"Oh! that would be delightful. Miss Melville, may I go?"

"I think not, Emily," said Jane. "Your mamma will be soon here, and your papa will be disappointed
to find you gone when he comes here. I should not wonder that he will take you with him when
he goes himself, and that would be better, I think."

"Much better," said Miss Phillips. "I wonder that you could think of such a thing as troubling
Mr. Brandon to take care of you all that long way."

Emily made rather a pertinent remark as to her aunt showing her the example, at which Miss
Phillips blushed, and Grant looked conscious but delighted. He could not conceive what was
taking Brandon to Melbourne immediately on his return from Adelaide; he did not believe his
assertion that he had business to attend to there. It was another sign of his being spoiled
by his visit to England--it had completely unsettled him.

Now that Brandon had heard that his letter had never reached Elsie, and consequently that he
had not been treated by her with discourtesy or unkindness, he felt relieved; but, at the same
time, a little sorry that all his trouble had been wasted, and that it was all to do over again.
A few months ago he had lamented that he could not have it out by word of mouth; but now he
regretted this letter had not, at least, broken the ice, and inclined her to listen to his
suit. However, things had come to such a pass that he could not wait an indefinite time; he
must go to Melbourne and learn his fate without delay. He left Edgar at Wiriwilta, where Emily
thought him very much improved, and where the boy was exceedingly happy. He took a great fancy
to Miss Melville, who was very different from the fond anxious women who had brought him up,
but whose experiences with the Lowries had given her great interest in boys of that age, and
who knew so much on all subjects that she never failed to win upon them, if they were tolerably
intelligent and well disposed.

Chapter VI.

Mrs. Peck's Progress

All things continued favourable to Mrs. Peck's plans--she met with no disaster by sea in her
voyage from Adelaide to Melbourne; the 'Havilah' brought her to her destination in three days,
and she landed on the familiar shores with a light and hopeful heart. She was not long in discovering
where Mrs. Phillips lived, which was in East Melbourne; and as no time was to be lost, she
repaired to the house on the very day on which she landed, dressed decently and respectably,
like the wife of an artisan, or perhaps with more of the appearance of a monthly nurse.

The girl who opened the door asked her name when she requested to see Mrs. Phillips, and she
announced herself, not as Mrs. Peck, but as Mrs. Mahoney, under which name she had taken out
her passage, and begged to see the missis by herself for a few minutes. Mrs. Phillips was then
sitting in an easy-chair in the drawing-room, the nurse was engaged with the baby, and Elsie
busy in Mrs. Phillips's room; so the stranger was introduced to have a quiet interview with
her daughter. 

So he passed the long days impatiently until the hearing of the injunction in little Ben's
suit arrived, and every day burned some heavier line into his face
that recorded the presence of the quenchless fire of purpose in his
heart.

A smiling, affable man was Judge Thomas Van Dorn in his court the morning of June 16. He had
his ticket bought for Chicago and a seat in the great convention of his party assured. He walked through
the court room, rather dapperly. He put his high silk hat on the bench beside him, by way of adding
a certain air of easy informality to the proceedings. His red necktie brought out every thin wrinkle
in his burnished brown face and upon the pink brow threaded by a chain lightning of a scar.
The old mushy, emotional voice of his youth and maturity had thickened, and he talked loudly. He
listened to arguments of counsel. Young Joe Calvin, representing the Fuel Company, was particularly
eloquent. Henry Fenn knew that his case was hopeless, but made such reply as he could.

"Well," cut in the court before Fenn was off his feet at the close of his argument, "there's
nothing to your contention. The court is familiar with those cases, cited by counsel. Either
the constitution means what it says or it doesn't. This court is willing to subscribe to a
fund to pay this Bowman child a just compensation. This is a case for charity and the company
is always generous in its benevolence. The Socialists may have the state courts, and the people
are doubtless crazy--but this court will uphold the constitution. The injunction is made permanent.
The court stands adjourned."

The crowd of laborers in the court room laughed in the Judge's face. They followed Grant Adams,
who with head bowed in thought walked slowly to the street car. "Well, fellows," said Grant,
"here's the end.

As it stands now, the law considers steel and iron in machinery more
sacred than flesh and blood.

The court would have allowed them to appropriate money for machines without due process of law;
but it enjoins them from appropriating money for flesh and blood."

He was talking to the members of the Valley Labor Council as they stood waiting for a car. "We
may as well miss a car and present our demands to the Calvins. The sooner we get this thing moving,
the better."

Ten minutes later the Council walked into the office of Calvin and Calvin. There sat Joseph
Calvin, the elder, a ratty little man still, with a thin stringy neck and with a bald head. His
small, mousy eyes blinked at the workmen. He was exceedingly polite. He admitted that he was
attorney for the owners' association in the Valley, that he could if he chose speak for them in
any negotiations they might desire to make with their employees, but that he was authorized to
say that the owners were not ready to consider or even to receive any communication from the
men upon any subject--except as individual employees might desire to confer with superintendents
or foremen in the various mines and mills.

So they walked out.

At labor headquarters in South Harvey, Nathan Perry came sauntering in.
"Well, boys--let's have your agreement--I think I know what it is.
We're ready to sign."

In an hour men were carrying out posters to
be distributed throughout the Valley, signed by Grant Adams, chairman
of the Wahoo Valley Trades Workers' Council. It read:

STRIKE STRIKE
STRIKE

The managers of our mines and mills in the Wahoo Valley have
refused to confer with representatives of the workers about an important
matter. Therefore we order a general strike of all workers in the
mines and mills in this District. Workers before leaving will see
that their machines are carefully oiled, covered, and prepared to
rest without injury. She delighted to go amongst people who did not know her, where she could give
out an entirely fictitious history of herself quite new. Even to her intimate acquaintances
her narrations were singularly inconsistent. When her interest demanded that she should speak
the truth she did so, but it was with an effort; when the balance lay the other way she had
no hesitation and no scruple.

"I ain't good at these stories, mother," said Mrs. Phillips, "and I don't just see what good
it will do me to get into trouble with Stanley on your account. It is just the one thing he
is unreasonable about. When he married me he said he made only one stipulation, and that was,
that I should have nothing to do with you or with Peck, and I said I wouldn't."

Mrs. Peck here began to sob, and Elsie who was sewing in the next room, hearing a little noise,
and afraid that Mrs. Phillips was not well, came in at this moment. Mrs. Phillips was quite
at a loss to account for the emotion of her visitor, but her mother was equal to the emergency.

"I am sure, Mrs. Phillips, I cannot say what I feel," said she, "but your goodness really overpowers
me. To think as the little girl as I knowed when she played with my poor Susan as is now no
more should recollect me now she's growed up so beautiful, and had such a fine house of her
own, and should help me in my troubles! It is quite too much for me. But all I want is just
a little to start me in a way of business, and I'll be sure to pay it back again if I get on--and
I have got a good connection, a capital connection--your liberality I can never forget;" and
Mrs. Peck fumbled with her purse, and looked very hard at Elsie. This was the person whom she
wished to see, even more than her ungrateful daughter, from whom she had expected a kinder
reception. Elsie looked simple-minded enough--there was no doubt she would be easily dealt
with, and much better by speech than by letter.

"This is your maid, I suppose?"

Mrs. Phillips assented.

Mrs. Peck turned to Elsie and said, "I think as how the missis wants some sal volatile; she
looks a bit faint--she don't seem to be strong yet."

Elsie fetched the sal volatile, and gave Mrs. Phillips a little of it, and then returned to
her work. She was puzzled at the stranger's speaking of Mrs. Phillips's liberality--for she
was not generally liberal--and at her fumbling at her purse as if she had received money, for
she knew that Mrs. Phillips had left her purse in her bedroom.

"You must let me come and go for the few days I am to stay in Melbourne, Betsy," said her mother.

"Oh, I'd rather give you money, if you need it--at least, all I've got."

"I fear I will need money to take me back, for I made such an effort to get across, but I could
not help it. But I won't hurt you, Betsy, and I may do you good. What sort of girl is it that
you've got?"

"Oh, a very clever milliner, and a handy girl enough. Stanley says he thinks her pretty, but
I don't see it. He makes a great fuss over both her and her sister, but Jane is plain."

"If he says he thinks her pretty, I'd not keep her in the house if I was you. I know what men
are," said Mrs. Peck.

"I don't think you know what Stanley is," said Mrs. Phillips, with some dignity. "I did not
like it at first, but I ain't frightened now; and besides, they are both so badly off it's
quite a charity to keep them."

"If she is a milliner, I know of a capital situation," said Mrs. Peck.

"Stanley would be in a pretty state if I let her go to a situation of your recommending," said
Mrs. Phillips.

"Oh, I don't mean to meddle with your affairs; but young people are very unwary. You think
as how you're too handsome for your husband to think of looking at another woman; but I know
the world better nor that. Howsomever, that is neither here nor there. But you know I am risking
my annuity from Mr. Phillips by coming here to see you; but I heard in Adelaide that for the
first time since you was married I might have the chance of seeing you, without making dispeace,
which is the last thing I would wish to do. So, Betsy, if you will be reasonable, and let me
come again, as Mrs. Mahoney (an old neighbour in New South Wales), and help me, as you say,
with money to take me away, I will be as quiet as a mouse. It is a pleasure to see you, and
to speak to you. Give me a little needlework, and let me sit with your maid, and just have
a look at you now and then, and at the baby. I ain't seen none of your children, Betsy. Because
you've been so well off, and had no cares, you shouldn't turn off your mother in that unfeeling
way."

"Oh, I wish I dare do it. But if Stanley was to come--he may come suddenly. I've sent him a
message to hurry home. You can't think what a good, kind husband he is to me, mother. But he'd
be furious if he found you here."

"Oh, if he comes home you do not need me to work any longer; and you can give the girl that
message; and you can drop me a hint if I happen to be in the house. Even if he was to see me
here, I know I could find some reason. I am never without an excuse."

Mrs. Phillips was not particularly fond of her mother, who had been very harsh and violent-tempered
to her in her childish days, while she was as fond of her husband as she could be of any one
but herself, and she knew with what abhorrence he regarded this fierce, cunning old woman.
She wished Mrs. Peck to be satisfied with this one visit and to come back no more, for she
feared that Alice and the other servants might suspect something, and she had no confidence
in her own powers of concealment. But Mrs. Peck had more ammunition in her chest; she again
began to sob, and showed symptoms of going into violent hysterics, and bewailed her own hard
lot and the cruelty of her ungrateful daughter so loudly, that she was glad to agree to her
demands to make her keep quiet for the present.

Mrs. Peck then saw the baby, which she admired exceedingly, and accepted of some refreshments.
Mrs. Phillips got her purse, and really gave her some money; and shortly after, her mother
took leave, engaging to come back on the following morning to do some needlework, and uttering
many blessings on Mrs. Phillips for her kindness and generosity in Alice's hearing. Mrs. Phillips
looked greatly relieved when she was out of the house, but the apprehension of her return weighed
considerably on her mind.

Chapter VII.

Business Interrupted By Love

Mrs. Peck appeared on the following day, according to promise, carrying a little black bag,
containing scissors, yard-measure, and a few other implements of needlework, all perfectly
new; and after a short conversation with Mrs. Phillips and a little refreshment, she sat down
beside Elsie to ingratiate herself with that young lady. Elsie thought she had never seen any
one so ignorant of the work she had set about as Mrs. Mahoney appeared to be. She confessed
that she was not skilful, and it showed all the more kindness in Mrs. Phillips to give her
work when she had had so little practice, and did it so badly. She had been accustomed to go
out as a nurse, she said; but she had got too old for that, and could not stand the sitting
up of nights; and then she branched off into accounts of dreadful experiences in nursing, and
deathbeds, and awful operations, that were enough to make Elsie's hair stand on end. She found
fault with Mrs. Phillips's nurse as being too much of the fine lady, and told Elsie what she
considered to be a nurse's duties, which she would like to do if she was only fit for it. Then
she threw herself on Elsie's good nature for a little lesson in needlework, admired her quickness
and taste and skill, wished she could do anything half as well, and asked her to be good enough
to cut out and place her work for her, and to lend her patterns, and altogether behaved with
the most insinuating affability.

Although Elsie Melville looked simple-minded, she was by no means wanting in observation, and
her situation with Mrs. Phillips and her sister-in-law had taught her a wonderful amount of
prudence. She thought there was some inconsistency in Mrs. Mahoney's fluent narratives, and
something very peculiar in her relations with Mrs. Phillips, who appeared to be restless and
uncomfortable whenever she was in the house. Elsie was, however, good-natured enough to give
her some instruction, for which great gratitude was expressed. On the third day of her visits,
when apparently occupied in learning how to do featherstitch for trimming baby's pinafores,
Mrs. Peck looked up from her work, and asked Elsie if she did not come from ----shire.

"That was my native county," said Elsie.

"Do you know Cross Hall at all?" asked Mrs. Peck.

"I was brought up there," said Elsie.

"I come from that county, too," said Mrs. Peck.

"I did not think you had been Scotch," said Elsie.

"I have been in these colonies for thirty-four years, and seen but few of my own country folks;
but the English say they'd know me to be Scotch by my accent."

"Well, perhaps your accent is a little like that of ----shire, when I come to think of it;
but the turn of your expressions is not Scotch at all," said Elsie. "Thirty-four years is a
long time, however; I may, perhaps, get rid of some of my own Scotticisms by that time."

"I knew Hogarth of Cross Hall, very well, when I was young," said Mrs. Peck. "Do you mean to
say you was brought up there?"

"Mr. Hogarth was my uncle," said Elsie.

"Oh, you must be a daughter of his sister Mary's; I fancy there was only the one daughter that
lived to grow up. But if Cross Hall was your uncle, how came you to be in this situation?"
said Mrs. Peck, with feigned astonishment.

"My sister and I were educated by him; he was exceedingly kind to us as long as he lived."

"But his property did not come to you;--the heir-at-law swallowed up all," said Mrs. Peck,
with a fierce glare in her eyes that she could not quite subdue. "It is very hard on you."

"We have felt it rather hard," said Elsie; "but still things have been worse for us at one
time than they are now. Jane and I can earn our own living, and that is the position of most
people in the world."

"What would you give now," said Mrs. Peck, "if you could get back to Cross Hall, and be just
as you used to be?"

"I cannot say what I would give," said Elsie. "But it is impossible. Unless we could restore
my poor uncle to life, things could never be again as they used to be."

"And the new man might have helped you, and not have driven you to seek service at the ends
of the earth. Would you not like to serve him out?" said Mrs. Peck with the same subdued fierceness
as before.

Elsie's instinctive sincerity would have led her to justify Francis, by explaining about the
will, but she felt reluctant to say anything to this strange woman that she could help. Besides,
though she knew nothing of the letter that had been sent by Mrs. Peck to her cousin, and left
unanswered, at Mr. Phillips's earnest request, she was beginning to suspect something of the
truth. Mrs. Peck's courting her so assiduously had puzzled her; and now the interest she felt
in this story, which was all the more apparent to a keen observer from the efforts she made
to conceal it, showed that she knew more about the matter than she liked at once to disclose.

Elsie had a good eye for likenesses, and could see family resemblances where no one else could;
and it had always struck her as very remarkable that there was not the slightest resemblance
between Francis and her uncle, nor between him and any other member of the family whom she
had seen or whose portraits had been preserved. Not merely were the features and complexion
unlike, but there was not a trick of the countenance or of the gait reproduced, as is generally
the case with the sons of fathers who had such marked characteristics as Henry Hogarth. Though
she had not heard of Mrs. Peck's letter, Jane had told her about Madame de Vericourt's to her
uncle, and in her own heart she had fancied that the reason why he had been so cold to Francis
was, that he had been doubtful of the paternity; the very indifferent character of the woman
he had married was not calculated to inspire him with confidence, and the absolute absence
of all family likeness was an additional cause of distrust. The points found can then be used
in a statement in which the limits within which the middle fifty per cent of the cases fall.
Using the same figures that are given above for scores in English composition, the lower limit
is 2.64 and the limit which marks the point above which the upper
twenty-five per cent of the cases are to be found is 5.08.

The limits, therefore, within which the middle fifty per cent of the cases fall are from 2.64
to 5.08.

It is desirable to measure the relationship existing between the achievements
(or other traits) of groups.

In order to express such relationship in a single figure the coefficient or correlation is
used. This measure appears frequently in the literature of education
and will be briefly explained.

"It was a Scotch marriage, you know," said Mrs. Peck.

"Yes, but a binding one; he is received everywhere as my uncle's lawful son."

"Yes, as his lawful son, no doubt. Do you know if he has brought forward his mother at all?"
said Mrs. Peck.

"No; I suppose she is dead, or we should certainly have heard of her."

"Dead, you suppose!" said Mrs. Peck, indignantly; "that is the easy way of getting quit of
relations that has got claims on you--just Suppose them dead?"

"I do not know anything of the matter, except that she has not been heard of. If she were alive
and heard of his inheriting this property, she would be sure to write claiming him, and probably
asking for assistance, which I have no doubt she would at once receive, for he has ample means,
and has the character of being both just and liberal."

"And you think she would apply; and you have no doubt that she ought to have got it? Any one
would have thought that," said Mrs. Peck, between her set teeth.

"Yes, certainly," said Elsie; "but perhaps she did not go the right way to work?"

"She did," said Mrs. Peck, indignantly. "I knowed her well, and heard all about it."

This was to throw Elsie off her guard, for she did not wish to be identified at once; but it
had not the effect desired, for Elsie felt convinced that this was the person who claimed to
be Francis's mother.

Mrs. Phillips came in at this interesting poise in the conversation, and began to give Elsie
directions as to some alterations in a dress.

"There's some buttons and trimmings to get to make it up with. Alice, you had better go to
town and get them for me. You need a walk, at any rate; I do not think you've had your walk
at all regularly of late," said Mrs. Phillips.

"Indeed," said Mrs. Peck, "she has had no walk since here I've been, whatever she might have
had before. It's trying work sitting still all day; I feel it myself, and all the more that
I'm not used to it. If you'd be so good as excuse me for a hour or two; I'd take it as a great
kindness if you'd let me go with Alice for a walk to do her bit of shopping, and to show her
round Melbourne a bit. If I don't know Melbourne well, I ought to. I don't think I ever saw
so good a hand as Alice has. I think I could make her fortune, if she'd only give me a little
commission."

"Oh, I don't think Alice is inclined to leave me," said Mrs. Phillips; "and, indeed, I am very
well satisfied with her."

"But this ain't exactly her sphere. She was a telling me as she was brought up with great expectations,"
said Mrs. Peck.

"She has got over her disappointment about that, I think," said Mrs. Phillips.

"I dare say you think it shabby in me to try to entice your maid from you; and really, after
all, a comfortable home with a lady, as it must be a pleasure to serve and to wait upon, is
perhaps the best thing after all. But as I was saying, Mrs. Phillips, I would be glad to get
out for an hour or two with Alice. I'll not do much work without her, for I'm sure to go wrong
if she is not at my elbow. There's not many ladies so generous as you, to pay me for my blundering
work; and Alice is wonderful patient too. I don't know how to thank her for the pains she takes
with me, and I can't help being very stupid. After being used to active life, one don't take
well to this sitting still. So I'll just put on my bonnet and shawl and go out a bit with Alice."

Mrs. Phillips did not at all like this proposal, for she had an idea that her husband would
very much disapprove of it, and would be still more angry at that than at her having her mother
in her house; but then Mr. Phillips was away, and her mother was there, and the present terror
conquered the distant one. She never knew what her mother might or might not say, if she thwarted
her in anything: she had distant recollections of terrible punishments that always followed
the slightest act of disobedience, or even carelessness, in her childish days; and though now
she knew her mother would not strike her with her hands, she was in constant dread of her tongue. Fourth,
we demand that all negotiations between the employers and the workers arising out of the demands
shall be conducted on behalf of the workers by the Trades Workers' Council of the Wahoo Valley
or their accredited representatives.
 She felt that this Mrs. Mahoney had intelligence to give that was of great importance,
and that she wished to be secure from interruption. Mrs. Phillips was constantly going in and
out, for she was afraid to leave her mother long with any one, and always looked suspicious
of what they might be talking about. Mary, the housemaid, and the nurse, too, seemed to be
curious about this old needlewoman, and were often coming in unexpectedly.

When Mrs. Peck had put on her bonnet and shawl, and dropped her veil over her face, she looked
sufficiently respectable for a companion to one so little known in Melbourne as Alice Melville,
so she thought there could be no harm in going out for an hour or two with her for the sake
of ascertaining if she had any light to throw on the dark subject of Francis's birth.

When they got out of doors, Mrs. Peck appeared at first to be rather anxious to resume the
conversation which her daughter had interrupted; but as they were pretty closely followed by
two other pedestrians all the way into town, she made up her mind to attend to Mrs. Phillips's
business first, so they went to Collins Street and bought the trimmings. In the first place, the
measurement of a group is not expressed satisfactorily by giving the average score or rate of
achievement of the class. It is true that this is one measure, but it is not one which tells enough,
and it is not the one which is most significant for the teacher.

It is important whenever we measure children to get as clear a view as we can of the whole situation.
For this purpose we want not primarily to know what the average performance is, but, rather, how
many children there are at each level of achievement. In arithmetic, for example, we want
to know how many there are who can do none of the Courtis problems in addition, or how many
there are who can do the first six on the Woody test, how many can
do seven, eight, and so on. She felt, now, that she had made a
great mistake in going out with this Mrs. Mahoney, whose rather loud remarks and vulgar appearance
seemed to attract general attention, and she could only wish fervently that, with or without
her secret, she could get back safely to East Melbourne. As they returned, Mrs. Peck proposed
a detour by the Botanic Gardens, which Elsie had never seen. Mrs. Phillips would not expect
them home soon, for she had proposed to show Miss Melville all about Melbourne; and the gardens
were well worth seeing. On a week day they were quiet, and one could get a seat to have a little
comfortable talk. Much as Elsie wished for the talk, she would not on any account lengthen
her walk for it, so she declined the proposal.

"Then," said Mrs. Peck, "let us go out of the regular road we came by, and go round Fitzroy
Square, and have a look round at all the churches and chapels that are built on the Eastern Hill."

Fitzroy Square was not at that time enclosed or planted. It was merely a vacant space, intersected
by numerous footpaths in various directions, and covered where there was no beaten path with
very dusty withered-looking grass. Elsie had no objection to go out of the thoroughfare; but,
instead of pointing out the churches or anything else, as soon as Mrs. Peck had got safe out
of any third party's hearing, she slackened her pace, and eagerly opened the subject which
was nearest to her heart.

"I said, Miss Melville, that I could make your fortune if you'd only give me a handsome commission.
Are you willing to drive a bargain?" said Mrs. Peck.

"If I can see my way clear to the fortune, I should, of course, be glad to pay you for the
information; but I must know what you have got to say before I can guess what it is worth,"
said Elsie.

"And I must know what you are willing to give, before I can tell what I know," said Mrs. Peck.

"But I have really got nothing to offer," said Elsie; "you know how poor I am."

"But suppose you and your sister was to get Cross Hall through means of me, what would you
give me for that?" asked Mrs. Peck.

Elsie felt sure that this woman could not give the property to Jane and herself, for it had
been left to Francis distinctly by will, by name and description; but yet she wanted very much
to find out if he was really their cousin or not, so she said----

"I must consult with my sister on this matter, for it concerns her as much as myself, and also
with Mr. Phillips, who has been to both of us the kindest and best of friends, before I could
make you any definite offer."

"No, no," said Mrs. Peck; "I want no interference of strangers, and I ain't got no time to
waste here while you write up the country to anybody. I must go back to Adelaide in a few days,
and surely your sister will see the advantages of your acting for her. What do you say to 2,000
pounds."

To be asked 2,000 pounds for what Elsie knew to be worth nothing, in a money point of view,
appeared to her rather absurd. "That is a very large sum," said she.

"A year's income is not too much for such a secret as I've got. Cross Hall must be worth 2,000
pounds a year now, and more than that, and I must have something handsome to cover my risk."

"Then you put yourself under the grasp of the law by what you have to reveal?" said Elsie.

"You must let me get clear off before you publish it," said Mrs. Peck. "I have been treated
with the greatest ingratitude by Frank, and I'd like a little revenge. I'd like to pull him
down from his high horse, and set him working for his bread as you have had to do; but at the
same time I am a poor woman, and I must live."

"I cannot tell what we would give you," said Elsie, "until I have something more distinct than
these vague threats; but you may be sure that we will give you as much as it is worth. Trust
to our honour for that."

"Trust to a fiddlestick's end! I am too old a bird to be caught with such chaff as that. No,
I must have it down in black and white. Now we know (if the instructions given above have been
followed) that the compositions rated at 3 were so rated by virtue of the fact that the judges
considered them nearer in quality to the sample valued at 3.69 than to any other sample on
the scale. We should expect, then, to find that some of those rated at 3 were only slightly nearer
to the sample valued at 3.69 than they were to the sample valued at 2.60, while others were
only slightly nearer to 3.69 than they were to 4.74.

Her eager eyes watched the girl's countenance as she read the agreement and weighed the pros
and cons of the bargain she was making, and neither of them were aware, in their preoccupation,
that they were observed. When Elsie looked up, puzzled as to what she was to do, and Mrs. Peck
was putting her pen into her hand, she saw the figure of Walter Brandon approaching her with
the appearance of haste and agitation. Mrs. Peck snatched the paper from Elsie's hand, and
replaced it in the black bag, along with the other writing materials and the extempore desk.

"Alice Melville!" said Brandon, "what in Heaven's name are you doing here in such company as this?"

Elsie turned as pale as death; she could not utter a syllable.

"Come with me--let me take you home. I heard from Mrs. Phillips that you had gone out; but
I could not have imagined you to have such a companion."

"Such a companion, indeed!" said Mrs. Peck, indignantly. "I have been in these colonies more
nor thirty years, and I'm good enough company for any fine lady's-maid as ever walked on shoe
leather."

"Oh, Mr. Brandon!" said Elsie, who had recovered her powers of speech; "she was doing needlework
at Mrs. Phillips's, and I was sent out on an errand, and she would come with me."

"And we was just a looking over the bill, and seeing as our money was all right," said Mrs.
Peck, in the most plausible manner.

"No; it was not a bill," said Elsie, who hated the idea of this woman telling lies for her.

"Did Mrs. Phillips actually send you out walking with this person?" said Brandon, with a look
of the most intense contempt and disgust at Mrs. Peck.

"She said nothing against it; but she did not send me; it was all my own fault," said Elsie,
weeping bitterly. "I rather wished to go with her."

"My dear Miss Alice, you must have seen that this was no fit person for you to associate with.
You are an innocent girl, ignorant of the world, as all girls ought to be; but you are not
so easily deceived in character as not to see in this woman's face, language, and manners,
that she is to be avoided as you would avoid death and destruction," said Brandon. 

The examples given above will, however, suffice to make clear the distinction between the ordinary
type of examination and the more careful study of the achievements of children which may be accomplished
by using these measuring sticks. She had treasured his parting words and his parting looks in her heart; and now
to meet him again in this way--to feel that he must look down on her as in the old days of
his pity he never could have done--was dreadful. How was he to guess at the almost irresistible
temptation that had led her to compromise herself so far?

