There are several things to be learned by this fable. But I shall content myself with simply
pointing out one of them, presuming your good sense will discover the rest: Before you attempt
to take care of others, learn to take care of yourselves.

XII.

THE WRONG WAY.

Edward was rather a rude, headstrong boy. Like a great many young people of his age, he needed
to be punished sometimes, and sometimes his parents did deal pretty sternly with him. Edward
had a sister, older than himself, by some years. Fanny--for this was the name of the girl--tried
one day, to tame little Eddy, when, according to her notion, he was inclined to be too wild.
Fanny was grieved to see her brother act so rudely. They were visiting that day, at Aunt Sally's,
and it was natural enough that Fanny should wish to have her brother behave as well as he could.

"Eddy," said she, in the hearing of her aunt and some of her cousins, "you act like a young colt."

"Well, what if I do?" said Eddy, rather tartly.

"Why, you will need breaking, if you go on so, that's all."

"And suppose I should need breaking, I'd like to know who'll break me."

"May be I'd try my hand at it, if there's nobody else to do it."

"I'd like to see you try it."

"Hush, Edward! I'm ashamed of you."

"You had better hush yourself, if you want me to hush."

At this point in the dispute between the brother and sister, Aunt Sally thought it was best
to put a stop to it. She saw that Fanny could do no good to Edward, while he was in that mood,
and so she said a word or two which turned the thoughts of both the brother and sister into
another channel.

I suppose it can hardly be necessary to say to you, that, whatever may have been the right
way to manage Edward, that which his sister tried at this time was certainly the wrong.

XIII.

THE RIGHT WAY.

Edward still behaved rather rudely--still "acted like a young colt." "What a pity!" Fanny said
to herself. "Mamma will be mortified, if she ever hears about it. Well, I must try again, and
see what I can do with the little fellow this time."

So she called Eddy out into the yard in front of the house, and there, where nobody else but
him could hear her, she said,

"Eddy, I want to tell you a little story."

"Well," said Edward, "I want to hear a little story."

"Once there was a little boy," the sister said, commencing her story, "that had a sister who
was kind to him. His sister took good care of her brother. She tried to do so, at any rate.
When this little boy was abroad, playing with his cousins, he was rude. He would not mind his
sister. He was a good deal younger than she was, and one would suppose that he ought to have
listened to her, when she talked to him. But he did not. He was just as rude as ever; and his
sister was afraid that, when his mamma heard of his conduct, she would feel ashamed of her
son. What do you think of that boy, Eddy?"

"Sister," said the little fellow, "I am a very naughty boy. But I am sorry I behaved so. I
will try to do better, if you will forgive me."

And so, you see, the wild, rattle-headed boy, who was so full of fun, that he could hardly
hold in, and who was so wild that Fanny thought it was best to check him with a curb bit, something
as she would a young colt, was completely tamed by this soft, gentle language. My young friend,
don't you think there's great power in such words? I do, and I advise you, when you are dealing
with such a "young colt" as Eddy was, to try the plan that Fanny tried last, and see if it
don't succeed better than anything else?

    Use gentle words, for who can tell
      The blessings they impart!
    How oft they fall as manna fell,
      On some nigh-fainting heart!

    "In lonely wilds by light-winged birds
      Rare seeds have oft been sown;
    And hope has sprung from gentle words,
      Where only grief had grown."

XIV.

THE OLD GOAT AND HIS PUPIL.

A FABLE.

A spruce young goat tried very hard to make himself appear like a sheep. He endeavored to talk
and act like a sheep. Half his time was spent in putting on airs. He went so far as to cut
off his beard, so that he might bear a more striking resemblance to the sheep family; and he
was once heard to say that he would give anything if he could either get rid of his horns altogether,
or have them twisted as the horns were worn by some of the old fathers whom he so much admired.
The little simpleton, however, lost more than he gained by his singular manners. Instead of
his being more respected and beloved, as he expected to be, he was despised by everybody.

One day, after being ridiculed and abused by some of his young neighbors, he went to his schoolmaster
with a great budget full of troubles. This schoolmaster was an old goat, with a long beard,
and a long head, too, as it would seem from the character he had.

"O dear!" said the little simpleton, "everybody hates me. I wish I were dead. I'm sure I don't
know what it means. The more I try to be good, the less they all like me."

"My dear fellow," said Mr. Longbeard, "I am sorry for you. But I can do nothing to help you.
It will always be so, until you do better."

"Why, I do as well as I can now," replied the young goat.

"You ape the sheep too much."

"Well, the farmer thinks more of his sheep than he does of his goats--a great deal more."

"And what of it?"

"Why, if he likes the sheep best, he will like me best when I act as the sheep do."

"That's your mistake. He will not like you half as well."

"Why not?"

"For the same reason that nobody else likes you so well--because you don't act like yourself.
Take my advice, now. Be yourself. Don't try to be anybody else. Depend upon it, if you ever
come across a person that likes you, he will like you as a goat, and not as a sheep. A sheep
you could never be, though you should practice all your life-time. Be a goat, then--be a goat,
and nothing else."

This advice, I believe, proved of some service to the juvenile goat; and by the way, reader,
perhaps it may be worth something to you.

XV.

ON BARKING DOGS.

It is an old saying--and there is a good deal of truth in it--that "barking dogs never bite."
I say there is a good deal of truth in it. It is not strictly true. Scarcely any proverb will
bear picking to pieces, and analyzing, as a botanist would pick to pieces and analyze a rose
or a tulip. Almost all dogs bark a little, now and then. Still I believe those dogs bark the
most that bite the least, and the dogs that make a practice of biting the hardest and the oftenest,
make very little noise about it.

Have you never been passing by a house, and seen a little pocket edition of a cur run out of
the front door yard, to meet you, with ever so much bravery and heroism, as if he intended
to eat you at two or three mouthfuls? What a barking he set up. The meaning of his bow, wow,
wow, every time he repeated the words, was, "I'll bite you! I'll bite you!" But the very moment
you turned round and faced him, he ran back into the yard, as if forty tigers were after him.
You see he was all bark, and no bite.

Well, it is about the same with men and women, and boys and girls, as it is with dogs. Those
who bark most bite least, the world over.

Show me a boy who talks about being as bold as a lion, and I will show you one with the heart
of a young rabbit, just learning to eat cabbage. I do dislike to see boys and girls boasting
of what they can do. It always gives me a low opinion of their merits.

There is Tom Thrasher. You don't know Tom, do you? Well, he is one of your barking dogs. He
is all the time boasting of the great things he is able to do. Nobody ever saw him do any such
things. Still he keeps on boasting, right in the midst of the young people who know him through
and through, a great deal better than he knows himself. It is strange that he should brag at
that rate where everybody knows him. But he has fallen into the habit of bragging, and I suppose
he hardly thinks of the absurd and foolish language he is using. According to his account of
himself, he can run a mile in a minute, jump over a fence ten rails high, shoot an arrow from
his bow twenty rods, and hit an apple at that distance half a dozen times running.

I must tell you a story about this Tom Thrasher. Poor Tom! he got "come up with," not long
ago, by some fun-loving boys that lived in his neighborhood. Tom had been boasting of his great
feats in jumping. He could jump higher than any boy on Blue Hill. In fact, he had just jumped
over the fence around Captain Corning's goat pasture, which, as everybody knows, was eight
rails high, and verily believed he could have cleared it just as easily, if it had been two
rails higher. That was the kind of language he used to this company of boys. They did not believe
a word he said.

"Let's try Tom," one whispered to another, "let's try the fellow, and see how high he can jump."

"Say, Tom," said one of the boys, "will you go down to the captain's goat pasture with us,
and try that thing over again?"

Tom did not seem to be very fierce for going. But all the boys urged him so hard, that he finally
consented and went. When he got to the goat pasture, he measured the fence with his eye; and
from the manner in which he shrugged his shoulders, it was pretty clear that he considered
the fence a very high one indeed. He was not at all in a hurry about performing the feat. But
the roguish boys would not let him off.

"Come, Tom," said one.

"Now for it," said another.

"No backing out," said a third.

"It's only eight rails high," said a fourth.

Still, somehow or other, Tom could not get his courage quite up to the point. The best thing
he could have done, in my way of thinking, when he found himself so completely cornered was
to have said, "Well, boys, there's no use in mincing the matter at all. I am a little dunce.
I can no more jump over that fence than I can build a steamboat or catch a streak of lightning."
But that was not his way of getting out of the scrape.

"Let me give the word now," said one of the lads. "I'll say 'one, two, three,' and when I come
to 'three,' you shall run and jump."

"Go ahead," said Tom.

And the other boy began: "One--two--three"--

Tom started, and ran. I'm not sure but he had boasted so much about his jumping, that he had
almost made himself believe he really could jump over that fence. At any rate, he tried it,
and--failed, of course. His feet struck the fence about three quarters of the distance from
the ground, and over he went, head foremost, into the goat pasture. It was fortunate for him
that he did not break his neck. As it was, his spirit was broken, and that was about all. He
went home a much humbler boy than he was when he came to the goat pasture; and a somewhat wiser
one, too. After that unfortunate leap, if Tom ever boasted largely of what he could do and
what he had done, it was a very common thing for his playmates to say, "Take care, Tom; remember
that famous leap."

    *       *       *       *       *

Woodworth's Juvenile Works.

"Of those who have the gift to write for children, Mr. Woodworth stands among the first; and
what is best of all, with the ability to adapt himself to the wants and comprehension of children,
he has that high moral principle, which will permit nothing to leave his pen that can do harm."--Arthur's
Home Gaz.

"We never pen a notice with more pleasure than when any work of our friend Mr. Woodworth is
the subject. Whatever he does is well done, and in a sweet and gentle spirit"--Christ. Inquirer.

"The author is a man of fine abilities and refined taste, and does his work in a spirit of
vivacious but most truthful earnestness." --Ladies Repos.

WOODWORTH'S STORIES ABOUT ANIMALS. 12mo., with Illuminated Title, and upwards of Fifty Beautiful
Engravings; pp. 336.

WOODWORTH'S STORIES ABOUT BIRDS. Uniform with the above. With Sixty Splendid Engravings.

These two volumes, containing characteristic anecdotes, told in a brief and pleasing vein,
are among the most entertaining books of the kind to be found in the English language.

"Attractive stories, told in a style of great liveliness and beauty."--N.Y. Tribune.

"A melange of most agreeable reading."--Presbyterian.

"They cannot fail to be intensely interesting."--Ch. Register.

"Charming stories, told with that felicitous simplicity and eloquence of diction which characterize
all Mr. Woodworth's efforts for the young."--N.Y. Commercial Advertiser.

"Nothing can be more interesting than the stories and pictorial illustrations of these works."--Brattleborough
Dem.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNCLE FRANK'S PEEP AT THE BEASTS. Square 12mo. Profusely Illustrated; pp. 160.

UNCLE FRANKS PEEP AT THE BIRDS. Uniform with the above.

These two volumes are written in the simplest style, and with words, for the most part, of
two or three syllables. They are exceedingly popular among children.