Wikkey seemed satisfied, and in a few minutes was dozing again. He slept for an hour after
being put to bed, but then grew restless, and the night passed wearily between intervals of
heavy oppression--half-unconscious wakefulness and rambling, incoherent talk, sometimes of
his street-life, of his broom, for which he felt about with weak, aimless hands, of cold and
hunger; and then he would break out into murmuring complaints of Mrs. Skimmidge, when forbidden
words would slip out, and even then the child's look of distress went to Lawrence's heart.
But oftenest the wandering talk was of the incidents of the last few weeks, and over and over
came the words--"See the King in his beauty."

In the morning Wikkey was quieter and perfectly sensible: but the pinched look on his face,
and the heavy labored breathing, told plainly that he was sinking.

Hard as it had been for Lawrence to leave his "little lad," up to this time he had been scrupulous
in never allowing Wikkey to interfere with his office duties; but now it seemed impossible
to leave the child, who clung feebly to him with a frightened whisper--

"Oh, don't go, Lawrence! p'raps the King will want me, and maybe I shouldn't be so frightened
if I kept looking at you."

No, he could not go; so writing a hurried line--"Cannot come to-day--the boy I told you of
is dying--the work shall be ready in time," he dispatched it to the head clerk of his department.
"Granby's Craze" had at first excited a good deal of astonishment when it became known at the
office; but Lawrence had quietly discouraged any attempts at "chaff" on the subject, and as
time went on he used to be greeted by really warm inquiries after "the little chap."

The hours passed slowly by. Reginald came and went as he could spare time; sometimes he prayed
in such short and simple language as Wikkey could join in--and the expression of his face showed
that he did so--sometimes he knelt in silence, praying earnestly for the departing soul, and
for Lawrence in his mournful watch. As the day began to wane, Reginald entering, saw that the
end was near, and knelt to say the last prayers; as he finished the pale March sun, struggling
through the clouds, sent a shaft of soft light into the room and touched Wikkey's closed eyes.
They opened with a smile, and raising himself in Lawrence's arms, he leant forward with a look
so eager and expectant, that with a thrill of awe, almost amounting to terror, the young man
whispered--

"What is it, Wikkey? Do you see anything?"

"Not yet--soon--it's coming," the boy murmured, without altering his fixed gaze; and then for
an instant a wondrous light seemed to break over the wan face--only for an instant--for suddenly
as it had dawned, it faded out, and with it fled the little spirit, leaving only the frail
worn-out form to fall back gently on Lawrence's breast.

Was he gone? Almost incredulously Lawrence looked down, and then, with pale, set features,
he rose, and laying Wikkey on the bed, sank on his knees beside it, and buried his face in
the pillow, with the sound of a great sob. Reginald approached the bed, and laying his hand
for a moment on the bowed head, spoke low and solemnly--

"The blessing of a soul that was ready to perish come upon you, Lawrence."

Then he quitted the room, and closing the door softly, left Lawrence alone with his "little lad."

       *       *       *       *       *

So Wikkey passed away, and Lawrence went back to his work, ever
retaining deep down in his heart the memory of the child whose life had
become so strangely interwoven with his own, and more precious still,
the lesson bequeathed to him by his "little lad," of how a soul that
looks persistently upwards finds its full satisfaction at last in the
Vision of "The King in His Beauty." |
    |          changed "Skimmedge to Skimmidge      |
    |                                               |
    | Page 13: changed Wikky to Wikkey              |
    |                                               |
    | Page 34: changed guvnor to guvner             |
    |                                               |
    | Page 46: changed Wikkie to Wikkey             |
    |                                               |
    | Page 65: changed Evans's to Evans'            |
    |                                               |
    | Page 70: changed to to too                    |
    |                                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+