We confess to some regret that our journey is so near its end. Perhaps it is the sentimental
regret with which one always leaves the east, for we have been a thousand miles nearer Ireland
than Boston is. Collecting in the mind the detached pictures given to our eyes in all these
brilliant and inspiring days, we realize afresh the variety, the extent, the richness of these
northeastern lands which the Gulf Stream pets and tempers. If it were not for attracting speculators,
we should delight to speak of the beds of coal, the quarries of marble, the mines of gold.
Look on the map and follow the shores of these peninsulas and islands, the bays, the penetrating
arms of the sea, the harbors filled with islands, the protected straits and sounds. All this
is favorable to the highest commercial activity and enterprise. Greece itself and its islands
are not more indented and inviting. Fish swarm about the shores and in all the streams. There
are, I have no doubt, great forests which we did not see from the car windows, the inhabitants
of which do not show themselves to the travelers at the railway-stations. In the dining-room
of a friend, who goes away every autumn into the wilds of Nova Scotia at the season when the
snow falls, hang trophies--enormous branching antlers of the caribou, and heads of the mighty
moose--which I am assured came from there; and I have no reason to doubt that the noble creatures
who once carried these superb horns were murdered by my friend at long range. Many people have
an insatiate longing to kill, once in their life, a moose, and would travel far and endure
great hardships to gratify this ambition. In the present state of the world it is more difficult
to do it than it is to be written down as one who loves his fellow-men.

We received everywhere in the Provinces courtesy and kindness, which were not based upon any
expectation that we would invest in mines or railways, for the people are honest, kindly, and
hearty by nature. What they will become when the railways are completed that are to bind St.
John to Quebec, and make Nova Scotia, Cape Breton, and Newfoundland only stepping-stones to
Europe, we cannot say. Probably they will become like the rest of the world, and furnish no
material for the kindly persiflage of the traveler.

Regretting that we could see no more of St. John, that we could scarcely see our way through
its dimly lighted streets, we found the ferry to Carleton, and a sleeping-car for Bangor. It
was in the heart of the negro porter to cause us alarm by the intelligence that the customs
officer would, search our baggage during the night. A search is a blow to one's self-respect,
especially if one has anything dutiable. But as the porter might be an agent of our government
in disguise, we preserved an appearance of philosophical indifference in his presence. It takes
a sharp observer to tell innocence from assurance. During the night, awaking, I saw a great
light. A man, crawling along the aisle of the car, and poking under the seats, had found my
traveling-bag and was "going through" it.

I felt a thrill of pride as I recognized in this crouching figure an officer of our government,
and knew that I was in my native land.