"I was afraid," said Lesley, softly, "lest the years that have gone by should have made you
forget his gentleness and nobleness of soul--lest for one moment you should think him capable
of a mean or vile action. I came to tell you, dearest mother, how impossible it was for us--who
know him--to credit for one moment an accusation of this kind. If all the world said that he
was guilty, you and I, mamma, would know that he was not."

"My child, my darling, you must speak for yourself. Do not try to speak for me!"

"Mother, won't you give me a message for him?"

"Are you going to see him, Lesley?"

"I hope so. Mr. Kenyon said he would take me."

There was a short silence, and then Lesley lifted her eyes to her mother's face. She was not
encouraged by what she saw there. It was pale, sad, immobile, and, as it seemed to Lesley,
very cold.

"Mother, I must go. Won't you send him a message?"

"I have no message, Lesley."

"Not one little word?"

"Not one." And then, as if trying to excuse herself Lady Alice added, hurriedly, "there is
nothing that I can say which would please him. He would not care for any message from me."

"He would care to hear that you trusted him!"

"I do not think so," said Lady Alice, with a little shake of her head.

Lesley rose to her feet, silenced for the moment, but not altogether vanquished. She put her
arms round her mother's neck.

"But you do trust him, mamma? Tell me that, at any rate."

For almost the first time within Lesley's memory Lady Alice made a gesture of impatience.

"I cannot be catechised; Lesley. Let me alone. You do not understand."

And Lesley was obliged to go away, feeling sorrowfully that she had failed in her mission.
Perhaps, however, she had succeeded better than she knew.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

"AT YOUR SIDE."

Caspar Brooke was not as yet debarred the privilege of seeing his friends, and on the morning
after his arrest he had a great many visitors, including, of course, Maurice Kenyon and his
lawyer. Maurice was busying himself earnestly on his friend's behalf; and, considering the
position that Brooke held, the esteem felt for him in high places, and the amount of interest
that was being brought to bear on the authorities, there was little doubt but that he would
be let out on bail in a day or two, even if the proceedings were not quashed altogether. Some
delay, however, there was sure to be owing to the pertinacity of Mary Trent's assertion that
she saw him struggling with Oliver on the stairs, but in the meantime his detention was allowed
to press as lightly upon him as possible.

It was noon before Lesley saw him, and when she sprang to his side and threw her arms around
his neck, with a new demonstrativeness of manner, she noticed that his brows lifted a little,
and that he smiled with a look of positive pleasure and relief.

"So you have come?" he said, holding her to him as if he did not like to let her go. "I began
to wonder if you had deserted me!"

"Oh, father! Why, I have been waiting ever so long for Mr. Grierson to go."

"And before that----?" he asked, in rather a peculiar tone.

"Before that--I went to see mamma." And Lesley looked bravely up into his face.

"That was an infringement of contract, as I suppose you know," said Caspar, smiling persistently.
"But it does not matter very much. What did 'mamma' say to you?"

"I--don't--know," murmured Lesley, confused by the question. "Nothing very much."

"Nothing. Ah, I know what that means." He turned away from her, and, sitting down, leaned his
elbows upon a table, and played with his beard. "It was useless, Lesley," he said, quietly,
after a few minutes' silence. "Your mother is the last person whose sympathies will be enlisted
on my side."

Lesley tried to speak but suddenly felt her voice fail her; so instead of speaking she knelt
down by her father, leaned her head upon his shoulder, and burst into very heartfelt tears.

"Little one," said Caspar, "I'm afraid we have both got ourselves into a mess."

It did not sound comforting, but Lesley stayed her tears to listen.

"I have been talking to Grierson," her father continued, "and we have agreed that there must
be no suppression of the truth. My dislike to Oliver Trent has been commented on already, and
I must give a reason for it. Lesley, my dear, you will have to contribute your own evidence
as to the reason."

Lesley looked up with terrified, wide-open eyes. "Do you mean that I shall have to say----"

"You will have to go into the witness-box and tell what you know, or rather answer the questions
that are asked you."

"But will that be--best--for you?" She put the question with some difficulty.

"That is not the point. What we have to do is to tell the truth, and leave the result to others."

"--To God?" Lesley interposed, almost involuntarily. Caspar Brooke's lip moved with a grave smile.

"Well, yes, to God if you will have it so--we use different terms, but perhaps we have the
same meaning. We must at any rate leave the result to the working of various laws which we
cannot control, and to fight against these laws of nature is wrong-doing--or sin. Therefore,
Lesley, you will have to tell the truth, whether it may seem to be for my good or my harm."

She glanced at him rather piteously, and her eyes filled with tears. Aunt Sophy's words recurred
to her mind; but they seemed feeble and futile in the light of his courage and steadfastness.
Aunt Sophy had been wrong--so much was clear to Lesley; and truth was best under all possible
circumstances.

"It is for Ethel I am sorry," she murmured.

"Yes, poor Ethel. It is true then--what that woman said--that Oliver Trent was in love with you?"

"I could not help it, father. I don't think it was my fault. I did not know till it was too late."

"I am not blaming you, my dear. When I came into the drawing-room that day--do you remember?--what
had happened then? Can you bear to tell me?"

She hid her face on his shoulder as she answered, "He was speaking foolishly. I think he wanted
to--to kiss me.... I was very glad that you came in."

"Was that the first time?"

"Yes, the first. And I did not even see him again until that Saturday night, when he found
me in the study--and----"

"And asked you to run away with him?"

"Yes. Indeed, I had not led him to think that I would do any such thing, father. I told him
never to speak to me again. If it had not been for Ethel's sake, I think I should have called
someone--but I did not like to make a disturbance."

"No, dear, no. And you--yourself--you did not care for him?"

"Oh no, no, no!"

"It has been a terrible tangle--and the knot has been cut very rudely," said Mr. Brooke, in
a musing tone. "Of one thing I am quite certain, we were not fit to have the care of you, Lesley--your
aunt and I. You would never have been in this position, my poor child, if we had looked after you."

"It isn't that which troubles me," said Lesley, trying to steady her voice. "It is--that you
have to bear the brunt of it all. If it had not been for me you would never have been here.
It has been my fault!"

"Not your fault, child," said her father. "The fault did not lie with you, but with that unfortunate
young man, for whom I am truly sorry. Don't be morbid, Lesley; look things straight in the
face, and don't blame yourself unless you are perfectly sure that you deserve to be blamed."

And there the conference ended, for Miss Brooke arrived at that moment, and Lesley thought
it advisable to leave the choice of a subject of conversation in her hands. Caspar had many
visitors that day, and many letters of advice and condolence, for few men were blessed--or
cursed--with as many friends as he. Among the letters that reached him was a note without signature,
which he read hastily, and as hastily concealed when he had read it. We have chosen thee, our
prayers have consecrated thee, for all the wishes of the people went with thee. Thou art to
stand as mountain unremoved, for thy throne is planted secure on
the hearts of thy people.

Stand steadfast then, for we have endowed thee with power irresistible. Fall therefore not away;
but let thy sceptre be held firmly in thy grasp.

Which is more potent, Matter or Spirit? Is the power with which the people endow their king identical
with the power of wealth with which we enrich him by paying him his
Royal dues?

We make him irresistible not by wealth but by the strength of our lives, the strength of our
mind, may, we have to pay him more according to our ancient Lawgivers, in as much as the eighth
part of our deeds and virtues, and the merit we have ourselves acquired. We can only make him
irresistible by the strength of our lives, the strength of our minds,
and the strength that comes out of righteousness.

DUTY TO OUR COUNTRY

And lastly, what are our duties to our country? These are essentially to win honour for it and
also win for it security and peace. As regards winning honour for our country, it is true that
while India has offered from the earliest times welcome and hospitality to all peoples and nationalities
her children have been subjected to intolerable humiliations in other countries even under
the flag of our king.

There can be no question of the fundamental duty of every Indian
to stand up and uphold the honour of his country and strove for the
removal of wrong.

The general task of redressing wrong is not a problem
of India alone, but one in which the righteous men are interested
the world over. She did not say
so. Probably she only wished to express her faith in him, and to assure him of her friendship.
Rosalind had been his friend through many a long year. She had always shown herself kind and
sympathetic--in spite of one or two interludes of coldness and general oddity which Caspar
had never felt able to understand. It would be pleasant enough to hear her say that she trusted
him--he could not help feeling that. For, although he had passed the matter off very lightly
when talking to Lesley, he was secretly hurt at the absence of any message from his wife. He
could almost have worked himself into a rage at the thought of it. "Does she, too, think me
guilty?" he asked himself. "She ought to know me better, although she does not love me! She
ought to know. And she does know, but she is too cold and too proud to say so. Poor, warm-hearted
Lesley has tried to win her sympathy for me and failed. Well, I never expected otherwise: she
never gave me what I wanted--sympathy, understanding, or love! And how can she blame me"--the
thought stole unawares into his mind--"if I turn for sympathy to one who offers it?"

Yes, Rosalind would sympathize, and there would be no harm in listening to her gentle words.
He had the pen in his hand, paper and ink before him: a word would be enough, if he wished
to stay her visit. But he would not write it: if she liked to come, she might come--he would
be glad to see her. Besides, her letter wanted explanation: for what had she to forgive?

He pushed the writing materials away from him, and went to the fireplace, where a small fire
was burning very dimly. The day was cloudy, and the afternoon was drawing in. He crushed the
coal with the heel of his boot in order to make a flame leap up; then leaned his elbow on the
narrow mantelpiece and gazed down into the glowing embers.

The door opened and closed again behind him, but at first he did not look up. He thought that
the attendant had come to light the gas or bring him some tea. But when he heard no further
sound, he suddenly stirred and looked up; and in the dim light he saw beside him the figure
of a woman, cloaked and veiled.

Was it Rosalind? No, it was too tall for Rosalind Romaine. Not Lesley?--though it had a look
of her! And then his heart gave a tremendous leap (although no one would have suspected it,
for his massive form and bearded face remained as motionless and calm as ever), for it dawned
upon him that the visitor was none other than Lesley's mother, his wife, Alice Brooke, who
had quitted him in anger twelve years before.

"I beg your pardon," he said, courteously. "I did not see--I had no idea who it was. Will you
not sit down?"

He handed her a chair, with a bow as formal as that of a complete stranger. Perhaps the formality
was inevitable. Lady Alice put her hand on the back of the chair, and felt that she was trembling.

"I hope I am not intruding," she said, in a voice as formal as his own.

"Not at all. It was most kind of you to come. Pray sit down."

She seated herself in silence, and then put up her veil. He remained standing, and for a moment
or two the husband and wife looked each other steadily in the face, with a sort of curiosity
and with a sort of wonder too. The years had not dealt unkindly with either of them. Lady Alice
had kept her slender grace of figure and her gentleness of expression, but the traces of sorrow
and anxiety were so visible upon her delicate face that Caspar felt a sudden impulse of pity
towards the woman who had suffered in her loneliness more than he had perhaps thought possible.
As she sat and looked at him, a certain pathetic quality showing itself with more than usual
vividness in her soft eyes and drooping mouth, he was conscious of a desire to take her in
his arms and console her for all the past. But he caught back the impulse with an inward laugh
of scorn. She had no doubt come to run needles into him, as she used to do in those unlucky
days of poverty and struggle. She had a knack of looking pretty and sweet while she was doing
it, he remembered. It would not do to show any weakness now.

And she--what did she think of him? She was less absorbed with the consideration of any change
in him than with what she intended to say. What impressed her most were the inflections of
his quiet, musical voice--a voice as unroughened and as gentle as when it wooed her in her
father's Northern Castle years before! She had forgotten its power, but it made her tremble
now from head to foot with a sort of terror that was not without charm. It was so cold a voice--so
cold and calm! She felt that if it once grew tender and caressing her strength would fail her
altogether. But there was not much fear of tenderness from him--to her.

After that involuntary and rather awkward pause, Lady Alice recollected herself; and spoke first.

"You must be very much surprised to see me?"

"I am delighted, of course. I could wish"--with a slight smile--"that the apartment was more
worthy of you, and that the circumstances were less disagreeable; but I am unfortunately not
able to alter these details."

"And it is exactly to these details that you owe my visit," said Lady Alice, with unexpected
calmness.

"Then I ought to be grateful them, no doubt."

She moved uneasily, as if the studied conventionality of his tone jarred on her a little; and
then she said, with an effort that made her words sound brusque,

"I mean that under ordinary circumstances I should not have come to see you. But these are
so strange--so extraordinary--that you will perhaps pardon the intrusion. I felt--on reflection--that
it was only right for me to come--to express----"

She faltered, and he took advantage of her hesitation to say, with a quiet smile--

"I am very much obliged to you. But you should not have taken all this trouble. A note would
have answered the purpose just as well. I suppose you wish to express your indignation at the
little care I seem to have taken of Lesley. You cannot blame me more severely than I blame
myself. If she had been under your care I have no doubt we should not be in our present dilemma;
but it is no use fretting over what is past--or inevitable. I can only say that I am exceedingly
sorry. Will you not loosen your cloak? This room is rather warm. I can't very well ring for
tea, I am afraid. You should call on me at Woburn Place, if you want tea." 

An easy green-house life makes them less than themselves, overgrown and flabby, capable of response,
till they have become hardened by adversity to a fuller existence.

"We have now before our mind's eye the whole organism of the perceiving,
throbbing and responding plant, a complex unity and not a congeries
of unrelated parts.

The barriers which separated kindred phenomena in the plant and animal
are now thrown down.

Thus community throughout the great ocean of life is seen to outweigh
apparent dissimilarity Diversity is swallowed up in unity.

"In realising this, is our sense of final mystery of things deepened or lessened? Is our sense of
wonder diminished when we realise in the infinite expanse of life that is silent and voiceless
the foreshadowings of more wonderful complexities?

Is it not rather that science evokes in us a deeper sense of awe? Does not each of her new
advances gain for us a step in that stairway of rock which all must climb who desire to look from
the mountain tops of the spirit upon the promised land of truth?"

Sir Jagadis then gave a most interesting exposition of his researches with the aid of magic lantern
slides.

SENSITIVENESS IN PLANTS

Referring first of all his discovery of sensitiveness in plants, he said that in that respect
they were akin to the human system.

He illustrated this truth by a demonstration of the reaction that takes place in the frog when
a shock is communicated and side by side presenting the reaction that is similarly effected in
the plant. "Plants have a nervous system like our own," he said, and with the aid of an enlarged
illustration of the mimosa he showed the changes that took place when the plant was disturbed.
Turning to plant autograph, he spoke of the Resonant Recorder, a special apparatus which he
has invented to prove how even plants are tuned to environment. Certain tunes had no effect on
plants, he said, while others had and he asked them specially to observe the beautiful and variegated
colour formation produced by their response to tunes.

He gave an interesting experiment on this point, and both Lord and
Lady Willingdon tried it.

There was a great outburst of cheering, which was renewed each time the effect was produced,
and it was noticed that the cheering, which was vociferous had its own effect. It had taken him
a long time, he said, to produce and perfect the complete apparatus to determine the latent mimosa
and by the aid of that apparatus, he was able to record the movement
of the plant to one thousandth of a second.

He next went on to say
that all plants were endowed like ourselves, but at first the news
was received with great scepticism. He did not despair, however, of
success and was continuously engaged in discovering, in collecting
fresh evidence. Thanks to the action of the Government of India in
sending him on a world tour, he got at last the opportunity to prove
before the scientific societies of the world, the truth of his discoveries.


She rose from her chair and drew her fur-lined cloak closely round her, as if preparing to depart.

"I should like to hear it--if I am not troubling you too much," said Caspar.

She averted her eyes and began slowly to draw on her gloves. "It is really nothing--I came
on a momentary impulse. I have not seen you for a good many years, and we parted with very
angry words on our lips, did we not?--but I wanted to say that--although you were sometimes
angry--I never knew you do a cruel thing--you were always kind--kindest of all to creatures
that were weak (except, perhaps to me); and I am quite sure--sure as that I stand here--that
you never did the thing of which they are accusing you. There!"--and she looked straight into
his face--"it is a little thing, no doubt: you have hosts of friends to say the same thing
to you: but my tribute is worth having, perhaps, because, after all, I am your wife--and in
some ways I do understand!"

Caspar's face worked strangely: he bit his lip hard as he looked at her.

"You are generous, Alice," he said, in a low voice, after a pause that seemed eternal to her.

"Oh, no. Why should you call it generous? I only wanted to say this--and also--that if I can
be of any use to you now, I am ready. A little thing sometimes turns the course of public opinion.
If I were to go to Woburn Place--to stay with Lesley, for instance--so that all the world could
see that I believed in you----"

"But--I shall be at Woburn Place myself in a day or two, on bail; and then----"

"I could stay," said Lady Alice, again looking at him. Then her eyes dropped and the color
mounted to her forehead. He made a sudden step towards her.

"Alice--is it possible--after all these years----"

"No, it is not possible," she said, with a little laugh which yet had something in it of a
sob, "and I don't think we should ever get on together--and I don't love you at all, except
for Lesley's sake--but just until this horrible affair is over, if I might show everybody that
I have all possible faith in you, and that I know you to be good and upright and honorable--just
till then, Caspar, I should like to be at your side."

But whether Caspar heard the whole of this speech must remain for ever doubtful, as, long before
its close, he had taken her in his arms and was sealing the past between them with a long kiss
which might verily be called the kiss of peace.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

"OUT ON BAIL."

Miss Brooke was electrified. Such a thing had never occurred to her as possible. After years
of separation, of dispute, of ill-feeling on either side, here was Lady Alice appearing in
her husband's house, and expressing a desire to remain in it. She came to Woburn Place on the
evening after her interview with Caspar, and at once made known her wishes to Doctor Sophy.

It was a curious interview. Miss Brooke sat bolt upright on a sofa, with an air of repressed
indignation which was exceedingly striking: Lady Alice, half enveloped in soft black furs,
was leaning back in the lowest and most luxurious chair the room afforded, with rather more
the air of the grande dame than she actually wished to convey. In reality her heart was very
soft, and there was moisture in her eyes; but it was difficult for her to shake off an appearance
of cold indifference to all the world when Miss Sophia Brooke, M. D., was in her society. She
had never understood Doctor Sophy, and Miss Brooke had always detested her.

"Am I to understand, Lady Alice," said the spinster, in her stiffest voice, "that my brother
wishes you to take up your abode in this house during his absence?"

"Yes, I think so," said Lady Alice, equably. "He has wished me to take up my abode here for
some time past."

"Indeed?"

The note of incredulity in her voice angered Caspar's wife.

"I think you hardly understand," she said with some quiet dignity, "that I have been to see
Mr. Brooke this afternoon. Strange circumstances demand new treatment, Miss Brooke. I consulted
with my husband as to what we had better do, and he agreed with me that it would be better
for Lesley if I came here--at any rate for the present."

"Better for Lesley!" Miss Brooke was evidently offended. "I do not think that you need put
yourself to any inconvenience--even for Lesley's sake. I will take care of her."

"But I happen to be her mother," said Lady Alice, with a touch of amusement. It struck her
as odd that Miss Brooke only amused her now, and did not make her angry at all. "And we have
the world to think of, besides."

"I scarcely thought you troubled yourself very much about what the world said," remarked Aunt
Sophy, severely. "It has said a good deal during the last ten or twelve years."

"At least it shall not say," responded Lady Alice, "that I believe my husband guilty of murder.
I have come back to prevent that."

Miss Brooke looked at her doubtfully. She was not a person of very quick perceptions.

"You mean," she said at last, "that you have come back--because----"

"Because he was accused of murder," said Lady Alice, clearly, "and I choose to show the world
that I do not believe it."

And Lesley, entering from the library, heard the words, and stood transfixed for a moment with
pure delight. Then she sprang forward, fell on her knees before her mother, and embraced her
with such fervor that Miss Brooke put up her eye-glasses and gazed in surprise.

"Mother! my own dearest mother! You do believe in him, then! and you have come to show us that
you do! Oh! how delighted he will be when he knows!"

A little color showed itself in Lady Alice's delicate face. "He does know," she whispered,
almost with the coyness of a girl.

"And he was delighted, was he not? It would be such a comfort to him--just now when he wants
every kind of comfort. Oh, mamma, it is so good of you, and I am so glad. Aunty Sophy, aren't
you glad, too?"

Lady Alice tried to stifle this naïve utterance, but it would not be repressed, and Aunt Sophy
had to rise to the occasion as best she could, with rather a grim face, she rose from her seat
upon the sofa and advanced towards her brother's wife, holding out a very reluctant hand.

"I appreciate your motives, Lady Alice, and I see that your conduct may be of service to my
brother." Then she relapsed into a more colloquial tone. "But how on earth you mean to live
in this part of London, I'm sure I can't imagine. No doubt it seems rather smoky and grimy
to you after Mayfair and Belgravia."

"London is generally a little smoky," said Lady Alice, smiling in spite of herself. "Thank
you, Sophy: I thought you would do me justice."

And the hands of the two women met in a friendlier grasp than ever in the days of yore.

"I must see about your room," said Miss Brooke, practically. It was her way of holding out
the olive branch. "You would like to be near Lesley, I suppose. We shall try to make you comfortable,
but, of course, you won't expect the luxuries of your own home here."

"I shall be very comfortable, I am sure," said Lady Alice.

"What, does she mean by talking in that tone?" cried Lesley, hotly when Doctor Sophy had left
the room. "It was almost insulting!"

"No, my darling, no. It is only a memory of old times when I was--exacting and dissatisfied.
Yes, I see that I must have seemed so, then. I had not had much experience in those days; and
then your father was not a man of substance as he seems to be now," said Lady Alice, inspecting
the room, with a half-smile. The smile died quickly away, however, and was succeeded by a sad
look, and a sigh. "Ah, poor Caspar!"

"He will be home in a day or two. Everybody says so."

"I trust so, dearest. And I will stay with--you till he comes home."

"Oh, but now that you have come, mamma you will never be allowed to go away again."

"I never said that, Lesley. I have come to maintain a principle, that is all. A wife ought
to show that she trusts her husband, if he is falsely accused."

And then Lady Alice lowered her eyes and changed the subject, for it suddenly occurred to her
that she had not been very ready, in her younger years, to give the trust that now seemed to
be her husband's due.

But she settled down quite naturally in her husband's home during the next few days. Lesley,
remembering the discomfort of her own first few weeks, expected her to say that the house was
hideous and the neighborhood detestable. But Lady Alice said nothing of the kind. She thought
it a fine old house--well-built and roomy--far preferable, she said, to the places she had
often occupied in the West End. With different furniture and a little good taste it might be
made absolutely charming. And when she got as far as "absolutely charming," uttered with her
chin pillowed on one hand, and her eyes roving meditatively over the drawing-room mantelpiece,
Lesley smiled to herself, and gave up all fear that she would ever go away again. Lady Alice
had evidently come to the conclusion that it was her duty to see that Caspar's house was thoroughly
redecorated from top to bottom.

But she did not come to this conclusion all at once. There were days when the minds of mother
and daughter were too full of sorrow and anxiety to occupy themselves with upholstery and bric-a-brac.
And the day of the adjourned inquest, when Caspar Brooke was allowed to go to his own house
on bail, was one of the worst of all.

He came home quietly that afternoon in company with Maurice Kenyon, greeted his family affectionately
but with something of a melancholy air, then went at once to his study, where he shut himself
up and began to write and read letters. The cloud was hanging over him still. He knew well
enough that if he had been a poor man, of no account in the world, he would at that moment
have been occupying a prison cell instead of his own comfortable study. For presumption was
strong against him; and it had taken a great deal of influence and extraordinarily high bail
to secure his release. At present he stood committed to take his trial for manslaughter within
a very short space of time. And nobody had succeeded, or seemed likely to succeed, in throwing
any doubt on the testimony of Mary Trent. He was certainly in a very awkward position: it might
be a very terrible position by-and-bye.

He was aroused from the reverie into which he had fallen by the entry of a servant with a note.
He opened it, read the contents slowly, and then put it into the fire. He stood frowning a
little as he watched it burn.

After a few moments of this hesitation he rang the bell, told Sarah that he was going out,
and left the house. The three women in the drawing-room upstairs, already nervous and overstrained
from long suspense, all started when the reverberation of that closing door made itself heard.
Lesley felt her mother's hand close on hers with a quick, convulsive pressure. She looked up.

"He has gone out!" Lady Alice murmured, so that Lesley alone could hear. "He does not come--to us!"

Lesley did not know what to say. She was surprised to find that her mother expected him to
come. But then she was only Caspar Brooke's daughter and not his wife.

Lady Alice lay back in her chair, closed her eyes and waited. She had once been a jealous woman:
there were the seeds of jealousy in her still. She sat and wondered whether Caspar had gone
for sympathy and comfort to any other woman. And after wondering this for half an hour it suddenly
occurred to her mind with the vividness of a lightning flash that if things were so--if her
husband had found sympathy elsewhere--it was her own fault. She had no right to accuse him,
or to blame him, when she had left him for a dozen years.

"I have no right to blame him, perhaps, but I have still a right to know," she said to herself.
And then, disengaging her hand from Lesley's clinging fingers, she rose and went downstairs--down
to the study which she had so seldom visited. She seated herself in Caspar's arm-chair, and
prepared to wait there for his return. Surely he would not be long!--and then she would speak
to him, and things should be made clear.

Caspar's note had been written by Mrs. Romaine. It was quite formal, and merely contained a
request that he would call on her at his earliest convenience. And he complied at once, as
she had surmised that he would do. Her confidential maid opened the door to him, and conducted
him to the drawing-room. It was dusk, and the blinds were drawn down. Oliver Trent's funeral
had taken place the day before.

Mr. Brooke did not sit down. He knew that the interview which was about to take place was likely
to be a painful one, but he could not guess in the least what kind of turn it would take. Did
Rosalind believe in his guilt? Did she know what manner of man her brother Oliver had been?
Was she going to reproach or to condole? She had done a strange thing in asking him to the
house at all, and at another time he might have thought it wiser not to accede to her request;
but he was in the mood in which the most extraordinary incidents seem possible, and scarcely
anything could have seemed to him too bizarre to happen. He felt curiously impatient of the
ordinary conventionalities of civilized life. Early in the morning, after the prolonged inactivity
of a cold night, we find the plant inclined to be lethargic, and its first answers correspondingly
small. But as blow after blow is delivered, this lethargy passes off, and the replies become
stronger and stronger. A good way to remove this lethargy quickly, is to give the plant a warm
bath. In the heat of the midday, this state of things is reversed. That is to say, after giving
vigorous replies the plant becomes fatigued, and its responses grow smaller. This fatigue passes
off, however, on allowing it a period of rest.

On increasing the intensity of the impinging stimulus, the response also increases. But a limit
is attained, beyond which response can no longer be enhanced. She looked different--she
was changed. Her face was very pale: her eyelids were reddened: she was dressed in the deepest
black, and over her head she had flung a black lace veil, which gave her--perhaps unintentionally--a
tragic look. She held the folds together with her right hand, and spoke to him quietly.

"It was kind of you to come," she said.

"You summoned me. I should not have come without that," he answered, quickly.

"No, I suppose not. And of course--in the ordinary course of things--I ought not to have summoned
you. The world would say that I was wrong. But we have been old friends for many years now,
have we not?"

"I always thought so," he answered, gravely. "But now--I fear----"

"You mean"--with a strange vibration in her voice--"you mean that we must never be friends
again--because--because of Oliver----"

"This accusation must naturally tend to separate the families," he said, in a very calm, grave
voice. "Even when it is disproved, we shall not find it easy to resume old relations. I am
very sorry for it, Rosalind, just as I need not tell you how sorry I am for the cause----"

She interrupted him hurriedly. "Yes, yes, I know all that; but you speak of disproving the
charge. Can you do that?"

He was silent for a moment. "I shall do my best," he said at length, with some emotion in his
voice.

"And if it is not disproved--what then?" she asked. "Suppose they call it murder?"

Caspar drew himself up: a certain displeasure began to mark itself upon his features.

"Need you ask me?"

"Yes, I need. I want you to consider the answer that you would give. I have a reason."

Her eager eyes, hot and burning in a face that was strangely white, pled for her. Caspar relented
a little, but bent his brows as he replied--

"The extreme penalty of the law, I suppose. It is absurd--but, of course, it is possible. It
is not a case in which I should expect penal servitude for life to be substituted, supposing
that I were found guilty. But I fail to see your motive for asking what must be to me a rather
painful question."

"Oh, you are strong! You can bear it!" she said, dropping her face upon her hands. Caspar gazed
at her in amazement. He began to wonder whether she were going out of her mind. But before
he could find any word of calming or consoling tendency, she flung down her hands and spoke
again. "I want you to fix your mind on it for a moment, even although it hurts you," she said.
"You are a strong man--you do not shrink from a thing because, it is a little painful. Think
what it would mean for yourself, and not for yourself only; for your friends, for those who
love you! A perpetual disgrace--a misery!"

"You seem anxious to assume that I shall be convicted," he said, still with displeasure.

"I tell you I am doing so on purpose. I want you to think of it. You know--you know as well
as I do--that the chances are against you!"

"And if they are?"

"If they are--why do you incur such a risk!"

"Mrs. Romaine," said Caspar, gently, but with a steady coldness of tone, of which she did not
at first feel the import, "I think you hardly know the force of what you are saying. I do not
incur any risk unnecessarily or wantonly: I only wish the truth to be made known. What can
I do more--or less?"

"You could go away," she said, almost in a whisper.

If the room had been lighter, she might, perhaps, have seen the frown that was gathering on
his brow, the wrath that darkened his eyes as he spoke: but his face was in shadow, and for
a moment anger made him speechless. She went on eagerly, breathlessly, without waiting for a reply.

"You might get off quite easily to--to Spain, perhaps, or some place where there was no extradition
treaty. You are out on bail, I know; but your friends could not complain. Surely it is a natural
enough thing for a man, situated as you are, to wish to escape: nobody would blame you in the
long run--they would only say that you were wise. And if you stay, everything is against you.
You had so much better take your present chance!"

Caspar muttered something inarticulate, then seemed to choke back further utterance, and kept
silence for a minute. When he spoke it was in a curiously tranquil tone.

"You do not seem to have heard of the quality that men call their honor?"

"Oh, honor! I have heard enough about honor," she answered with a nervous, rasping laugh. "And
you--you to talk about honor--after--after what you have done!"

Caspar Brooke fell back a step or two and surveyed her curiously. "Good God!" The exclamation
broke from him, as if against his will. "You speak as though you thought I was guilty--as though
I had--murdered Oliver!"

And she, looking at him as intently as he looked at her, said only, in the simplest possible way--

"And did you not?"

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

LOVE OR TRUST.

Caspar turned away. For a moment he felt mortally sick, as if from a pang of acute physical
pain. Distrust from an old friend is always a hard thing to bear. And so, for a moment or two,
he did not speak.

"I was not surprised," said Mrs. Romaine, quickly. "I had been looking for something of the
kind. I won't say that you were not justified--in a certain sense. Oliver acted abominably,
I know. He told me what he was going to do beforehand."

"Told you what he was going to do?"

"Yes--to make Lesley fall in love with him. He did not mean to marry her. He meant to gain
her affections and then to--to--leave her, to break her heart. I suppose that is what you found
out. I do not wonder that you were surprised."

"No doubt you have good authority for what you are saying," said Mr. Brooke, very coldly, "but
your account does not tally with what I have gathered from other sources." 

The apparatus employed by Mr Lacon is very compact and simple, being
fixed under the deck-seats, so as to be not in the least incommodious.

In treating of this patent invention, the Liverpool Mercury says, Mr Lacon has succeeded in
'solving a problem which has hitherto baffled the ingenuity of scientific
and practical men, and attaining the "desideratum of lowering boats
evenly, and of rapidly disengaging the tackles," by a self-acting
contrivance.

Mr Lacon takes as his principle the well-known axiom in mechanics, that what is gained in
power is lost in time; and although he approves of the method at present in use, as being the
best for hoisting up boats: he (seeing that the hoisting need never be a hurried operation) substitutes
two single ropes or chains, which, being secured to two broad slings passing round the body
of the boat, are then brought inboard on davits, and carried to two concave barrels connected together
by means of a shaft.

The ends of the ropes or chains are secured to the barrels in such
a manner that they will support any amount of weight until such time
as the boat has reached the water, when they will disconnect and fall
away from their attachment by their own weight, by which means he
prevents the possibility of a ship, in its onward progress through
a rough sea, dragging forward a lowered boat sideways, and capsizing
or swamping it.

By means, then, of a friction-strap and pulley round the shaft, one man is enabled to regulate
the descent of the boat, which will go down by its own weight; and by means of the parallel action
of the two barrels, he lowers both ends uniformly, and insures the boat falling in a proper position
on the water.'

IGNORANCE THE GREAT CAUSE OF POVERTY.
 "I have proved that in
every way: I ought to be prepared for cowardice--even from you. They want to slip out of every
unpleasant position, and leave some woman to bear the brunt of it. You, for instance, want
to go now, this minute, because I have said one or two things that pain you. You don't care
enough for what I think to make you wish to alter my opinion--to fight it out and conquer me;
you only want to get away and leave me to 'cool down,' as you would call it. You are mistaken.
I am not speaking from any momentary irritation: what I say to you to-day is the result of
long thought, long consideration, long patience. It would be better for you to have the courage
and the manliness to listen to me."

"You talk in a very extraordinary way, Rosalind,", said Caspar. "I do not understand it, and
I fail to see its justice towards me. I have never refused to listen to you, have I? As for
cowardice--it seemed to me that you were trying to persuade me to do a very cowardly thing
just now; but perhaps I was mistaken. I will hear all that you have to say: if I was anxious
to go, it was only that I might save you from tiring or hurting yourself."

"It matters so much whether I am tired or hurt, does it not?" she said, with the faintest possible
flicker of a smile on her white lips. "That is what you all think of--whether one suffers--suffers
physically. It is my soul that is hurt, my heart that is tired--but you don't concern yourself
with that sort of thing."

"I assure you that I am very sorry----," he began, and then he stopped short. She had made
it very difficult for him to say anything so commonplace, and yet so true.

"If you are sorry," she said, in a softer tone, "and if you want to make me happier--save yourself."

"No," said Caspar, roughly--almost violently--"by Heaven, I won't do that."

"You don't wish to save yourself?"

"Not at that price--the price of my honor."

"Listen to me," she said, drawing nearer to him and speaking very softly. "I have made it my
business during the last day or two--when I gathered that you would be let out on bail--to
collect all the information that might be useful to you. You could get away to-morrow or next
day by a vessel that leaves Southampton at the time I have marked on this paper. It is not
an ordinary steamer--not a passenger-ship at all--and no one will know that you are on board.
It would take you to Oporto. You would be safe enough in the interior--a friend of mine who
went there once told me that there were charming palaces and half-ruined castles to let, where
one could live as in paradise, amidst the loveliest gardens, full of fountains and birds and
flowers."

Her voice took on a caressing tone, as if she were dreaming of perfect happiness. "How like
a woman," thought Caspar to himself, "to think only of the material side of life?" Then he
corrected himself: "Like some women: not like all, thank-God!"

"So you would condemn me to exile and loneliness as well as to dishonor?" he said. It was as
much as he could do not to laugh outright at the chimerical idea.

"It is no exile to a cosmopolitan like yourself to live out of England," she answered, scornfully.
"As to dishonor--what will you not have to suffer if you stay in England? Where is your reputation
now? And as to loneliness--don't you know--do you not see--that you need not go--alone?"

She put her left hand gently on his arm, and for a moment there was silence in the room. Her
heart beat so loudly that she was afraid of his hearing it. But she need not have feared; his
mind was far too much occupied with more important matters to be able to take cognizance of
such a detail as the state of Mrs. Romaine's pulse.

His first impulse was one of intense indignation and anger. His second was one of pity. These
feelings alternated in him when at last he forced himself to speak. Which of the two predominated
he hardly knew. Perhaps pity: because it drove him, almost as a matter of self-respect, to
make a pretence of not knowing what she meant.

"Anything is exile to a man who leaves his home," he said sternly. "To a man who leaves his
wife and daughter--do you understand? As for the dishonor of such a course, it seems as if
you could not comprehend that: my feelings on the subject are evidently beyond your ken. But
you can understand this--first, that I should go nowhere into no exile, into no new home, without
my wife; and, secondly, that she, at least, trusts me--she knows that I have not your brother's
blood upon my hands."

Rosalind's fingers had slipped from his arm when he began to speak: she knew that if she had
not removed them then they would have been shaken off. He could see them amongst the folds
of black lace at her breast--clutching, tearing, as if she had not room to breathe.

"Your wife!" she said, with a gasp. "I did not know.... She has been beforehand with me, then!
And it is she--she--that you will take--to Spain?"

"There is no question of Spain. I mean to stay here in England and fight the matter out. My
wife would be the first person to tell me so. I cannot imagine her speaking to me again if
I were coward enough to run away."

"She would not do for you what I have done!" cried the unhappy woman, now, as it seemed, beside
herself. "If she believes you innocent, so much the easier for her! But I--I--believe you guilty--yes,
Caspar Brooke, I believe that you killed my brother--and I do not care! I loved him, yes; but
I love you--you--a thousand times more!"

"You do not know what you are saying. You are mad. Be silent, Rosalind," said Caspar Brooke,
in a deep tone of anger. But she raved on.

"Have I not been silent for years? And who is as faithful to you as I have been? It is easy
to love a man who is innocent; but not a man who is guilty! Guilty or not--I do not care. It
is you that I care for--and you may have as many sins as you please upon your soul--but they
are nothing to me. I am past anything now but speaking the truth. Have you no pity for a woman
to whom you are dearer than her own soul?"

She would have thrown herself at his feet, if he had not prevented her. He was touched a little
by her suffering, but he was also immeasurably angered and disgusted. An exhibition of uncontrolled
feeling was not the way to charm him. His one desire now became the desire to escape.

"I should have no pity," he said, gravely, "for my own selfishness and cowardice, if I took
advantage of this moment of weakness on your part. It is weakness, I hope--I will not call
it by any other name. You will recover from it when the stress of this painful time is over,
and you will be glad to forget it as I shall do. Believe me, I will not think of it again.
It shall be in my mind as though you had not said it; and, though it will be impossible for
us to continue on our former terms of friendship, I shall always wish for your welfare, and
hope that time will bring you happiness and peace."

She made no answer. She lay where he had placed her, her head buried amongst the cushions,
crushed to the very earth. She would not look at him, would not make semblance to have heard.
And he, without hesitation, went deliberately to the door and let himself out. He gained the
street without being intercepted, and drew a long breath of relief when he felt the soft night
air playing on his heated brow. The moralist would have said that he came off victor; but he
had a sense, as he went out along the pavement, of being only a defeated and degraded man.
There was not even the excitement of gratified vanity, for an offered love which did not include
perfect trust in his honor was an insult in itself. And Caspar Brooke's integrity of soul was
dear to him.

It was perhaps impossible for him--a mere man--to estimate the extent of suffering to which
his scorn had subjected the woman that he left behind. Rosalind remained as he had seen her,
crouching on the ground, with her head on the sofa cushions, for full two hours or more. When
she rose she went to her own room and lay upon her bed, refusing for many hours either to eat
or to speak. She did not sleep: she lay broad awake all night, recalling every tone of Caspar's
voice, and every passing expression of his face. She was bitterly humiliated and ashamed. But
she was not ashamed in the sense of shame for wrong-doing: she was only ashamed because he
had rebuffed her. She was sick with mortification. She had offered him everything in her power--peace,
safety, love: she had offered him herself even, and been rejected with scorn. Nothing crushes
a woman like this humiliation. And in some women's natures such an experience will produce
dire results; for loss of self-respect is resented as the worst injury that man can inflict,
and is followed by deadly hatred to the man who has inflicted it. It may be argued by the more
logical male that the woman has brought it all upon herself; but no affronted, humiliated,
shame-stricken woman will ever allow this to be the fact. The sacrifice she conceives to have
been all her own; but the pain has come from him.

This was the way in which Rosalind looked at the matter. And mistaken as she was in her view
of the moralities and proprieties of the situation, she suffered an amount of pain which may
well arouse in us more pity than Caspar Brooke felt for her. The burning, stinging sense of
shame seemed to make her whole soul an open wound. It was intolerable. The only way out of
it, she said to herself at first, is to die. There was an old song that rang in her ears continually,
as if somebody were repeating it over and over again. She could not remember it all--only a
line here and there. "When lovely woman stoops to folly," it began, what art can wash her tears
and stains and shame away? And the answer was what Rosalind herself had already given: the
only way "to rouse his pity" was "to die!" She almost laughed at herself for repeating the
well-worn, hackneyed, century-old ditty. People did not die now-a-days, either of broken hearts
or of chloral, when their lovers deserted them. And Caspar Brooke had never been her lover.
No, he had only given her pain; and she wished that she could make him suffer, too. "Revenge"
was too high-flown a word; but if she could see him heartbroken, ruined, disgraced, she would
be--not satisfied, but she would feel her pain allayed.

Caspar Brooke walked for an hour before he was calm enough to remember that he ought to go
home. When this idea once occurred to him, he felt a pang of shame for his own forgetfulness.
What would Alice think of him? And this was the first day that she had been with him in his
house for so many years. He must go home and make his apologies. Not that she would expect
very much attention from him. Had she not said that she was only trying to do her duty? Probably
she disliked him still.

He let himself in with his latch-key, and walked straight into the study. A shaded lamp had
been lighted, and but faintly illuminated the corners of the room. But there was light enough
for him to see that Lady Alice was sitting in his chair. He came up to the table, and looked
at her without speaking. There was a strange tumult of feeling in his heart. He wished that
he could tell her how gratified he was by her trust in him, how much he prized the very things
that had once irritated him against her--her reserve, her fine perception, her excellent fastidiousness
of taste, even that little air of coldness that became her so well. To come into her presence
was like entering a fragrant English garden, after stifling for an hour in a conservatory where
the air was heavy with the perfume of stephanotis.

She rose, as he continued silent, and stood on the rug, almost face to face with him. She did
not find it easy to speak, and there was something in his air which frightened her a little.
She made a trivial remark at last, but with great difficulty.

"You have been away a long time," she said.

She was not prepared for the answer. He put out his hand and drew her close to him. "You were
away a great deal longer," he said, looking down at her fair, serious face. She could not reply.
"Twelve years, is it not?" he went on. "That's a long time out of one's life, Alice. I feel
myself an old man now."

"No, no, Caspar!" she said, tremulously.

"What was it all about, Alice? You know I never really understood it. Can't you make me understand?
Was it that I was simply unbearable? too disagreeable to be put up with any longer."

"No, it was not that. I will speak the truth now, Caspar. I was jealous--I thought you cared
for Rosalind Romaine."

"But you know now--surely--that that was not true?"

"Could you swear it?" she asked, suddenly and sharply, with a quick look into his face.

For a moment he was annoyed. Then his brow cleared, and he answered, very gravely--

"I can and will, if you like. But I thought--having trusted me so far--that you could trust
me without an oath. Alice, I never loved any woman but one: and that one was yourself. Have
you been as true to me as I have been to you?"

"I don't think I ever knew that I loved you until now," said Alice, laying her head with a
deep sigh upon her husband's breast.

"Love is not enough, though it is a great deal: do you trust me?"

"Implicitly--now that I have looked at you again."

Caspar gave a little laugh.

"Then I must never let you go away from me, or you will begin to disbelieve in me," he said.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

TWELVE SILVER SPOONS.

Lady Alice was not long in finding out that Maurice Kenyon, her husband's chief friend, was
the man of whom Lesley had spoken in her letters, and also the doctor who had interested her
at the hospital. She did not speak to Lesley about him: she took a little time to accustom
herself to her husband's circle before she made any remarks upon its members. But she was shrewd
enough to see very quickly that Mr. Kenyon took even more interest in her daughter than in
her husband, and from Lesley's shy looks she fancied that the interest was reciprocated. She
had a twinge of regret for her favorite, Harry Duchesne, and then consoled herself by saying
that after all Lesley was too young to know her own mind, and that probably she would change
before she was twenty-one.

She did not come particularly into contact with Maurice, however, until the Sunday after she
had taken up her abode in Woburn Place. And then she saw a good deal of him. For Lesley went
to sit with Ethel as was her wont, and Maurice came to dine at Mr. Brooke's. After the early
dinner, Lady Alice noticed that there was some parleying between the guest and his host.

"I am going," said Maurice in an urgent undertone. To which Caspar returned a cheerful answer.

"All right, old man; but I am going too." And then Mr. Kenyon knitted his brows and looked vexed.

Caspar at once noted his wife's glance of inquiry. "Has Lesley told you nothing about our Sunday
meetings at the Club? We generally betake ourselves to North London on a Sunday afternoon.
Mr. Kenyon thinks I had better stay with you, and--I don't."

From Maurice's uncomfortable looks, Lady Alice gathered that there was something doubtful in
the proceeding. "Will you let me go with you?" she said, by way of experiment.

There was an exchange of astonished and rather embarrassed looks all round. Caspar elevated
his eyebrows and clutched his beard: Miss Brooke made a curious sound, something like a snort;
and Maurice flushed a deep and dusky red; indications which all annoyed Lady Alice, although
she did not quite know what they signified. She rose from her chair and took the matter into
her own hands; but all without the slightest change in the manner of graceful indifference
which had grown natural to her of late years.

"That is the place where Lesley used to go," she said. "She tells me she sings to the people
sometimes. I cannot sing, but I can play the piano a little, if that is any good. Sophy is
going, is she not? And I should like to go too."

"There is no reason why you should not," said Mr. Brooke rather abruptly. But the gleam in
his eye told of pleasure. "There are some very rough characters at the club sometimes, you
know. And perhaps the reception they give me to-day will not be of the pleasantest."

Lady Alice looked at her husband with a mixture of wonder and admiration. The calm way in which
he sometimes alluded to his present circumstances, without a trace of bitterness or fretfulness,
amazed her. In old days she would have put it down to "good breeding--good manners," some superficial
veneer of good society of which she thoroughly approved; but she had seen too much of the seamy
side of "good society" now to be able to accept this explanation of his calmness. It was not
want of sensitiveness, she was sure of that: he was by no means obtuse: it was simply that
his large, strong nature rose above the pettiness of resentment and complaint. The suspicion
under which he labored was a grave thing--a trouble, a blow; but it had not made him sour,
nor borne him to the earth with a conviction of the injustice of mankind.

His wife looked and marveled, but recollected herself in time to say after only a minute's
hesitation:

"I know a little more about rough characters than I once did. We saw a good many at the East
End hospital, did we not, Mr. Kenyon?"

It was the first time that she had shown that she remembered Maurice's face. Caspar pricked
up his ears.

"You at a hospital, Alice? Why, what were you doing there?"

"Visiting some of the patients," she answered, with a little blush.

"Visits which were much appreciated," put in Maurice, "although we found that Lady Alice was
too generous."

"Until I was warned by one of the patients that the others abused my kindness and traded on
it," said Lady Alice, laughing rather nervously, "and then I drew in a little."

"What patient was that?"

"The name I think was Smith--the man who lost his memory in that curious way."

"Ah yes, I remember." And then Maurice knitted his brows and became very thoughtful: he looked
as if a thoroughly new idea had been suggested to him.

Miss Brooke remarked that it was almost time to set out if they were to go to the club that
afternoon, and Lady Alice went to her room for her cloak. She was before the looking-glass,
apparently studying the reflection of her own face, when a knock at the door, to which she
absently said "Come in," was followed by Caspar's entrance. She, thinking that it was her maid,
did not look round, and he came behind her without being perceived. The first token of his
presence was received by her when his arm was slipped round her waist, and his voice said caressingly
and almost playfully in her ear, "I don't know that I want my dainty piece of china carried
down into the slums."

"Am I nothing more to you than that?" said Lady Alice reproachfully.

He made no answer, but as he looked at the fair face in the glass, and as their eyes met, she
thought that she read a reply in his glance.

"I have been nothing more--I know," she said, with sudden humbleness, "but if it is not too
late--if I can make up now for the time I have lost----"

The tears trembled in her eyes, but he kissed them away with new tenderness, saying in a soothing
tone--

"We will see, my dear, we will see. I was only in jest."

And she felt that he was thinking not only of the lost years, but of the possible gulf before
him--that horror of darkness and disgrace which they might yet have to face.

She went downstairs to the cab that was waiting, with a new and subduing sensation very present
to her mind: a sense of something missed out of her own life, a sense of having failed in the
duty that had once been given her to do. Hitherto she had been buoyed up by a certain confidence
in her own conscientiousness and power of judgment, as most rather narrow-minded women are;
but it now occurred to her that she might have been wrong--not only in a few details, as she
had consented to admit--but wrong from beginning to end. She had marred not only her own life
but the lives of her husband and her child.

This consciousness kept her very quiet during the drive to Macclesfield Buildings. But nobody
spoke much, except Doctor Sophy, who made interjectional remarks, half lost in the rattling
of the cab, by way of trying to keep up everybody's spirits. Caspar sitting opposite his wife,
with his arms folded and his long legs carefully tucked out of the way, had an unusually serious
and even anxious expression. Indeed it struck Lady Alice for the first time that he was looking
haggard and ill. The burden was weighing upon him even more than he knew. Maurice, too, seemed
absorbed in thought, so that the drive was not a particularly lively one.

They got out at the block of buildings which had once struck Lesley as so particularly ugly.
Perhaps their ugliness did not impress Lady Alice so much. At any rate she made no remark upon
it. Her fingers were lightly pressed upon Caspar's arm: her thoughts were occupied by him.

At the door of the block in which the club-rooms were situated, a little group of men were
standing in somewhat aimless fashion, smoking and talking among themselves. Caspar recognized
several of the club members in this group. "Ah," he said quietly to his wife, "they thought
that I should not come." She made no answer: as a matter of fact she began to feel a trifle
frightened. These rough-looking men, with their pipes, who nudged each other and laughed as
she passed, were of a kind unknown to her. But Caspar walked through them easily, nodding here
and there, with a cheery "Good-afternoon."

Lady Alice did not know it, but the room presented an unusual sight to her husband's eyes that
afternoon. The fire was burning, and the gas was lighted, for the day was cold and damp: the
comfortable red-seated chairs were as inviting as ever, and the magazines and newspapers lay
in rows upon the scarlet table-cloth. There were flowers in the vases, and a piece of music
on the open piano. Lady Alice exclaimed in her pleasure, "How pretty it is! how cosy!" and
wondered at the gloom that sat upon her husband's brow.

The room was cosy and pretty enough--but it was empty.

Caspar looked round mutely, then glanced at his companions. Miss Brooke paused in the act of
taking off one woollen glove, and opened her mouth and forgot to shut it again. Maurice stood
frowning, twitching his brows and biting his lips in the effort to subdue a torrent of rage
that was surging up in his heart. He would have sworn, he said afterwards, if Lady Alice had
not been there--he did not mind Doctor Sophy so much. All that he did now, however, was to
mutter "Ungrateful rascals," and make as if he would turn to flee.

But he was stopped by Caspar's clutch at his arm. Maurice saw that his purpose--that of haranguing
the men outside--had been divined and arrested. He turned to his friend and saw for the first
time on Caspar's face that the shaft had gone home. He had shown scarcely any sign of suffering
before.

"I don't deserve this from them," said Brooke quietly, and Maurice could tell that he had gone
rather white about the lips. Then in a still lower voice, "Don't let her know. You were right,
Maurice; I had better not have come."

"I'll just go and look outside: I won't speak to them, don't be afraid--you talk to Lady Alice,"
said Maurice breaking from him. But when he got into the dark little entry, he did not look
outside for anything or anybody: he only relieved himself by exclaiming. "Oh, d--n the fools!"
and shaking his first in a very reprehensible way at some imaginary crowd of auditors. For
Maurice was half an Irishman, and his blood was up, and on his friend's behalf he was, as he
would just then have expressed it, "in a devil of a rage." While he was executing a sort of
mad war-dance on the jute mat in the passage, relieving his mind by some wild gesticulation
and still wilder objurgation of the world, Mr. Brooke had turned back to his wife with a pleasant
word and smile.

"I must show you the photographs," he said. "We are very proud of them. There will be plenty
of time, for the members seem to be a little late in getting together to-day. Possibly they
thought I was not coming."

"It is scarcely time yet," said Miss Brooke heroically. She knew it was ten minutes past, but
she was quite prepared to sacrifice truth for the maintenance of her brother's dignity.

"That's a good one of the Parthenon," said Caspar negligently, putting his hand within his
wife's arm, and leading her from one picture to another. "The Coliseum you see: not quite so
clear as it might be. These frames were made by one of the men in the buildings--given as a
present to the club. Not bad taste, are they? And this statuette----".

He broke off suddenly. He had been going on hurriedly and feverishly, filling up the time as
best he might, trying to forget the embarrassing situation into which he had brought his wife
and himself, when the sound of heavy footsteps fell upon his ear. A sound of shuffling, the
creak of men's boots, a little gruff whispering in the doorway--what was it all about? Were
the men whom he had helped and guided going to turn against him openly--to give him in his
wife's presence some other insult beside the tacit insult of their absence? He turned round
sharply, with the feeling that if he was brought to bay the men would have a bad time of it.
He certainly looked a formidable antagonist. The hair had fallen over his forehead, his brows
were knotted, his eyes gleamed rather fiercely beneath them, his under lip was thrust out aggressively.
"As fierce as a lion," said one of the observers, afterwards. But even while his eyes darted
flame and fury at the men who had deserted them, his body kept its half-protecting, half-deferential
pose with respect to Lady Alice; and the hand that held her arm was studiously gentle in its touch.

Lady Alice turned round, amazed. There was a little crowd in the passage: the room was already
half full. Men and women too were there, and more crowded in from behind. There must have been
nearly fifty, when all were seen, and there were more men than women. But they did not sit
down: they stood, they leaned against the walls; one or two mounted on the benches at the back
and stood where they could get a good view of the proceedings. Caspar's scowl remained fixed,
but it was a scowl of astonishment. He looked round for Maurice, whom he presently saw beckoning
to him to take his usual place near the piano. He said a word to his wife, and brought her
round with him towards his sister and his friend. The men still stood, and crowded a little
nearer to him as he reached his place. There was very little talking in the room, and the men's
faces looked somewhat solemn: it was evidently a serious occasion.

"Is this--this--what usually goes on?" queried the puzzled Lady Alice.

"This? Oh no!" said Maurice, to whom she had addressed herself, with a sudden happy laugh,
and a perfectly beaming face. "This is--a demonstration. Here, Caspar, old man, you've got
to stand here. Now, Gregson."

Lady Alice accepted the chair offered to her, and Miss Brooke another. Caspar began to look
utterly perplexed, but a little relieved also, for his eye, in straying over the crowd, had
recognized two or three faces as those of intimate friends who seemed to be mingling with the
men, and he felt sure that they had no inimical purpose towards him. All that he could do was
to look down and grasp his beard, as usual, while Jim Gregson, the man who had once spoken
to Lesley so warmly of her father, being pushed forward by the crowd as their spokesman, addressed
himself to Caspar.

"Mr. Brooke--Sir: We have made bold to change the order of the proceedings for this 'ere afternoon. The
great Department of Agriculture in Mashington spends millions every year on such experiments,
there being a thousand men employed in research. Recently many experiments have been undertaken
on the effect of electricity on growth. The results obtained have been mostly contradictory.
For real advance in agriculture we must first discover the laws of growth. Ordinary experiments
on growth are of little value because they take weeks for detecting changes of growth which
might have been brought about by charges in the environment. The only satisfactory method is
to devise an apparatus which would make the plant itself record the rate of its growth, and the
changes induced by food or treatment in the course of less than a minute, during which short
time it is possible to maintain external conditions constant.

THE MAGNETIC CRESCOGRAPH

All the difficulties connected with the devising of apparatus has been completely removed by the lecturer's
successful invention of his new magnetic crescograph in which practically unlimited magnification
is obtained without the difficulties arising from the unavoidable friction of bearings. Magnetic
forces are so exactly balanced that a disturbance in the balance caused by slightest movements
such as that of growth is magnified ten millions of times. The application of this new principle
will be of great importance in various investigations in Physics.

Sir J. C. Bose next demonstrated some marvellous results obtained with his apparatus. A seedling
which on account of the Winter season appeared stationary jotted down by taps on a moving plate,
the rate of its growth. The application of a chemical instantly arrested this growth, but an
antidote timely applied, not only removed the torpor but enhanced
the growth at an enormous rate.

The life of the plant became pliant at the will of the experimenter,
and nothing appeared more marvellous than the realisation that man
has the power to pierce the veil that shrouds the mystery that had
hitherto baffled him.

The lecturer explained how the effect of a given agent--a chemical solution or an electric current--is
profoundly modified by the dose a given intensity, producing one
effect and a different intensity giving rise to an effect diametrically
opposite.

This is the reason of the inexplicable anomalies which have baffled many investigators. Numerous
are the forces which act on growth some helping, others retarding, the effects being further
modified by the strength and duration of application.

These factors that determine growth are each to be studied in detail, and the laws of effect
of each to be discovered. There can be no real advance in scientific agriculture until this
is done.

--Amrita Bazar Patrika, 19-1-1918.

SIR J. C. BOSE AT BOMBAY.

There was a brilliant gathering at the Royal Opera House on Tuesday the 22nd January 1918,
when Sir Jagadis Bose gave a deeply interesting lecture on the history of the inception of his
Institute in Calcutta and its aims together with an exposition of his scientific researches
illustrated by lantern slides. The theatre was full long before the lecture commenced and several
prominent people were present the bulk of the audience consisting of Indians.

Mr. Tilak in introducing the distinguished lecturer to the audience referred to Professor Bose's
lasting services not only to the Indian nation but to the whole world.
These references to Dr. Bose and his work elicited frequent applause
from the large audience.

A FIFTY THOUSAND RUPEES LECTURE.

Sir Jagadis,
who was accorded a most enthusiastic ovation on rising to address
the gathering, acknowledged his gratitude to the public of Bombay
who proved their appreciation of his work by their presence there
that evening, and the fact that they had subscribed Rs. 50,000 for
the occasion. He then gave a brief explanatory account of the nature
and scope of his work, which he had planned and carried out alone
for many years amidst many and varied difficulties. He gave an exposition
by the aid of one of the delicate instruments of his own invention
of how plants respond to various sounds and tunes and the beautiful
colour display which was observed in this connection appeared as though
he were a magician with a wand. And that was quite true: he couldn't.

But there was all the more applause, and all the more kindly feeling for that failure of his
to make a speech; and then one or two other men spoke of the good that Mr. Brooke had done
in that neighborhood, and of the help that he had given them all in founding the club, and
of the brave and encouraging words that he had spoken to them, and so on; and the young artist
for the Graphic sketched away faster and faster, and said to himself, "My eye, there'll be
a precious row if they try to hang him after this, whatever he's done." But the sensation of
the afternoon was yet to come.

"I can only say once more, my friends," said Caspar, as the hour wore away, "that I thank you
for this expression of your confidence in me, and that I have never had a prouder moment in
my life than this, in which you tell me of your own accord that you believe in my innocence
of the crime attributed to me. Of that, however, I will not speak. I wish only, before we separate,
to introduce you to my wife, who has never been here before, and whom I am sure you will welcome
for my sake."

There was a moment of astonishment. Every one knew something of the story of Caspar's married
life, and was taken aback by the appearance of his wife. But when Maurice Kenyon led the way
by clapping his hands vigorously, someone took up the word, and cried, "Three cheers for Mrs.
Brooke." And Lady Alice started at the new title, and thought that it sounded much better than
the one by which she was usually known.

"Shall I say any more?" said Caspar, smiling as he stooped down to her. But suddenly she rose
to her feet and put her hand within his arm. "No," she said, "I am going to do it myself."

The storm of clapping was renewed and died away when it was perceived that Lady Alice was about
to speak. She was a little flushed, but perfectly self-possessed, and her clear silvery voice
could be heard in every corner of the room.

"I wish to thank you, too," she said, "for your kindness to my husband and myself. I hope I
shall know more of his work here by and by, and in the meantime I can only tell you that you
are right to trust him and believe in him--as I trust him and believe in him with all my heart
and soul!"

She turned to him a little as she spoke, her eyes shining, her face transfigured--the faith
in her making itself manifest in feature and in gesture alike. There was not applause so much
as a murmur of assent when she had done; and Caspar, laying hold of her hand, looked down at
her with a new warmth of tenderness, and said half wonderingly,

"Why, Alice!"

"Do you think I could let them go without telling them what you are to me?" she said, with
a kind of passion in her voice which reminded him of Lesley. But there was no time to say more,
for every person in the room presented himself or herself to shake hands with Caspar and his
wife, and to admire the spoons, which had been purchased only the night before.

"Very glad to see you amongst us, Mrs. Brooke, mum; and hope you'll come again," was heard
so often that Lady Alice was quite amazed by the warmth of the greeting. "And the young lady
too--where's she? she ought to have been here as well," said one woman; to which Maurice Kenyon
responded in a pleased growl--

"Yes, confound your blundering, so she ought; and so she would have been, if you hadn't nearly
made such a blessed mull of the whole affair."

He did not think that anybody heard him, and was rather taken aback when Lady Alice smiled
at him over her shoulder. "What do you mean, Mr. Kenyon?" she said.

Maurice was on his good behavior immediately. "Oh, nothing, Lady Alice; only that Miss Brooke
might have been here if we had only had a hint beforehand, and it is a pity she should have
missed it."

"A great pity," said Lesley's mother; and she looked quite complacently at the twelve silver
spoons, which she was guarding so jealously, as if she feared they would be taken away from her.

Outside the doors, when the assembly had reluctantly dispersed, after an improvised collation,
given by Caspar, of hot drinks and plum cake, a little crowd of men and boys cheered the departing
hero of the day so valiantly that Lady Alice was almost glad to find herself once more driving
through the dusky London streets with her husband at her side. Miss Brooke and Maurice had
elected to walk home.

"There's one thing," said Caspar, rather later in the day, as a history of these experiences
was unfolded to Lesley; "we quite, forgot to tell the good folks your mother's name and title.
She was applauded to the echo as 'Mrs. Brooke.'"

"Oh, you must never tell them," said Lady Alice, hastily. "I do not want to be anything else,
please--now."

"I wish they had let one know beforehand," said Maurice, "they kept it a dead secret--even
from me."

"All the greater surprise for us," said Mr. Brooke. Then he looked at Maurice for a moment,
and smiled. But it was long before they mentioned to each other what both had thought and felt
in that heart-breaking minute of suspense when they believed that Caspar was deserted in the
hour of need.

"Well," said Caspar Brooke, at length, "whatever may happen now"--and he made a pause which
was fraught with graver meaning than he would have cared to put into words--"I can feel at
any rate that 'I have had my say.' And you, Alice--well, my dear, you will always have those
silver spoons to look at! So we have not done badly after all."

Like Sir Thomas More, he would have joked when going to the scaffold; but jokes under such
circumstances have rather a ghastly sound in the ears of his family.

CHAPTER XL.

CAIN.

Maurice Kenyon took an early opportunity of asking Lady Alice whether she would recognize the
man Smith if she saw him again.

"I think so. Why do you ask? You know I talked to him a good deal."

"I have been very blind," said Maurice seriously. "I never thought until to-day of associating
him in my mind with someone else--someone whom I have seen twice during the past week. May
I speak freely to you? You know I am as anxious as anyone can possibly be that this mystery
should be cleared up. I wish to speak of Francis Trent, the brother of Oliver Trent, and the
husband of the woman who makes this accusation against Mr. Brooke."

Lady Alice recoiled. "You cannot mean that John Smith had anything to do with him?"

"I have a strong belief that John Smith and Francis Trent are one and the same. To my shame
be it spoken, I did not recognize him either on Wednesday or Friday when I paid him a visit.
Ethel wished me to go when she heard that he was ill." He said this in a deprecating tone.

"I quite understand. You saw this man--Francis Trent--then?"

"Yes, and could not imagine where I had seen him before. I think it is the man I used to see
in hospital. Lady Alice--if you saw him yourself----"

"I, Mr. Kenyon? What! see the man and woman who accuse my husband of murder?"--There was genuine
horror in her tone. "How could I speak to them?"

"It is just a chance," said Maurice, in a low voice. "If he knew that you were the wife of
the man who was accused--perhaps something would come of it."

"What do you mean?"

"Lady Alice, pray do not build too much on what I am going to say. If Francis Trent and John
Smith be the same, then my knowledge of John Smith's previous condition leads me to think it
quite possible that it was Francis Trent who, in a fit of frenzy, committed the murder of which
your husband is suspected."

Lady Alice looked at him in silence. "I don't see exactly," she said, "that I should be of
much use."

"Nor I--exactly," said Maurice. "But I see a vague chance; and I ask you--for your husband's
sake--to try it."

"Ah, you know I cannot refuse that," she said quickly. And then she arranged with him where
they should meet on the following afternoon in order to drive to the lodgings now occupied
by Mr. and Mrs. Francis Trent. Whether this proceeding might not be stigmatized as "tampering
with witnesses," Maurice and Lady Alice neither knew nor cared. If Maurice had a doubt, he
stifled it by telling himself that they were not going to visit the "witness," Mary Trent,
but the sick man, John Smith, in whom Lady Alice had been interested at the hospital. It was
only as a precaution that he took with him young Mr. Grierson, junior partner of the firm of
solicitors to whom Caspar's defence was entrusted. Young Grierson was a friend as well as a
lawyer, and it was always as well to have a friend at hand. But really he hardly knew for what
result he hoped.

The rooms in which Maurice himself, at Ethel's instance, had located Mr. and Mrs. Francis Trent
were in Bernard Street. They were plain but apparently clean and comfortable. Maurice said
a word to the servant, and unceremoniously put her aside, and walked straight into the room
where he knew that Francis Trent was lying.

A thin, spare woman, with a deadly pale face and black sunken eyes, rose from a seat beside
the bed as they entered. Lady Alice knew, as if by instinct, that this was Mary Trent. She
averted her eyes from the woman who had falsely accused her husband: she could not bear to
look at her. But Mary Trent scarcely took her eyes off Lady Alice's face.

"Will you look here, Lady Alice, if you please?" said Maurice in his most professional tone.
She turned towards the bed, and saw--yes, it was the face of the man whom she had known in
the hospital: thinner, yellower, more haggard than ever, but still the face of the patient
who used to watch her as if her presence were a means of healing in itself.

"Yes," she said slowly, "that is--John Smith."

"His real name is Francis Trent," said Maurice. "Do you know this lady, Francis?"

The sick man nodded. There was a curiously vacant look upon his face, brightened only at times
by gleams of vivid consciousness.

"Yes, yes, I know her. The lady that came to see me in hospital," he murmured feebly.

"Do you know who she is?"

"Why do you trouble him, sir?" said Mrs. Trent. "You see how ill he is, wouldn't it be better
for him to be left in peace?"

She spoke with sedulous calmness; but there was a jar in her voice which did not sound quite
natural. Maurice simply repeated his question, and Francis Trent shook his head.

"She is the wife of Caspar Brooke, the man who, you say, killed your brother Oliver."

The sick man's eyes dilated, and fixed themselves uneasily on his wife. "I did not say it,"
he answered, almost in a whisper. "Mary said it--not I."

"But you heard something, did you not?" said Maurice remorselessly.

"How should he hear anything," said Mary Trent, "and he asleep in his bed at the time? Or if
not asleep, too ill and weak to notice anything. It's a shame to question him like that; and
not legal, neither. You'll please to leave us to ourselves, sir; we ain't a show. We can but
say what we saw and heard, whatever the consequences may be, but we need not be tortured for
all that."

"That's enough, Mary," said the man speaking from the bed in a much more natural manner and
in a stronger voice than he had yet used. "You're overdoing it--you always do. It's no good.
This is the last stroke, and I give up. It has gone against the grain with me to get anybody
into trouble," he said, looking attentively at Lady Alice, "and now that I know who this lady
is, I don't feel inclined to keep up the farce any longer. I am much too ill to live to be
hanged--Mr. Kenyon can tell you so at any minute--and I may as well give you the satisfaction
of knowing that Caspar Brooke had nothing at all to do with Oliver's death: I was his murderer,
and no one else: I swear it, so help me God!"

Lady Alice turned very faint. Someone put her in a chair and fanned her, and when she came
to herself she heard Francis Trent's wife speaking.

"He's mad, I tell you. It's no good paying any attention to what he says, gentlemen. I saw
him myself in his bed at the time, and----"

"Now, Mary, my dear good soul," said Francis with the old easy superiority which he had always
assumed to her, "will you just hold your tongue, and let me tell my own tale? You have done
your best for me, but you know I always told you I was not to be trusted to lie about it if
anybody appealed to me to evidence. I really have not the strength to keep it up. I want at
least to die like a gentleman."

"I am not at all sure that you are going to die," said Maurice quietly, with his finger on
the sick man's pulse. Francis had put off the vacant expression, and his eyes had lighted up.
He was evidently quite himself again.

"No?" he said easily. "Well, I would rather die, if it's all the same to you; because I fancy
I shall have to be put under restraint if I do live. I don't always know what I am doing in
the least. I know now, though. You can bear me out, doctor, isn't my brain in a very queer state?"

"I fear it is," said Maurice.

"Just so. I am subject to fits of rage in which I don't know what I am doing. And on that night
when Oliver came to see me, after Brooke had gone away, I got into one of these frenzies and
followed him downstairs, picking up Brooke's stick on the way and beating poor Oliver about
the head with it.... You know well enough how he was found. I only came to myself when it was
done. And then, my wife--with all a woman's ingenuity--bundled me into bed, swore that I had
never left it, and that Caspar Brooke had done it. It was a lie--she told me so afterwards.
Eh, Mary?--Forgive me, old girl: I've got you into trouble now; but that is better than letting
an innocent man swing for what I have done, especially when that man is the husband of one
who was so kind to me----"

"And the father of Lesley Brooke," said Maurice, looking steadfastly at Mary Trent.

A shudder ran through the woman's frame. Then she covered her face with her hands and flung
herself down at her husband's side.

"Oh Francis, my dear, my dear!" she said. "I did it for you."

And then for an instant there was silence in the room, save for her heavy sobs. Francis lay
still but patted her with his thin fingers, and looked at Caspar Brooke's wife with his large,
unnaturally bright, dark eyes.

"She is a good soul in spite of it all," he said, addressing himself to Lady Alice. "And she
did it out of love for me. You would have done as much for your husband, perhaps, if you loved
him--but I have heard, that you don't."

"Oh, but you are wrong," said Lady Alice. "I love him with all my heart, and I thank you deeply--deeply--for
saving him."

"That ought to be some payment," said Francis Trent, with his wan, wild smile. "And I don't
suppose they'll be very hard on me, as I did not know what I was doing. You'll speak a word
to that effect, won't you, doctor?"

"I will indeed. But it would have been better for you as well as for others if truth had been
told from the beginning," said Kenyon.

"It can't be helped now. Is there anything else I can do? You must have my statement taken
down. And Mary, my girl, you'll have to make your confession too."

"Oh, Francis, Francis!" she moaned. "Not against you, my dear--not against you!"

"Yes, against me," said Francis steadily. "And let us finish with the formalities as quickly
as may be, doctor, as long as my head's clear. I killed my brother Oliver--that you must make
known as soon as you can. Not for malice, poor chap, nor yet for money--though he had cheated
me many a time--but because I was mad--mad. And I am mad now--mad though you do not know it--stark,
staring mad!"

And his dark eyes glared at them so strangely that Lady Alice cried out and had to be led into
another room, for it was the light of madness indeed that shone from beneath his sunken brows.

It was while she sat alone for a minute or two while the gentlemen were talking in another
room, that Mary Trent came creeping to her, with folded hands and furtive mien.

"Oh, my lady, my lady, forgive me," she said, sobbing fretfully as she spoke. "I thought but
of my own--I did not think of you. Nor of Miss Lesley, though I did love her--yes, I did, and
tried my best to save her from that wicked man. Mr. Brooke will tell you what I mean, ma'am.
And tell him, if you will be so good, that I was frightened into taking back the stories I
had told him about Oliver--but they were all true. Everyone of 'em was true. And that I beg
he'll forgive me; for a better and a kinder gentleman I never see, nor one that loved poor
people more. And Miss Lesley was just like him--but it was my husband, and I thought he'd be
hanged for it, and what could I do?"

And then, while Lady Alice still hesitated between pity and a feeling of revolt at pity for
a woman who had sworn falsely against her dearly beloved husband, Caspar Brooke, a cry was
heard from the bedroom, and Mary turned and fled back to the scene of her duties--sad and painful
duties indeed, sometimes, when the madman became violent, and likely enough to be very speedily
terminated by death.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What can I say to you?" said Lady Alice to Maurice Kenyon, a day or two later. "It was your
acuteness that brought the matter to light. Now that that poor wretched man is hopelessly insane,
we might never have learnt the truth. Is there any way in which I can thank you? any way in
which I can give you a reward?"

She looked steadily into his face, and saw that he changed color.

"There is only one way, Lady Alice," he stammered.

"You are not to call me Lady Alice: I like 'Mrs. Brooke' much better. Well?"

"I love your daughter," said Maurice bluntly, "and I believe she would love me if you would
let her."

"Let her?" said Mrs. Brooke, with a smile.

"She made you some promises before she came to London----"

"Ah, not to become engaged before the year was out. Tell her that I absolve her from that promise,
and--ask her again."

Maurice found that under these conditions Lesley's answer was all that could be desired.

CHAPTER XLI.

VALE!

"Now that Ethel has gone to the sea-side, I can have you to myself a little while," said Lady
Alice to her daughter.

"Poor Ethel! But it is delightful to have you here, mamma: it is so home-like and comfortable."

"Ah, you will soon have to make a home for somebody else!"

Lesley grew red, but smiled. "We won't think of that yet," she said softly. "Mamma, I want
to speak to you on a very serious subject."

"Well, my darling?"

"You won't be angry with me, will you? It is--about Mrs. Romaine."

Lady Alice's brow clouded a little. "Well, Lesley?" she said.

"Mamma, I can't bear Mrs. Romaine myself. Neither can you. Neither can papa. And it is very
unchristian of all of us, to say the least. Because----"

"Neither can papa," repeated Lady Alice, with raised brows. "My dear child, Mrs. Romaine is
a great friend of your father's. He told me only the other day that she used to come here very
often--to see your Aunt Sophy and yourself."

"So she did," said Lesley, lightly. "But, of course, she can't very well come now--at least,
it would be awkward. Still I am sure papa does not like her, for he looked quite pleased the
other day when I told him that she was going to give up her house, and said in his short way--'So
much the better.'"

"Very slight evidence," said Caspar Brooke's wife smiling.

"Well, never mind evidence, mammy dear. What I want to say is that I feel very sorry for Mrs.
Romaine. You see she must be feeling very much alone in the world. Oliver, whom she really
cared for, is dead, and Francis is out of his mind, and Francis' wife"--with a little shudder--"cannot
be anything to her--and then, don't you think, mamma, that when there has been one case of
insanity in the family, she must be afraid of herself too?"

"Not necessarily. Francis Trent's insanity was the result of an accident."

"Yes, but it is very saddening for her, all the same, and she must be terribly lonely in that
house in Russell Square. I wanted to know if I might go and call upon her?"

"You, dear? I thought you did not like her."

"I don't," said Lesley, frankly, "but I am sorry for her. Ethel asked me why I did not go.
She thought there must be something wrong, because Rosalind never came to see her after Oliver's
death--never once. I believe she has scarcely been out of the house--not at all since the funeral,
and that is a month ago. I have not heard that she was ill, so I suppose it is just that she
is--miserable, poor thing."

Lady Alice stroked her daughter's hair in silence for a minute or two. "I think I had better
go instead of you, Lesley. There is no reason why she should feel she cannot see us. She was
not to blame for that accusation--though I heard that she believed it. But I will see her first,
and you can go afterwards if she is able to receive visitors."

"That is very good of you, mamma--especially as you don't like her," said Lesley. "I can't
help feeling thankful that Ethel will have nothing to do with that family now. And since Maurice
told her a little more about poor Mr. Trent, I think she sees that she would not have been
very happy." She was silent for a little while, and then went on, trying to give an indifferent
sound to her words:--"Captain Duchesne's people live near Eastbourne, he told me; and Ethel
has gone to Seaford."

"Not far off," said Lady Alice, smiling a little. "I hope that his sister Margaret will call
on Ethel: I think they would like each other."

And no more was said, for it was as yet too early to wonder even whether Harry Duchesne's adoration
for Ethel Kenyon was ultimately to meet with a return.

True to her new tastes, Lady Alice had had cards printed bearing the name "Mrs. Caspar Brooke."
She desired, she said, to be identified with her husband as much as possible: it was a great
mistake to retain a mere courtesy title, as if she had interests and station remote from those
of her husband. Caspar had smilingly opposed this change, but Lady Alice had stood firm. Indeed,
to her old friends she remained "Lady Alice" to the end of the chapter; but to the outer world
she was henceforth known as Mrs. Brooke.

She sent up one of her new cards when she called upon Mrs. Romaine. She paid this visit with
considerable shrinking of heart. She had bitter memories connected with Mrs. Romaine. Since
the day on which she had been reconciled to her husband, she had cast from her all suspicion
of his past--cast it from her in much the same arbitrary and unreasoning manner as she had
first embraced it. For, like most women, she was governed far more by her feelings and instincts
than by the laws of evidence. As Rosalind had once told her brother, Lady Alice had accidentally
seen and intercepted a letter of hers to Caspar; and Lady Alice had then rushed to the conclusion
that it was part of a long continued correspondence and not a single communication. And now--now----what
did she think? She hardly knew; of one thing only was she certain that Caspar had never been
untrue to her, had never cared for any woman but herself.

She was not at all sure that Mrs. Romaine would receive her: she knew that she had written
to her in a tone that no woman, especially a woman like Mrs. Romaine, is likely to forgive;
but time, she thought, blunts the memory of past injuries, and if Rosalind chose to forget
the past, she would forget it too. It was with a soft and kindly feeling, therefore, that Lady
Alice asked for admittance at Mrs. Romaine's door, and learned that Mrs. Romaine was at home
and would see her.

Before she had been in the drawing-room five minutes, it dawned on Lady Alice's mind that there
was something odd in her hostess' manner and even in her appearance. Of course she was prepared
for a change; in the twelve years or more that had elapsed since they had met she herself must
have also changed. But, as a matter of fact, Lady Alice's long, elegant figure, shining hair
and delicate complexion showed the ravages of time far less distinctly than she imagined; while
Mrs. Romaine was a mere wreck of what she had been in her youth. POETRY AND SCIENCE

The poet, seeing by the heart, realises the inexpressible and strived to give it expression.
His imagination soars, where the sight of others fails, and his news of realm unknown finds
voice in rhyme and metre. The path of the scientific man may be different, yet there is some likeness
between the two pursuits. Where visible light ends, he still follows the invisible. Where the
note of the audible reaches the unheard, even there he gathers the
tremulous message.

That mystery which lies behind the expressed, is the object of his questioning also; and he, in
his scientific way, attempts to render its abstruse discoveries into human speech.

This vast abode of nature is built in many wings, each with its own portal. The physicist, the
chemist, and the biologist entering by different doors, each one
his own department of knowledge, comes to think that this is his special
domain, unconnected with that of any other.

Hence has arisen our present rigid division of phenomena, into the
worlds of the inorganic, vegetal, and sentient.

But this attitude of mind is philosophical, may be denied.

We must remember that all enquiries have as their goal the attainment
of knowledge in its entirety.

The partition walls between the cells in the great laboratory are
only erected for a time to aid this search.

Only at that point where all lines of investigation meet, can the whole truth be found.

Both poet and scientific worker have set out for the same goal, to find a unity in the bewildering
diversity. The difference is that the poet thinks little of the path, whereas the scientific
man must not neglect.

The imagination of the poet has to be unrestricted. The intuitions of emotion cannot be established
by rigid proof.

He has, therefore, to use the language of imagery, adding constantly the words 'as if.'

The road that the scientific man has to tread is on the other hand
very rugged, and in his pursuit of demonstration he must pay a severe
restraint on his imagination.

His constant anxiety is lest he should be self-deceived.

He has, therefore, at every step to compare his own thought with
the external fact.

He has remorselessly to abandon all in which these are not agreed. His reward is that he gets, however
little is certain, forming a strong foundation for what is yet to
come.

Even by this path of self-restraint and verification, however, he is making for a region surpassing
wonder. In the range of that invisible light, gross objects cease to be a barrier, and force
and matter become less aesthetic. When the veil is suddenly lifted, upon the vision hitherto
unsuspected, he may for a moment lose his accustomed self-restraint and, exclaim "not 'as if'--but
the thing itself!"

INVISIBLE LIGHT.

In illustration of this sense of wonder which links together poetry
and science, let me allude briefly to a few matters that belong to
my own small corner in the great universe of knowledge, that of light
invisible and of life unvoiced.

Can anything appeal more to the imagination than the fact that we can detect the peculiarities
in the internal molecular structure of an opaque body by means of light that is itself invisible?
Could anything have been more unexpected than to find that a sphere
of China-clay focuses invisible light more perfectly than a sphere
of glass focuses the visible; that in fact, the refractive power of
this clay to electric radiation is at least as great as that of the
most costly diamond to light?

From amongst the innumerable octaves of light, there is only one octave, with power to excite the human
eye. In reality, we stand, in the midst of a luminous ocean, almost blind! The little that we can
see is nothing, compared to the vastness of that which we cannot.

But it may be said that out of the very imperfection of his senses
man has been able, in science, to build for himself a raft of thought
by which to make daring adventure on the great seas of the unknown.

UNVOICED LIFE.

Again, just as, in following up light from visible to invisible, our range of investigation transcends
our physical sight, so also does our power of sympathy become extended, when we pass from the voiced to
the unvoiced, in the study of life: Is there then any possible relation between our own life
and that of the plant world?

That there may be such a relation, some of the foremost of scientific
men have denied.

So distinguished a leader as the late Burdon-Sanderson declared that the majority of plants
were not capable of giving any answer, by either mechanical or electrical
excitement, to an outside stock.

Pfeffer, again, and his distinguished followers, have insisted that the plants have neither a
nervous system, nor anything analogous to the nervous impulse of the animal.
 But the
temptation to a naturally exacting nature was very great. She hesitated for a moment, and Mrs.
Romaine went rapidly on.

"I wrote a letter once." The hot color mounted to her cheeks and brow while she was speaking.
"You wrote to me about it. But you did not send it back. You have that letter still."

Lady Alice continued to look at her steadily, but made no reply.

"That letter has been the curse of my life. I repented it as soon as it was sent--you may be
sure of that: I could repeat it word for word even now. Oh, no doubt you made the most of it--jeered
at it--laughed over it with him--but to me----"

"It is the last thing I should ever have mentioned to my husband," said Lady Alice, with grave
disdain. "He never knew that you wrote it--never saw it--never will see or know it from me."

"Do you mean that you have kept it to yourself all these years?"

"I mean that I put it into the fire as soon as I had read it. Why are you so concerned about
it? Was it worse than the others that you must have written--before that?"

"I never wrote to him before."

They faced each other with mutual suspicion in their eyes. Lady Alice had forgotten her proud
reserve: she wanted to know the truth at last.

"I will acknowledge," she said, "that I believed that you had written other letters--of a somewhat
similar kind--to Mr. Brooke. I was angry and disgusted: it was that which formed one of my
reasons for leaving him years ago. But I have come to a better mind since then. I do not care
what you wrote, what you said, or what you did: I believe that my husband is a good man and
I love him. I have come back to him, and shall never leave him again. You can do me no harm now."

Mrs. Romaine laughed mockingly. "Can I not?" she said. "Do you know that he came to me within
an hour after his release? Do you know that he asked me to go away with him to Spain, where
we could be safe and happy together? What do you say to that?"

"I say this," cried Lady Alice, almost violently, "that I do not believe a word of it." She
drew herself to her full height and turned to leave the room. Then she looked at Rosalind and
spoke in a gentler tone. "I am sorry for you," she said. "But your suffering is partly your
own fault. What right had you to think of winning my husband's heart away from me? You have
not succeeded, although you have done your best to make us miserable. I have never spoken of
you to him--never; but now, when I go home, I shall go straight to him and tell him all that
you have said to me, and I shall know very well whether what you say is false or true."

She left the room proudly and firmly, unheeding of the mocking laugh that Rosalind sent after
her. She let herself out into the street and walked straight back to her home. Caspar was out:
she could not go to him immediately, as she had said that she would do. She went to her room
and lay down upon the bed, feeling strangely tired and weak. In spite of her haughty rebuttal
of the charge against her husband, she was wounded and oppressed by it. And as the time went
on, she felt more and more the difficulty of telling him her story, of asking him to clear
himself. How could she question him without seeming to doubt?

She fretted herself until a headache came on, and she was unable to go down to dinner. Lesley
brought her up a cup of tea, but her mother refused her company. "I shall be better alone,"
she said. "Has your father come in yet? Isn't he very late?"

It was nearly ten o'clock when Mr. Brooke came in, and, hearing that he had been asked for,
made his way to his wife's room. He bent over her tenderly, asking her how she felt; and she
put one hand up to his rough cheek, without answering.

"What has made your head ache, my darling?" he asked.

"Caspar, I have been to see Mrs. Romaine."

She felt a sort of start or quiver go through him at the name. He put his lips softly to her
forehead before he spoke. "Well!" he said, a little dryly.

"Did you--did she----"

Then she broke down, and sobbed a little with her face against her husband's breast. Caspar's
breath grew shorter--a sign of excitement with him--but for a time he waited quietly and would
not speak. He could not all at once make up his mind what to say.

"Alice," he said at last, "if you ask me questions I suppose I must answer them in one way
or another. But--I think I had rather you did not." He felt that every nerve was strained in
self-control as she listened to him. "Mrs. Romaine," he went on deliberately, "is not a woman
that I like--or--respect. I would very much prefer not to talk about her."

"I must tell you just one thing," she whispered, "it was my feeling about her--my jealousy
of her--that made me leave you--twelve years ago."

She had surprised him now. "Alice! Impossible," he said. "Why, my poor girl, there was not
the slightest reason. I can most solemnly swear to you, Alice, that I never had any other feeling
for Mrs. Romaine than that of ordinary friendship. My dear, will you never believe that you
have always been the one woman in all the world for me?"

"Forgive me, Caspar," she murmured, "I do believe it now."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the same hour, a haggard and despairing woman raised herself from the floor where she had
lain for many weary hours, trying by passionate tears and cries and outbursts of unavailing
lamentation to exhaust or stifle the anguish which seemed to have reached its most intolerable
point. Her robes were soiled and crushed, her hair was dishevelled, her eyes were red with
weeping; and, as she rose, she wrung her hands together and then raised them in appeal to the
God whom she had so long forgotten and forsaken.

"Oh, my God," she cried, "how can I bear it? All that I do is useless. I may lie and cheat
and plot as much as I like, but all my schemes are in vain. I cannot hurt her, as she said:
I cannot punish him: I have no power left. No power, no beauty, no will! Am I losing my senses,
too, like Francis?" She shuddered at the thought. "Perhaps I am going mad--they have driven
me mad, Caspar Brooke and his wife, between them--mad, mad, mad!--Oh, God," she said, with
a long shivering sigh, "Oh, God, avert that doom! Not that punishment of all others, for mercy's
sake!"

She looked up and down her dimly lighted room with an expression upon her face of horror and
unrest, which bore some resemblance to the look of one whose intellect was becoming unhinged.
It seemed as if she were afraid that something might leap out upon her from the darkness, or
as if goblin voices might at any moment mutter in her ear. For a long time she stood motionless
in the middle of the room, her eyes staring, her hands hanging at her sides. Then she moved
slowly to a writing-table, took a sheet of paper and a pen, and wrote a few lines. When she
had finished she enclosed the sheet in an envelope, and addressed it to Lady Alice Brooke.
And when that was done she rang the bell and sent the letter to the post. Then she nodded and
smiled strangely to herself.

"Perhaps that will atone," she murmured vaguely. "And perhaps God will not take away my reason,
after all."

And then she began to fumble among the things upon her dressing-table for the little bottle
that contained her nightly sleeping draught.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Romaine's letter was brought to Lady Alice before she rose next morning. It contained
these words:--

     "I told you what was not true to-day. Your husband never asked me
     to go away with him--he never cared for me. I loved him, that was
     all. His carelessness drove me mad--I tried to revenge myself on
     him by making you suffer. But you would not believe me, and you
     were right. Pity me if you can, and pray for me.

     "ROSALIND ROMAINE."

"Ah, poor soul!" thought Alice Brooke, her eyes filling with tears. "I do pity her--I do, with
all my heart. God help her!"

And she said those words again--useless as they might be--when, by and by, a messenger came
hurrying to the house with the news that Mrs. Romaine had been found dead that morning--dead,
from an overdose of the chloral which she kept beside her for sleeplessness. And so the life
of false aims and perverted longings came to its appointed end.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was never a cloud on Alice Brooke's domestic happiness, never a shadow of distrust between
her and her husband, after this. For some little time they changed their mode of life--giving
up the house in Bloomsbury and spending long, blissful months in Italy and the Tyrol. It was
like another honeymoon. And when they returned to London, Caspar took a house in a sunnier
and pleasanter region than Upper Woburn Place, but not so far away as to prevent him from visiting
the Macclesfield Club on Sundays, and having a chat with Jim Gregson and his other workman
friends. These workmen and their wives came also in their turn to Mr. Brooke's abode, where
there was not only a gentle and gracious lady to preside at the table (where twelve especially
valued silver spoons always held a place of honor), but a very remarkable baby in the nursery;
and it was Mr. Brooke's continual regret that he had not insisted on naming his son and heir
Macclesfield, after the workmen's buildings, instead of the more commonplace Maurice, after
Maurice Kenyon. His later investigation shows that "all plants, even the trees, are fully alive
to changes of environment; they respond visibly to all stimuli, even
to the slight fluctuations of light by a drifting cloud."[17]

'TROPIC'
MOVEMENTS

Finding that the plants give, not only electric but motile
response as well, to stimulus, Dr. Bose proceeded to study the nature
of responses evoked in plants by the stimuli of the natural forces.

He found that plants respond visibly, by movements, to environmental stimuli. But the movements
induced--'tropic' movements--are extremely diverse. Light, for example, induces sometimes positive
curvature, sometimes negative. Gravitation, again, induces one movement in the root, and the opposition
in the shoot. Dr. Bose applied himself to find out whether the movements in response to external
stimuli, though apparently so diverse, could not be ultimately reduced to a fundamental unity
of reaction. As a result of a very deep and penetrating study of the effects of various environmental
stimuli, on different plant organs, he showed that the cells on two sides are unequally influenced,
on account of different external conditions, and contract unequally,
and hence the various movements are produced--that the many anomalous
effects, hitherto ascribed to 'specific sensibilities,' are due to
the 'differential sensibilities'--differential excitability of anisotropic
structures and to the opposite effects of external and internal stimuli--that
all varieties of plant movements are capable of a consistent mechanical
explanation.

Dr. Bose's "latest investigations recently communicated to the Royal Society have established
the single fundamental reaction which underlies all these effects
so extremely diverse."[18]

EXTENDED APPLICATION OF MECHANICAL THEORY

With
an extended application of his mechanical theory, Dr. Bose has gradually
removed the veil of obscurity from many a phenomenon in plant life.

The 'autonomous' movements of plants, for example, which remained
enveloped in mystery, received a satisfactory solution at his hands.

'AUTONOMOUS' MOVEMENTS

It was believed that automatically pulsating tissues draw their energy
from a mysterious "vital force" working within.

  By controlling external forces,
  Dr. Bose stopped the pulsation and re-started it and thus demonstrated
that the 'automatic action' was not due to any internal vital force.

       He pointed out that the external stimulus--instead of causing, as
was customary to suppose, an explosive chemical change and an inevitable
run-down of energy--brings about an accumulation of energy by the
plant.

And with the accumulation of absorbed energy, a point is reached
when there is an overflow--the excess of energy bubbles over, as it
were, and shows itself in 'spontaneous' movements.


       Insist upon getting one of them.
                 25c. each.
    For Sale by all Respectable Druggists.
      LAVIOLETTE & NELSON, Druggists,
  AGENTS OF FRENCH PATENTS. 1605 Notre Dame St.*

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS IN "STAR" SERIES.

  107. LUCK IN DISGUISE, BY WM. J. ZEXTER                  .30
  108. THE BONDMAN, BY HALL CAINE                          .30
  109. A MARCH IN THE RANKS, BY JESSIE FOTHERGILL          .30
  110. COSETTE, BY KATHERINE S. MACQUAID                   .30
  111. WHOSE WAS THE HAND? BY MISS BRADDON                 .30
  112. THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW, BY RUDYARD KIPLING           .25
  113. THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS, BY RUDYARD KIPLING        .25
  114. SOLDIERS THREE, and other Tales, BY RUDYARD KIPLING .25
  115. PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS, BY RUDYARD KIPLING      .25
  116. THE DEMONIAC, BY WALTER BESANT                      .25
  117. BRAVE HEARTS AND TRUE, BY FLORENCE MARRYAT          .25
  118. GOOD BYE, BY JOHN STRANGE WINTER                    .25

*For Sale by all Booksellers.*

       *       *       *       *       *

              Scarff's Marshmallow Cream

  For the Skin and Complexion, superior to anything in use
         for roughness, or any irritation of the skin,
                     sunburn, pimples, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          TRY
                  HOREHOUND AND HONEY
                     COUGH BALSAM

For Coughs, Colds, &c., Pleasant, Reliable, Effectual.

       *       *       *       *       *

                       SCARFF'S
                SAPONACEOUS TOOTH WASH
                      CARBOLATED.

  Is the best preparation for Cleansing, Preserving and
                   Beautifying the
                   Teeth and Gums.
                    PREPARED BY

      *CHAS. E, SCARFF, CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST*
   2262 St. Catherine Street, opposite Victoria.

                         CATALOGUE
                            OF
                LOVELL'S CANADIAN COPYRIGHT
                           AND
                     *"STAR" SERIES.*

All the books in the Copyright Series are by arrangement with the Authors, to whom a Royalty
is paid, and no American reprints can lawfully be sold in Canada.

CANADIAN COPYRIGHT SERIES.

  1. The Wing of Azrael, by Mona Caird                              .30
  2. The Fatal Phryne, by F. C. Philips                             .30
  3. The Search for Basil Lyndhurst, by Rosa Nouchette Carey        .30
  4. The Luck of the House, by Adeline Sergeant                     .30
  5. Sophy Carmine, by John Strange Winter                          .30
  6. Jezebel's Friends, by Dora Russell                             .30
  7. That Other Woman, by Annie Thomas                              .30
  8. The Curse of Carne's Hold, by G. A. Henty                      .30
  9. An I. D. B. in South Africa, by Louise Vescellins Sheldon      .30
  10. A Life Sentence, by Adeline Sergeant                          .30
  11. Comedy of a Country House, by Julian Sturgis                  .30
  12. The Tree of Knowledge, by G. M. Robins                        .30
  13. Kit Wyndham; or, Fettered for Life, by Frank Barrett          .30
  14. The Haute Noblesse, by George Manville Fenn                   .30
  15. Buttons, by John Strange Winter                               .30
  16. Earth Born, by Spirito Gentil                                 .30
  17. Mount Eden, by Florence Marryat                               .30
  18. Hedri; or, Blind Justice, by Helen Mathers                    .30
  19. Joshua, a Story of Egyptian-Israelitish Life, by Georg Ebers  .30
  20. Hester Hepworth, by Kate Tannatt Woods                        .30
  21. Nurse Revel's Mistake, by Florence Warden                     .30
  22. Sylvia Arden, by Oswall Crawfurd                              .30
  23. The Mynns Mystery, by George Manville Fenn                    .30
  24. Was Ever Woman in this Humor Wooed? by Charles Gibbon         .30
  25. A Girl of the People, by L. T. Meade                          .30
  26. The Firm of Girdlestone, by A. Conan Doyle                    .30
  27. April's Lady, by The Duchess                                  .30
  28. By Order of the Czar, by Joseph Hatton                        .30
  29. The Lady Egeria, by John Berwick Hardwood                     .30
  30. Syrlin, by Ouida                                              .50
  31. The Burnt Million, by James Payn                              .30
  32. Her Last Throw, by The Duchess                                .30
  33. A Woman's Heart, by Mrs. Alexander                            .30
  34. A Scarlet Sin, by Florence Marryat                            .30
  35. A True Friend, by Adeline Sergeant                            .30
  36. A Smuggler's Secret, by Frank Barrett                         .30
  37. The Great Mill Street Mystery, by Adeline Sergeant            .30
  38. The Moment After, by Robert Buchanan                          .30
  39. Ruffino, by Ouida                                             .30
  40. The Chief Justice, by Karl Emil Franzos                       .30
  41. Lover or Friend, by Rosa Nouchette Carey                      .30
  42. Heart of Gold, by L. T. Meade                                 .30
  43. Famous or Infamous                                            .30

JOHN LOVELL & SON'S PUBLICATIONS.

=Nurse Revel's Mistake.= By FLORENCE WARDEN.

From first to last it is without a dull page, and is full of thrilling adventure, which renders
it a most readable volume.

PRICE 30 cents.

=Sylvia Arden.= By OSWALD CRAWFURD.

This work adds materially to the growing fame of this popular author.

PRICE 30 cents.

=The Mynns' Mystery.= By GEO. MANVILLE FENN.

An interesting story of life among the richer classes of England, with a glimpse into the early
western life of the United States, that always affords to a wearied mind a few moments of refreshing
reading.

PRICE 30 cents.

=Was Ever Woman in this Humor Wooed?= By CHS. GIBBON.

A novel of more than ordinary merit, with a rather remarkable plot, which gives a peculiar
charm to lady readers especially.

PRICE 30 cents.

=A Girl of the People.= By L. T. MEADE.

A story of low life in Liverpool, recounting the trials and troubles of a brave young girl,
which will be read with much interest.

PRICE 30 cents.

=The Firm of Girdlestone.= By A. CONAN DOYLE.

The style is free and flowing, the situations startling, the characters few and well sustained,
the plot original and very clever. It is not a love story, but none the less interesting and
romantic on that account.

PRICE 30 cents.

=The Curse of Curne's Gold.= By G. A. HENTY.

A thrilling story of love and adventure. The scene is laid in the late Kaffir war, of which
the author had a large personal experience, having acted as war correspondent, in which position
he became thoroughly acquainted with the adventures and accidents by flood and field of which
his story so ably treats.

PRICE 30 cents.

=An I. D. B. in South Africa.= By LOUISE V. SHELDON.

An interesting story, profusely illustrated. The plot is a clever one, and holds the reader's
attention throughout.

PRICE 30 cents.

=A Life Sentence.= By ADELINE SERGEANT.

One of the strongest and most dramatic of this popular author's works. The story combines very
sensational incidents with interesting developments of personal character.

PRICE 30 cents.

=The Tree of Knowledge.= By G. M. ROBINS.

A fascinating book of fiction which all lovers of light literature should read. The work bears
a strong stamp of originality and power.

PRICE 30 cents.

=Kit Wyndham; or, Fettered for Life.= By FRANK BARRETT.

A highly sensational story, which, however, presents a pleasing contrast to the evil literature
which has of late been spread broadcast. The novel is one which once begun will be finished,
and the denouement is as pleasing as it is unexpected.

                        CASTOR-FLUID.
                        (Registered.)

A delightfully refreshing and cooling preparation for the Hair. It absolutely prevents dandruff,
promotes the growth, keeps the hair from falling, and does not darken it. It should be used
daily, after the morning bath.

*Price 25c. For Sale at all Chemists.*

Henry R. Gray, Chemist, 122 St. Lawrence, Montreal, Sole Manufacturer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                   WHITE ROSE LANOLIN CREAM.
                    (Patent applied for.)

Much superior to "Cold Cream" as a soothing and softening unguent for the skin. It will cure
chapped hands, and will render rough and dry skin as smooth and as soft as velvet.

       *       *       *       *       *

                GRAY'S SAPONACEOUS DENTIFRICE.
              Antiseptic. Cleansing. Beautifying.

Keeps the teeth free from tartar, deodorizes the breath, and destroys bacteria.

       *       *       *       *       *

           JOHNSTON'S FLUID BEEF
                THE GREAT
              Strength Giver

          *An Invaluable Food
                  FOR
          Invalids & Convalescents
                BECAUSE:
  Easily Digested by the WEAKEST STOMACH.*

Useful in domestic economy for making delicious Beef Tea, enriching Gravies and Soups.

       *       *       *       *       *

      NOTMAN

  *17 BLEURY ST.,*
    AND ROOM 116
  *WINDSOR HOTEL,
     MONTREAL.
   Photographer*
     TO THE
     *QUEEN*.

     THE BEST

      *VIEWS*
    OF MONTREAL,
     OF QUEBEC,
   OF THE SAGUENAY
        AND
   Rocky Mountains
     ETC., ETC.

     *PORTRAITS*
         IN
    =All Sizes=
        AND
     =Styles=
         AT
  *REASONABLE PRICES*.

  *AMATEUR OUTFITS.*
    Photo-Chemicals
      KODAK and
       LILIPUT
      *CAMERAS*.
      ETC., ETC.

  *Visitors always Welcome.*

        *BRANCHES:*

  GEORGE STREET, HALIFAX.

      315 MADISON AV.,
         NEW YORK.

  3 PARK ST. AND 184 BOYLSTON ST.,
         BOSTON.

  48 NORTH PEARL ST., ALBANY.

Inconsistent hyphenation and italicization have been retained as-is within the text.

Here is a list of the minor typographical corrections made:
  - Comma replaced by period after "ETC" on the second page of
    advertisements.
  - Comma changed to a period after "cents" on the fourth page of
    advertisements (the second page of book listing).
  - Comma changed to a period after "25c" on Page 4.
  - "loose" changed to "lose" on Page 7.
  - "had" changed to "Had" on Page 8.
  - "a a" changed to "a" on Page 17.
  - Quote added after "mean----" on Page 20.
  - "show-white" changed to "snow-white" on Page 24.
  - "a a" changed to "a" on Page 42.
  - "occurrred" changed to "occurred" on Page 57.
  - "word" changed to "world" on Page 64.
  - "fasionably" changed to "fashionably" on Page 65.
  - "brink" changed to "drink" on Page 78.
  - Comma changed to period after "doubt" on Page 83.
  - Quote removed after "I?" on Page 84.
  - "demeannor" changed to "demeanor" on Page 90.
  - Period added after "aglow" on Page 90.
  - "pursued" changed to "pursed" on Page 91.
  - Quote added after "Club." on Page 114.
  - Single quote added before the final "t" in "'T'aint"
    on Page 123.
  - Comma changed to period after "Romaine" on Page 124.
  - Comma changed to period after "too" on Page 138.
  - Quote removed after "even----" on Page 145.
  - "sonething" changed to "something" on Page 148.
  - "got" changed to "get" on Page 148.
  - Quote removed before "Her" on Page 154.
  - "quitely" changed to "quietly" on Page 165.
  - "thing" changed to "think" on Page 166.
  - "Leslie" changed to "Lesley" on Page 180.
  - "vist" changed to "visit" on Page 181.
  - Single quote moved to before "prettiness" on Page 184.
  - Double quote added after "'art'" on Page 184.
  - Quotation mark removed after "feel." on Page 185.
  - Comma changed to period after "explanation" on Page 188.
  - "the the" changed to "the" on Page 191.
  - "commoness" changed to "commonness" on Page 193.
  - "Leslie" changed to "Lesley" on Page 199.
  - Exclamation mark changed to question mark after "Lesley"
    on Page 201.
  - Quote added after "dreams!" on Page 211.
  - "nan" changed to "man" on Page 218.
  - Quotation mark moved to follow "suppose," on Page 219.
  - "againt" changed to "against" on Page 221.
  - Removed quotation mark after "position," on Page 225.
  - "brough" changed to "brought" on Page 225.
  - Question mark changed to a period after "seat" and following
    letter capitalized on Page 232.
  - "then" changed to "them" on Page 242.
  - Quote added after "behind." on Page 247.
  - Quotation mark added after "then?" on Page 254.
  - Period added after "start" on Page 260.
  - "back ground" changed to "background" on Page 262.
  - Quote added after "Trent?" on Page 265.
  - "draw" changed to "drew" on Page 276.
  - Quotes removed after "Because" and before "your" on Page 278.
  - Question mark changed to period after "heard" on Page 279.
  - Comma changed to a period after "Lesley" on Page 280.
  - Question mark changed to comma after "accommodated" on Page 282.
  - Quote added after "him." on Page .284
  - "night" changed to "night's" on Page 286.
  - "afaid" changed to "afraid" on Page 289.
  - Quote removed after "forgive?" on Page 292.
  - "God God" changed to "Good God" on Page 305.
  - "need need" changed to "need" on Page 308.
  - "nowa-days" The wind was blowing strongly from the southwest, with
    a heavy surge
  running. This proved fortunate, for the better
  testing of the efficacy of the system.
  In the first trial, a boat was lowered
  from the steamer by one man, with several
  persons on board, and alighted on the
  water, abaft of the larboard paddle-box,
  with the utmost safety and apparent comfort,
  the tackle being released momentarily by the weight of the boat's
descent, the vessel at the time steaming at the rate of 12-1/2 knots
per hour..