Love a horse and a hound, but no part of a swine.

The Gipsies Metamorphosed.

James's own proposed banquet for the Devil was a loin of pork and a poll of ling, with a pipe
of tobacco for digestion.

NOTE 22

In the number of persons of all ranks who assembled at the same table, though by no means to
discuss the same fare, the Highland chiefs only retained a custom which had been formerly universally
observed throughout Scotland. 'I myself,' says the traveller, Fynes Morrison, in the end of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, the scene being the Lowlands of Scotland, 'was at a knight's house,
who had many servants to attend him, that brought in his meat with their heads covered with
blue caps, the table being more than half furnished with great platters of porridge, each having
a little piece of sodden meat. And when the table was served, the servants did sit down with
us; but the upper mess, instead of porridge, had a pullet, with some prunes in the broth.'--Travels,
p. 155. 

I shall demonstrate to the judicious, that France and Rome are at the bottom of this horrid conspiracy
against me; and that culprit aforesaid is a popish emissary, has paid his visits to St. Germains,
and is now in the measures of Lewis XIV.
Lord Lovat, who knew well how to feed the vanity and restrain the appetites of his clansmen,
allowed each sturdy Fraser who had the slightest pretensions to be a Duinhewassel the full
honour of the sitting, but at the same time took care that his young kinsmen did not acquire
at his table any taste for outlandish luxuries. His lordship was always ready with some honourable
apology why foreign wines and French brandy, delicacies which he conceived might sap the hardy
habits of his cousins, should not circulate past an assigned point on the table.

NOTE 23

In the Irish ballads relating to Fion (the Fingal of Mac-Pherson) there occurs, as in the primitive
poetry of most nations, a cycle of heroes, each of whom has some distinguishing attribute;
upon these qualities, and the adventures of those possessing them, many proverbs are formed,
which are still current in the Highlands. Among other characters, Conan is distinguished as
in some respects a kind of Thersites, but brave and daring even to rashness. He had made a
vow that he would never take a blow without returning it; and having, like other heroes of
antiquity, descended to the infernal regions, he received a cuff from the Arch-fiend who presided
there, which he instantly returned, using the expression in the text. Sometimes the proverb
is worded thus--'Claw for claw, and the devil take the shortest nails, as Conan said to the devil.'

NOTE 24

The description of the waterfall mentioned in this chapter is taken from that of Ledeard, at
the farm so called, on the northern side of Lochard, and near the head of the lake, four or
five miles from Aberfoyle. It is upon a small scale, but otherwise one of the most exquisite
cascades it is possible to behold. The appearance of Flora with the harp, as described, has
been justly censured as too theatrical and affected for the lady-like simplicity of her character.
But something may be allowed to her French education, in which point and striking effect always
make a considerable object.

NOTE 25

The author has been sometimes accused of confounding fiction with reality. He therefore thinks
it necessary to state that the circumstance of the hunting described in the text as preparatory
to the insurrection of 1745 is, so far as he knows, entirely imaginary. But it is well known
such a great hunting was held in the Forest of Brae-Mar, under the auspices of the Earl of
Mar, as preparatory to the Rebellion of 1715; and most of the Highland chieftains who afterwards
engaged in that civil commotion were present on this occasion.

GLOSSARY

A', all.

ABOON, abune, above.

