Jackson drew back about three miles, where he halted and threw up a long line of breastworks,
reaching from the river to the morass; he left a body of mounted riflemen to watch the British.
All the English troops reached the field on the day after the fight; but the rough handling
that the foremost had received made them cautious about advancing. Moreover, the left division
was kept behind the levee all day by the Carolina, which opened upon them whenever they tried
to get away; nor was it till dark that they made their escape out of range of her cannon. Christmas-day
opened drearily enough for the invaders. Although they were well inland, the schooner, by greatly
elevating her guns, could sometimes reach them, and she annoyed them all through the day [Footnote:
"While sitting at table, a loud shriek was heard.... A shot had taken effect on the body of
an unfortunate soldier... who was fairly cut in two at the lower portion of the belly!" (Gleig,
p. 306.) ]; and as the Americans had cut the levee in their front, it at one time seemed likely
that they would be drowned out. However, matters now took a turn for the better. The river
was so low that the cutting of the levee instead of flooding the plain [Footnote: Latour, 113.]
merely filled the shrunken bayous, and rendered it easy for the British to bring up their heavy
guns; and on the same day their trusted leader, Sir Edward Packenham, arrived to take command
in person, and his presence gave new life to the whole army. A battery was thrown up during
the two succeeding nights on the brink of the river opposite to where the Carolina lay; and
at dawn a heavy cannonade of red-hot shot and shell was opened upon her from eleven guns and
a mortar. [Footnote: Gleig, 307. The Americans thought the battery consisted of 5 18- and 12-pounders;
Gleig says 9 field-pieces (9--and 6-pounders), 2 howitzers, and a mortar.] She responded briskly,
but very soon caught fire and blew up, to the vengeful joy of the troops whose bane she had
been for the past few days. Her destruction removed the last obstacle to the immediate advance
of the army; but that night her place was partly taken by the mounted riflemen, who rode down
to the British lines, shot the sentries, engaged the out-posts, and kept the whole camp in
a constant state of alarm. [Footnote: Gleig, 310.] In the morning Sir Edward Packenham put
his army in motion, and marched on New Orleans. When he had gone nearly three miles he suddenly,
and to his great surprise, stumbled on the American army. Jackson's men had worked like beavers,
and his breastworks were already defended by over three thousand fighting men, [Footnote: 3,282
men in all, according to the Adjutant-General's return for Dec. 28, 1814.] and by half a dozen
guns, and moreover were flanked by the corvette Louisiana, anchored in the stream. No sooner
had the heads of the British columns appeared than they were driven back by the fire of the
American batteries; the field-pieces, mortars, and rocket guns were then brought up, and a
sharp artillery duel took place. The motley crew of the Louisiana handled their long ship guns
with particular effect; the British rockets proved of but little service [Footnote: Latour,
121.]; and after a stiff fight, in which they had two field-pieces and a light mortar dismounted,
[Footnote: Gleig, 314. The official returns show a loss of 18 Americans and 58 British, the
latter suffering much less than Jackson supposed. Lossing, in his "Field Book of the War of
1812," not only greatly overestimates the British loss, but speaks as if this was a serious
attack, which it was not. Packenham's army, while marching, unexpectedly came upon the American
intrenchment, and recoiled at once, after seeing that his field-pieces were unable to contend
with the American artillery.] the British artillerymen fell back on the infantry. Then Packenham
drew off his whole army out of cannon shot, and pitched his camp facing the intrenched lines
of the Americans. For the next three days the British battalions lay quietly in front of their
foe, like wolves who have brought to bay a gray boar, and crouch just out of reach of his tusks,
waiting a chance to close in.

Packenham, having once tried the strength of Jackson's position, made up his mind to breach
his works and silence his guns with a regular battering train. Heavy cannon were brought up
from the ships, and a battery was established on the bank to keep in check the Louisiana. Then,
on the night of the last day of the year, strong parties of workmen were sent forward, who,
shielded by the darkness, speedily threw up stout earthworks, and mounted therein fourteen
heavy guns, [Footnote: 10 long 18s and 4 24-pound carronades (James, ii, 368). Gleig says (p.
318), "6 batteries, mounting 30 pieces of heavy cannon." This must include the "brigade of
field-pieces" of which James speaks. 9 of these, 9--and 6-pounders, and 2 howitzers, had been
used in the attack on the Carolina; and there were also 2 field-mortars and 2 3-pounders present;
and there must have been 1 other field-piece with the army, to make up the 30 of which Gleig
speaks.] to face the thirteen [Footnote: viz.: 1 long 32, 3 long 24s, 1 long 18, 3 long 12s,
3 long 6s, a 6-inch howitzer, and a small carronade (Latour, 147); and on the same day Patterson
had in his water-battery 1 long 24 and 2 long 12s (see his letter of Jan. 2d), making a total
of 16 American guns.] mounted in Jackson's lines, which were but three hundred yards distant.

New Year's day dawned very misty. As soon as the haze cleared off the British artillerymen
opened with a perfect hail of balls, accompanied by a cloud of rockets and mortar shells. The
Americans were taken by surprise, but promptly returned the fire, with equal fury and greater
skill. Their guns were admirably handled; some by the cool New England seamen lately forming
the crew of the Carolina, others by the fierce creole privateersmen of Lafitte, and still others
by trained artillerymen of the regular army. They were all old hands, who in their time had
done their fair share of fighting, and were not to be flurried by any attack, however unexpected.
The British cannoneers plied their guns like fiends, and fast and thick fell their shot; more
slowly but with surer aim, their opponents answered them. [Footnote: The British historian,
Alison, says ("History of Europe," by Sir Archibald Alison, 9th edition, Edinburgh and London,
1852, vol. xii. p. 141): "It was soon found that the enemy's guns were so superior in weight
and number, that nothing was to be expected from that species of attack." As shown above, at
this time Jackson had on both sides of the river 16 guns; the British, according to both James
and Gleig, between 20 and 30. Jackson's long guns were 1 32, 4 24s, 1 18, 5 12s, and 3 6s,
throwing in all 224 pounds; Packenham had 10 long 18s. 2 long 3s, and from 6 to 10 long 9s
and 6s, thus throwing between 228 and 258 pounds of shot; while Jackson had but 1 howitzer
and 1 carronade to oppose 4 carronades, 2 howitzers, 2 mortars, and a dozen rocket guns; so
in both number and weight of guns the British were greatly superior.] The cotton bales used
in the American embrasures caught fire, and blew up two powder caissons; while the sugar hogsheads
of which the British batteries were partly composed were speedily shattered and splintered
in all directions. Though the British champions fought with unflagging courage and untiring
energy, and though they had long been versed in war, yet they seemed to lack the judgment to
see and correct their faults, and most of their shot went too high. [Footnote: In strong contrast
to Alison, Admiral Codrington, an eye-witness, states the true reason of the British failure:
("Memoir of Admiral Sir Edward Codrington," by Lady Bourchier, London, 1873, vol. i, p. 334.)
"On the 1st we had our batteries ready, by severe labor, in situation, from which the artillery
people were, as a matter of course, to destroy and silence the opposing batteries, and give
opportunity for a well-arranged storm. But, instead, not a gun of the enemy appeared to suffer,
and our own firing too high was not discovered till" too late. "Such a failure in this boasted
arm was not to be expected, and I think it a blot on the artillery escutcheon."] On the other
hand, the old sea-dogs and trained regulars who held the field against them, not only fought
their guns well and skilfully from the beginning, but all through the action kept coolly correcting
their faults and making more sure their aim. Still, the fight was stiff and well contested.
Two of the American guns were disabled and 34 of their men were killed or wounded. But one
by one the British cannon were silenced or dismounted, and by noon their gunners had all been
driven away, with the loss of 78 of their number.

The Louisiana herself took no part in this action. Patterson had previously landed some of
her guns on the opposite bank of the river, placing them in a small redoubt. To match these
the British also threw up some works and placed in them heavy guns, and all through New Year's
day a brisk cannonade was kept up across the river between the two water-batteries, but with
very little damage to either side.

For a week after this failure the army of the invaders lay motionless facing the Americans.
In the morning and evening the defiant, rolling challenge of the English drums came throbbing
up through the gloomy cypress swamps to where the grim riflemen of Tennessee were lying behind
their log breastworks, and both day and night the stillness was at short intervals broken by
the sullen boom of the great guns which, under Jackson's orders, kept up a never-ending fire
on the leaguering camp of his foes. [Footnote: Gleig, 322.] Nor could the wearied British even
sleep undisturbed; all through the hours of darkness the outposts were engaged in a most harassing
bush warfare by the backwoodsmen, who shot the sentries, drove in the pickets, and allowed
none of those who were on guard a moment's safety or freedom from alarm. [Footnote: Gleig, 323.]

But Packenham was all the while steadily preparing for his last and greatest stroke. He had
determined to make an assault in force as soon as the expected reinforcements came up; nor,
in the light of his past experience in conflict with foes of far greater military repute than
those now before him, was this a rash resolve. He had seen the greatest of Napoleon's marshals,
each in turn, defeated once and again, and driven in headlong flight over the Pyrenees by the
Duke of Wellington; now he had under him the flower of the troops who had won those victories;
was it to be supposed for a moment that such soldiers [Footnote: Speaking of Souk's overthrow
a few months previous to this battle, Napier says (v, 209): "He was opposed to one of the greatest
generals of the world, at the head of unconquerable troops. That there would be loss of life
in such an assault was certain; but was loss of life to daunt men who had seen the horrible
slaughter through which the stormers moved on to victory at Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajos, and San
Sebastian? At the battle of Toulouse an English army, of which Packenham's troops then formed
part, had driven Soult from a stronger position than was now to be assailed, though he held
it with a veteran infantry. Of a surety, the dashing general who had delivered the decisive
blow on the stricken field of Salamanca, [Footnote: It was about 5 o'clock when Packenham fell
upon Thomieres.... From the chief to the lowest soldier, all [of the French] felt that they
were lost, and in an instant Packenham, the most frank and gallant of men, commenced the battle.
The British columns formed lines as they marched, and the French gunners, standing up manfully
for the honor of their country, sent showers of grape into the advancing masses, while a crowd
of light troops poured in a fire of musketry, under cover of which the main body endeavored
to display a front. But, bearing onwards through the skirmishers with the might of a giant,
Packenham broke the half-formed lines into fragments, and sent the whole in confusion upon
the advancing supports... Packenham, bearing onwards with conquering violence,... formed one
formidable line two miles in advance of where Packenham had first attacked; and that impetuous
officer, with unmitigated strength, still pressed forward, spreading terror and disorder on
the enemy's left. (Napier, iv, 57, 58. 59.)] who had taken part in the rout of the ablest generals
and steadiest soldiers of Continental Europe, was not the man to flinch from a motley array
of volunteers, militia, and raw regulars, led by a grizzled old bush-fighter, whose name had
never been heard of outside of his own swamps, and there only as the savage destroyer of some
scarcely more savage Indian tribes. Moreover, Packenham was planning a flank attack. Under
his orders a canal was being dug from the head of the bayou up which the British had come,
across the plain to the Mississippi. This was to permit the passage of a number of ships' boats,
on which one division was to be ferried to the opposite bank of the river, where it was to
move up, and, by capturing the breastworks and water-battery on the west side, flank Jackson's
main position on the east side. [Footnote: "A particular feature in the assault was our cutting
a canal into the Mississippi... to convey a force to the right bank, which... might surprise
the enemy's batteries on that side. I do not know how far this measure was relied on by the
general, but, as he ordered and made his assault at daylight, I imagine he did not place much
dependence upon it." (Codrington, i, 335.) ] When this canal was nearly finished the expected
reinforcements, two thousand strong, under General Lambert, arrived, and by the evening of
the 7th all was ready for the attack, which was to be made at daybreak on the following morning.
Packenham had under him nearly 10,000 [Footnote: James (ii, 373) says the British "rank and
file" amounted to 8,153 men, including 1,200 seamen and marines. The only other place where
he speaks of the latter is in recounting the attack on the right bank, when he says "about
200" were with Thornton, while both the admirals, Cochrane and Codrington, make the number
300; so he probably underestimates their number throughout, and at least 300 can be added,
making 1,500 sailors and marines, and a total of 8,453. This number is corroborated by Major
McDougal. the officer who received Sir Edward's body in his arms when was killed; he says (as
quoted in the "Memoirs of British Generals Distinguished During the Peninsular War," by John
William Cole, London. 1856, vol. ii, p. 364) that after the battle and the loss of 2,036 men,
"we had still an effective force of 6,400," making a total before the attack of 8,436 rank
and file. Calling it 8,450, and adding (see ante, note 10) 13.3 per cent, for the officers,
sergeants, and trumpeters, we get about 9,600 men.] fighting men; 1,500 of these, under Colonel
Thornton were to cross the river and make the attack on the west bank. Packenham himself was
to superintend the main assault, on the east bank, which was to be made by the British right
under General Gibbs, while the left moved forward under General Keane, and General Lambert
commanded the reserve.[Footnote: Letter of Major-General John Lambert to Earl Bathurst, Jan.
10, 1815.] Jackson's [Footnote: 4,698 on the east bank, according to the official report of
Adjutant-General Robert Butler, for the morning of January 8th. The details are as follow:

At batteries..................................................... 154 Command of Col. Ross
(671 regulars and 742 Louisiana militia)... 1413 Command of General Carroll (Tennesseeans,
and somewhat under 500 Kentuckians).................................................... 1562
General Coffee's command (Tennesseeans, and about 250 Louisiana militia)........................................................
813 Major Hind's dragoons...........................................  230 Col. Slaughter's
command........................................  526

Total,                                                          4,698

These figures tally almost exactly with those given by Major Latour, except that he omits all
reference to Col. Slaughter's command, thus reducing the number to about 4,100. Nor can I anywhere
find any allusion to Slaughter's command as taking part in the battle; and it is possible that
these troops were the 500 Kentuckians ordered across the river by Jackson; in which case his
whole force but slightly exceeded 5,000 men.

On the west bank there were 546 Louisiana militia--260 of the First regiment, 176 of the Second,
and 110 of the Sixth. Jackson had ordered 500 Kentucky troops to be sent to reinforce them;
only 400 started, of whom but 180 had arms. Seventy more received arms from the Naval Arsenal;
and thus a total of 250 armed men were added to the 546 already on the west bank.] position
was held by a total of 5,500 men. [Footnote: Two thousand Kentucky militia had arrived, but
in wretched plight; only 500 had arms, though pieces were found for about 250 more; and thus
Jackson's army received an addition of 750 very badly disciplined soldiers.

"Hardly one third of the Kentucky troops, so long expected, are armed, and the arms they have
are not fit for use." (Letter of Gen. Jackson to the Secretary of War, Jan. 3d.) Having kept
a constant watch on the British, Jackson had rightly concluded that they would make the main
attack on the east bank, and had, accordingly, kept the bulk of his force on that side. His
works consisted simply of a mud breastwork, with a ditch in front of it, which stretched in
a straight line from the river on his right across the plain, and some distance into the morass
that sheltered his left. There was a small, unfinished redoubt in front of the breastworks
on the river bank. Thirteen pieces of artillery were mounted on the works. [Footnote: Almost
all British writers underestimate their own force and enormously magnify that of the Americans.
Alison, for example, quadruples Jackson's relative strength, writing: "About 6,000 combatants
were on the British side; a slender force to attack double their number, intrenched to the
teeth in works bristling with bayonets and loaded with heavy artillery." Instead of double,
he should have said half; the bayonets only "bristled" metaphorically, as less than a quarter
of the Americans were armed with them; and the British breaching batteries had a heavier "load"
of artillery than did the American lines. Gleig says that "to come nearer the truth" he "will
choose a middle course, and suppose their whole force to be about 25,000 men," (p. 325). Gleig,
by the way, in speaking of the battle itself, mentions one most startling evolution of the
Americans, namely, that "without so much as lifting their faces above the ramparts, they swung
their firelocks by one arm over the wall and discharged them" at the British. If any one will
try to perform this feat, with a long, heavy rifle held in one hand, and with his head hid
behind a wall, so as not to see the object aimed at, he will get a good idea of the likelihood
of any man in his senses attempting it.] On the right was posted the Seventh regular infantry,
430 strong; then came 740 Louisiana militia (both French Creoles and men of color, and comprising
30 New Orleans riflemen, who were Americans), and 240 regulars of the Forty-fourth regiment;
while the rest of the line was formed by nearly 500 Kentuckians and over 1,600 Tennesseeans,
under Carroll and Coffee, with 250 creole militia in the morass on the extreme left, to guard
the head of a bayou. In the rear were 230 dragoons, chiefly from Mississippi, and some other
troops in reserve; making in all 4,700 men on the east bank. The works on the west bank were
farther down stream, and were very much weaker. Commodore Patterson had thrown up a water-battery
of nine guns, three long 24's and six long 12's, pointing across the river, and intended to
take in flank any foe attacking Jackson. This battery was protected by some strong earthworks,
mounting three field-pieces, which were thrown up just below it, and stretched from the river
about 200 yards into the plain. The line of defence was extended by a ditch for about a quarter
of a mile farther, when it ended, and from there to the morass, half a mile distant, there
were no defensive works at all. General Morgan, a very poor militia officer, [Footnote: He
committed every possible fault, except showing lack of courage. He placed his works at a very
broad instead of a narrow part of the plain, against the advice of Latour, who had Jackson's
approval (Latour, 167). He continued his earthworks but a very short distance inland, making
them exceedingly strong in front, and absolutely defenceless on account of their flanks being
unprotected. He did not mount the lighter guns of the water-battery on his lines, as he ought
to have done. Having a force of 800 men, too weak anyhow, he promptly divided it; and, finally,
in the fight itself, he stationed a small number of absolutely raw troops in a thin line on
the open, with their flank in the air; while a much larger number of older troops were kept
to defend a much shorter line, behind a strong breastwork, with their flanks covered.] was
in command, with a force of 550 Louisiana militia, some of them poorly armed; and on the night
before the engagement he was reinforced by 250 Kentuckians, poorly armed, undisciplined, and
worn out with fatigue. [Footnote: Latour, 170.]

All through the night of the 7th a strange, murmurous clangor arose from the British camp,
and was borne on the moist air to the lines of their slumbering foes. The blows of pickaxe
and spade as the ground was thrown up into batteries by gangs of workmen, the rumble of the
artillery as it was placed in position, the measured tread of the battalions as they shifted
their places or marched off under Thornton,--all these and the thousand other sounds of warlike
preparation were softened and blended by the distance into one continuous humming murmur, which
struck on the ears of the American sentries with ominous foreboding for the morrow. By midnight
Jackson had risen and was getting every thing in readiness to hurl back the blow that he rightly
judged was soon to fall on his front. Before the dawn broke his soldiery was all on the alert.
The bronzed and brawny seamen were grouped in clusters around the great guns. The creole soldiers
came of a race whose habit it has ever been to take all phases of life joyously; but that morning
their gayety was tempered by a dark undercurrent of fierce anxiety. They had more at stake
than any other men on the field. They were fighting for their homes; they were fighting for
their wives and their daughters. They well knew that the men they were to face were very brave
in battle and very cruel in victory [Footnote: To prove this, it is only needful to quote from
the words of the Duke of Wellington himself; referring, it must be remembered, to their conduct
in a friendly, not a hostile country. "It is impossible to describe to you the irregularities
and outrages committed by the troops. They are never out of sight of their officers, I might
almost say, out of sight of the commanding officers of the regiments that outrages are not
committed... There is not an outrage of any description which has not been committed on a people
who have uniformly received them as friends." "I really believe that more plunder and outrages
have been committed by this army than by any other that ever was in the field." "A detachment
seldom marches... that a murder, or a highway robbery, or some act of outrage is not committed
by the British soldiers composing it. They have killed eight people since the army returned
to Portugal." "They really forget every thing when plunder or wine is within reach."]; they
well knew the fell destruction and nameless woe that awaited their city should the English
take it at the sword's point. They feared not for themselves; but in the hearts of the bravest
and most careless there lurked a dull terror of what that day might bring upon those they loved.
[Footnote: That these fears were just can be seen by the following quotations, from the works
of a British officer, General Napier, who was an eye-witness of what he describes. It must
be remembered that Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajos, and San Sebastian were friendly towns, only the
garrisons being hostile. "Now commenced that wild and desperate wickedness which tarnished
the lustre of the soldiers' heroism. All, indeed, were not alike, for hundreds risked and many
lost their lives in striving to stop the violence; but the madness generally prevailed, and
as the worst men were leaders here, all the dreadful passions of human nature were displayed.
Shameless rapacity, brutal intemperance, savage lust, cruelty and murder, shrieks and piteous
lamentations, groans, shouts, imprecations, the hissing of fires bursting from the houses,
the crashing of doors and windows, the reports of muskets used in violence, resounded for two
days and nights in the streets of Badajos. On the third, when the city was sacked, when the
soldiers were exhausted by their own excesses, the tumult rather subsided than was quelled."
(Vol. iii, 377). And again: "This storm seemed to be a signal from hell for the perpetration
of villainy which would have shamed the most ferocious barbarians of antiquity. Packenham himself
would have certainly done all in his power to prevent excesses, and has been foully slandered
by many early American writers. Alluding to these, Napier remarks, somewhat caustically: "Pre-eminently
distinguished for detestion of inhumanity and outrage, he has been, with astounding falsehood,
represented as instigating his troops to the most infamous excesses; but from a people holding
millions of their fellow-beings in the most horrible slavery, while they prate and vaunt of
liberty until all men turn in loathing from the sickening folly, what can be expected?" (Vol.
v, p. 31.) Napier possessed to a very eminent degree the virtue of being plain-spoken. Elsewhere
(iii, 450), after giving a most admirably fair and just account of the origin of the Anglo-American
war, he alludes, with a good deal of justice, to the Americans of 1812, as "a people who (notwithstanding
the curse of black slavery which clings to them, adding the most horrible ferocity to the peculiar
baseness of their mercantile spirit, and rendering their republican vanity ridiculous) do,
in their general government, uphold civil institutions which have startled the crazy despotisms
of Europe."] The Tennesseeans were troubled by no such misgivings. In saturnine, confident
silence they lolled behind their mud walls, or, leaning on their long rifles, peered out into
the gray fog with savage, reckless eyes. So, hour after hour, the two armies stood facing each
other in the darkness, waiting for the light of day.

At last the sun rose, and as its beams struggled through the morning mist they glinted on the
sharp steel bayonets of the English, where their scarlet ranks were drawn up in battle array,
but four hundred yards from the American breastworks. There stood the matchless infantry of
the island king, in the pride of their strength and the splendor of their martial glory; and
as the haze cleared away they moved forward, in stern silence, broken only by the angry, snarling
notes of the brazen bugles. At once the American artillery leaped into furious life; and, ready
and quick, the more numerous cannon of the invaders responded from their hot, feverish lips.
Unshaken amid the tumult of that iron storm the heavy red column moved steadily on toward the
left of the American line, where the Tennesseeans were standing in motionless, grim expectancy.
Three fourths of the open space was crossed, and the eager soldiers broke into a run. Then
a fire of hell smote the British column. From the breastwork in front of them the white smoke
curled thick into the air, as rank after rank the wild marksmen of the backwoods rose and fired,
aiming low and sure. As stubble is withered by flame, so withered the British column under
that deadly fire; and, aghast at the slaughter, the reeling files staggered and gave back.
Packenham, fit captain for his valorous host, rode to the front, and the troops, rallying round
him, sprang forward with ringing cheers. But once again the pealing rifle-blast beat in their
faces; and the life of their dauntless leader went out before its scorching and fiery breath.
With him fell the other general who was with the column, and all of the men who were leading
it on; and, as a last resource, Keane brought up his stalwart Highlanders; but in vain the
stubborn mountaineers rushed on, only to die as their comrades had died before them, with unconquerable
courage, facing the foe, to the last. Keane himself was struck down; and the shattered wrecks
of the British column, quailing before certain destruction, turned and sought refuge beyond
reach of the leaden death that overwhelmed their comrades. Nor did it fare better with the
weaker force that was to assail the right of the American line. This was led by the dashing
Colonel Rennie, who, when the confusion caused by the main attack was at its height, rushed
forward with impetuous bravery along the river bank. With such headlong fury did he make the
assault, that the rush of his troops took the outlying redoubt, whose defenders, regulars and
artillerymen, fought to the last with their bayonets and clubbed muskets, and were butchered
to a man. Without delay Rennie flung his men at the breastworks behind, and, gallantly leading
them, sword in hand, he, and all around him, fell, riddled through and through by the balls
of the riflemen. Brave though they were, the British soldiers could not stand against the singing,
leaden hail, for if they stood it was but to die. So in rout and wild dismay they fled back
along the river bank, to the main army. For some time afterward the British artillery kept
up its fire, but was gradually silenced; the repulse was entire and complete along the whole
line; nor did the cheering news of success brought from the west bank give any hope to the
British commanders, stunned by their crushing overthrow. [Footnote: According to their official
returns the British loss was 2,036; the American accounts, of course, make it much greater.
Latour is the only trustworthy American contemporary historian of this war, and even he at
times absurdly exaggerates the British force and loss. Most of the other American "histories"
of that period were the most preposterously bombastic works that ever saw print. But as regards
this battle, none of them are as bad as even such British historians as Alison; the exact reverse
being the case in many other battles, notably Lake Erie. The devices each author adopts to
lessen the seeming force of his side are generally of much the same character. For instance,
Latour says that 800 of Jackson's men were employed on works at the rear, on guard duty, etc.,
and deducts them; James, for precisely similar reasons, deducts 853 men: by such means one
reduces Jackson's total force to 4,000, and the other gives Packenham but 7,300. Only 2,000
Americans were actually engaged on the east banks.]

Meanwhile Colonel Thornton's attack on the opposite side had been successful, but had been
delayed beyond the originally intended hour. The sides of the canal by which the boats were
to be brought through to the Mississippi caved in, and choked the passage, [Footnote: Codrington,
i, 386.] so that only enough got through to take over a half of Thornton's force. With these,
seven hundred in number, [Footnote: James says 298 soldiers and about 200 sailors; but Admiral
Cochrane in his letter (Jan. 18th) says 600 men, half sailors; and Admiral Codrington also
(p. 335) gives this number, 300 being sailors: adding 13 1/3 per cent. for the officers, sergeants,
and trumpeters, we get 680 men.] he crossed, but as he did not allow for the current, it carried
him down about two miles below the proper landing-place. Meanwhile General Morgan, having under
him eight hundred militia [Footnote: 796. (Latour, 164-172.)] whom it was of the utmost importance
to have kept together, promptly divided them and sent three hundred of the rawest and most
poorly armed down to meet the enemy in the open. The inevitable result was their immediate
rout and dispersion; about one hundred got back to Morgan's lines. He then had six hundred
men, all militia, to oppose to seven hundred regulars. So he stationed the four hundred best
disciplined men to defend the two hundred yards of strong breastworks, mounting three guns,
which covered his left; while the two hundred worst disciplined were placed to guard six hundred
yards of open ground on his right, with their flank resting in air, and entirely unprotected.
[Footnote: Report of Court of Inquiry, Maj.-Gen. Wm. Carroll presiding.] This truly phenomenal
arrangement ensured beforehand the certain defeat of his troops, no matter how well they fought;
but, as it turned out, they hardly fought at all. Thornton, pushing up the river, first attacked
the breastwork in front, but was checked by a hot fire; deploying his men he then sent a strong
force to march round and take Morgan on his exposed right flank. [Footnote: Letter of Col.
W. Thornton, Jan. 8. 1815.] There, the already demoralized Kentucky militia, extended in thin
order across an open space, outnumbered, and taken in flank by regular troops, were stampeded
at once, and after firing a single volley they took to their heels. [Footnote: Letter of Commodore
Patterson, Jan. 13, 1815.] This exposed the flank of the better disciplined creoles, who were
also put to flight; but they kept some order and were soon rallied. [Footnote: Alison outdoes
himself in recounting this feat. Having reduced the British force to 340 men, he says they
captured the redoubt, "though defended by 22 guns and 1,700 men." Of course, it was physically
impossible for the water-battery to take part in the defence; so there were but 3 guns, and
by halving the force on one side and trebling it on the other, he makes the relative strength
of the Americans just sixfold what it was,--and is faithfully followed by other British writers.]
In bitter rage Patterson spiked the guns of his water-battery and marched off with his sailors,
unmolested. The American loss had been slight, and that of their opponents not heavy, though
among their dangerously wounded was Colonel Thornton.

This success, though a brilliant one, and a disgrace to the American arms, had no effect on
the battle. Jackson at once sent over reinforcements under the famous French general, Humbert,
and preparations were forthwith made to retake the lost position. But it was already abandoned,
and the force that had captured it had been recalled by Lambert, when he found that the place
could not be held without additional troops.[Footnote: The British Col. Dickson, who had been
sent over to inspect, reported that 2,000 men would be needed to hold the battery; so Lambert
ordered the British to retire. (Lambert's letter, Jan. 10th.)] The total British loss on both
sides of the river amounted to over two thousand men, the vast majority of whom had fallen
in the attack on the Tennesseeans, and most of the remainder in the attack made by Colonel
Rennie. The Americans had lost but seventy men, of whom but thirteen fell in the main attack.
On the east bank, neither the creole militia nor the Forty-fourth regiment had taken any part
in the combat.

The English had thrown for high stakes and had lost every thing, and they knew it. There was
nothing to hope for left. Nearly a fourth of their fighting men had fallen; and among the officers
the proportion was far larger. Of their four generals, Packenham was dead, Gibbs dying, Keane
disabled, and only Lambert left. Their leader, the ablest officers, and all the flower of their
bravest men were lying, stark and dead, on the bloody plain before them; and their bodies were
doomed to crumble into mouldering dust on the green fields where they had fought and had fallen.
It was useless to make another trial. They had learned to their bitter cost, that no troops,
however steady, could advance over open ground against such a fire as came from Jackson's lines.
Their artillerymen had three times tried conclusions with the American gunners, and each time
they had been forced to acknowledge themselves worsted. They would never have another chance
to repeat their flank attack, for Jackson had greatly strengthened and enlarged the works on
the west bank, and had seen that they were fully manned and ably commanded. Moreover, no sooner
had the assault failed, than the Americans again began their old harassing warfare. The heaviest
cannon, both from the breastwork and the water-battery, played on the British camp, both night
and day, giving the army no rest, and the mounted riflemen kept up a trifling, but incessant
and annoying, skirmishing with their pickets and outposts.

The British could not advance, and it was worse than useless for them to stay where they were,
for though they, from time to time, were reinforced, yet Jackson's forces augmented faster
than theirs, and every day lessened the numerical inequality between the two armies. There
was but one thing left to do, and that was to retreat. They had no fear of being attacked in
turn. The British soldiers were made of too good stuff to be in the least cowed or cast down
even by such a slaughtering defeat as that they had just suffered, and nothing would have given
them keener pleasure than to have had a fair chance at their adversaries in the open; but this
chance was just what Jackson had no idea of giving them. His own army, though in part as good
as an army could be, consisted also in part of untrained militia, while not a quarter of his
men had bayonets; and the wary old chief, for all his hardihood, had far too much wit to hazard
such a force in fight with a superior number of seasoned veterans, thoroughly equipped, unless
on his own ground and in his own manner. So he contented himself with keeping a sharp watch
on Lambert; and on the night of January 18th the latter deserted his position, and made a very
skilful and rapid retreat, leaving eighty wounded men and fourteen pieces of cannon behind
him. [Footnote: Letter of General Jackson, Jan. 19th, and of General Lambert, Jan. 28th.] A
few stragglers were captured on land, and, while the troops were embarking, a number of barges,
with over a hundred prisoners, were cut out by some American seamen in row-boats; but the bulk
of the army reached the transports unmolested. At the same time, a squadron of vessels, which
had been unsuccessfully bombarding Fort Saint Philip for a week or two, and had been finally
driven off when the fort got a mortar large enough to reach them with, also returned; and the
whole fleet set sail for Mobile. The object was to capture Fort Bowyer, which contained less
than four hundred men, and, though formidable on its sea-front, [Footnote: "Towards the sea
its fortifications are respectable enough; but on the land side it is little better than a
block-house. (Gleig, 357.)

General Jackson impliedly censures the garrison for surrendering so quickly; but in such a
fort it was absolutely impossible to act otherwise, and not the slightest stain rests upon
the fort's defenders.] was incapable of defence when regularly attacked on its land side. The
British landed, February 8th, some 1,500 men, broke ground, and made approaches; for four days
the work went on amid a continual fire, which killed or wounded 11 Americans and 31 British;
by that time the battering guns were in position and the fort capitulated, February 12th, the
garrison marching out with the honors of war. Immediately afterward the news of peace arrived
and all hostilities terminated.

In spite of the last trifling success, the campaign had been to the British both bloody and
disastrous. It did not affect the results of the war; and the decisive battle itself was a
perfectly useless shedding of blood, for peace had been declared before it was fought. Nevertheless,
it was not only glorious but profitable to the United States. Louisiana was saved from being
severely ravaged, and New Orleans from possible destruction; and after our humiliating defeats
in trying to repel the invasions of Virginia and Maryland, the signal victory of New Orleans
was really almost a necessity for the preservation of the national honor. This campaign was
the great event of the war, and in it was fought the most important battle as regards numbers
that took place during the entire struggle; and the fact that we were victorious, not only
saved our self-respect at home, but also gave us prestige abroad which we should otherwise
have totally lacked. It could not be said to entirely balance the numerous defeats that we
had elsewhere suffered on land--defeats which had so far only been offset by Harrison's victory
in 1813 and the campaign in Lower Canada in 1814--but it at any rate went a long way toward
making the score even.

Jackson is certainly by all odds the most prominent figure that appeared during this war, and
stands head and shoulders above any other commander, American or British, that it produced.
It will be difficult, in all history, to show a parallel to the feat that he performed. In
three weeks' fighting, with a force largely composed of militia, he utterly defeated and drove
away an army twice the size of his own, composed of veteran troops, and led by one of the ablest
of European generals. During the whole campaign he only erred once, and that was in putting
General Morgan, a very incompetent officer, in command of the forces on the west bank. He suited
his movements admirably to the various exigencies that arose. The promptness and skill with
which he attacked, as soon as he knew of the near approach of the British, undoubtedly saved
the city; for their vanguard was so roughly handled that, instead of being able to advance
at once, they were forced to delay three days, during which time Jackson entrenched himself
in a position from which he was never driven. But after this attack the offensive would have
been not only hazardous, but useless, and accordingly Jackson, adopting the mode of warfare
which best suited the ground he was on and the troops he had under him, forced the enemy always
to fight him where he was strongest, and confined himself strictly to the pure defensive--a
system condemned by most European authorities, [Footnote: Thus Napier says (vol. v, p. 25):
"Soult fared as most generals will who seek by extensive lines to supply the want of numbers
or of hardiness in the troops. Against rude commanders and undisciplined soldiers, lines may
avail; seldom against accomplished commanders, never when the assailants are the better soldiers."
And again (p. 150), "Offensive operations must be the basis of a good defensive system."] but
which has at times succeeded to admiration in America, as witness Fredericksburg, Gettysburg,
Kenesaw Mountain, and Franklin. Moreover, it must be remembered that Jackson's success was
in no wise owing either to chance or to the errors of his adversary. [Footnote: The reverse
has been stated again and again with very great injustice, not only by British, but even by
American writers (as e.g., Prof. W. G. Sumner, in his "Andrew Jackson as a Public Man," Boston,
1882). The climax of absurdity is reached by Major McDougal, who says (as quoted by Cole in
his "Memoirs of British Generals," ii, p. 364): "Sir Edward Packenham fell, not after an utter
and disastrous defeat, but at the very moment when the arms of victory were extended towards
him"; and by James, who says (ii, 388): "The premature fall of a British general saved an American
city." These assertions are just on a par with those made by American writers, that only the
fall of Lawrence prevented the Chesapeake from capturing the Shannon.

British writers have always attributed the defeat largely to the fact that the 44th regiment,
which was to have led the attack with fascines and ladders, did not act well. I doubt if this
had any effect on the result. Some few of the men with ladders did reach the ditch, but were
shot down at once, and their fate would have been shared by any others who had been with them;
the bulk of the column was never able to advance through the fire up to the breastwork, and
all the ladders and fascines in Christendom would not have helped it. There will always be
innumerable excuses offered for any defeat; but on this occasion the truth is simply that the
British regulars found they could not advance in the open against a fire more deadly than they
had ever before encountered.] As far as fortune favored either side, it was that of the British
[Footnote: E.g.: The unexpected frost made the swamps firm for them to advance through; the
river being so low when the levee was cut, the bayous were filled, instead of the British being
drowned out; the Carolina was only blown up because the wind happened to fail her; bad weather
delayed the advance of arms and reinforcements, etc., etc.]; and Packenham left nothing undone
to accomplish his aim, and made no movements that his experience in European war did not justify
his making. There is not the slightest reason for supposing that any other British general
would have accomplished more or have fared better than he did. [Footnote: "He was the next
man to look to after Lord Wellington" (Codrington, i, 339).] Of course Jackson owed much to
the nature of the ground on which he fought; but the opportunities it afforded would have been
useless in the hands of any general less ready, hardy, and skilful than Old Hickory.

A word as to the troops themselves. The British infantry was at that time the best in Europe,
the French coming next. Packenham's soldiers had formed part of Wellington's magnificent peninsular
army, and they lost nothing of their honor at New Orleans. Their conduct throughout was admirable.
Their steadiness in the night battle, their patience through the various hardships they had
to undergo, their stubborn courage in action, and the undaunted front they showed in time of
disaster (for at the very end they were to the full as ready and eager to fight as at the beginning),
all showed that their soldierly qualities were of the highest order. As much cannot be said
of the British artillery, which, though very bravely fought was clearly by no means as skilfully
handled as was the case with the American guns. The courage of the British officers of all
arms is mournfully attested by the sadly large proportion they bore to the total on the lists
of the killed and wounded.

An even greater meed of praise is due to the American soldiers, for it must not be forgotten
that they were raw troops opposed to veterans; and indeed, nothing but Jackson's tireless care
in drilling them could have brought them into shape at all. The regulars were just as good
as the British, and no better. The Kentucky militia, who had only been 48 hours with the army
and were badly armed and totally undisciplined, proved as useless as their brethren of New
York and Virginia, at Queenstown Heights and Bladensburg, had previously shown themselves to
be. They would not stand in the open at all, and even behind a breastwork had to be mixed with
better men. The Louisiana militia, fighting in defence of their homes, and well trained, behaved
excellently, and behind breastworks were as formidable as the regulars. The Tennesseeans, good
men to start with, and already well trained in actual warfare under Jackson, were in their
own way unsurpassable as soldiers. In the open field the British regulars, owing to their greater
skill in manoeuvring, and to their having bayonets, with which the Tennesseeans were unprovided,
could in all likelihood have beaten them; but in rough or broken ground the skill of the Tennesseeans,
both as marksmen and woodsmen, would probably have given them the advantage; while the extreme
deadliness of their fire made it far more dangerous to attempt to storm a breastwork guarded
by these forest riflemen than it would have been to attack the same work guarded by an equal
number of the best regular troops of Europe. The American soldiers deserve great credit for
doing so well; but greater credit still belongs to Andrew Jackson, who, with his cool head
and quick eye, his stout heart and strong hand, stands out in history as the ablest general
the United States produced, from the outbreak of the Revolution down to the beginning of the
Great Rebellion.

Appendix A

TONNAGE OF THE BRITISH AND AMERICAN MEN-OF-WAR IN 1812-15

According to Act of Congress (quoted in "Niles' Register," iv, 64), the way of measuring double-decked
or war-vessels was as follows:

"Measure from fore-part of main stem to after-part of stern port, above the upper deck; take
the breadth thereof at broadest part above the main wales, one half of which breadth shall
be accounted the depth. Deduct from the length three fifths of such breadth, multiply the remainder
by the breadth and the product by the depth; divide by 95; quotient is tonnage."

(i.e., if length = x, and breadth = y;

          (x - 3/5 y) X y X 1/2 y
Tonnage = -----------------------   .)
                     95

Niles states that the British mode, as taken from Steele's "Shipmaster's Assistant," was this:
Drop plumb-line over stem of ship and measure distance between such line and the after part
of the stern port at the load water-mark; then measure from top of said plumb-line in parallel
direction with the water to perpendicular point immediately over the load water-mark of the
fore part of main stem; subtract from such admeasurement the above distance; the remainder
is ship's extreme length, from which deduct 3 inches for every foot of the load-draught of
water for the rake abaft, and also three fifths of the ship's breadth for the rake forward;
remainder is length of keel for tonnage. Breadth shall be taken from outside to outside of
the plank in broadest part of the ship either above or below the main wales, exclusive of all
manner of sheathing or doubling. Depth is to be considered as one half the length. Tonnage
will then be the length into the depth into breadth, divided by 94.

Tonnage was thus estimated in a purely arbitrary manner, with no regard to actual capacity
or displacement; and, moreover, what is of more importance, the British method differed from
the American so much that a ship measured in the latter way would be nominally about 15 per
cent. larger than if measured by British rules. This is the exact reverse of the statement
made by the British naval historian, James. His mistake is pardonable, for great confusion
existed on the subject at that time, even the officers not knowing the tonnage of their own
ships. When the President was captured, her officers stated that she measured about 1,400 tons;
in reality she tonned 1,576, American measure. Still more singular was the testimony of the
officers of the Argus, who thought her to be of about 350 tons, while she was of 298, by American,
or 244, by British measurement. These errors were the more excusable as they occurred also
in higher quarters. The earliest notice we have about the three 44-gun frigates of the Constitution's
class, is in the letter of Secretary of the Navy, Benjamin Stoddart, on Dec. 24, 1798, [Footnote:
"American State Papers," xiv, 57.] where they are expressly said to be of 1,576 tons; and this
tonnage is given them in every navy list that mentions it for 40 years afterward; yet Secretary
Paul Hamilton in one of his letters incidentally alludes to them as of 1,444 tons. Later, I
think about the year 1838, the method of measuring was changed, and their tonnage was put down
as 1,607. James takes the American tonnage from Secretary Hamilton's letter as 1,444, and states
(vol. vi, p. 5), that this is equivalent to 1,533 tons, English. But in reality, by American
measurement, the tonnage was 1,576; so that even according to James' own figures the British
way of measurement made the frigate 43 tons smaller than the American way did; actually the
difference was nearer 290 tons. James' statements as to the size of our various ships would
seem to have been largely mere guesswork, as he sometimes makes them smaller and sometimes
larger than they were according to the official navy lists. Thus, the Constitution, President,
and United States, each of 1,576, he puts down as of 1,533; the Wasp, of 450, as of 434; the
Hornet, of 480, as of 460; and the Chesapeake, of 1,244, as of 1,135 tons. On the other hand
the Enterprise, of 165 tons, he states to be of 245; the Argus of 298, he considers to be of
316, and the Peacock, Frolic, etc., of 509 each, as of 539. He thus certainly adopts different
standards of measurement, not only for the American as distinguished from the British vessels,
but even among the various American vessels themselves. And there are other difficulties to
be encountered; not only were there different ways of casting tonnage from given measurements,
but also there were different ways of getting what purported to be the same measurement. A
ship, that, according to the British method of measurement was of a certain length, would,
according to the American method, be about 5 per cent. longer; and so if two vessels were the
same size, the American would have the greatest nominal tonnage. For example, James in his
"Naval Occurrences" (p. 467) gives the length of the Cyane's main deck as 118 feet 2 inches.
This same Cyane was carefully surveyed and measured, under orders from the United States navy
department, by Lieut. B. F. Hoffman, and in his published report [Footnote: "American State
Papers," xiv, p. 417.] he gives, among the other dimensions: "Length of spar-deck, 124 feet
9 inches," and "length of gun-deck 123 feet 3 inches." With such a difference in the way of
taking measurements, as well as of computing tonnage from the measurements when taken, it is
not surprising that according to the American method the Cyane should have ranked as of about
659 tons, instead of 539. As James takes no account of any of these differences I hardly know
how to treat his statements of comparative tonnage. Thus he makes the Hornet 460 tons, and
the Peacock and Penguin, which she at different times captured, about 388 each. As it happens
both Captain Lawrence and Captain Biddle, who commanded the Hornet in her two successful actions,
had their prizes measured. The Peacock sank so rapidly that Lawrence could not get very accurate
measurements of her; he states her to be four feet shorter and half a foot broader than the
Hornet. The British naval historian, Brenton (vol. v, p. 111), also states that they were of
about the same tonnage. But we have more satisfactory evidence from Captain Biddle. He stayed
by his prize nearly two days, and had her thoroughly examined in every way; and his testimony
is, of course, final. He reports that the Penguin was by actual measurement two feet shorter,
and somewhat broader than the Hornet, and with thicker scantling. She tonned 477, compared
to the Hornet's 480--a difference of about one half of one per cent. This testimony is corroborated
by that of the naval inspectors who examined the Epervier after she was captured by the Peacock.
Those two vessels were respectively of 477 and 509 tons, and as such they ranked on the navy
lists. The American Peacock and her sister ships were very much longer than the brig sloops
of the Epervier's class, but were no broader, the latter being very tubby. All the English
sloops were broader in proportion than the American ones were; thus the Levant, which was to
have mounted the same number of guns as the Peacock, had much more beam, and was of greater
tonnage, although of rather less length. The Macedonian, when captured, ranked on our lists
as of 1,325 tons, [Footnote: See the work of Lieutenant Emmons, who had access to all the official
records.] the United States as of 1,576; and they thus continued until, as I have said before,
the method of measurement was changed, when the former ranked as of 1,341, and the latter as
of 1,607 tons. James, however, makes them respectively, 1,081, and 1,533. Now to get the comparative
force he ought to have adopted the first set of measurements given, or else have made them
1,081 and 1,286. Out of the twelve single-ship actions of the war, four were fought with 38-gun
frigates like the Macedonian, and seven with 18-gun brig sloops of the Epervier's class; and
as the Macedonian and Epervier were both regularly rated in our navy, we get a very exact idea
of our antagonists in those eleven cases. The twelfth was the fight between the Enterprise
and the Boxer, in which the latter was captured; the Enterprise was apparently a little smaller
than her foe, but had two more guns, which she carried in her bridle ports.

As my purpose in giving the tonnage is to get it comparatively, and not absolutely, I have
given it throughout for both sides as estimated by the American method of that day. The tonnage
of the vessels on the lakes has been already noticed.

Appendix B

PREVIOUS HISTORY OF UNITED STATES NAVY

Very few students of naval history will deny that in 1812 the average American ship was superior
to the average British ship of the same strength; and that the latter was in turn superior
to the average French ship. The explanation given by the victor is in each case the same; the
American writer ascribes the success of his nation to "the aptitude of the American character
for the sea," and the Briton similarly writes that "the English are inherently better suited
for the sea than the French." Race characteristics may have had some little effect between
the last pair of combatants (although only a little), and it is possible that they somewhat
affected the outcome of the Anglo-American struggle, but they did not form the main cause.
This can best be proved by examining the combats of two preceding periods, in which the English,
French, and Americans were at war with one another.

During the years 1798-1800, the United States carried on a desultory conflict with France,
then at war with England. Our navy was just built, and was rated in the most extraordinary
manner; the Chesapeake, carrying 18-pounders, was called a 44; and the Constellation which
carried 24's, a 36, while the Washington, rating 24, was really much heavier than the Boston,
rating 28. On Feb. 9, 1799, after an hour's conflict, the Constellation captured the French
frigate Insurgente; the Americans lost 3, the French 70 men, killed and wounded. The Constitution
carried but 38 guns; 28 long 24's, on the main-deck, and 10 long 12's on the quarter-deck,
with a crew of 309 men. According to Troude (iii, 169), l'lnsurgente carried 26 long 12's,
10 long 6's, and 4 36-pound carronades; the Americans report her number of men as nearly four
hundred. Thus in actual [Footnote: French shot was really very much heavier than the nominally
corresponding English shot, as the following table, taken from Captain T. L. Simmon's work
on "Heavy Ordnance" (London, 1837, p. 62) will show:

Nominal French Weight        Actual Weight of Same Shot in
      of Shot.                      English Pounds.
      36 lbs.                       43 lbs 4 oz.
      24 "                          28 " 8 3/4"
      18 "                          21 " 4 1/2"
      12 "                          14 " 7 "
] (not nominal) weight of shot the Constitution was superior by
about 80 pounds, and was inferior in crew by from 50 to 100 men.
This would make the vessels apparently nearly equal in force; but
of course the long 24's of the Constellation made it impossible that
l'lnsurgente, armed only with long 12's, should contend with her.
As already said, a superiority in number of men makes very little
difference, provided each vessel has ample to handle the guns, repair
damages, work the sails, etc. Troude goes more into details than
any other French historian; but I think his details are generally
wrong. In this case he gives the Constellation 12's, instead of
the 24's she really carried; and also supplies her with 10 32-pound
carronades--of which species of ordnance there was then not one piece
in our navy. The first carronades we ever had were those carried
by the same frigate on her next voyage. She had completely changed
her armament, having 28 long 18's on the main-deck, ten 24-pound
carronades on the quarter-deck; and, I believe, 6 long 12's on the
forecastle, with a crew of 310 men. Thus armed, she encountered and
fought a drawn battle with la Vengeance. Troude (vol. iii, pp.
201, and 216) describes the armament of the latter as 26 long 18's,
10 long 8's, and 4 36-pound carronades. On board of her was an
American prisoner, James Howe, who swore she had 52 guns, and 400
men (see Cooper, i, 306). The French and American accounts thus
radically disagree. The point is settled definitely by the report
of the British captain Milne, who, in the Seine frigate, captured
la Vengeance in the same year, and then reported her armament as
being 28 long 18's, 16 long 12's, and 8 36-pound carronades, with
326 men. As the American and British accounts, written entirely
independently of one another, tally almost exactly, it is evident
that Troude was very greatly mistaken. He blunders very much over
the Constellation's armament.

Thus in this action the American frigate fought a draw with an antagonist, nearly as much superior
to herself as an American 44 was to a British 38. In November, 1800, the "28-gun frigate,"
Boston, of 530 tons, 200 men, carrying 24 long 9's on the main-deck, and on the spar-deck 8
long 6's (or possibly 12-pound carronades) captured, after two hours action, the French corvette
Berceau, of 24 guns, long 8's; the Boston was about the same size as her foe, with the same
number of men, and superior in metal about as ten to nine. She lost 15, and the Berceau 40
men. Troude (iii, p. 219) gives the Berceau 30 guns, 22 long 8's, and 8 12-pound carronades.
If this is true she was in reality of equal force with the Boston. But I question if Troude
really knew anything about the combatants; he gives the Boston (of the same size and build
as the Cyane) 48 guns--a number impossible for her to carry. He continually makes the grossest
errors; in this same (the third) volume, for example, he arms a British 50-gun-ship with 72
cannon, giving her a broadside fifty per cent. heavier than it should be (p. 141); and, still
worse, states the ordinary complement of a British 32-gun frigate to be 384 men, instead of
about 220 (p. 417). He is by no means as trustworthy as James, though less rancorous.

The United States schooner Experiment, of 12 guns, long 6's, and 70 men, captured the French
man-of-war three-masted-schooner La Diane, of 14 guns (either 4- or 6-pounders), with a crew
of 60 men, and 30 passengers; and the Enterprise, the sister vessel of the Experiment, captured
numerous strong privateers. One of them, a much heavier vessel than her captor, made a most
obstinate fight. She was the Flambeau brig of fourteen 8-pounders and 100 men, of whom half
were killed or wounded. The Enterprise had 3 killed and 7 wounded.

Comparing these different actions, it is evident that the Americans were superior to the French
in fighting capacity during the years 1799 and 1800. During the same two years there had been
numerous single contests between vessels of Britain and France, ending almost invariably in
favor of the former, which I mention first in each couple. The 12-pounder frigate Daedalus
captured the 12-pounder frigate Prudente, of equal force. The British 18-pounder frigate Sybille
captured the frigate Forte, armed with 52 guns, 30 of them long 24's on the main-deck; she
was formidably armed and as heavy as the Constitution. The Sybille lost 22 and the Forte 145
men killed and wounded. The 18-pounder frigate Clyde, with the loss of 5 men, captured the
12-pounder frigate Vestale, which lost 32. The cutter Courser, of twelve 4-pounders and 40
men, captured the privateer Guerriere, of fourteen 4-pounders and 44 men. The cutter Viper,
of fourteen 4-pounders and 48 men, captured the privateer Suret, of fourteen 4-pounders and
57 men. The 16-gun ship-sloop, Peterel, with 89 men, engaged the Cerf, 14, Lejoille, 6, and
Ligurienne, 16, with in all 240 men, and captured the Ligunenne. The 30-gun corvette Dart captured
by surprise the 38-gun frigate Desiree. The Gypsey, of ten 4-pounders and 82 men, captured
the Quidproquo, of 8 guns, 4- and 8-pounders, and 98 men. The schooner Milbrook of sixteen
18-pounder carronades and 47 men, fought a draw with the privateer Bellone, of 24 long 8's
and six 36-pound carronades. Finally, six months after the Vengeance had escaped from the Constellation
(or beaten her off, as the French say) she was captured by the British frigate Seine, which
threw a broadside about 30 pounds more than the American did in her action, and had some 29
men less aboard. So that her commander, Captain Milne, with the same force as Commodore Truxtun,
of the Constellation, accomplished what the latter failed to do.

Reviewing all these actions, it seems pretty clear that, while the Americans were then undoubtedly
much superior to the French, they were still, at least slightly, inferior to the British.

From 1777 to 1782 the state of things was very different. The single combats were too numerous
for me to mention them here; and besides it would be impossible to get at the truth without
going to a great deal of trouble--the accounts given by Cooper, Sohomberg, and Troude differing
so widely that they can often hardly be recognized as treating of the same events. But it is
certain that the British were very much superior to the Americans. Some of the American ships
behaved most disgracefully, deserting their consorts and fleeing from much smaller foes. Generally
the American ship was captured when opposed by an equal force--although there were some brilliant
exceptions to this. With the French things were more equal; their frigates were sunk or captured
time and again, but nearly as often they sunk or captured their antagonists. Some of the most
gallant fights on record are recounted of French frigates of this period; in 1781 the Minerve,
32, resisted the Courageous, 74, till she had lost 73 men and had actually inflicted a loss
of 17 men on her gigantic antagonist, and the previous year the Bellepoule, 32, had performed
a similar feat with the Nonsuch, 64, while the Capricieuse, 32, had fought for five hours before
surrendering to the Prudente and Licorne, each of force equal to herself. She lost 100 men,
inflicting a loss of 55 upon her two antagonists. Such instances make us feel rather ashamed
when we compare them with the fight in which the British ship Glasgow, 20, beat off an American
squadron of 5 ships, including two of equal force to herself, or with the time when the Ariadne,
20, and Ceres, 14, attacked and captured without resistance the Alfred, 20, the latter ship
being deserted in the most outrageously cowardly manner by her consort the Raleigh, 32. At
that period the average American ship was certainly by no means equal to the average French
ship of the same force, and the latter in turn was a little, but only a little, inferior to
the average British ship of equal strength.

Thus in 1782 the British stood first in nautical prowess, separated but by a very narrow interval
from the French, while the Americans made a bad third. In 1789 the British still stood first,
while the Americans had made a great stride forward, coming close on their heels, and the French
had fallen far behind into the third place. In 1812 the relative positions of the British and
French were unchanged, but the Americans had taken another very decided step in advance, and
stood nearly as far ahead of the British as the latter were ahead of the French.

The explanation of these changes is not difficult. In 1782 the American war vessels were in
reality privateers; the crews were unpracticed, the officers untrained, and they had none of
the traditions and discipline of a regular service. At the same time the French marine was
at its highest point; it was commanded by officers of ability and experience, promoted largely
for merit, and with crews thoroughly trained, especially in gunnery, by a long course of service
on the sea. In courage, and in skill in the management of guns, musketry, etc., they were the
full equals of their English antagonists; their slight average inferiority in seamanship may,
it is possible, be fairly put down to the difference in race. (It seems certain that, when
serving in a neutral vessel, for example, the Englishmen aboard are apt to make better sailors
than the Frenchmen.) In 1799 the revolution had deprived the French of all their best officers,
had let the character of the marine run down, and the discipline of the service become utterly
disorganized; this exposed them to frightful reverses, and these in turn prevented the character
of the service from recovering its former tone. Meanwhile the Americans had established for
the first time a regular navy, and, as there was excellent material to work with, it at once
came up close to the English; constant and arduous service, fine discipline, promotion for
merit, and the most unflagging attention to practical seamanship and gunnery had in 1812 raised
it far above even the high English standard. During all these three periods the English marine,
it must be remembered, did not fall off, but at least kept its position; the French, on the
contrary, did fall off, while the American navy advanced by great strides to the first place.

Appendix C

After my work was in press I for the first time came across Prof. J. Russell Soley's "Naval
Campaign of 1812," in the "Proceedings of the United States Naval Institute," for October 20,
1881. It is apparently the precursor of a more extended history. Had I known that such a writer
as Professor Soley was engaged on a work of this kind I certainly should not have attempted
it myself.

In several points our accounts differ. In the action with the Guerriere his diagram differs
from mine chiefly in his making the Constitution steer in a more direct line, while I have
represented her as shifting her course several times in order to avoid being raked, bringing
the wind first on her port and then on her starboard-quarter. My account of the number of the
crew of the Guerriere is taken from the Constitution's muster-book (in the Treasury Department
at Washington), which contains the names of all the British prisoners received aboard the Constitution
after the fight. The various writers used "larboard" and "starboard" with such perfect indifference,
in speaking of the closing and the loss of the Guerriere's mizzen-mast, that I hardly knew
which account to adopt; it finally seemed to me that the only way to reconcile the conflicting
statements was by making the mast act as a rudder, first to keep the ship off the wind until
it was dead aft and then to bring her up into it. If this was the case, it deadened her speed,
and prevented Dacres from keeping his ship yardarm and yardarm with the foe, though he tried
to steady his course with the helm; but, in this view, it rather delayed Hull's raking than
helped him. If Professor Soley's account is right, I hardly know what to make of the statement
in one of the American accounts that the Constitution "luffed across the enemy's bow," and
of Cooper's statement (in Putnam's Magazine) that the Guerriere's bowsprit pressed against
the Constitution's "lee or port quarter."

In the action of the Wasp with the Frolic, I have adopted James' statement of the latter's
force; Professor Soley follows Captain Jones' letter, which gives the brig three additional
guns and 18 pounds more metal in broadside. My reason for following James was that his account
of the Frolic's force agrees with the regular armament of her class. Captain Jones gives her
two carronades on the topgallant forecastle, which must certainly be a mistake; he makes her
chase-guns long 12's, but all the other British brigs carried 6's; he also gives her another
gun in broadside, which he calls a 12-pounder, and Lieutenant Biddle (in a letter to his father)
a 32-pound carronade. His last gun should perhaps be counted in; I excluded it because the
two American officials differed in their account of it, because I did not know through what
port it could be fought, and because James asserted that it was dismounted and lashed to the
forecastle. The Wasp left port with 138 men; subtracting the pilot and two men who were drowned,
makes 135 the number on board during the action. As the battle was fought, I doubt if the loss
of the brig's main-yard had much effect on the result; had it been her object to keep on the
wind, or had the loss of her after-sails enabled her antagonist to cross her stern (as in the
case of the Argus and Pelican), the accident could fairly be said to have had a decided effect
upon the contest. But as a short time after the fight began the vessels were running nearly
free, and as the Wasp herself was greatly injured aloft at the time, and made no effort to
cross her foe's stern, it is difficult to see that it made much difference. The brig's head-sails
were all right, and, as she was not close-hauled, the cause of her not being kept more under
command was probably purely due to the slaughter on her decks.

Professor Soley represents the combat of the States and Macedonian as a plain yardarm and yardarm
action after the first forty minutes. I have followed the English authorities and make it a
running fight throughout. If Professor Soley is right, the enormous disparity in loss was due
mainly to the infinitely greater accuracy of the American fire; according to my diagram the
chief cause was the incompetency of the Macedonian's commander. In one event the difference
was mainly in the gunnery of the crews, in the other, it was mainly in the tactical skill of
the captains. The question is merely as to how soon Carden, in his headlong, foolishly rash
approach, was enabled to close with Decatur. I have represented the closing as taking place
later than Professor Soley has done; very possibly I am wrong. Could my work now be rewritten
I think I should adopt his diagram of the action of the Macedonian.

But in the action with the Java it seems to me that he is mistaken. He has here followed the
British accounts; but they are contradicted by the American authorities, and besides have a
very improbable look. When the Constitution came round for the second time, on the port tack,
James declares the Java passed directly across her stern, almost touching, but that the British
crew, overcome by astonishment or awe, did not fire a shot; and that shortly afterward the
manoeuvre was repeated. When this incident is said to have occurred the Java's crew had been
hard at work fighting the guns for half an hour, and they continued for an hour and a half
afterward; it is impossible to believe that they would have foreborne to fire more than one
gun when in such a superb position for inflicting damage. Even had the men been struck with
temporary lunacy the officers alone would have fired some of the guns. Moreover, if the courses
of the vessels were such as indicated on Professor Soley's diagram the Java would herself have
been previously exposed to a terrible raking fire, which was not the case. So the alleged manoeuvres
have, per se, a decidedly apocryphal look; and besides they are flatly contradicted by the
American accounts which state distinctly that the Java remained to windward in every portion
of the fight. On this same tack Professor Soley represents the Java as forereaching on the
Constitution; I have reversed this. At this time the Java had been much cut up in her rigging
and aloft generally, while the Constitution had set much additional sail, and in consequence
the latter forged ahead and wore in the smoke unperceived. When the ships came foul Professor
Soley has drawn the Constitution in a position in which she would receive a most destructive
stern rake from her antagonist's whole broadside. The positions could not have been as there
represented. The Java's bowsprit came foul in the Constitution's mizzen rigging and as the
latter forged ahead she pulled the former gradually round till when they separated the ships
were in a head and stern line. Commodore Bainbridge, as he particularly says, at once "kept
away to avoid being raked," while the loss of the head-sails aboard the Java would cause the
latter to come up in the wind, and the two ships would again be running parallel, with the
American to leeward. I have already discussed fully the reasons for rejecting in this instance
the British report of their own force and loss. This was the last defeat that the British officially
reported; the admiralty were smarting with the sting of successive disasters and anxious at
all costs to put the best possible face on affairs (as witness Mr. Croker's response to Lord
Dundonald's speech in the House). There is every reason for believing that in this case the
reports were garbled; exactly as at a later date the official correspondence preceding the
terrible disasters at Cabul was tampered with before being put before the public (see McCarthy's
"History of our Own Times").

It is difficult to draw a diagram of the action between the Hornet and Peacock, although it
was so short, the accounts contradicting one another as to which ship was to windward and which
on the "larboard tack;" and I do not know if I have correctly represented the position of the
combatants at the close of the engagement. Lieutenant Conner reported the number of men aboard
the Hornet fit for duty as 135; Lawrence says she had 8 absent in a prize and 7 too sick to
be at quarters. This would make an original complement of 150, and tallies exactly with the
number of men left on the Hornet after the action was over, as mentioned by Lawrence in his
account of the total number of souls aboard. The log-book of the Hornet just before starting
on her cruise, states her entire complement as 158; but 4 of these were sick and left behind.
There is still a discrepancy of 4 men, but during the course of the cruise nothing would be
more likely than that four men should be gotten rid of, either by sickness, desertion, or dismissal.
At any rate the discrepancy is very trivial. In her last cruise, as I have elsewhere said,
I have probably overestimated the number of the Hornet's crew; this seems especially likely
when it is remembered that toward the close of the war our vessels left port with fewer supernumeraries
aboard than earlier in the contest. If such is the case, the Hornet and Penguin were of almost
exactly equal force.

My own comments upon the causes of our success, upon the various historians of the war, etc.,
are so similar to those of Professor Soley, that I almost feel as if I had been guilty of plagiarism;
yet I never saw his writings till half an hour ago. But in commenting on the actions of 1812,
I think the Professor has laid too much stress on the difference in "dash" between the combatants.
The Wasp bore down with perfect confidence to engage an equal foe; and the Hornet could not
tell till the Peacock opened fire that the latter was inferior in force, and moreover fought
in sight of another hostile vessel. In the action with the Guerriere it was Hull and not Dacres
who acted boldly, the Englishman delaying the combat and trying to keep it at long range for
some time. In this fight it must be remembered that neither foe knew the exact force of the
other until the close work began; then, it is true, Dacres fought most bravely. So with the
Macedonian; James particularly says that she did not know the force of her foe, and was confident
of victory. The Java, however, must have known that she was to engage a superior force. In
neither of the first two frigate actions did the Americans have a chance to display any courage
in the actual fighting, the victory was won with such ease. But in each case they entered as
bravely, although by no means as rashly or foolishly, into the fight as their antagonists did.
It must always be remembered that until this time it was by no means proved that 24-pounders
were better guns than 18's to put on frigates; exactly as at a little later date it was vigorously
contended that 42-pounders were no more effective guns for two-deckers than 32-pounders were.
Till 1812 there had been no experience to justify the theory that the 24-pounder was the better
gun. So that in the first five actions it cannot be said that the British showed any especial
courage in beginning the fight; it was more properly to be called ignorance. After the fight
was once begun they certainly acted very bravely, and, in particular, the desperate nature
of the Frolic's defence has never been surpassed.

But admitting this is a very different thing from admitting that the British fought more bravely
than their foes; the combatants were about on a par in this respect. The Americans, it seems
to me, were always to the full as ready to engage as their antagonists were; on each side there
were few over-cautious men, such as Commodore Rodgers and Sir George Collier, the opposing
captains on Lake Ontario, the commander of the Bonne Citoyenne, and perhaps Commodore Decatur,
but as a rule either side jumped at the chance of a fight. The difference in tactics was one
of skill and common sense, not one of timidity. The United States did not "avoid close action"
from over-caution, but simply to take advantage of her opponent's rashness. Hull's approach
was as bold as it was skilful; had the opponent to leeward been the Endymion, instead of the
Guerriere, her 24-pounders would not have saved her from the fate that overtook the latter.
Throughout the war I think that the Americans were as bold in beginning action, and as stubborn
in continuing it, as were their foes--although no more so. Neither side can claim any superiority
on the average, though each can in individual cases, as regards courage. Foolhardiness does
not imply bravery. A prize-fighter who refused to use his guard would be looked upon as exceptionally
brainless, not as exceptionally brave; yet such a case is almost exactly parallel to that of
the captain of the Macedonian.

Appendix D

In the "Historical Register of the United States" (Edited by T. H. Palmer, Philadelphia, 1814),
vol. 1 p. 105 (State Papers), is a letter from Lieut. L. H. Babbitt to Master-commandant Wm.
U. Crane, both of the Nautilus, dated Sept. 13, 1812, in which he says that of the six men
imprisoned by the British on suspicion of being of English birth, four were native-born Americans,
and two naturalized citizens. He also gives a list of six men who deserted, and entered on
the Shannon, of whom two were American born--the birthplaces of the four others not being given.
Adding these last, we still have but six men as the number of British aboard the Nautilus,
It is thus seen that the crack frigate Shannon had American deserters aboard her--although
these probably formed a merely trifling faction of her crew, as did the British deserters aboard
the crack frigate Constitution.

On p. 108, is a letter of Dec. 17, 1812, from Geo. S. Wise, purser of the Wasp, stating that
twelve of that ship's crew had been detained "under the pretence of their being British subjects";
so that nine per cent. of her crew may have been British--or the proportion may have been very
much smaller.

On p. 117, is a letter of Jan. 14, 1813, from Commodore J. Rodgers, in which he states that
he encloses the muster-rolls of H. B. M. ships, Moselle and Sappho, taken out of the captured
packet Swallow; and that these muster-rolls show that in August 1812, one eighth of the crews
of the Moselle and Sappho, was composed of Americans.

These various letters thus support strongly the conclusions reached on a former page as to
the proportion of British deserters on American vessels.

In "A Biographical Memoir of the late Commodore Joshua Barney, from Autographical Notes and
Journals" (Edited by Mary Barney, Boston, 1832), on pages 263, and 315, are descriptions of
the flotilla destroyed in the Patuxent. It consisted of one gun-boat, carrying a long 24; one
cutter, carrying a long 18, a columbiad 18, and four 9-pound carronades, and thirteen row barges,
each carrying a long 18 or 12 in the bow, with a 32-pound or 18-pound carronade in the stern.
On p. 256, Barney's force in St. Leonard's creek, is described as consisting of one sloop,
two gun-boats, and thirteen barges, with in all somewhat over 500 men; and it is claimed that
the flotilla drove away the blockading frigates, entirely unaided; the infantry force on shore
rendering no assistance. The work is of some value, as showing that James had more than doubled
the size, and almost doubled the strength, of Barney's various gun-boats.

It may be mentioned that on p. 108, Commodore Barney describes the Dutch-American frigate South
Carolina, which carried a crew of 550 men, and was armed with 28 long 42's on the maindeck,
and 12 long 12's on the spardeck. She was far heavier than any of our 44-gun frigates of 1812,
and an overmatch for anything under the rank of a 74. This gives further emphasis to what I
have already stated--that the distinguishing feature of the war of 1812, is not the introduction
of the heavy frigate, for heavy frigates had been in use among various nations for thirty years
previously, but the fact that for the first time the heavy frigate was used to the best possible
advantage.

Appendix E

In the last edition of James' "Naval History of Great Britain," published in London, in 1886,
by Richard Bentley & Son, there is an appendix by Mr. H. T. Powell, devoted to the war of 1812,
mainly to my account thereof.

Mr. Powell begins by stating with naif solemnity that "most British readers will be surprised
to learn that, notwithstanding the infinite pains taken by William James to render his history
a monument of accuracy, and notwithstanding the exposure he brought upon contemporary misstatements,
yet to this day the Americans still dispute his facts." It is difficult to discuss seriously
any question with a man capable of writing down in good faith such a sentence as the above.
James (unlike Brenton and Cooper) knew perfectly well how to be accurate; but if Mr. Powell
will read the comments on his accounts which I have appended to the description of almost every
battle, he will see that James stands convicted beyond possibility of doubt, not merely of
occasional inaccuracies or errors, but of the systematic, malicious, and continuous practice
of every known form of wilful misstatement, from the suppression of the truth and the suggestion
of the false to the lie direct. To a man of his character the temptation was irresistible;
for when he came to our naval war, he had to appear as the champion of the beaten side, and
to explain away defeat instead of chronicling victory. The contemporary American writers were
quite as boastful and untruthful. No honorable American should at this day endorse their statements;
and similarly, no reputable Englishman should permit his name to be associated in any way with
James' book without explicitly disclaiming all share in, or sympathy with, its scurrilous mendacity.

Mr. Powell's efforts to controvert my statements can be disposed of in short order. He first
endeavors to prove that James was right about the tonnage of the ships; but all that he does
is to show that his author gave for the English frigates and sloops the correct tonnage by
English and French rules. This I never for a moment disputed. What I said was that the comparative
tonnage of the various pairs of combatants as given by James was all wrong; and this Mr. Powell
does not even discuss. James applied one system correctly to the English vessels; but he applied
quite another to the American (especially on the lakes). Mr. Powell actually quotes Admiral
Chads as a witness, because he says that his father considered James' account of the Java's
fight accurate; if he wishes such testimony, I can produce many relatives of the Perrys, Porters,
and Rodgers of 1812, who insist that I have done much less than justice to the American side.
He says I passed over silently James' schedule of dimensions of the frigates and sloops. This
is a mistake; I showed by the testimony of Captains Biddle and Warrington and Lieutenant Hoffman
that his comparative measurements (the absolute measurements being of no consequence) for the
American and British sloops are all wrong; and the same holds true of the frigates.

Mr. Powell deals with the weight of shot exactly as he does with the tonnage--that is, he seeks
to show what the absolute weight of the British shot was; but he does not touch upon the point
at issue, the comparative weight of the British and American shot.

When he comes to the lake actions, Mr. Powell is driven to conclude that what I aver must be
accurate, because he thinks the Confiance was the size of the General Pike (instead of half
as large again; she mounted 30 guns in battery on her main deck, as against the Pike's 26,
and stood to the latter as the Constellation did to the Essex), and because an American writer
(very properly) expresses dissatisfaction with Commodore Chauncy! What Mr. Powell thinks this
last statement tends to prove would be difficult to say. In the body of my work I go into the
minute details of the strength of the combatants in the lake action; I clearly show that James
was guilty of gross and wilful falsification of the truth; and no material statement I make
can be successfully controverted.

So much for Mr. Powell. But a much higher authority, Mr. Frank Chiswell, has recently published
some articles which tend to show that my conclusions as to the tonnage of the sea vessels (not
as to the lake vessels, which are taken from different sources) are open to question. In the
appendix to my first edition I myself showed that it was quite impossible to reconcile all
the different statements; that the most that could be done was to take one method and apply
it all through, admitting that even in this way it would be impossible to make all the cases
square with one another.

Mr. Chiswell states that "the American tonnage measurements, properly taken, never could give
results for frigates varying largely from the English tonnage." But a statement like this is
idle; for the answer to the "never could" is that they did. If Mr. Chiswell will turn to James'
"Naval Occurrences," he will find the Chesapeake set down as 1,135 tons, and the Macedonian
as of 1,081; but in the American Navy lists, which are those I followed, the Chesapeake is
put down as of 1,244 tons. A simple application of the rule of three shows that even if I accepted
James' figures, I would be obliged to consider the Macedonian as of about 1,185 tons, to make
her correspond with the system I had adopted for the American ships.

But this is not all. James gives the length of the Macedonian as 154 ft. 6 in. In the Navy
Department at Washington are two plans of the Macedonian. One is dated 1817, and gives her
length as 157 ft. 3 in. This difference in measurement would make a difference of 20 odd tons;
so that by the American mode she must certainly have been over 1,200 tons, instead of under
1,100, as by the British rules. The second plan in the Navy Department, much more elaborate
than the first, is dated 1829, and gives the length as 164 ft.; it is probably this that Emmons
and the United States Navy lists have followed--as I did myself in calling the tonnage of the
Macedonian 1,325. Since finding the plan of 1817, however, I think it possible that the other
refers to the second vessel of the name, which was built in 1832. If this is true, then the
Macedonian (as well as the Guerriere and Java) should be put down as about 120 tons less than
the measurements given by Emmons and adopted by me; but even if this is so, she must be considered
as tonning over 1,200, using the method I have applied to the Chesapeake. Therefore, adopting
the same system that I apply to the American 38-gun frigates, the British 38-gun frigates were
of over 1,200, not under 1,100, tons.

As for the Cyane, James makes her but 118 ft. and 2 in. long, while the American Peacock he
puts at 119 ft. 5 in. But Lieut. Hoffman's official report makes the former 123 ft. 3 in.,
and the plans in the State Department at Washington make the latter 117 ft. 11 in. in length.
I care nothing for the different methods of measuring different vessels; what I wish to get
at is the comparative measurement, and this stands as above. The comparative tonnage is thus
the very reverse of that indicated by James' figures.

Finally, as to the brigs, James makes them some ten feet shorter than the American ship-sloops.
In the Washington archives I can find no plan on record of the measurements of the captured
Epervier; but in the Navy Department, volume 10, of the "Letters of Master Commandants, 1814,"
under date of May 12th, is the statement of the Surveyor of the Port of Charleston that she
measured 467 tons (in another place it is given as 477). James makes her 388; but as he makes
the American Wasp 434, whereas she stands on our list as of 450, the application of the same
rule as with the frigates gives us, even taking his own figures, 400 as her tonnage, when measured
as our ships were. But the measurements of the Surveyor of the Port who examined the Epervier
are corroborated by the statements of Captain Biddle, who captured her sister brig, the Penguin.
Biddle reported that the latter was two feet shorter and a little broader than his own ship,
the Hornet, which was of 480 tons. This would correspond almost exactly with the Surveyor's
estimate.

It still seems impossible to reconcile all these conflicting statements; but I am inclined
to think that, on the whole, in the sea (not the lake) vessels I have put the British tonnage
too high. On the scale I have adopted for the American 44-gun and 38-gun frigates and 18-gun
sloops like the Hornet and Wasp, the British 38-gun frigates ought to be put down as of a little
over 1,200, and the British 18-gun sloops as of between 400 and 450, tons. In other words,
of the twelve single-ship actions of the war five, those of the Chesapeake and Shannon, Enterprise
and Boxer, Wasp and Frolic, Hornet and Peacock, Hornet and Penguin, were between vessels of
nearly equal size; in six the American was the superior about in the proportion of five to
four (rather more in the case of the frigates, rather less in the case of the brigs); and in
one, that of the Argus and Pelican, the British sloop was the bigger, in a somewhat similar ratio.

This correction would be in favor of the British. But in a more important particular I think
I have done injustice to the Americans. I should have allowed for the short weight of American
metal on the lakes, taking off seven per cent, from the nominal broadsides of Perry and Macdonough;
for the American ordnance was of exactly the same quality as that on the ocean vessels, while
the British was brought over from England, and must have shown the same superiority that obtained
on the sea-going ships.

Moreover, I am now inclined to believe that both the Guerriere and the Java, which were originally
French ships, still carried French 18's on their main-deck, and that, therefore, about 20 pounds
should be added to the broadside weight of metal of each. The American accounts stated this
to be the case in both instances; but I paid no heed to them until my attention was called
to the fact that the English had captured enormous quantities of French cannon and shot and
certainly used the captured ordnance on some of their ships.

In writing my history I have had to deal with a mass of confused and contradictory testimony,
which it has sometimes been quite impossible to reconcile, the difficulty being greatly enhanced
by the calculated mendacity of James and some others of the earlier writers, both American
and British. Often I have had simply to balance probabilities, and choose between two sets
of figures, aware that, whichever I chose, much could be said against the choice. It has, therefore,
been quite impossible to avoid errors; but I am confident they have been as much in favor of
the British as the Americans; and in all important points my statements are substantially accurate.

I do not believe that my final conclusions on the different fights can be disputed. James asserts
that the American ships were officered by cunning cowards, and manned to the extent of half
their force in point of effectiveness by renegade British. I show that the percentage of non-American
seamen aboard the American ships was probably but little greater than the percentage of non-British
seamen aboard the British ships; and as for the charges of cowardice, there were but two instances
in which it could be fairly urged against a beaten crew--that of the British Epervier and that
of the American Argus (for the cases of Sir George Collier, Commodore Rodgers, Chauncy, Yeo,
the commander of the Bonne Citoyenne, etc., etc., cannot be considered as coming under this
head). James states that there was usually a great superiority of force on the side of the
Americans; this is true; but I show that it was not nearly as great as he makes it, and that
in dealing with the lake flotillas his figures are absolutely false, to the extent of even
reversing the relative strength of the combatants on Lake Champlain, where the Americans won,
although with an inferior force. In the one noteworthy British victory, that of the Shannon,
all British authors fail to make any allowance for the vital fact that the Shannon's crew had
been drilled for seven years, whereas the Chesapeake had an absolutely new crew, and had been
out of port just eight hours; yet such a difference in length of drill is more important than
disparity in weight of metal.

As a whole, it must be said that both sides showed equal courage and resolution; that the Americans
usually possessed the advantage in material force; and that they also showed a decided superiority
in fighting skill, notably in marksmanship.

INDEX

Abeille Aboukir Acasta Adams Adams, Chaplain Adams, Lieutenant Adonis Aeolus Aetna Africa Alacrity
Albion Alert Alexandria Alfred Alison, Mr. Allen Allen, Lieutenant William Henry Alligator
Almy, Sailing-master Thomas C. Alwyn, John C. Ambuscade Amelia American American Revolution
American State Papers Angus, Commander S. Annapolis, Maryland Appling, Major Arab Arbuthnot,
Captain James Arethuse Argo Argus Ariadne Ariel Armada Armide Armstrong, Lieutenant Arundel,
Sailing-master Asp Aspinwall, Lieutenant Atalanta Atlas Austria Avenger Avon Aylwin Ayscough,
Sir George Azores

