The minister of police suspected the Royalists of this attempt; but the First Consul attributed
it to the Jacobins, because they were already guilty, he said, of crimes as odious.  One hundred
and thirty of the most noted men of this party were transported on pure suspicion, and without
any form of trial.  It is now known that the discovery, trial, and execution of Saint Regent
and Carbon, the true criminals, proved that the conjectures of the minister were more correct
than those of the chief of state.

The 4th Nivose, at noon, the First Consul held a grand review in the Place Carrousel, where
an innumerable crowd of citizens were collected to behold, and also to testify their affection
for his person, and their indignation against the enemies who dared attack him only by assassination.
Hardly had he turned his horse towards the first line of grenadiers of the Consular Guard,
when their innumerable acclamations rose on all sides.  He rode along the ranks, at a walk,
very slowly, showing his appreciation, and replying by a few simple and affectionate words
to this effusion of popular joy; and cries of "Vive Bonaparte! Vive the First Consul!" did
not cease till after he had re-entered his apartments.

The conspirators who obstinately persisted, with so much animosity, in attacking the life of
the First Consul, could not have chosen a period in which circumstances would have been more
adverse to their plans than in 1800 and 1801, for then the Consul was beloved not only for
his military deeds, but still more for the hope of peace that he gave to France, which hope
was soon realized.  As soon as the first rumor spread abroad that peace had been concluded
with Austria, the greater part of the inhabitants of Paris gathered under the windows of the
Pavilion of Flora. Blessings and cries of gratitude and joy were heard on all sides; then musicians
assembled to give a serenade to the chief of state, and proceeded to form themselves into orchestras;
and there was dancing the whole night through.  I have never seen a sight more striking or
more joyous than the bird's-eye view of this improvised jubilee.

When in the month of October, the, peace of Amiens having been concluded with England, France
found herself delivered from all the wars that she had maintained through so many years, and
at the cost of so many sacrifices, it would be impossible to form an idea of the joy which
burst forth on all sides.  The decrees which ordered either the disarmament of vessels of war,
or the placing of the forts on a peace footing, were welcomed as pledges of happiness and security.
The day of the reception of Lord Cornwallis, Ambassador of England, the First Consul ordered
that the greatest magnificence should be displayed.  "It is necessary," he had said the evening
before, "to show these proud Britons that we are not reduced to beggary."  The fact is, the
English, before setting foot on the French continent, had expected to find only ruins, penury,
and misery.  The whole of France had been described to them as being in the most distressing
condition, and they thought themselves on the point of landing in a barbarous country.  Their
surprise was great when they saw how many evils the First Consul had already repaired in so
short a time, and all the improvements that he still intended to carry out; and they spread
through their own country the report of what they themselves called the prodigies of the First
Consul, by which thousands of their compatriots were influenced to come and judge with their
own eyes.  At the moment that Lord Cornwallis entered the great hall of the Ambassadors with
his suite, the eyes of all the English must have been dazzled by the sight of the First Consul,
surrounded by his two colleagues, with all the diplomatic corps, and with an already brilliant
military court.

In the midst of all these rich uniforms, his was remarkable for its simplicity; but the diamond
called the Regent, which had been put in pawn under the Directory, and redeemed a few days
since by the First Consul, sparkled on the hilt of his sword.