          "Although now Shelley was coming to believe that his wedded
          union with Harriet was a thing of the past, he had not ceased
          to regard her with affectionate consideration; he wrote to her
          frequently, and kept her informed of his whereabouts."

We must not get impatient over these curious inharmoniousnesses and irreconcilabilities in
Shelley's character. You can see by the biographer's attitude towards them that there is nothing
objectionable about them. Shelley was doing his best to make two adoring young creatures happy:
he was regarding the one with affectionate consideration by mail, and he was assuaging the
other one at home.

          "Unhappy Harriet, residing at Bath, had perhaps never desired
          that the breach between herself and her husband should be
          irreparable and complete."

I find no fault with that sentence except that the "perhaps" is not strictly warranted. It
should have been left out. In support--or shall we say extenuation?--of this opinion I submit
that there is not sufficient evidence to warrant the uncertainty which it implies. The only
"evidence" offered that Harriet was hard and proud and standing out against a reconciliation
is a poem--the poem in which Shelley beseeches her to "bid the remorseless feeling flee" and
"pity" if she "cannot love." We have just that as "evidence," and out of its meagre materials
the biographer builds a cobhouse of conjectures as big as the Coliseum; conjectures which convince
him, the prosecuting attorney, but ought to fall far short of convincing any fair-minded jury.

Shelley's love-poems may be very good evidence, but we know well that they are "good for this
day and train only." We are able to believe that they spoke the truth for that one day, but
we know by experience that they could not be depended on to speak it the next. The very supplication
for a rewarming of Harriet's chilled love was followed so suddenly by the poet's plunge into
an adoring passion for Mary Godwin that if it had been a check it would have lost its value
before a lazy person could have gotten to the bank with it.

Hardness, stubbornness, pride, vindictiveness--these may sometimes reside in a young wife and
mother of nineteen, but they are not charged against Harriet Shelley outside of that poem,
and one has no right to insert them into her character on such shadowy "evidence" as that.
Peacock knew Harriet well, and she has a flexible and persuadable look, as painted by him:

          "Her manners were good, and her whole aspect and demeanor such
          manifest emanations of pure and truthful nature that to be once
          in her company was to know her thoroughly.  She was fond of her
          husband, and accommodated herself in every way to his tastes.
          If they mixed in society, she adorned it; if they lived in
          retirement, she was satisfied; if they travelled, she enjoyed
          the change of scene."

"Perhaps" she had never desired that the breach should be irreparable
and complete. The truth is, we do not even know that there was any
breach at all at this time. We know that the husband and wife went
before the altar and took a new oath on the 24th of March to love and
cherish each other until death--and this may be regarded as a sort of
reconciliation itself, and a wiping out of the old grudges. Then Harriet
went away, and the sister-in-law removed herself from her society. That
was in April. Shelley wrote his "appeal" in May, but the corresponding
went right along afterwards. We have a right to doubt that the subject
of it was a "reconciliation," or that Harriet had any suspicion that she
needed to be reconciled and that her husband was trying to persuade
her to it--as the biographer has sought to make us believe, with his
Coliseum of conjectures built out of a waste-basket of poetry. For we
have "evidence" now--not poetry and conjecture. When Shelley had been
dining daily in the Skinner Street paradise fifteen days and continuing
the love-match which was already a fortnight old twenty-five days
earlier, he forgot to write Harriet; forgot it the next day and the
next. During four days Harriet got no letter from him. Then her fright
and anxiety rose to expression-heat, and she wrote a letter to Shelley's
publisher which seems to reveal to us that Shelley's letters to her
had been the customary affectionate letters of husband to wife, and had
carried no appeals for reconciliation and had not needed to:
                                   "BATH (postmark July 7, 1814).

          "MY DEAR SIR,--You will greatly oblige me by giving the
          enclosed to Mr.  Shelley.  I would not trouble you, but it is
          now four days since I have heard from him, which to me is an
          age.  Will you write by return of post and tell me what has
          become of him? as I always fancy something dreadful has
          happened if I do not hear from him.  If you tell me that he is
          well I shall not come to London, but if I do not hear from you
          or him I shall certainly come, as I cannot endure this dreadful
          state of suspense.  You are his friend and you can feel for me.

                              "I remain yours truly,

                                                  "H. S."

Even without Peacock's testimony that "her whole aspect and demeanor were manifest emanations
of a pure and truthful nature," we should hold this to be a truthful letter, a sincere letter,
a loving letter; it bears those marks; I think it is also the letter of a person accustomed
to receiving letters from her husband frequently, and that they have been of a welcome and
satisfactory sort, too, this long time back--ever since the solemn remarriage and reconciliation
at the altar most likely.

The biographer follows Harriet's letter with a conjecture. He conjectures that she "would now
gladly have retraced her steps." Which means that it is proven that she had steps to retrace--proven
by the poem. Well, if the poem is better evidence than the letter, we must let it stand at that.

Then the biographer attacks Harriet Shelley's honor--by authority of random and unverified
gossip scavengered from a group of people whose very names make a person shudder: Mary Godwin,
mistress to Shelley; her part-sister, discarded mistress of Lord Byron; Godwin, the philosophical
tramp, who gathers his share of it from a shadow--that is to say, from a person whom he shirks
out of naming. Yet the biographer dignifies this sorry rubbish with the name of "evidence."

Nothing remotely resembling a distinct charge from a named person professing to know is offered
among this precious "evidence."

1. "Shelley believed" so and so.

2. Byron's discarded mistress says that Shelley told Mary Godwin so and so, and Mary told her.

3. "Shelley said" so and so--and later "admitted over and over again that he had been in error."

4. The unspeakable Godwin "wrote to Mr. Baxter" that he knew so and so "from unquestionable
authority"--name not furnished.

How-any man in his right mind could bring himself to defile the grave of a shamefully abused
and defenceless girl with these baseless fabrications, this manufactured filth, is inconceivable.
How any man, in his right mind or out of it, could sit down and coldly try to persuade anybody
to believe it, or listen patiently to it, or, indeed, do anything but scoff at it and deride
it, is astonishing.

