Moreover, since ethical naturalism proves itself insufficient for the principles of any and
all morality, it is but a natural conclusion that it is still less able to produce those principles
which are characteristic of the highest representation of human morality known to mankind,
namely: Christian morality. Ethical monism has no room for three ethical fundamental views,
whose full possession morality owes to Christianity, and which gives to Christian morality
its highest motive power. One of these is a deeper conception of evil as a sin, as a positive
rebellion against the good; another is faith in a future {385} absolute realization of the
highest good in an end sometime to be reached by mankind and the individual and by means of
a moral order of the world; and the third is the acknowledgment of the full worth of personality.
Evil--to which of course no objective valid moral law, but only one conventionally established,
stands opposed--is to ethical naturalism nothing but the action of an instinct which in this
given case is not beneficial to man in his struggle for existence; the category of good and
evil is entirely replaced by the category of the useful and detrimental. With the disappearance
of the idea of sin as a transgression of the divine law, the correlated idea of holiness also
disappears from the system of ethical naturalism. Besides, blessedness, complete harmony of
the outer and inner man with the ideal in the state of mankind as well as of every individual,
complete realization of the highest good for the whole as well as for the single through the
means of moral work and perfection on the part of man and of holy and loving guidance and endowment
on the part of God, is an aim which naturalism is not able to acknowledge, since, according
to it, mankind and individuals continue in the ever-flowing stream of earthly incompletion
until both reach their destiny in annihilation. A moral order of the world is an impossibility
to it, since no holy and loving Ruler and Governor of the world, but only a blind mechanism,
causes the course of things. Finally, the personality of man can be only perceived in its worth
and in its full importance, when, in the first place, it is in the possession of freedom, of
full moral responsibility; and when, in the second place, it lives beyond the span of its short
earthly existence and may hope for a full realization of {386} all its ideals of virtue and
the highest good for itself as well as for mankind. Both these points must be contested by
monism and naturalism. The place of freedom is taken by absolute determinism; even man is only
a natural product, the highest which naturalism knows, but still no more than a product of
nature; his personality and his life, bound to the material body, cease with the death of this
body, and therefore never reach the ideal of either morality or blessedness. All ideals are
and must forever remain objective illusions which came forth out of the power of the corresponding
noble impulse, imaginative objective conceptions of the moral impulses.

§ 2. Scientific Darwinism and Moral Principles.

Whilst Darwinistic naturalism surely injures the moral principles, the Darwinistic theories
are friendly to them, if they, as mere scientific theories, restrain themselves within the
limits of natural science. But in no other point of the entire realm of contact between the
natural and intellectual sciences is it more difficult to observe the boundary-line than in
reflecting upon the moral self-determination of man; here natural science is always in danger
of going beyond its limits.

In the question as to the relation of the evolution theories to religion, the boundary-line
can everywhere be easily drawn in theory and easily observed in practice. For it is entirely
natural for man to look upon the phenomena of the visible world on the one hand, with a religious
mind, as works and actions of an almighty Creator and Ruler of the world, on the other, with
his observing and reflecting mind, as products of natural causes. With this double view, man
by no means feels {387} himself dragged hither and thither between two conflicting views; he
is able in his logical contemplation of the world scientifically to establish and arrange each
for itself and both in their harmony, and has the full consciousness that the one, like the
other, has subjective as well as objective truth. Or, if a single individual does not have
this consciousness, he must at least admit that it is not Darwinism primarily which created
the difficulty of this combined view of the world, but that the latter existed for man in the
past as well as in the present.

But the relation of the Darwinian theories to ethical problems is quite a different thing.
Here, in the first place, it is not the same process which is to be explained as well in regard
to its natural conditions as to its moral cause. It is true that this double view deserves
attention in so far as we can look upon every action which results from a moral determination
also in reference to its natural side. If I have to raise my arm in consequence of a moral
determination, then physiology and mechanism can demonstrate with it the whole theory of the
motion of members. But this is not the question, when we treat of the relation between the
natural and the ethical. In this example, the moralist examines the motives of my action, the
scientist describes and explains the activity of the nerves and muscles of my arm, and as long
as the scientist is not guilty of going beyond the boundary to which he is tempted, and which
even now we are endeavoring to make clear, as long as he does not include the ethical motives
in his physiological attempts at explanation, the one keeps himself neutral with reference
to the other; each of them knows that he is {388} operating in a field which at first has nothing
in common with that of the other. In a moral action, as such, the question is no longer as
to a process which is to be explained as well in regard to its natural conditions as to its
ethical cause, but of a process which either has its ethical cause, and then in its ethical
value no natural cause, or which even in its ethical motives belongs to the causal connection
of empirical nature with its indestructible chain of natural causes and natural effects. Now
at this point the scientist, as such, is always exposed to the danger of denying the first
part of our dilemma and affirming the second. For, in moral action, something which is elevated
above nature and its causal connection always makes its way into this causal connection of
nature, and with its action and the effects of this action wholly enters into this connection:
and natural science which has to deal particularly with this causal connection of nature and
with it alone, is on that account nevertheless always tempted to explain everything that it
sees coming into this connection, in all its causes (even in those which no longer belong to
this natural causal connection), out of it. It is therefore always tempted to trace even ethical
action which, with its deeds, makes its way and enters into this causal connection, but which
with its motives stands above it, as to its motives, back to a natural causal connection; and
thus to contest the independence of ethical motives and their principles--which independence
is not dependent on nature, but, on the contrary, frequently contradicts it. Ethics must adhere
to the fact that the ethical determination of the will has its origin not in a natural condition,
but in the ethical centre of personality; although all the conditions under which the ethical
motive {389} originates and acts, belong completely to the causal connection of natural life,
in which man himself stands as to the whole natural part of his being. The ethical realm stands
above the natural realm, and shows its superiority partly by the category of moral demands
whose imperativeness cannot have grown out of the mechanical necessity of the natural law,
because it often enough contradicts the latter and carries out its demands in opposition to
it, partly by the consciousness of individual responsibility which cannot be got rid of even
by him who mentally establishes a system of determinism that denies responsibility, partly
by the voice of the injured conscience which cannot merely be the dislike of a dissatisfied
higher natural impulse, when it can speak of the same action for years, even for an entire
human life, and even, where man has counterbalanced that once felt dissatisfaction of the higher
impulse, by an oft-repeated satisfaction of it. In Book I, Chapter V, § 1, we tried to show
that even Darwin seems not to have entirely avoided this danger of explaining the moral from
physical causes; while at the same time we acknowledge that he otherwise esteems the realm
of the moral, and that he even finds the lofty position of man above the animal world still
more decidedly expressed in his moral than in his intellectual qualities.

But such an intrusion of the physical into the ethical is by no means a necessary consequence
of scientific Darwinism--only an ever-present temptation of it. He who once admits that even
by means of development something new can originate, that even under the full influence of
the evolution theory there appeared in the series of creation entirely new phenomena with the
{390} appearance of life and the organic, and of sensation and consciousness, and still more
with the appearance of self-consciousness and freedom, which phenomena no evolution theory
is able to explain; and he who takes into consideration the weight of that other obvious fact
that, in the origin and the growth of each single man, a time in which he acts with moral responsibility
follows in gradual development a time in which he had but the value and the life of a cell,--such
an one can explain the whole origin of mankind according to the evolution theory, and yet see
something absolutely new coming forth with the appearance of moral determination. All conditions
of the moral determinations of the will may be and are naturally conditioned, as, indeed, in
this world the entire spiritual life of man is certainly bound to the conditions of his corporeal
life; all preliminary stages of moral types which preceded the temporal appearance of moral
beings, and which surround us still, those stages which appear in the animal world, may have
preceded and prepared the way for the introduction of morally responsible beings into the world:
the moral determination of the will itself nevertheless remains something new and independent--something
which transcends nature.

If this fact is once admitted, then ethics also has free play to establish independently and
render valid its principles. And then we have no longer any reason to treat of the relation
of the different ethical principles to naturo-historical Darwinism; for this relation is that
of absolute mutual peace.

Precisely the same relationship between Darwinism and morality, which we found in treating
of moral principles, presents itself when we ask about the relationship of Darwinistic ideas
and moral life in its concrete reality. He who builds a system of monistic naturalism upon
his Darwinism, if he is logical, and not better than his system, comes into inevitable collision
with concrete moral life; while he who limits his Darwinism to the realm of natural science,
remains in concrete life in peace with morality.

That Darwinistic ethical naturalism also comes into conflict with concrete moral life, becomes
evident from the joy with which the advocates of subversion and negation greet the new principle
of the "struggle for existence," and make it the principle of their own actions and social
theories. This is not chance sympathy, but is founded upon the nature of ethical naturalism.
Of him who learns to look upon himself only as a product of nature, though highly ennobled,
we cannot expect any other principle than that of following his nature: not, indeed, the ideal
nature of man--for this is an abstraction which man reaches only by means of a long {392} process
of reflection--but his own empirical nature, as he finds it present in himself; for this is
indeed that natural product as which man has to consider himself according to that theory.
Where this leads to, everybody knows who knows human nature. If these consequences are not
to be found in all ethical naturalists, and if they are perhaps the least evident in the system
and life of the very ones who otherwise teach naturalism the most logically (Strauss, for example),
we again most cheerfully admit that many men are better than their systems, and that in making
objection to a system, even an ethical system, we in the first place do not say anything at
all about the advocates of this system and their moral value. Often enough some noble and fruitful
truth has been advocated by men who are personally contemptible, and often enough some dangerous
error is propagated by men who are personally very amiable and moral, although the damage which
such an error carries with it, must become evident in their lives, on closer observation. Besides,
we must not overlook the fact, that what in a perverse system is still relatively true, and
the thing which gives it a relative vitality, is borrowed from truth and from the correct system;
and that all those who oppose the present fundamentals of morality, and especially of Christian
morality, in a thousand ways live upon and consume the possessions which they owe to the same
influences against which they contend.

But to whatever relative height the moral nobility of single advocates of ethical naturalism
may rise, it is not able, at least not from its own principles, to produce thoroughly moral
and truly cultivated characters; such are only produced where that which forms the character,
{393} flows out of a spring of life whose origin is above nature and its series of causes.

From this we see that for the most part a very low idea of personality, a very low derivation
of the motives of human action, is found in the works of Darwinistic moralists--as, e.g., we
have seen in the works of Häckel that to him the idea of a personality of God is inseparably
connected with the idea of capricious arbitrariness, and that he derives all actions of all
men from the motives of egoism.

But we also see, from still more common evidences, the fact that some of the very highest blossoms
and noblest fruits of human virtue, as they ripen on the ground of Christian morality, are
not even acknowledged, much less required, by ethical naturalism. We think particularly of
the virtues of love, of self-denial, and of humility. Certainly, we do not deny that men who
are inclined toward naturalism can and do possess love to a certain degree, but the highest
exemplification of love, the love of enemies in the fullest sense of the word--not only compassion
on the battle-field, but the full, forgiving, blessing love which renders good for evil, and
even intercedes for a personal enemy, although he may be the intentional and successful destroyer
of our whole earthly happiness--such a love may perhaps be demanded and admired by a naturalistic
moralist under the imposing influence of the presence of such a love and in unconscious dependence
on the motives of Christianity which surround him; but he will never be able to show from what
point of his system it is to be deduced. On the other hand, it is easy to show him more than
one point of his system which, far from requiring such love, {394} stigmatizes it as simple
foolishness. Such a fruit only ripens under the care of him who gave his life for us while
we still were enemies, and under the influence of the remission of our sin by our Heavenly Father.

Moreover, an ethical naturalist can also accomplish much in self-denial: he can make many great
sacrifices, if he can thereby reach a desirable end that cannot be reached without acts of
self-denial; he can show great strength and patience in a resigned endurance of the inevitable;
and if we take into consideration the possibility of its being logically at variance with his
system, he may perform all that which the highest morality requires. But a renunciation which
is more than silent resignation, and which under certain circumstances can also become a joyful
renunciation of all that was beloved and dear to man on earth, does not grow out of the soil
of naturalism, and is possible only there where man carries in himself a possession which would
render him still more fortunate and happy than the idea of species, and where he knows the
cross of Jesus, and understands the word of the Lord: "He that loveth his life shall lose it;
and he that loseth his life for my sake, shall find it." Strauss is a striking proof that naturalism
is not able to estimate the tasks of self-denial at their full importance. In his "The Old
Faith and the New," although he speaks with great earnestness of moral demands, yet he deeply
degrades that which is connected with a Christian renunciation of self and the world, when
he reproaches Christianity with "a thorough cult of poverty and mendicity" (!) and, regarding
its demand for self-denial, he denies that it has any comprehension of the tasks of {395} industry,
of the virtues of home and family life, of patriotism and civil virtue.

Finally, we may make a similar statement in regard to humility. There certainly are ethical
naturalists also who are modest. But when the prophets of ethical naturalism again and again
announce that the great aim of all the discoveries of the evolution theory is to show us how
far mankind has fortunately progressed; when their spirit of devotion is nourished by Göthe's
Promethean word: "Hast thou not thyself accomplished all, thou holy glowing heart?"--and even
when Häckel prints as the leading motto of his "Anthropogeny" Göthe's poem "Prometheus"; when
the struggle of selection is also elevated to a moral principle, and the life-task of an individual
is limited to creating elbow-room for himself: then humility, indeed, is a virtue which a naturalist
may acquire, not through his naturalism, but in spite of it; and the great naïveté with which,
in books of that tendency, haughtiness and passion for glory are treated as something necessarily
understood, and their own ego is glorified, is a much more logical result. "We are proud of
having so immensely out-stripped our lower animal ancestors, and derive from it the consoling
assurance that in future also, mankind, as a whole, will follow the glorious career of progressive
development, and attain a still higher degree of mental perfection." (Häckel, "Hist. of Creat.")
This is the theme which is repeated in many variations in all books of similar tendency. In
the same book already referred to, we read: "Each free and highly developed individual, each
original person, has his own religion, his own God; so it is certainly not arrogance when we
also claim the {396} right of forming our own idea of God." L. Büchner, in his collection of
essays, "Aus Natur und Welt" ("From Nature and the World"), dedicates a long chapter to self-glorification,
and finds confirmed in himself the word of the poet, "Great destinies are always preceded by
spirit messengers"; and he, still living, prefaces his own biography in the latest edition
of "Kraft und Stoff" ("Force and Matter"), and on the first page of the same publishes the
testimonial which he received, when leaving the gymnasium: "The bearer of this testimonial
excelled in the thorough study of literature, philosophy, and poetry, and as regards style
in his productions showed an excellent talent." In view of these things, we certainly do no
injustice to this tendency when we deny to it the conception of the idea and the practice of
humility.

§ 2. Scientific Darwinism and Moral Life.

It is evident from the peace-relation between mere scientific Darwinism and moral principles,
that naturo-historical Darwinism also remains in peace with moral life. We therefore have no
longer to treat of any question of competency in the realm of concrete moral life, but only
to mention the points of contact in which both realms, fully acknowledging their mutual independence,
yet in an inferior way exercise some beneficial influence upon each other. {397}

Moral life influences Darwinism in so far as, by its mere existence, it cautions the advocate
of the scientific evolution theory against effacing the differences between the moral and the
natural, and against degrading man to the level of animals on account of his connection with
the animal world. The naturo-historical idea of evolution, in case it should turn out to be
correct, would exercise an influence upon moral life in a three-fold direction: First, it would
add to all the motives of the humane treatment of the animal world--which certainly without
it already has moral demands--a new one, and establish them all more firmly. Man would then
recognize in the animal world which surrounds him branches of his own natural pedigree, and
exercise his right of mastery only in the sense which Alex. Braun expresses, when he says:
"Man consents to the idea of being appointed master of animals; but then he must also acknowledge
that he is not placed over his subjects as a stranger, but proceeded from the people itself,
whose master he wishes to be." A second service which the idea of evolution would have to render
to the forming of moral life, would consist in the fact that it would favor all those ethical
modes of contemplation and those maxims which regard the gradual process of development and
the growth of character as the relative power of influences and conditions, and that it would
give them hints for the perception of moral growth, in like manner as, in the before-mentioned
parable, the Lord illustrates the imperceptible and continual growth of the kingdom of God
with the growth of a plant. A third service which the evolution theory might be able {398}
to render to moral life, would consist in the fact that it would give to the motive of perfection
and progress, which is always and everywhere a moral lever, a new illustration and a new weight
by pointing at the progress which development has to show in the life of nature.

       *       *       *       *       * {399}

CONCLUSION.

If now, having reached our goal, we look back upon the way which we have traversed, we find
a justification of the regret expressed at the beginning, that a scientific treatment of religion
and morality is compelled to take a position in regard to theories which are not yet established.
We found the most different problems--scientific, naturo-philosophical, metaphysical, religious
and ethical--inextricably mixed, and were obliged, as one of our first tasks, to make an attempt
at finding the clew and at examining and testing each single problem, together with attempts
at its solution, separately, although keeping constantly in mind its connection with all other
problems and their attempts at solution. We found ourselves led into the presence of a series
of the most interesting problems, but not a single solution finished. That very attempt at
solution which brought up this whole question, and which was repeatedly announced as the infallible
key to the solution of all scientific problems--the selection theory--we found a decided failure,
at least in the direction of the extension and importance which was given to this theory. And
yet in spite of the hypothetical nature of all attempts at solution, we see investigators in
all the realms of natural science strongly attracted by the very promising character of these
problems and busily engaged in making attempts at solution; {400} and we see even philosophy
strongly attracted by its interest in these works. Such a diligent work can certainly not be
without gain; but wherein will this gain consist? Will it, as its antagonists prophecy, be
like that which in former times alchemy brought to science, which, indeed, enriched chemistry
by an entire series of new discoveries, but did not find what it sought, the one fundamental
element from which all the rest are derived, which only confirmed, with a power acknowledged
even to-day, the old doctrine of the elementary difference of the elements? Will the Darwinian
investigations thus also make all possible discoveries by the way, but in place of that which
they look for, in place of a common pedigree or of a few pedigrees for all organisms, finally
only give additional strength to the permanence of species and the unapproachableness of the
secret of their origin? Or can we derive from the reasons which the investigators urge in favor
of the idea of an origin of species through descent and evolution, the hope that that mysterious
darkness of prehistoric times upon which the works of our century have shed so much light,
will still be illuminated even to the sources from which organic species came, and from which
mankind also originated? We must leave the decision of these questions to the future and to
scientists.

But we have to note one gain, which is so great that on its account, we willingly cease our
regret in regard to the unfinished condition of these theories; for we owe the full enjoyment
of this gain to that very unfinished condition. It is the gain which religion and morality
get from these investigations, and which consists in the new and comprehensive confirmation
of the conviction, {401} which, indeed, was established before, that religion and morality--Christian
religion and Christian morality--rest on foundations which can no longer be shaken by any result
of exact investigation.

The triumph with which the Darwinian theories were greeted by many as the new sun before whose
rising all that mankind had thus far called light and sun turns pale, and the antipathy with
which, on that very account, many to whom their religious and ethical acquisitions are a sacred
sanctuary, turn away from these theories, urged us to investigate their position in reference
to religion and morality. Now, if these theories had produced a certain undoubted result, we
should unquestionably have been satisfied with the examination of the position of religion
and morality in reference to this certain result. But since not a single result of those investigations
is really established, we have found ourselves obliged to give our investigation a much greater
extension and to discuss even all imaginable possibilities. The beneficial result of this comparison
was, that religion and morality not only remain at peace with all imaginable possibilities
of scientific theories, but can also, in the realm of the philosophy of the doctrines of nature,
be passive spectators of all investigations and attempts, even of all possible excursions into
the realm of fancy, without being obliged to interfere. It is in the realm of mere metaphysics
that we first perceive an antagonist whose victory would indeed be fatal to the religious and
ethical acquisitions of mankind: this antagonist is called elimination from nature of the idea
of design. Fortunately, this metaphysical idea is in such striking opposition not only to the
whole world of facts but also to all logical {402} reasoning, it has everywhere, where man
perceives organization and a difference between lower and higher, especially in the contemplation
of the world, of this cosmos of wonderful order and beauty, so decidedly all philosophical
as well as all exact sciences as its adversaries, it lays its hands so rudely and so destructively
not only upon the religious and ethical acquisitions but also upon all ideal remaining acquisitions
of mankind, that religion and morality know, when fighting this adversary, they are in firm
accord with all the spiritual interests of mankind.

This, in its most essential features, is the pleasing result of our critical examination; and
such a demonstration of the immovably solid foundation, secure from all the change of opinions
and all the progress of discoveries on which morality and religion rest, has still an entire
series of further pleasing consequences in its train.

In the first place, it is a living and actual proof of the fact that religion and morality
give to all sciences the full freedom of investigation. The religious and ethical interest
itself not only gives, but even requires, this freedom of investigation. It requires it in
consequence of that impulse of truth which religion has in common with every impulse of knowledge,
and which in itself is an ethical impulse. In consequence of this impulse, religion must found
its possession on nothing else than subjective and objective truth, and can look upon all the
paths which lead through even the remotest realm of knowledge to the establishment of truth,
only with sympathetic interest. Precisely those who see in religion more than a mere expression
of emotion, and all those who require that their religious life and the object of {403} their
religious faith shall possess truth, subjective and objective, cannot commit any greater folly
than treating search for truth in any other realm with suspicion, or even ignoring it. They
only injure that which they meant to defend, by rendering the purity of their own religious
interest suspected, and by establishing more firmly the breach between religious life and faith
and the other acquisitions of culture and interests of their time, of which neither religion
nor science, but only a misguided tendency of their minds and hearts, is guilty. How much unfriendly
and unjust judgment has already found utterance by means of the pen and voice, in reference
to honest and meritorious workers, on the part of religious zealots who fail to recognize that
close relationship of the religious with the scientific impulse of truth! How often and how
much does such a judgment gain great consideration from a public of which but a few are able
to form an independent opinion of the men and works which are thus abused before their eyes
and ears, and how much of the aversion to the form in which the religious life of the present
offers itself, on the part of those men who are thus suspected, is in the last instance to
be attributed neither to be irreligiousness of these men nor to the deficiency of the present
form of our religious life, but to the repelling effect of that unjust treatment!

Another gain of our discussion, correlated to that just mentioned, consists in the proof that
religion and morality have their autonomous principle and realm which is not at all obliged
to borrow the proof of its truth from the present condition and degree of our knowledge, but
carries it in itself, although it stands in {404} fruitful reciprocal action with all the other
realms of knowledge and life. Just as decidedly as we had to caution the advocates of religion
against keeping themselves indifferent, suspicious, or even hostile, regarding the advances
into the realm of secular knowledge, so decidedly do we like to see the workers in the realm
of the knowledge of nature cautioned against confusing points of view, in thinking that they
can through their scientific knowledge purify and reform the religious and ethical realms.
They may purify and reform as much as they please, but only in their own realm. The only thing
they are able to reform is our knowledge of nature, and in our religious and ethical life and
perception only that which belongs to this natural part; but this is only the outer part of
religious and ethical life: the source of our religion and morality springs from quite another
ground than that which they cultivate.

A third gain from our discussion is the actual proof of the harmony between faith and knowledge,
between the religious and the scientific views of the world. In our investigation we had no
occasion for psychological or theoretical investigations as to faith and knowledge and their
mutual relation; but if our discussion is not an entire failure, perhaps the actual exposition
of a standpoint on which faith and knowledge may live at peace with one another, which is not
bought by a sacrifice on either side, and which does not consist in a compromise of the two,
but which has its reason in the deepest and most active interest of the one, in the full and
unconstrained freedom of the other, a stronger proof for the intimate relationship of these
brothers, between whom the present generation wishes too often to sow discord, than if we {405}
had undertaken long religio-philosophical and theoretical investigations.

Finally, the results of our analysis have given us still another gain: they have led us beyond
Lessing's "Nathan" and his parable of the "Three Rings." We call this a gain, without the least
intention of discrediting by it the motives of tolerance and the points of view for the judgment
of the character and religiousness of human individuals, which lay in that parable, or suspecting
the motives of so many of our contemporaries whose religio-philosophical judgment is entirely
expressed in that parable. We saw ourselves compelled to make a choice either of accepting
or of rejecting ends in the world, and found that the world resolves itself into a senseless
game at dice, and that the phenomena become more unintelligible the more important they are,
if we ignore or even reject teleology. The acknowledgment of the latter prevented us from seeing
in the world and its events merely the eternal stream of planless coming and going; it prevented
us from accepting such an endless stream of appearance and disappearance, and therefore also
an endless stream of the appearance and disappearance of new forms of religion in that creature
for whose appearance we see all other creatures are only a preparation, and are even obliged
to look upon them as a preparation in accordance with no other theory more than that of evolution.
It also urged us to inquire as to the ends and designs of mankind, and we found this end in
the disposition of man for a communion with God, for the state of bearing his image and of
being his child. Now we have fully to acknowledge that Christianity, like all religions which
claim truth and universal acceptance, {406} is to be analyzed with the very same means of science
as all phenomena in the world of facts, and that therefore it is especially subject to all
investigations of religio-philosophical, religio-historical, and historical criticism, to its
fullest extent. But precisely such an analysis of Christianity leads us to a result which elevates
Christian religion high above all other forms. It also confirms by means of science what, indeed,
is established to a Christian mind as certainty from his own direct experience, that the quintessence
of that which Christianity offers us, is truth and gives full satisfaction to soul and mind.
For that analysis establishes, in the first place, that Christianity shows us the idea of God
and the nature and destiny of man in a purity such as no other religion does, and in such a
life-creating power that it is able to satisfy most completely all the nobler desires and impulses
of soul and mind, and to overcome most successfully all ignoble ones. Furthermore, it shows
us that these gifts of Christianity offered themselves, and still offer themselves, not only
in philosophemes and doctrines, in parables and myths, in postulates and prophecies, but what,
indeed, is not the case in any other religion, in an arranged course of deeds and facts which,
in everything that is necessary and essential for the acquisition of that idea of God and for
the realization of that ideal of mankind, legitimate themselves to criticism as historical
facts, and which legitimate themselves as actions of divine manifestation by the fact, that
they and their consequences also are really able to fulfill what they promise, and to bring
mankind nearer to the accomplishment of that goal which they set up for it. Finally, it shows
us, when it reviews and compares the development of {407} culture among all mankind, that the
Christian nations have really borne the richest blossom and fruit which has appeared hitherto
on the tree of mankind, and that Christianity, for the life of nations, has not only, like
other religions, powers of preservation, but also powers of renovation and renewal which other
religions are wanting. Even all the errors of superstition and immorality, of intolerance and
lust of power, of so many of its advocates and confessors, at which the adversaries of the
Christian view of the world so willingly point, are but a confirmation of its value. For they
show us how divine and heavenly the gift must be, if even such errors were not able to smother
its fruits. If we do not wish to suppose that mankind has foundations and ends which up to
the present it is not yet allowed to know, we certainly must look for these foundations and
ends where we find the best which has so far been given to mankind and which has been accomplished
by it.

This acknowledgment of Christianity as the only true and only really universal religion leads
us beyond another sentiment of Lessing, which has found an equally strong or perhaps still
stronger echo in the mind. We mean the expression that, if he had to choose, he would prefer
the continual search for truth to the possession of truth itself. We emphatically acknowledge
the holy right and the high nobility of this impulse of investigation and activity, but we
need not buy its acknowledgment and satisfaction at the price of being obliged to renounce
a consciousness or the hope of a consciousness which is equally indispensable to our inner
happiness as that impulse of investigation, and which first gives to this impulse its overwhelming
power--namely, the {408} consciousness and the hope of really possessing the truth. For, in
fact, we are not required to make this choice. There is a possession of truth which does not
exclude, but requires, the search for truth: that is the possession of truth in the answer
to the questions as to the starting point and the goal of our life, the possession of truth
in the fundamentals of our religious view of the world. It is the certainty about the starting-point
and goal of our life, which lastingly and effectively invites us also to look for and perceive
all the ways which, in theory as well as in practice, lead from a firm starting-point to a
certain end, and only the possession of truth in the fundamentals of our religious view of
the world gives value and satisfaction to investigation in a world which, without this possession,
contains for us only transitory and fleeting, and therefore only unsatisfactory, things, but
which stands before us as the work and the theatre of revelation of a God and Father, and therefore
gives to investigation inexhaustible joy and satisfaction when we look upon it from those stand-points.

In like manner as, at the outset of our investigation, we perceived in organic species creations
of God, and in spite of this, or rather on account of it, looked upon the attempts at exploring
their origin with so much deeper interest, we also see ourselves, in the still more direct
religious realm, not at all condemned to stagnation when we acknowledge Christianity as absolute
religion. This very acknowledgment alone makes a real progress possible for us. For every progress,
in order to be a real progress, needs a firm starting-point and a certain goal; hence that
which is shown and offered to mankind in Christianity. From this {409} starting-point and toward
this end there are tasks enough for religious progress. The ever more definite investigation
of the facts and doctrines of Christianity, the improvement and ever more complete reproduction
of the scientific image in which these facts and doctrines are reflected in the mind of man
the progressing adaptation of ecclesiastical life in divine service, and organization to the
substance and the need of Christian religiousness, the harmonizing of our possession of faith
with all other elements of culture of each period, the working up of that which is given to
us in Christianity into the spiritual and ethical acquisition of a single personality and its
ever more complete representation and realization in the individual and the common life, the
progressing penetration of generations by the transfiguring light of religion and morality,
and the progressive overcoming of the likewise progressingly developing kingdom of evil--in
short, all that which the language of religion calls the growth of the kingdom of God, is work
and progress enough, but certainly work and progress on the ground of a certain basis as the
starting-point given to us by God, and work and progress toward a certain goal set for us by God.

It is only from this basis of a possession of truth as it is offered to us by Christian theism,
and by the facts of redemption and of a reconciliation of man with God, that the breach between
faith and knowledge, between religion and the life of culture, which at present takes place
in so many a heart and mind, can be healed; and, far from seeking to cripple or hinder those
who stand on this basis, it alone gives to their theoretical and practical activity its joyous
strength and certain end, to {410} their sphere of knowledge its universal breadth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notes

[1] "The International Scientific Series." No. XIII.

[2] "Evolution of Man."

