In February the ambassadors returned, but returned laden with bad tidings. Servius Sulpicius,
who was to have been their chief spokesman, died just as they reached Antony. The other two
immediately began to treat with him, so as to become the bearers back to Rome of conditions
proposed by him. This was exactly what they had been told not to do. They had carried the orders
of the Senate to their rebellious officer, and then admitted the authority of that rebel by
bringing back his propositions. They were not even allowed to go into Mutina so as to see Decimus;
but they were, in truth, only too well in accord with the majority of the Senate, whose hearts
were with Antony. Anything to those lovers of their fish-ponds was more desirable than a return
to the loyalty of the Republic. The Deputies were received by the Senate, who discussed their
embassy, and on the next day they met again, when Cicero pronounced his eighth Philippic. Why
he did not speak on the previous day I do not know. Middleton is somewhat confused in his account.
Morabin says that Cicero was not able to obtain a hearing when the Deputies were received.
The Senate did on that occasion come to a decision; against which act of pusillanimity Cicero
on the following day expressed himself very vehemently. They had decided that this was not
to be called a war, but rather a tumult, and seem to have hesitated in denouncing Antony as
a public enemy. The Senate was convoked on the next day to decide the terms of the amnesty
to be accorded to the soldiers who had followed Antony, when Cicero, again throwing aside the
minor matter, burst upon them in his wrath. He had hitherto inveighed against Antony; now his
anger is addressed to the Senate. "Lucius Cæsar," he said, "has told us that he is Antony's
uncle, and must vote as such. Are you all uncles to Antony?" Then he goes on to show that war
is the only name by which this rebellion can be described. "Has not Hirtius, who has gone away,
sick as he is, called it a war? Has not young Cæsar, young as he is, prompted to it by no one,
undertaken it as a war?" He repeats the words of a letter from Hirtius which could only have
been used in war: "I have taken Claterna. Their cavalry has been put to flight. A battle has
been fought. So many men have been killed. This is what you call peace!" Then he speaks of
other civil wars, which he says have grown from difference of opinion--"except that last between
Pompey and Cæsar, as to which I will not speak. I have been ignorant of its cause, and have
hated its ending." But in this war all men are of one opinion who are worthy of the name of
Romans. "We are fighting for the temples of our gods, for our walls, our homes, for the abode
of the Roman people, for their Penates, their altars, their hearths for the graves of ancestors--and
we are fighting only against Antony. * * * Fufius Calenus tells us of peace--as though I of
all men did not know that peace was a blessing. But tell me, Calenus, is slavery peace?" He
is very angry with Calenus. Although he has called him his friend, he was in great wrath against
him. "I am fighting for Decimus and you for Antony. I wish to preserve a Roman city; you wish
to see it battered to the ground. Can you deny this, you who are creating all means of delays
by which Decimus may be weakened and Antony made strong?"

"I had consoled myself with this," he says, "that when these ambassadors had been sent and
had returned despised, and had told the Senate that not only had Antony refused to leave Gaul
but was besieging Mutina, and would not let them even see Decimus--that then, in our passion
and our rage, we should have gone forth with our arms, and our horses, and our men, and at
once have rescued our General. But we--since we have seen the audacity, the insolence, and
the pride of Antony--we have become only more cowardly than before." Then he gives his opinion
about the amnesty: "Let any of those who are now with Antony, but shall leave him before the
ides of March and pass to the armies of the Consuls, or of Decimus, or of young Cæsar, be held
to be free from reproach. If one should quit their ranks through their own will, let them be
rewarded and honored as Hirtius and Pansa, our Consuls, may think proper." This was the eighth
Philippic, and is perhaps the finest of them all. It does not contain the bitter invective
of the second, but there is in it a true feeling of patriotic earnestness. The ninth also is
very eloquent, though it is rather a pæan sung on behalf of his friend Sulpicius, who in bad
health had encountered the danger of the journey, and had died in the effort, than one of these
Philippics which are supposed to have been written and spoken with the view of demolishing
Antony. It is a specimen of those funereal orations delivered on behalf of a citizen who had
died in the service of his country which used to be common among the Romans.

The tenth is in praise of Marcus Junius Brutus. Were I to attempt to explain the situation
of Brutus in Macedonia, and to say how he had come to fill it, I should be carried away from
my purpose as to Cicero's life, and should be endeavoring to write the history of the time.
My object is simply to illustrate the life of Cicero by such facts as we know. In the confusion
which existed at the time, Brutus had obtained some advantages in Macedonia, and had recovered
for himself the legions of which Caius Antonius had been in possession, and who was now a prisoner
in his hands. At this time young Marcus Cicero was his lieutenant, and it is told us how one
of those legions had put themselves under his command. Brutus had at any rate written home
letters to the Senate early in March, and Pansa had called the Senate together to receive them.

Again he attacks Fufius Calenus, Pansa's father-in-law, who was the only man in the Senate
bold enough to stand up against him; though there were doubtless many of those foot Senators--men
who traversed the house backward and forward to give their votes--who were anxious to oppose
him. He thanks Pansa for calling them so quickly, seeing that when they had parted yesterday
they had not expected to be again so soon convoked. We may gather from this the existence of
a practice of sending messengers round to the Senators' houses to call them together. He praises
Brutus for his courage and his patience. It is his object to convince his hearers, and through
them the Romans of the day, that the cause of Antony is hopeless. Let us rise up and crush
him. Let us all rise, and we shall certainly crush him. There is nothing so likely to attain
success as a belief that the success has been already attained. "From all sides men are running
together to put out the flames which he has lighted. Our veterans, following the example of
young Cæsar, have repudiated Antony and his attempts. The 'Legio Martia' has blunted the edge
of his rage, and the 'Legio Quarta' has attacked him. He dominated their ugly convention with his
height, his face so ruddy and fresh under the pale brown of his hair, his alert, assured, deft
movement. His high good nature had the effect of sweetening for him even Clara Britton's flavorless
manner. The "We were speaking of you," with which she saw him to his seat, had all the warmth
of a smile, but a smile far in the background of Flora's immediate possession. Indeed, Flora
had seldom had so much to say to Harry as at this moment of her excitement over what he had actually
seen. For the evidence that he had seen something was vivid in his face. She had never found
him so splendidly alive. She had never seen him, it came to her, quite like this before.

She shook the paper at him. "Tell us everything, instantly!"

He gaily acknowledged her right to make him thus stand and deliver. He shot his hands into the
air with the lightening vivacity that was in him a sort of wit. "Not guilty," he grinned at
her.

"Harry, you know you were in it. The papers have you the most important personage."

"Oh, not all that," he denied her allegation. "They had the whole lot of us cooped up together
for investigation for as much as two hours. I thought I shouldn't have time to dress! I'm as hungry
as a hawk!" He rolled it out with the full gusto with which he was by this time engaged on
his first course.

"Poor dear," said Flora with cooing mock-sympathy, "and did they starve it? But would it mind
telling us, now that it has its food, what is true, and what was the gallant part it played this
afternoon?"

"Well," he followed her whimsical lead, "the chief detective and I were the star performers.
I found the ring wasn't there, and he found he couldn't find it."

"Don't you know any more than the paper?"

Flora mourned.

"Considerably less--if I know the papers." He grinned with a fine flash of even teeth. "What
do you want me to say?"
"Why, stupid, the adventures of Harry Cressy, Esquire. How did you
feel?"

"Thirsty."

"Oh, Harry!" She glanced about, as if for a missile
to threaten him with.

"Upon my word! But look here--wait a minute!"
he arrived deliberately at what was required of him. "Never mind how
I felt; but if you want to know the way it happened--here's your Maple
Room." He began a diagram with forks on the cloth before him, and
Clara, who had watched their sparring from her point of vantage in
the background, now leaned forward, as if at last they were getting
to the point.

"This is the case, furthest from the door." He planted
a salt-cellar in his silver inclosure. "I come in very early, at half-past
two, before the crowd; fail to meet you there." He made mischievous
bows to right and left. "I go out again. But first I see this ring."

"What
was it like?" Flora demanded.

"Like?" Harry turned a speculative
eye to the dull glow of the candelabrum, as if between its points
of flame he conjured up the vision of the vanished jewel. "Like a
bit of an old gold heathen god curled round himself, with his head,
which was mostly two yellow sapphires, between his knees, and a big,
blue stone on top. Soft, yellow gold, so fine you could almost dent
it. And carved! Even through a glass every line of it is right." The Greek historian Appian gives us none of these horrors, but
simply intimates that Trebonius, having been taken in the snare, had his head cut off.[215]
That Cicero believed the story is probable. It is told against his son-in-law, of whom he had
hitherto spoken favorably. He would not have spoken against the man except on conviction. Dolabella
was immediately declared an enemy to the Republic. Cicero inveighs against him with all his
force, and says that such as Dolabella is, he had been made by the cruelty of Antony. But he
goes on to philosophize, and declare how much more miserable than Trebonius was Dolabella himself,
who is so base that from his childhood those things had been a delight to him which have been
held as disgraceful by other children. Then he turns to the question which is in dispute, whether
Brutus should be left in command of Macedonia, and Cassius of Syria--Cassius was now on his
way to avenge the death of Trebonius--or whether other noble Romans, Publius Servilius, for
instance, or that Hirtius and Pansa, the two Consuls, when they can be spared from Italy, shall
be sent there. It is necessary here to read between the lines. The going of the Consuls would
mean the withdrawing of the troops from Italy, and would leave Rome open to the Cæsarean faction.
At present Decimus and Cicero, and whoever else there might be loyal to the Republic, had to
fight by the assistance of other forces than their own. Hirtius and Pansa were constrained
to take the part of the Republic by Cicero's eloquence, and by the action of those Senators
who felt themselves compelled to obey Cicero. But they did not object to send the Consuls away,
and the Consular legions, under the plea of saving the provinces. This they were willing enough
to do--with the real object of delivering Italy over to those who were Cicero's enemies but
were not theirs. All this Cicero understood, and, in conducting the contest, had to be on his
guard, not only against the soldiers of Antony but against the Senators also, who were supposed
to be his own friends, but whose hearts were intent on having back some Cæsar to preserve for
them their privileges.

Cicero in this matter talked some nonsense. "By what right, by what law," he asks, "shall Cassius
go to Syria? By that law which Jupiter sanctioned when he ordained that all things good for
the Republic should be just and legal." For neither had Brutus a right to establish himself
in Macedonia as Proconsul nor Cassius in Syria. This reference to Jupiter was a begging of
the question with a vengeance. But it was perhaps necessary, in a time of such confusion, to
assume some pretext of legality, let it be ever so poor. Nothing could now be done in true
obedience to the laws. The Triumvirate, with Cæsar at its head, had finally trodden down all
law; and yet every one was clamoring for legal rights! Then he sings the praises of Cassius,
but declares that he does not dare to give him credit in that place for the greatest deed he
had done. He means, of course, the murder of Cæsar.

Paterculus tells us that all these things were decreed by the Senate.[216] But he is wrong.
The decree of the Senate went against Cicero, and on the next day, amid much tumult, he addressed
himself to the people on the subject. This he did in opposition to Pansa, who endeavored to
hinder him from speaking in the Forum, and to Servilia, the mother-in-law of Cassius, who was
afraid lest her son-in-law should encounter the anger of the Consuls. He went so far as to
tell the people that Cassius would not obey the Senate, but would take upon himself, on such
an emergency, to act as best he could for the Republic.[217] There was no moment in this stirring
year, none, I think, during Cicero's life, in which he behaved with greater courage than now
in appealing from the Senate to the people, and in the hardihood with which he declared that
the Senate's decree should be held as going for nothing. Before the time came in which it could
be carried out both Hirtius and Pansa were dead. They had fallen in relieving Decimus at Mutina.
His address on this occasion to the people was not made public, and has not been preserved. 

When Germany pays an indemnity of £2,000,000,000 I think we might knock off a tenner or so because
the KAISER has done so much to beautify our banks. Once they were cold cheerless places. A suspicion
of an overdraft always swept through them.
Cicero had therefore assented, and had agreed to be one of the deputation. The twelfth Philippic
was spoken with the object of showing that no such embassy should be sent. Cicero's condition
at this period was most peculiar and most perilous. The Senate would not altogether oppose
his efforts, but they hated them. Was I better value than six M.P.'s? Of course I might be worth
six RAMSAY MACDONALDS. However I resolved to avoid greed and ask for a simple hundred thousand.

So
I went to my bank and said to a blue-eyed, Watteau type of beauty, "I want to see the manager,
please. He had agreed to go on this embassy--who can say for
what motives? To him it would be a mission of especial peril. It was one from which he could
hardly hope ever to come back alive. It may be that he had agreed to go with his life in his
hand, and to let them know that he at any rate had been willing to die for the Republic. It
may be that he had heard of some altered circumstances. But he changed his mind and resolved
that he would not go, unless driven forth by the Senate. There seems to have been a manifest
attempt to get him out of Rome and send him where he might have his throat cut. But he declined;
and this is the speech in which he did so. That's the only one that's worth a guinea; and there's
no winning or losing, there's no right or wrong to it, and it doesn't matter what a man is in it as
long as he's a good one."
"Even if he is a thief?" The question was out of Flora's lips before
she could catch it.
Nothing is so common to men as to fear to die--and nothing more necessary, or men would soon
cease to live. To fear death more than ignominy is the disgrace--a truth which the French critic
does not seem to have recognized when he twits the memory of Cicero with his scornful sneer.
"J'ai peur." Did it occur to the French critic to ask himself for what purpose should Cicero
go to Antony's camp, where he would probably be murdered, and by so doing favor the views of
his own enemies in Rome? The deputation was not sent; but in lieu of the deputation Pansa,
the remaining Consul, led his legions out of Rome at the beginning of April.

[Sidenote: B.C. 43, ætat. 64.]

