Doubtless Gilbert Potter did not analyze the charm which it exercised upon him; it was enough
that he felt and submitted to it. A few quiet remarks sufficed to draw from him the story of
the chase, in all its particulars, and the lively interest in Martha Deane's face, the boisterous
glee of Sally Fairthorn, with his own lurking sense of triumph, soon swept every gloomy line
from his visage. His mouth relaxed from its set compression, and wore a winning sweetness;
his eyes shone softly-bright, and a nimble spirit of gayety gave grace to his movements.

"Fairly won, I must say!" exclaimed Miss Sally Fairthorn, when the narrative was finished.
"And now, Gilbert, the brush?"

"The brush?"

"Who's to have it, I mean. Did you never get one before, as you don't seem to understand?"

"Yes, I understand," said he, in an indifferent tone; "it may be had for the asking."

"Then it's mine!" cried Sally, urging her heavy horse against him and making a clutch at his
cap. But he leaned as suddenly away, and shot a length ahead, out of her reach. Miss Deane's
horse, a light, spirited animal, kept pace with his.

"Martha!" cried the disappointed damsel, "Martha! one of us must have it; ask him, you!"

"No," answered Martha, with her clear blue eyes fixed on Gilbert's face, "I will not ask."

He returned her gaze, and his eyes seemed to say: "Will you take it, knowing what the acceptance
implies?"

She read the question correctly; but of this he was not sure. Neither, if it were so, could
he trust himself to interpret the answer. Sally had already resumed her place on his left,
and he saw that the mock strife would be instantly renewed. With a movement so sudden as to
appear almost ungracious, he snatched the brush from his cap and extended it to Martha Deane,
without saying a word.

If she hesitated, it was at least no longer than would be required in order to understand the
action. Gilbert might either so interpret it, or suspect that she had understood the condition
in his mind, and meant to signify the rejection thereof. The language of gestures is wonderfully
rapid, and all that could be said by either, in this way, was over, and the brush in Martha
Deane's hand, before Sally Fairthorn became aware of the transfer.

"Well-done, Martha!" she exclaimed: "Don't let him have it again! Do you know to whom he would
have given it: an A. and a W., with the look of an X,--so!"

Thereupon Sally pulled off her mittens and crossed her forefingers, an action which her companions
understood--in combination with the mysterious initials--to be the rude, primitive symbol of
a squint.

Gilbert looked annoyed, but before he could reply, Sally let go the rein in order to put on
her mittens, and the blinded mare quickly dropping her head, the rein slipped instantly to
the animal's ears. The latter perceived her advantage, and began snuffing along the edges of
the road in a deliberate search for spring grass. In vain Sally called and kicked; the mare
provokingly preserved her independence. Finally, a piteous appeal to Gilbert, who had pretended
not to notice the dilemma, and was a hundred yards in advance, was Sally's only resource. The
two halted and enjoyed her comical helplessness.

"That's enough, Gilbert," said Martha Deane, presently, "go now and pick up the rein."

He rode back, picked it up, and handed it to Sally without speaking.

"Gilbert," she said, with a sudden demure change of tone, as they rode on to where Miss Deane
was waiting, "come and take supper with us, at home. Martha has promised. You've hardly been
to see us in a month."

"You know how much I have to do, Sally," he answered. "It isn't only that, to-day being a Saturday;
but I've promised mother to be at home by dark, and fetch a quarter of tea from the store." They went for a walk to third, and the dangerous sense of his importance and sudden Significance in
the child was still fueled by the remarkable interest that both he dedicated. Edgar was almost
exclusively the subject of conversation by the mother spoke with some feigned concern about
his pallor and nervousness during the Baron Again, this warded off smiling and boasting "about
the nice way of his" friend, as he called him, was issued.
 But you should not allow her to go on in that way; you should"--

What Miss Deane would have said must remain unwritten. Gilbert's eyes were upon her, and held
her own; perhaps a little more color came into her face, but she did not show the slightest
embarrassment. A keen observer might have supposed that either a broken or an imperfect relation
existed between the two, which the gentleman was trying to restore or complete without the
aid of words; and that, furthermore, while the lady was the more skilful in the use of that
silent language, neither rightly understood the other.

By this time they were ascending the hill from Redley Creek to Kennett Square. Martha Deane
had thus far carried the brush carelessly in her right hand; she now rolled it into a coil
and thrust it into a large velvet reticule which hung from the pommel of her saddle. A few
dull orange streaks in the overcast sky, behind them, denoted sunset, and a raw, gloomy twilight
crept up from the east.

"You'll not go with us?" Sally asked again, as they reached the corner, and the loungers on
the porch of the Unicorn Tavern beyond, perceiving Gilbert, sprang from their seats to ask
for news of the chase.

"Sally, I cannot!" he answered. "Good-night!"

Joe and Jake Fairthorn rushed up with a whoop, and before Gilbert could satisfy the curiosity
of the tavern-idlers, the former sat behind Sally, on the old mare, with his face to her tail,
while Jake, prevented by Miss Deane's riding-whip from attempting the same performance, capered
behind the horses and kept up their spirits by flinging handfuls of sand.

Gilbert found another group in "the store"--farmers or their sons who had come in for a supply
of groceries, or the weekly mail, and who sat in a sweltering atmosphere around the roaring
stove. They, too, had heard of the chase, and he was obliged to give them as many details as
possible while his quarter of tea was being weighed, after which he left them to supply the
story from the narrative of Mr. Joel Ferris, who, a new-comer announced, had just alighted
at the Unicorn, a little drunk, and in a very bad humor.

"Where's Barton?" Gilbert heard some one ask of Ferris, as he mounted.

"In his skin!" was the answer, "unless he's got into that fellow Fortune's. They're as thick
as two pickpockets!"

Gilbert rode down the hill, and allowed his horse to plod leisurely across the muddy level,
regardless of the deepening twilight.

He was powerfully moved by some suppressed emotion. The muscles of his lips twitched convulsively,
and there was a hot surge and swell somewhere in his head, as of tears about to overrun their
secret reservoir. But they failed to surprise him, this time. As the first drops fell from
his dark eyelashes, he loosed the rein and gave the word to his horse. Over the ridge, along
the crest, between dusky thorn-hedges, he swept at full gallop, and so, slowly sinking towards
the fair valley which began to twinkle with the lights of scattered farms to the eastward,
he soon reached the last steep descent, and saw the gray gleam of his own barn below him.

By this time his face was sternly set. He clinched his hands, and muttered to himself--

"It will almost kill me to ask, but I must know, and--and she must tell."

It was dark now. As he climbed again from the bottom of the hill towards the house, a figure
on the summit was drawn indistinctly against the sky, unconscious that it was thus betrayed.
But it vanished instantly, and then he groaned--

"God help me! I cannot ask."

CHAPTER III.

