The south pavilion encompassed the displays of viticulture. Representations of actual scenes
in the vicinity of California vine-yards-- wine cellars--cool grottos--and a highly ornamental
fountain throwing sprays of wine, constituted the most attractive domestic scenes.

A picturesque panorama of the vine-clad banks of the Rhine with its romantically situated castles--reminiscences
of feudal times--formed a portion of the German wine cellar exhibit; also comprising an excellent
display of Rhein- und Moselweine.

Of the foreign wine-growing countries, the most attractive contributions were made by Italy,
Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, Chili, New South Wales, and Canada.

We abandoned the building in order to view the floricultural out-of-door exhibits, which covered
the large spaces on the lawns adjoining it and the Wooded Island.

Glancing at the beautiful orchids, roses, carnations, sweet peas, dianthus, asters, phlox,
gladiolus, zinnias, and many other fragrant flowers, we experienced infinitely more subtle
modulations of delight than can be easily described. The features of the horticultural displays
were so striking that their memory is immortalized:--

   "For this picture in my brain
    Only fades to come again."

In fact, we had witnessed multifarious sublime spectacles during that day's sojourn in the
White City.

Returning to the pier where the "Marguerite" lay moored, we were greatly amazed as we caught
sight of Lake Michigan--to find its waters lashed into fury by a northeast gale, of which we
had felt nothing while in the pleasantly tempered Horticultural Building.

Since it was impossible to stay where we were, on account of the exposed situation, there was
no help for it--but to put out for our usual anchorage, inside the breakwater at Chicago. For
my own part, I decided to remain on deck. Perhaps, had I realized more fully what we had to
encounter, I should have sought my stateroom, with the rest. But I can truly say: for three-quarters
of an hour, my whole energies were employed to keep my place.

During our entire journey from Schenectady, N.Y., to the White City, we had not experienced
anything like it. Everything of a movable character had to be secured; and it was an intense
relief to all, when after an extraordinary upheaval--the last effort of the uncontrolled waves
upon our stanch craft--she passed into the peaceful waters behind the breakwater; completely
sheltered from the raging elements, which broke with ceaseless roar upon the concrete mass.

The following morning as the rest of the party decided to remain in Chicago for the purpose
of viewing the renowned play "America" in the Auditorium, I visited Jackson Park alone, spending
many hours in the Liberal Arts Building, which inclosed (besides multitudinous magnificent
displays illustrating the department of Liberal Arts) the object of my special interest, viz.
the educational exhibits. They comprised not only contributions from every State in the Union
but also from Germany, Great Britain, France, Mexico, Canada, Russia, New South Wales, Spain,
Belgium, and Japan.

The general character of them was represented by models and appliances for teaching, text-books,
diagrams, examples, specimens of the school work on the various scientific subjects, and illustrations
of the methods employed in instruction by the teachers of the different States and Nations.

