In the early Saxon times, long before trains or steamers had been invented, we find Primate
after Primate of All England undertaking the long and perilous journey over the sea, and then
across the Continent of Europe, and over the precipitous and dangerous passes of the Alps,
down through the sunny and vine-clad slopes of Italy, in order to receive the pallium in person
from the venerable successor of St. Peter, in the great Basilica in Rome. But, whether they
actually went for it themselves in person, or whether special messengers were sent with it
from Rome to England, they always awaited its reception before they considered themselves fully
empowered to exercise their metropolitan functions. By way of illustration, it may be interesting
to consider some special case, and we will then leave the reader to judge whether we are dealing
with an England that is Catholic or an England that is Protestant; with an England united to
the Holy See and to the rest of Catholic Europe, or an England independent of the Holy See,
isolated, and established by Law and Parliament, as it is to-day--an England in possession
of the truth, which is universal and the same everywhere, or an England clinging to error,
which is local, national and circumscribed.

It does not much matter what name we select; any will answer our purpose. Let us then take
Simon Langham, as good and honest an English name as ever there was. It is the year 1366, some
two hundred years before the Church in England cut itself off from the rest of Christendom.
The metropolitan See of Canterbury is vacant. The widowed Diocese seeks, at the hands of the
Pope, Urban V., a new Archbishop. After mature inquiry and consideration the Pope selects Simon
Langham. And who is he? Who is this distinguished man, now called to rule over that portion
of the one Catholic Church represented by England? If we study his history we shall find that
he in no way resembles the typical amiable Anglican Canon of the present day, with a wife and
children, living within the Cathedral close, but that he is a simple, austere, Benedictine
monk. He has been living for some time past in the famous Abbey of Westminster. He was first
a simple monk, then he was chosen Prior, and finally Lord Abbot. Some years later, i.e., in
1362, he was appointed to the vacant See of Ely. By whom? Well, in those days the Church was
not a mere department of the State, so it was not by the Crown. No: nor by the Prime Minister,
as in the Anglican Church of to-day. But, as history records, by a special Papal Bull. Thus,
at the time we are now considering, viz., 1366, he had been Bishop just four years. Now, the
Primatial throne of St. Augustine, as already stated, has become vacant, and Simon Langham,
the Bishop of Ely, is appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Primate of England.

As with all the other Archbishops before the "Reformation," he cannot exercise his metropolitan
powers till he has received from Rome the insignia of his office, viz., the sacred pallium.
On this occasion the Archbishop does not go himself to Italy, to receive it from the hands
of the Sovereign Pontiff, but it is brought by special messengers from Rome to England.

We may well imagine the interest these visitors from the Eternal City would excite among the
population of London. Their dark complexion and bright, black eyes, and foreign appearance
would, no doubt, attract considerable attention. Of course they would be made welcome and be
shown the chief sights of the city. They would greatly admire, for instance, the beauty of
Westminster Abbey, and would probably ask its history. Then they would be told how it originated
with St. Edward the Confessor. How he had made a vow to go on a pilgrimage to the tomb of the
Apostles at Rome, like a loyal Catholic, in order to pay homage to the successor of St. Peter,
whom Christ appointed as head of the Church; how the pious King, finding his kingdom in danger
of invasion, and his authority threatened, and not daring to absent himself, begged the Pope
to release him from his vow; how the Pope at once commuted it, and bade him build a church
instead, in honour of St. Peter; and so forth. Then they would very likely visit the inmates
of the Abbey. The Benedictine monks who served the Abbey would entertain them, and ask after
their brethren in Italy. Some of these English monks would in all likelihood have been educated
at Subiaco, where St. Benedict first lived, or at Monte Cassino, where he died, and where his
body still lies. In any case, these English monks were undoubtedly true children of St. Benedict,
and followed his rule, and were animated by his spirit, and rejoiced to acknowledge him as
their founder and spiritual father. There was nothing of the modern Anglican, and nothing insular
about them!

In the meantime the great day arrives. It is the 4th of November in the year 1366. The bells
of the Abbey are ringing a merry peal. The Faithful are flocking in to witness the Archbishop
receive the Pallium, the symbol of jurisdiction, and the sign that all spiritual authority
emanates from St. Peter, who alone has received the keys, and from his rightful successors
in the Petrine See of Rome.

It is a grand ceremony, and we have even to-day, in the old Latin records, a full account of
what took place. Anything more truly Roman Catholic, or less like the Anglican Church of the
"Reformation," it would be difficult to imagine.

It was directed by the rubrics, that the Cathedral clergy should be called together, at an
early hour, and that Prime and the rest of the Divine Office should be recited, up to the High
Mass. Then the cross-bearers and torch-bearers and thurifers, and the attendants carrying the
Book of the Gospels and other articles of the sanctuary, are drawn up in processional order
in the chancel. Two and two, followed by priests and other ecclesiastical dignitaries, they
walk down the nave. Then comes the Archbishop himself, robed in full pontificals, though, out
of respect to the Pallium, with bare feet. The rubric on this point is explicit, viz., "nudis
pedibus". Behind the Archbishop come the Prior and the monks wearing copes. In this order they
all pass through the streets of London to the gate of the city to meet the Papal Commissioner
who bears the Pallium. He is dressed in an alb and choir-cope, and solemnly carries the Pallium
enclosed in a costly vessel either of gold or of silver. As soon as the procession meets the
Pallium-bearer it turns round, and those who issued forth retrace their steps towards the Abbey.
Last but one walks the Archbishop, and last of all follows the bearer of the Pallium. On reaching
the church the Pallium is reverently laid on the high altar. The Archbishop then remains, for
some minutes, prostrate in prayer before the high altar. They have hence touched the east and south,
the extremities of the maritime world.

"The Negritos, scarcely known a few years ago, and to-day confounded
with the Papuans by some anthropologists, have spread to the west
and northwest.

"They have left unmistakable traces in Japan; we find them yet in the Philippines and in many
of the islands of the Malay archipelago; they constitute the indigenous population of the Andaman
Islands, in the Gulf of Bengal. Indeed, they have formerly occupied a great part of the two
peninsulas of India, and I have elsewhere shown that we can follow
their steps to the foot of the Himalayas, and beyond the Indus to
Lake Zerah.

I have only sketched here the history of this race, whose representatives in the past have
been the type of the Asiatic pygmies of whom Pliny and Ctesias speak, and whose creoles were
those Ethiopians, black and with smooth hair, who figured in the army of Xerxes.

"I have devoted two long examinations to another black race much less important in numbers and
in the extent of their domain, but which possess for the anthropologist a very peculiar interest
and a sad one.

It exists no more; its last representative, a woman, died in 1877. I refer to the Tasmanians.

"The
documents gathered by various English writers, and above all by Bouwick, give numerous facts
upon the intellectual and moral character of the Tasmanians. The complete destruction of the
Tasmanians, accomplished in at most 72 years over a territory measuring 4,400 square leagues,
raises a sorrowful and difficult question. Their extinction has been explained by the barbarity
of the civilized Europeans, and which, often conspicuous, has never been more destructively
present than in their dealings with the Tasmanians. But I am convinced that this is an error.
I certainly do not wish to apologize for or extenuate the crimes
of the convicts and colonists, against which the most vigorous protests
have been raised both in England and in the colony itself, but neither
war nor social disasters have been the principal cause of the disappearance
of the Tasmanians. The Roman Papacy and the royalty of
St. Peter, I will be their helper to defend and to maintain, saving my order, against all men.
When summoned to a Synod I will come, unless hindered by a canonical impediment. The Legate
of the Apostolic See I will treat honourably in his coming and going, and will help him in
his needs. Every third year I will visit the threshold of the Apostles, either personally or
by proxy, unless I am dispensed by Apostolic licence. The possessions which pertain to the
support of my Archbishopric, I will not sell, nor give away, nor pledge, nor re-enfeoff, nor
alienate in any way, without first consulting the Roman Pontiff. So help me, God, and these
God's Holy Gospels."

If you, who read these lines, had stood by, and listened to this oath, would it leave any doubt
in your minds as to the religion of the Archbishop? Could you possibly mistake it for the religion
of the present Church of England?

Was the present Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury chosen and appointed by the Pope? Did he
take a vow of celibacy? Does the present Archbishop acknowledge publicly and officially that
he receives his jurisdiction from the Pope? Did he receive the Pallium from Rome, sent by special
Papal messengers? Did he stand up and swear on the Gospels that he would be faithful and obedient
to his Lord the Pope? Did he promise to visit Rome every three years, to give his Lord the
Pope an account of his diocese? Nothing of the kind. Yet we are gravely told that there is
no break between the Church of St. Anselm, and Simon Langham, and of Cardinal Fisher, on the
one hand, and the Church of the present Archbishop of Canterbury on the other!

Why are these good men so exceedingly anxious to prove that black is white? Why will they assert
and re-assert, in every mood and tense, that things most opposite are identical, and things
most unlike are exactly the same?

We will deal with that question in the next chapter. All we now affirm is that the reason is
abundantly clear and evident, though little creditable to these perverters of history.

CHAPTER III.

THE AWKWARD DILEMMA.

In the whole catalogue of sin, there is hardly one so detestable in itself, or so withering
in its effects, as the sin of heresy. Consequently, though we feel a great love as well as
a great interest in the Church in England during the thousand years in which she formed a part
of the Church of God, we can have little love for the present Church of England, as by law
established, cut off, as she is, from the only true Church, which Christ, the Incarnate God,
was pleased in His infinite wisdom to build upon St. Peter, and upon those who should succeed
him in his sublime office, and who have received the Divine Commission to rule over the entire
flock, to hold the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and to confirm their brethren to the end of time.

Besides, a careful study of the origin and genesis of the present Anglican Establishment is
scarcely calculated to predispose any one particularly in its favour. It is not Catholics only
who might be thought biased upon such a point, but others also who feel this. In fact, it is
precisely impartial men, unaffected by any interest either way, who most fully realise from
what a very shady beginning the new state of things arose. As Sir Osborne Morgan puts it, "Every
student of English history knows that, if a very bad king had not fallen in love with a very
pretty woman, and desired to get divorced from his plain and elderly wife, and if he had not
compelled a servile Parliament to carry out his wishes, there would, in all human probability,
never have been an Established Church at all."

This gentleman is a Protestant, and the son of a Protestant clergyman, so we may be quite sure
that he harbours no special leanings towards us, yet he speaks impartially as one who has not
only read history, but read it without coloured spectacles. Perhaps Lord Macaulay puts the
case as bluntly as any one, and we may as well quote him because he, too, was no Catholic,
and held no brief for the Church of Rome. This brilliant writer, who was, perhaps, an historian
before all things, tells us that the work of the Reformation was the work, not of three saints,
nor even of three ordinary decent men, but of three notorious murderers! These are not our
words, but Macaulay's, and it is not our fault if this is his reading of history. We merely
summon him as a Protestant witness. Not a very auspicious beginning, it must be confessed,
and scarcely suggestive of the Divine afflatus. Those who planted the Catholic Church used
no violence, and did not inflict death. No! on the contrary, they endured death, and their
blood became the seed of the Church. And that is quite another story. In former days every
one admitted the present Anglican Church to be the child of the Reformation. It was, to quote
the Protestant historian, Child, "as completely the creation of Henry VIII., Edward's Council,
and Elizabeth as Saxon Protestantism was of Luther." But now? Oh! now, "nous avons changé tout
cela," and history has received a totally different setting. A certain section of Anglicans,
in these modern times, are labouring hard to persuade themselves and others that they can trace
their Church back to the time of St. Augustine. They will by no means allow that they started
into being only in the sixteenth century. In fact, it is quite pathetic to watch the strenuous
efforts they make, and the extravagant means to which they have recourse, in order to lull
themselves into the peaceful enjoyment of so sweet and consoling a delusion.

