"She left him and me, barely a fortnight afterward, to go to a big country-house party in the
north. That will show you--what she's made of. Then she wrote--a hypocritical letter--putting
it on him. He must not be agitated, nor feel her any burden upon him; so, for his sake, she
broke it off. Of course, they were to be cousins and friends again just as before. She had
arranged it all to her own satisfaction--and was meanwhile flirting desperately, as we heard
from various people in the north, with Lord Philip Darcy. Oliver showed me her letter, and
at last told me the whole story. I persuaded him not to answer it. A fortnight ago, she wrote
again, proposing to come back here--to 'look after' us--poor things! This time, I replied.
She would like Tallyn, no doubt, as a place of retreat, should other plans fail; but it will
not be open to her!"

It was not energy now--vindictive energy--that was lacking to the personality before him!

"An odious young woman" exclaimed Sir James, lifting hands and eyebrows. "I am afraid I always
thought so, saving your presence, Lady Lucy. However, she will want a retreat; for her plans--in
the quarter you name--have not a chance of success."

"I am delighted to hear it!" said Lady Lucy, still erect and flushed. "What do you know?"

"Simply that Lord Philip is not in the least likely to marry her, having, I imagine, views
in quite other quarters--so I am told. But he is the least scrupulous of men--and no doubt
if, at Eastham, she threw herself into his arms--'what mother's son,' et cetera. Only, if she
imagined herself to have caught him--such an old and hardened stager!--in a week--her abilities
are less than I supposed."

"Alicia's self-conceit was always her weak point."

But as she spoke the force imparted by resentment died away. Lady Lucy sank back in her chair.

"And Oliver felt it very much?" asked Sir James, after a pause, his shrewd eyes upon her.

"He was wounded, of course--he has been more depressed since; but I have never believed that
he was in love with her."

Sir James did not pursue the subject, but the vivacity of the glance bent now on the fire,
now on his companion, betrayed the marching thoughts behind.

"Will Oliver see me this evening?" he inquired, presently.

"I hope so. He promised me to make the effort."

A servant knocked at the door. It was Oliver's valet.

"Please, my lady, Mr. Marsham wished me to say he was afraid he would not be strong enough
to see Sir James Chide to-night. He is very sorry--and would Sir James be kind enough to come
and see him after breakfast to-morrow?"

Lady Lucy threw up her hands in a little gesture of despair, Then she rose, and went to speak
to the servant in the doorway.

When she returned she looked whiter and more shrivelled than before.

"Is he worse to-night?" asked Sir James, gently.

"It is the pain," she said, in a muffled voice; "and we can't touch it--yet. He mustn't have
any more morphia--yet."

She sat down once more. Sir James, the best of gossips, glided off into talk of London, and
of old common friends, trying to amuse and distract her. But he realized that she scarcely
listened to him, and that he was talking to a woman whose life was being ground away between
a last affection and the torment it had power to cause her. A new Lady Lucy, indeed! Had any
one ever dared to pity her before?

Meanwhile, five miles off, a girl whom he loved as a daughter was eating her heart out for
sorrow over this mother and son--consumed, as he guessed, with the wild desire to offer them,
in any sacrificial mode they pleased, her youth and her sweet self. In one way or another he
had found out that Hugh Roughsedge had been sent about his business--of course, with all the
usual softening formulæ.

And now there was a kind of mute conflict going on between himself and Mrs. Colwood on the
one side, and Diana on the other side.

No, she should not spend and waste her youth in the vain attempt to mend this house of tragedy!--it
was not to be tolerated--not to be thought of. She would suffer, but she would get over it;
and Oliver would probably die. Sooner or later she would begin life afresh, if only he was
able to stand between her and the madness in her heart.

But as he sat there, looking at Lady Lucy, he realized that it might have been better for his
powers and efficacy as a counsellor if he, too, had held aloof from this house of pain.

CHAPTER XXIV

It was about ten o'clock at night. Lankester, who had arrived from London an hour before, had
said good-night to Lady Lucy and Sir James, and had slipped into Marsham's room. Marsham had
barred his door that evening against both his mother and Sir James. But Lankester was not excluded.

Off and on and in the intervals of his parliamentary work he had been staying at Tallyn for
some days. A letter from Lady Lucy, in reply to an inquiry, had brought him down. Oliver had
received him with few words--indeed, with an evident distaste for words; but at the end of
the first day's visit had asked him abruptly, peremptorily even, to come again.

When he entered Marsham's room he found the invalid asleep under the influence of morphia.
The valet, a young fellow, was noiselessly putting things straight. Lankester noticed that
he looked pale.

"A bad time?" he said, in a whisper, standing beside the carefully regulated spinal couch on
which Marsham was sleeping.

"Awful, sir. He was fair beside himself till we gave him the morphia."

"Is there anybody sitting up?"

"No. He'll be quiet now for six or seven hours. I shall be in the next room."

The young man spoke wearily. It was clear that the moral strain of what he had just seen had
weighed upon him as much as the fatigue of the day's attendance.

"Come!" said Lankester, looking at him. "You want a good night. Go to my room. I'll lie down
there." To help him with his new venture, Wallace took a copy of the London promotional pamphlet
to a New York printer to be reproduced. The printer was John Peter Zenger, not yet an editor and
three years away from the events which were to link his name inextricably with the concept
of the freedom of the press.

This 1731 pamphlet may well have been the earliest work on any medical theme to be printed in
New York.[48]
[47] A short treatise of the virtues of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops
(see footnote 6).

Presently the huge house sank into a silence even more profound than that in which it was now
steeped by day. A cold autumn wind blew round about it. After midnight the wind dropped, and
the temperature with it. The first severe frost laid its grip on forest and down and garden.
Silently the dahlias and the roses died, the leaves shrivelled and blackened, and a cold and
glorious moon rose upon the ruins of the summer.

Lankester dozed and woke, keeping up the fire, and wrapping himself in an eider-down, with
which the valet had provided him. In the small hours he walked across the room to look at Marsham.
He was lying still and breathing heavily. His thick fair hair, always slightly gray from the
time he was thirty, had become much grayer of late; the thin handsome face was drawn and damp,
the eyes cavernous, the lips bloodless. Even in sleep his aspect showed what he had suffered.

Poor, poor old fellow!

Lankester's whole being softened into pity. Yet he had no illusions as to the man before him--a
man of inferior morale and weak will, incapable, indeed, of the clever brutalities by which
the wicked flourish; incapable also of virtues that must, after all, be tolerably common, or
the world would run much more lamely than it does. Straight, honorable, unselfish fellows--Lankester
knew scores of them, rich and poor, clever and slow, who could and did pass the tests of life
without flinching; who could produce in any society--as politicians or green-grocers--an impression
of uprightness and power, an effect of character, that Marsham, for all his ability, had never
produced, or, in the long run, and as he came to be known, had never sustained.

Well, what then? In the man looking down on Marsham not a tinge of pharisaic condemnation mingled
with the strange clearness of his judgment. What are we all--the best of us? Lankester had
not parted, like the majority of his contemporaries, with the "sense of sin." A vivid, spiritual
imagination, trained for years on prayer and reverie, showed him the world and human nature--his
own first and foremost--everywhere flecked and stained with evil. For the man of religion the
difference between saint and sinner has never been as sharp as for the man of the world; it
is for the difference between holiness and sin that he reserves his passion. And the stricken
or repentant sinner is at all times nearer to his heart than the men "who need no repentance."

Moreover, it is in men like Lankester that the ascetic temper common to all ages and faiths
is perpetually reproduced, the temper which makes of suffering itself a divine and sacred thing--the
symbol of a mystery. In his own pity for this emaciated arrested youth he read the pledge of
a divine sympathy, the secret voice of a God suffering for and with man, which, in its myriad
forms, is the primeval faith of the race. Where a thinker of another type would have seen mere
aimless waste and mutilation, this evangelical optimist bared the head and bent the knee. The
spot whereon he stood was holy ground, and above this piteous sleeper heavenly dominations,
princedoms, powers, hung in watch.

He sank, indeed, upon his knees beside the sleeper. In the intense and mystical concentration,
which the habit of his life had taught him, the prayer to which he committed himself took a
marvellous range without ever losing its detail, its poignancy. The pain, moral and physical,
of man--pain of the savage, the slave, the child; the miseries of innumerable persons he had
known, whose stories had been confided to him, whose fates he had shared; the anguish of irreparable
failure, of missed, untasted joy; agonies brutal or obscure, of nerve and brain!--his mind
and soul surrendered themselves to these impressions, shook under the storm and scourge of
them. His prayer was not his own; it seemed to be the Spirit wrestling with Itself, and rending
his own weak life.

He drew nearer to Marsham, resting his forehead on the bed. The firelight threw the shadow
of his gaunt kneeling figure on the white walls. And at last, after the struggle, there seemed
to be an effluence--a descending, invading love--overflowing his own being--enwrapping the
sufferer before him--silencing the clamor of a weeping world. And the dual mind of the modern,
even in Lankester, wavered between the two explanations: "It is myself," said the critical
intellect, "the intensification and projection of myself." "It is God!" replied the soul.

Marsham, meanwhile, as the morning drew on, and as the veil of morphia between him and reality
grew thinner, was aware of a dream slowly drifting into consciousness--of an experience that
grew more vivid as it progressed. Some one was in the room; he moved uneasily, lifted his head,
and saw indistinctly a figure in the shadows standing near the smouldering fire. It was not
his servant; and suddenly his dream mingled with what he saw, and his heart began to throb.

"Ferrier!" he called, under his breath. The figure turned, but in his blindness and semi-consciousness
he did not recognize it.

"I want to speak to you," he said, in the same guarded, half-whispered voice. "Of course, I
had no right to do it, but--"

His voice dropped and his eyelids closed.

Lankester advanced from the fire. He saw Marsham was not really awake, and he dreaded to rouse
him completely, lest it should only be to the consciousness of pain. He stooped over him gently,
and spoke his name.

"Yes," said Marsham, murmuring, without opening his eyes. "There's no need for you to rub it
in. I behaved like a beast, and Barrington--"

The voice became inarticulate again. The prostration and pallor of the speaker, the feebleness
of the tone--nothing could have been more pitiful. An idea rushed upon Lankester. He again
bent over the bed.

"Don't think of it any more," he said. "It's forgotten!"

A slight and ghastly smile showed on Marsham's lip as he lay with closed eyes. "Forgotten!
No, by Jove!" Then, after an uneasy movement, he said, in a stronger and irritable voice, which
seemed to come from another region of consciousness:

"It would have been better to have burned the paper. One can't get away from the thing. It--it
disturbs me--"

"What paper?" said Lankester, close to the dreamer's ear.

"The Herald," said Marsham, impatiently.

"Where is it?"

"In that cabinet by the fire."

"Shall I burn it?"

"Yes--don't bother me!" Evidently he now thought he was speaking to his valet, and a moan of
pain escaped him. Lankester walked over to the cabinet and opened the top drawer. He saw a
folded newspaper lying within it. After a moment's hesitation he lifted it, and perceived by
the light of the night-lamp that it was the Herald of August 2--the famous number issued on
the morning of Ferrier's death. All the story of the communicated article and the "Barrington
letter" ran through his mind. He stood debating with himself, shaken by emotion. Then he deliberately
took the paper to the fire, stirred the coals, and, tearing up the paper, burned it piece by piece.

After it was done he walked back to Marsham's side. "I have burned the paper," he said, kneeling
down by him.

Marsham, who was breathing lightly with occasional twitchings of the brow, took no notice.
But after a minute he said, in a steady yet thrilling voice:

"Ferrier!"

Silence.

"Ferrier!" The tone of the repeated word brought the moisture to Lankester's eyes. He took
the dreamer's hand in his, pressing it. Marsham returned the pressure, first strongly, again
more feebly. Then a wave of narcotic sleep returned upon him, and he seemed to sink into it
profoundly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning, as Marsham, after his dressing, was lying moody and exhausted on his pillows,
he suddenly said to his servant:

"I want something out of that cabinet by the fire."

"Yes, sir." The man moved toward it obediently.

"Find a newspaper in the top drawer, folded up small--on the right-hand side."

Richard looked.

"I am sorry, sir, but there is nothing in the drawer at all."

"Nonsense!" said Marsham, angrily. "You've got the wrong drawer!"

The whole cabinet was searched to no purpose. Marsham grew very pale. He must, of course, have
destroyed the paper himself, and his illness had effaced his memory of the act, as of other
things. Yet he could not shake off an impression of mystery. Twice now, weeks after Ferrier's
death, he seemed to have been in Ferrier's living presence, under conditions very unlike those
of an ordinary dream. He could only remind himself how easily the brain plays tricks upon a
man in his state.

       *       *       *       *       *

After breakfast, Sir James Chide was admitted. But Oliver was now in the state of obsession,
when the whole being, already conscious of a certain degree of pain, dreads the approach of
a much intenser form--hears it as the footfall of a beast of prey, drawing nearer room by room,
and can think of nothing else but the suffering it foresees, and the narcotic which those about
him deal out to him so grudgingly, rousing in him, the while, a secret and silent fury. He
answered Sir James in monosyllables, lying, dressed, upon his sofa, the neuralgic portion of
the spine packed and cushioned from any possible friction, his forehead drawn and frowning.

Sir James shrank from asking him about himself. But it was useless to talk of politics; Oliver
made no response, and was evidently no longer abreast even of the newspapers.

"Does your man read you the Times?" asked Sir James, noticing that it lay unopened beside him.

Oliver nodded. "There was a dreadful being my mother found a fortnight ago. I got rid of him."

He had evidently not strength to be more explicit. But Sir James had heard from Lady Lucy of
the failure of her secretarial attempt.

"I hear they talk of moving you for the winter."

"They talk of it. I shall oppose it."

"I hope not!--for Lady Lucy's sake. She is so hopeful about it, and she is not fit herself
to spend the winter in England."

"My mother must go," said Oliver, closing his eyes.

"She will never leave you."

Marsham made no reply; then, without closing his eyes again, he said, between his teeth: "What
is the use of going from one hell to another hell--through a third--which is the worst of all?"

"You dread the journey?" said Sir James, gently. "But there are ways and means."

"No!" Oliver's voice was sudden and loud. "There are none!--that make any difference."

Sir James was left perplexed, cudgelling his brains as to what to attempt next. It was Marsham,
however, who broke the silence. With his dimmed sight he looked, at last, intently, at his
companion.

"Is--is Miss Mallory still at Beechcote?"

Sir James moved involuntarily.

"Yes, certainly."

"You see a great deal of her?"

"I do--I--" Sir James cleared his throat a little--I look upon her as my adopted daughter."

"I should like to be remembered to her."

"You shall be," said Sir James, rising. "I will give her your message. Meanwhile, may I tell
Lady Lucy that you feel a little easier this morning?"

Oliver slowly and sombrely shook his head. Then, however, he made a visible effort.

"But I want to see her. Will you tell her?"

Lady Lucy, however, was already in the room. Probably she had heard the message from the open
doorway where she often hovered. Oliver held out his hand to her, and she stooped and kissed
him. She asked him a few low-voiced questions, to which he mostly answered by a shake of the
head. Then she attempted some ordinary conversation, during which it was very evident that
the sick man wished to be left alone.

She and Sir James retreated to her sitting-room, and there Lady Lucy, sitting helplessly by
the fire, brushed away some tears of which she was only half conscious. Sir James walked up
and down, coming at last to a stop beside her.

"It seems to me this is as much a moral as a physical breakdown. Can nothing be done to take
him out of himself?--give him fresh heart?"

"We have tried everything--suggested everything. But it seems impossible to rouse him to make
an effort."

Sir James resumed his walk--only to come to another stop.

"Do you know--that he just now--sent a message by me to Miss Mallory?"

Lady Lucy started.

"Did he?" she said, faintly, her eyes on the blaze. He came up to her.

"There is a woman who would never have deserted you!--or him!" he said, in a burst of irrepressible
feeling, which would out.

Lady Lucy's glance met his--silently, a little proudly. She said nothing and presently he took
his leave.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day wore on. A misty sunshine enwrapped the beech woods. The great trees stood marked here
and there by the first fiery summons of the frost. Their supreme moment was approaching which
would strike them, head to foot, into gold and amber, in a purple air. Lady Lucy took her drive
among them as a duty, but between her and the enchanted woodland there was a gulf fixed.

She paid a visit to Oliver, trembling, as she always did, lest some obscure catastrophe, of
which she was ever vaguely in dread, should have developed. But she found him in a rather easier
phase, with Lankester, who had just returned from town, reading aloud to him. She gave them
tea, thinking, as she did so, of the noisy parties gathered so recently, during the election
weeks, round the tea-tables in the hall. And then she returned to her own room to write some
letters.

She looked once more with distaste and weariness at the pile of letters and notes awaiting
her. All the business of the house, the estate, the village--she was getting an old woman;
she was weary of it. And with sudden bitterness she remembered that she had a daughter, and
that Isabel had never been a real day's help to her in her life. Where was she now? Campaigning
in the north--speaking at a bye-election--lecturing for the suffrage. Since the accident she
had paid two flying visits to her mother and brother. Oliver had got no help from her--nor
her mother; she was the Mrs. Jellyby of a more hypocritical day. Yet Lady Lucy in her youth
had been a very motherly mother; she could still recall in the depths of her being the thrill
of baby palms pressed "against the circle of the breast."

She sat down to her task, when the door opened behind her. A footman came in, saying something
which she did not catch. "My letters are not ready yet"--she threw over her shoulder, irritably,
without looking at him. The door closed. But some one was still in the room. She turned sharply
in astonishment.

"May I disturb you, Lady Lucy?" said a tremulous voice.

She saw a tall and slender woman, in black, bending toward her, with a willowy appealing grace,
and eyes that beseeched. Diana Mallory stood before her. There was a pause. Then Lady Lucy
rose slowly, laid down her spectacles, and held out her hand.

"It is very kind of you to come and see me," she said, mechanically. "Will you sit down?"

Diana gazed at her, with the childish short-sighted pucker of the brow that Lady Lucy remembered
well. Then she came closer, still holding Lady Lucy's hand.

"Sir James thought I might come," she said, breathlessly. "Isn't there--isn't there anything
I might do? I wanted you to let me help you--like a secretary--won't you? Sir James thought
you looked so tired--and this big place!--I am sure there are things I might do--and oh! it
would make me so happy!"

Now she had her two hands clasping, fondling Lady Lucy's. Her eyes shone with tears, her mouth
trembled.

"Oh, you must--you must!" she cried, suddenly; "don't let's remember anything but that we were
friends--that you were so kind to me--you and Mr. Oliver--in the spring. I can't bear sitting
there at Beechcote doing nothing--amusing myself--when you--and Mr. Oliver--"

She stopped, forcing back the tears that would drive their way up, studying in dismay the lined
and dwindled face before her. Lady Lucy colored deeply. During the months which had elapsed
since the broken engagement, she, even in her remote and hostile distance, had become fully
aware of the singular prestige, the homage of a whole district's admiration and tenderness,
which had gathered round Diana. She had resented the prestige and the homage, as telling against
Oliver, unfairly. Yet as she looked at her visitor she felt the breath of their ascendency.
Tender courage and self-control--the woman, where the girl had been--a nature steadied and
ennobled--these facts and victories spoke from Diana's face, her touch; they gave even something
of maternity to her maiden youth.

"You come to a sad house," said Lady Lucy, holding her away a little.

"I know." The voice was quivering and sweet. "But he will recover--of course he'll recover!"

Lady Lucy shook her head.

"He seems to have no will to recover."

Then her limbs failed her. She sank into a chair by the fire, and there was Diana on a stool
at her feet--timidly daring--dropping soft caresses on the hand she held, drawing out the tragic
history of the preceding weeks, bringing, indeed, to this sad and failing mother what she had
perforce done without till now--that electric sympathy of women with each other which is the
natural relief and sustenance of the sex.

Lady Lucy forgot her letters--forgot, in her mind-weariness, all the agitating facts about
this girl that she had once so vividly remembered. She had not the strength to battle and hold
aloof. Who now could talk of marrying or giving in marriage? They met under a shadow of death;
the situation between them reduced to bare elemental things.

"You'll stay and dine with me?" she said at last, feebly. "We'll send you home. The carriages
have nothing to do. And"--she straightened herself--"you must see Oliver. He will know that
you are here."

Diana said nothing. Lady Lucy rose and left the room. Diana leaned her head against the chair
in which the older lady had been sitting, and covered her eyes. Her whole being was gathered
into the moment of waiting.

Lady Lucy returned and beckoned. Once more Diana found herself hurrying along the ugly, interminable
corridors with which she had been so familiar in the spring. The house had never seemed to
her so forlorn. They paused at an open door, guarded by a screen.

"Go in, please," said Lady Lucy, making room for her to pass.

Diana entered, shaken with inward fear. She passed the screen, and there beyond it was an invalid
couch--a man lying on it--and a hand held out to her.

That shrunken and wasted being the Oliver Marsham of two months before! Her heart beat against
her breast. Surely she was looking at the irreparable! Her high courage wavered and sank.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Marsham did not perceive it. He saw, as in a cloud, the lovely oval of the face, the fringed
eyes, the bending form.

"Will you sit down?" he said, hoarsely.

She took a chair beside him, still holding his hand. It seemed as though she were struck dumb
by what she saw. He inquired if she was at Beechcote.

"Yes." Her head drooped. "But I want Lady Lucy to let me come and stay here--a little."

"No one ought to stay here," he said, abruptly, two spots of feverish color appearing on his
cheeks. "Sir James would advise you not. So do I."

She looked up softly.

"Your mother is so tired; she wants help. Won't you let me?"

Their eyes met. His hand trembled violently in hers.

"Why did you come?" he said, suddenly, breathing fast.

She found no words, only tears. She had relinquished his hand, but he stretched it out again
and touched her bent head.

"There's no time left," he said, impatiently, "to--to fence in. Look here! I can't stand this
pain many minutes more." He moved with a stifled groan. "They'll give me morphia--it's the
only thing. But I want you to know. Not only did they promote the medicine, but they actually
served as the labels for the bottles. Early packages of these patent medicines which have been
discovered indicate that paper labels were seldom applied to the glass bottles; instead, the bottle
was tightly wrapped and sealed in one of these broadsides.

[45] "Dr. Bateman's Drops" (see footnote 7).

[46] James Carter, Apothecary account book, Williamsburg [1752-1773].

Manuscript original preserved at Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia.
American imprints seeking to promote the English patent medicines
were certainly rare. The most significant example may be found in
the Library of the New York Academy of Medicine.[47] In 1731 James
Wallace, a New York merchant, became American agent for the sale of
Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops. Her dark head sank upon his shoulder, he felt her fresh cheek against his. With a cry
he pressed her to him.

"I am dying--and--I--I am weak," he said, incoherently. He raised her hand as it lay across
his breast and kissed it. Then he dropped it despairingly.

"The awful thing is that when the pain comes I care about nothing--not even you--nothing. And
it's coming now. Go!--dearest. Good-night. To-morrow!--Call my servant." And as she fled she
heard a sound of anguish that was like a sword in her own heart.

His servant hurried to him; in the passage outside Diana found Lady Lucy. They went back to
the sitting-room together.

"The morphia will ease him," said Lady Lucy, with painful composure, putting her arm round
the girl's shoulders. "Did he tell you he was dying?"

Diana nodded, unable to speak.

"It may be so. But the doctors don't agree." Then with a manner that recalled old days: "May
I ask--I don't know that I have the right--what he said to you?"

She had withdrawn her arm, and the two confronted each other.

"Perhaps you won't allow it," said Diana, piteously. "He said I might only stay, if--if he
might tell me--he loved me."

"Allow it?" said Lady Lucy, vaguely--"allow it?"

She fell into her chair, and Diana looked down upon her, hanging on the next word.

Lady Lucy made various movements as though to speak, which came to nothing.

"I have no one--but him," she said at last, with pathetic irrelevance. "No one. Isabel--"

Her voice failed her. Diana held out her hands, the tears running down her cheeks. "Dear Lady
Lucy, let me! I am yours--and Oliver's."

"It will, perhaps, be only a few weeks--or months--and then he will be taken from us."

"But give me the right to those weeks. You wouldn't--you wouldn't separate us now!"

Lady Lucy suddenly broke down. Diana clung to her with tears, and in that hour she became as
a daughter to the woman who had sentenced her youth. Lady Lucy asked no pardon in words, to
Diana's infinite relief; but the surrender of weakness and sorrow was complete. "Sir James
will forbid it," she said at last, when she had recovered her calm.

"No one shall forbid it!" said Diana, rising with a smile. "Now, may I answer some of those
letters for you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

For some weeks after this Diana went backward and forward daily, or almost daily, between Beechcote
and Tallyn. Then she migrated to Tallyn altogether, and Muriel Colwood with her. Before and
after that migration wisdom had been justified of her children in the person of the doctor.
Hugh Roughsedge's leave had been prolonged, owing to a slight but troublesome wound in the
arm, of which he had made nothing on coming home. No wound could have been more opportune--more
friendly to the doctor's craving for a daughter-in-law. It kept the Captain at Beechcote, but
it did not prevent him from coming over every Sunday to Tallyn to bring flowers or letters,
or news from the village; and it was positively benefited by such mild exercise as a man may
take, in company with a little round-eyed woman, feather-light and active, yet in relation
to Diana, like a tethered dove, that can only take short flights. Only here it was a tether
self-imposed and of the heart.

There was no direct wooing, however, and for weeks their talk was all of Diana. Then the Captain's
arm got well, and Nigeria called. But Muriel would not have allowed him to say a word before
departure had it not been for Diana--and the doctor--who were suddenly found to have entered,
in regard to this matter, upon a league and covenant not to be resisted. Whether the doctor
opened Diana's eyes need not be inquired; it is certain that if, all the while, in Oliver's
room, she and Lady Lucy had not been wrestling hour by hour with death--or worse--Diana would
have wanted no one to open them. When she did understand, there was no opposing her. She pleaded--not
without tears--to be given the happiness of knowing they were pledged, and her Muriel safe
in harbor. So Roughsedge had his say; a quiet engagement began its course in the world; Brookshire
as yet knew nothing; and the doctor triumphed over Patricia.

During this time Sir James Chide watched the development of a situation he had not been able
to change with a strange mixture of revolt and sympathy. Sometimes he looked beyond the tragedy
which he thought inevitable to a recovered and normal life for Diana; sometimes he felt a dismal
certainty that when Oliver had left her, that recovered life could only shape itself to ascetic
and self-renouncing ends. Had she belonged to his own church, she would no doubt have become
a "religious"; and he would have felt it the natural solution. Outside the Catholic Church,
the same need takes shape--he thought--in forms less suited to a woman's weakness, less conducive
to her dignity.

All through he resented the sacrifice of a being so noble, true, and tender to a love, in his
eyes, so unfitting and derogatory. Not all the pathos of suffering could blunt his sense of
Marsham's inferiority, or make him think it "worth while."

Then, looking deeper, he saw the mother in the child; and in Diana's devotion, mysterious influences,
flowing from her mother's fate--from the agony, the sin, the last tremulous hope, and piteous
submission of Juliet Sparling. He perceived that in this broken, tortured happiness to which
Diana had given herself there was some sustaining or consoling element that nothing more normal
or more earthly would have brought her; he guessed at spiritual currents and forces linking
the dead with the living, and at a soul heroically calm among them, sending forth rays into
the darkness. His religion, which was sincere, enabled him to understand her; his affection,
his infinite delicacy of feeling, helped her.

Meanwhile, Diana and Lankester became the sustaining angels of a stricken house. But not all
their tenderness and their pity could, in the end, do much for the two sufferers they tried
to comfort. In Oliver's case the spinal pain and disorganization increased, the blindness also;
Lady Lucy became steadily feebler and more decrepit. At last all life was centred on one hope--the
coming of a great French specialist, a disciple of Charcot's, recommended by the English Ambassador
in Paris, who was an old friend and kinsman of Lady Lucy.

But before he arrived Diana took a resolution. She went very early one morning to see Sir James
Chide. He was afterward closeted with Lady Lucy, and he went up to town the following day on
Diana's business. The upshot of it all was that on the morning of New Year's Eve a marriage
was celebrated in Oliver Marsham's room by the Rector of Tallyn and Mr. Lavery. It was a wedding
which, to all who witnessed it, was among the most heart-rending experiences of life. Oliver,
practically blind, could not see his bride, and only morphia enabled him to go through it.
Mrs. Fotheringham was to have been present; but there was a feminist congress in Paris, and
she was detained at the last moment. The French specialist came. He made a careful examination,
but would give no decided opinion. He was to stay a week at Tallyn in order to watch the case,
and he reserved his judgment. Meanwhile he gave certain directions as to local treatment, and
he asked that a new drug might be tried during the night instead of the second dose of morphia
usually given. The hearts of all in charge of the invalid sank as they foresaw the inevitable
struggle.

In the evening the new doctor paid a second visit to his patient. Diana saw him afterward alone.
He was evidently touched by the situation in the house, and, cautious as he was, allowed himself
a few guarded sentences throwing light on the doubt--which was in effect a hope--in his own mind.

"Madame, it is a very difficult case. The emaciation, the weakness, the nerve depression--even
if there were no organic disease--are alone enough to threaten life. The morphia is, of course,
a contributing cause. The question before us is: Have we here a case of irreparable disease
caused by the blow, or a case of nervous shock producing all the symptoms of disease--pain,
blindness, emaciation--but ultimately curable? That is what we have to solve."

Diana's eyes implored him.

"Give him hope," she said, with intensity. "For weeks--months--he has never allowed himself
a moment's hope."

The doctor reflected.

"We will do what we can," he said, slowly. "Meanwhile, cheerfulness!--all the cheerfulness
possible."

Diana's faint, obedient smile, as she rose to leave the room, touched him afresh. Just married,
he understood. These are the things that women do!

As he opened the door for her he said, with some hesitation: "You have, perhaps, heard of some
of the curious effects that a railway collision produces. A man who has been in a collision
and received a blow suffers afterward great pain, loss of walking power, impairment of vision,
and so forth. The man's suffering is real--the man himself perfectly sincere--his doctor diagnoses
incurable injury--the jury awards him damages. Yet, in a certain number of instances, the man
recovers. Have we here an aggravated form of the same thing? Ah, madame, courage!"

For in the doorway he saw her fall back against the lintel for support. The hope that he infused
tested her physically more severely than the agonies of the preceding weeks. But almost immediately
she controlled herself, smiled at him again, and went.

That night various changes were made at Tallyn. Diana's maid unpacked, in the room communicating
with Marsham's; and Diana, pale and composed, made a new arrangement with Oliver's male nurse.
She was to take the nursing of the first part of the night, and he was to relieve her at three
in the morning. To her would fall the administration of the new medicine.

       *       *       *       *       *

At eleven o'clock all was still in the house. Diana opened the door of Oliver's room with a
beating heart. She wore a dressing-gown of some white stuff; her black hair, released from
the combs of the day, was loosely rolled up, and curled round her neck and temples. She came
in with a gentle deliberate step; it was but a few hours since the ceremony of the morning,
but the tranformation in her was instinctive and complete. To-night she was the wife--alone
with her husband.

She saw that he was not asleep, and she went and knelt down beside him.

"Oliver, darling!"

He passed his hand over her hair.

"I have been waiting for you--it is our wedding night."

She hid her face against him.

"Oh! you angel!" he murmured to her--"angel of consolation! When I am gone, say to yourself:
'I drew him out of the pit, and helped him to die'; say 'he suffered, and I forgave him everything';
say 'he was my husband, and I carried him on my heart--so.'" He moved toward her. She put her
arms under his head and drew him to her breast, stooping over him and kissing him.

So the first part of the night went by, he very much under the influence of morphia and not
in pain; murmured words passing at intervals between them, the outward signs of an inward and
ineffable bond. Often, as she sat motionless beside him, the thought of her mother stirred
in her heart--father, mother, husband--close, close all of them--"closer than hands and feet"--one
with her and one with God.

About two o'clock she gave him the new drug, he piteously consenting for her sake. Then in
a mortal terror she resumed her place beside him. In a few minutes surely the pain, the leaping
hungry pain would be upon him, and she must see him wrestle with it defenceless. She sat holding
her breath, all existence gathered into fear.

But the minutes passed. She felt the tension of his hand relax. He went to sleep so gently
that in her infinite relief she too dropped into sleep, her head beside his, the black hair
mingling with the gray on the same pillow.

The servant coming in, as he had been told, looked at them in astonishment, and stole away again.

An hour or so later Oliver woke.

"I have had no morphia, and I am not in pain. My God! what does it mean?"

Trembling, he put out his hand. Yes!--Diana was there--asleep in her chair. His wife!

His touch roused her, and as she bent over him he saw her dimly in the dim light--her black
hair, her white dress.

"You can bring that old French fellow here whenever you like," he said, holding her. Then,
faintly, his eyes closed: "This is New Year's Day."

Once more Diana's kisses fell "on the tired heart like rain"; and when she left him he lay
still, wrapped in a tangle of thought which his weakness could not unravel. Presently he dropped
again into sleep.

Diana too slept, the sleep of a young exhaustion; and when she woke up, it was to find her
being flooded with an upholding, enkindling joy, she knew not how or whence. She threw open
the window to the frosty dawn, thinking of the year before and her first arrival at Beechcote.
And there, in the eastern sky--no radiant planet--but a twinkling star, in an ethereal blue;
and from the valley below, dim joyous sounds of bells.