Little Downy;

                      or,

                  THE HISTORY

                       of

                 A FIELD MOUSE.

               Embellished With

          TWELVE COLORED ENGRAVINGS.

                    LONDON:
                  Printed for
    A. K. NEWMAN and Co. Leadenhall-Street.
                Price 1s. 6d.

                 Little Downy;

                      or,

                  THE HISTORY

                       of

                 A FIELD-MOUSE.

                 A MORAL TALE.
                     1822.

  THE LIFE AND INTERESTING ADVENTURES

  of a

  FIELD MOUSE.

"What is my little Alfred crying for?" asked his mother, Mrs. Clifford, as she entered the
room where Alfred stood weeping by the table. Come here, and tell me what is the matter with you."

Alfred slowly advanced towards his mother, and wiped away his tears with her apron. Alfred
was but a little boy, or he would not have cried for such a simple thing as he did.

"Well, Alfred, and what is it?" asked his kind mamma.

"Why, mamma, you know that nice plum cake you gave me for saying my lesson well; I had put
it in the cupboard, as I did not want to eat it then, and I came just now to take a little
nibble at it; and when I opened the closet-door to look for it, there was an ugly brown mouse
in the closet, and hardly a scrap of my cake left; that greedy thing had eaten it all but a
few crumbs." And here Alfred's tears flowed afresh.

"I am very sorry, my dear child, that the mouse has eaten your cake; but still, I do not think
it was worth shedding so many tears about: you must learn to bear such trifling disappointments
with more patience. I dare say, the mouse has eaten my sugar and cake, but I shall not cry
if it has."

"I am sure it is enough to make any one cry, (said Alfred). I only wish, (added he, his eyes
sparkling with anger), that I could have killed the little beast for stealing my cake."

"Now, Alfred, I am ashamed of you," said his mother gravely.

Alfred could, however, think of nothing but the loss of his cake, and begged his mother to
let the mouse-trap be set to catch the mischievous intruder.

Mrs. Clifford was very sorry to hear her little son talk so, and she represented to him his
cruelty in wanting to take away the life of a poor mouse only for having satisfied its hunger.

"But, mamma, mice do a deal of mischief, (said Alfred), and ought to be killed; for that mouse
will soon eat up all your sugar."

"But, Alfred; I know a certain two-legged mouse, who, if I left the key in my store-closet,
would eat more sugar in one minute than this poor little animal could in an hour."

Alfred hung his head at this reproof, for it was but a day or two since he was detected at
the sugar dish; and he soon after left the room.

Mrs. Clifford was much grieved that her little Alfred shewed so much inclination to be cruel
and revengeful, two qualities so dangerous in a child, or in any one; and she knew that, unless
it was timely checked, it would grow into a habit. Harsh means, she did not like to adopt;
and so she at last thought of a method which seemed likely to succeed. She was well aware of
the inconvenience of having mice in her cupboard, as they not only commit great depredations,
but soil every thing they touch; so, as she was forced to kill the mouse, she hoped to turn
its death to a good use. Therefore, the next time Alfred entered the room, she asked him if
he was still resolved to have the mouse killed. "Yes, mamma, (replied Alfred), it had no right
to eat my cake."

"Very well; I will have the mouse-trap set; but observe, Alfred, whether before the day is
past, you do not tell me you are sorry for its death."

"Oh! no; that I am sure I sha'n't," replied Alfred, and Mrs. Clifford ordered the trap to be set.

Early the next morning, when Mrs. Clifford came down stairs and went to the closet, she beheld
her poor little prisoner dead in his wire cage. "See, Alfred, (said she), here is the poor
mouse dead!"

Alfred at first was glad; but when he saw what a pretty one it was, he was sorry, but contented
himself by saying to the dead mouse, "If you had not been in the cupboard doing so much mischief,
you would not have been killed!"

When he had said his lesson, his mother said to him, "Now, Alfred, shall I tell you a story?"
Alfred was very fond of hearing a story, if it was not too long, and he asked his mother, if
this would be a long one.

"I don't wish to tire you, (said his mother), so I will only tell you part of it this morning.
Alfred fetched his little stool, and having placed it at her side, fixed his eyes on her face
while she related

THE HISTORY OF A FIELD MOUSE.

"In a wheat-stack, in Farmer Ball's yard, lived an old mouse with her family, consisting of
five little ones, the most worthy of which was a pretty brown mouse, called Downy, because
her fur was longer and softer than either of her brothers and sisters, and besides being the
prettiest, she was likewise the wisest and best among them.

"Her mother was by birth a field-mouse; she had been carried among the sheaves of wheat into
the stack, with a great many more field-mice; and had lived there, at the expence of farmer
Ball, ever since.

"It was one fine clear morning, in the middle of March, that, as Downy was peeping her little
nose out of the straw at the edge of the stack, to breathe a little fresh air, she saw the
farmer with his men enter the yard, and heard him tell the people that he would have the stack
taken into the barn and thrashed, and desired them to bid Fen, the ratcatcher, come, and bring
all his dogs with him.

"Poor Downy was in a terrible fright at hearing this; she ran to acquaint her mother with it;
and asked her what they had best do; but her mother, who was but a foolish mouse, bade her
not be under the least alarm, for she was persuaded the farmer did not mean to take it in just
then; and added, it was time enough to think of it when the men began; she told Downy to go
to bed with the rest of her brothers and sisters, and not to be afraid.

"But poor Downy was in great trouble about what she should do, and could not sleep for thinking
of the sad fate which threatened them; she awakened her companions to consult with them; but
her sisters only laughed at her fear, and said, they would never leave a place where they were
so well off; and where they could get plenty of good corn, only for the trouble of eating it.
Her brothers were of the same opinion, and added, they could run so swiftly, they were sure
they could soon get away into the field; but they expected they should live very quietly yet
for some time.

"Poor foolish little things! they did not think the danger was so near; but they were awakened
the next morning by the farmer's men unroofing the stack, and they now wished they had hearkened
to the prudent advice of their sister Downy.

"Poor little Downy's heart almost died within her, when she heard the barking of the dogs,
and the hallooing of the men; how much rather would she have been in the field, than in the
warm stack! for she heard the men drawing near to the place where they lay; and they were all
terribly afraid; and their mother, the old mouse, would go to see how far the danger was from
them. Imprudent creature! she ventured too near; for a great black dog on the top of the stack,
the moment the men raised the sheaf where she was, snapped her up in an instant.

"Nothing was now to be heard but shrieks and cries from every side of the stack; and the men
drew nearer and nearer: Downy heard the last cries of her brethren; the sheaf where she had
taken refuge, was already on the point of being raised, when she sprang through an opening
in the side, and was just going to run down, when she beheld a great dog directly under her!

"Poor Downy gave herself up as lost, and awaited in trembling anxiety her fate: for some moments
she clung to the outside of the stack, not daring to descend, yet fearing still more to stay;
when, luckily for our poor little mouse, some one called the dog, who instantly ran off; and
Downy, darting from the stack, had just time to gain a place of security beneath a clod of
earth, where she lay shaking with fear, not daring to look up for some minutes.

"She shuddered with horror when she heard the dying groans of her friends in the stack, and
the shouts of the men encouraging the dogs; many a poor mouse did she see running away in hopes
of making its escape, but pursued and devoured by the dogs.

"Several times poor Downy had like to have been discovered by the dogs, or crushed beneath
the horses' feet, but she crouched very close to the ground, and lay so still, she hardly breathed,
so great was her fear; at length she watched an opportunity, when no one was near, to quit
her retreat, and ran with all the speed she could, not once daring to pause or look behind,
till she gained the farmer's orchard; where she laid among the long grass, panting, and half
dead with terror and fatigue; she hid herself toward night under the roots of an old apple-tree;
for she was very much afraid of a great white owl which she had seen flying near.

"It was in vain for her to lament the sad fate of her mother and brethren; she could not recal
them to life; and Downy was thankful that she had escaped so well; but the cold weather was
not gone yet, and poor little Downy knew she had nothing to eat and no warm house to live in;
but must make herself one; and she was afraid she should be starved to death with hunger, or
die with cold. These thoughts occupied her mind, till she fell asleep, nor did she awake next
morning till quite late, and found herself very hungry. She first peeped out of her hole, and
seeing nothing near to hurt her, she ventured forth in search of some food; she rummaged among
the dead leaves for some time, without success, till chance led her to a row of nut-trees;
here, after a diligent search, she had the good fortune to discover three nuts, one of which
she eat, being very hungry, and the rest she carried home to her tree; but Downy knew they
would not last long, and so thought it best to try and get more, she therefore deposited them
safely away, and sat off to look for more provisions; she spent nearly the whole day among
the nut-trees, but returned home only with one nut; and a shower of snow falling, she was forced
to return to her dwelling, and did not go out any more that day, but laid still, and thought
how she should make herself a warm nest; for she was very cold here, having been used to the
close warm stack, where scarce any air entered. She eat very sparingly of her nuts, saving
as much as possible for the morrow, fearing lest the snow should hinder her looking for more;
but there had not fallen much, and in the morning, the sun coming out quite bright, melted
it all; and Downy left her tree to look for something to line her nest with, and for more food.
That being the first object, she began to search for some first, and was more fortunate than
before, as she discovered several ears of corn, which had been blown by the wind off the stack;
she could hardly credit her good fortune, when she beheld her store and saw it all safely lodged
in her granary. Her next care was to line her nest; for this purpose, (though it was very cold
and frosty) she collected all the bits of dried moss and grass she could find, and carried
them in her mouth to her new habitation; she nibbled off the fibres which hung to the roots
of the tree, and dried weeds, and soon made her house quite warm and comfortable.

