It was at this time, and in consequence, to some extent, of these events, that a man who had
acquired the highest distinction in France was brought to the tomb in bitterness and grief,
for that which in any other country would have covered him with honour.  Vauban, for it is
to him that I allude, patriot as he was, had all his life been touched with the misery of the
people and the vexations they suffered.  The knowledge that his offices gave him of the necessity
for expense, the little hope he had that the King would retrench in matters of splendour and
amusement, made him groan to see no remedy to an oppression which increased in weight from
day to day.  Feeling this, he made no journey that he did not collect information upon the
value and produce of the land, upon the trade and industry of the towns and provinces, on the
nature of the imposts, and the manner of collecting them.  Not content with this, he secretly
sent to such places as he could not visit himself, or even to those he had visited, to instruct
him in everything, and compare the reports he received with those he had himself made.  The
last twenty years of his life were spent in these researches, and at considerable cost to himself.
In, the end, he convinced himself that the land was the only real wealth, and he set himself
to work to form a new system.

He had already made much progress, when several little books appeared by Boisguilbert, lieutenant-general
at Rouen, who long since had had the same views as Vauban, and had wanted to make them known.
From this labour had resulted a learned and profound book, in which a system was explained
by which the people could be relieved of all the expenses they supported, and from every tax,
and by which the revenue collected would go at once into the treasury of the King, instead
of enriching, first the traitants, the intendants, and the finance ministers. I said all along
that he was in the right to ask the people."

"Mamma," said Lady Selina, gravely, "listen to me: calmly now, and attentively. I don't know
what papa has told you; but I tell you Fanny does not dream of marrying
Adolphus.  Boisguilbert wished to preserve some imposts upon foreign commerce
and upon provisions.  Vauban wished to abolish all imposts, and to substitute for them two
taxes, one upon the land, the other upon trade and industry.  His book, in which he put forth
these ideas, was full of information and figures, all arranged with the utmost clearness, simplicity,
and exactitude.

But it had a grand fault.  It described a course which, if followed, would have ruined an army
of financiers, of clerks, of functionaries of all kinds; it would have forced them to live
at their own expense, instead of at the expense of the people; and it would have sapped the
foundations of those immense fortunes that are seen to grow up in such a short time.  This
was enough to cause its failure.

All the people interested in opposing the work set up a cry.  They saw place, power, everything,
about to fly from their grasp, if the counsels of Vauban were acted upon.  What wonder, then,
that the King, who was surrounded by these people, listened to their reasons, and received
with a very ill grace Marechal Vauban when he presented his book to him.  The ministers, it
may well be believed, did not give him a better welcome. From that moment his services, his
military capacity (unique of its kind), his virtues, the affection the King had had for him,
all were forgotten.  The King saw only in Marechal Vauban a man led astray by love for the
people, a criminal who attacked the authority of the ministers, and consequently that of the
King.  He explained himself to this effect without scruple.

